Title: 

URL Source: https://www.brennancenter.org/sites/default/files/2020-05/fbi_oversight_hearings_before_the_subcommittee_on_civil_rights_1976.pdf

Published Time: Wed, 06 May 2020 16:48:41 GMT

Markdown Content:
# , FBI OVERSIGHT HEARINGS BEFORE THE SUBCOMMITTEE ON 

# CIVIL AND CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS OF THE 

# COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES NINETY-FOURTH CONGRESS FIRST AND SECOND SESSIONS ON FBI OVERSIGHT CIRCUMSTANCES SURROUNDING DESTRUCTION OF THIE LEE HARVEY OSWALD NOTE--ATTORNEY GENERAL'S GUIDELINES FOR FBI ACTIVITIES AND ADDITIONAL LEGISLATIVE- PROPOSALS-FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT COMPLIANCE BY THE FBI AND PLAN TO ELIMINATE BACKLOG-PRELIMINARY GAO REPORT ON FBI ACCOM-PLISHMENTS AND STATISTICS OC'FOBIPEI 21, DECEMBER 11, 12, 1975; FEBRUARY 11, MAY 13, 20, 27, JUNE 10, JULY 29, SEPTEMBER 16, 29, 1976 Serial No. 

> R2-629

# 2Part 3

Printed for the use of the Committee on the Judiciary U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE WASHINGTON : 1976 

# Im5c~L -COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY PETER W. RODINO, Jj., New Jersey, OhlsAros 

JACK BROOKS, Texas ROBERT W. KASTENMEIER. Wisconsin DON EDWARDS, California WILLIAM L. HUNGATE, Missouri JOHN CONYERS. JL, Michigan JOSHUA EILBERG, Pennsylvania WALTER FLOWERS, Alabama JAMES R. MANN, South Carolina PAUL S. SARBANES, Maryland JOHN F. BEIBERLING, Ohio GEORGE E. DANIELSON, California ROBERT F. DRINAN, Massachusetts 

BARBARA JORDAN, Texas RAY THORNTON, Arkansas ELIZABETH HOLTZMAN, New York EDWARD MEZVINSKY, Iowa HERMAN BADILLO, New York ROMANO L MAZZOLI, Kentucky EDWARD W. PATTISON, New York CHRISTOPHER J. DODD, Connecticut WILLIAM J. HUGHES, New Jersey MARTIN A. RUSSO, Illinois SAM B. HALL, JR., Texas EDWARD HUTCHINSON, Michigan ROBERT McCLORY, Illinois TOM RAILSBACK, Illinois CHARLES E. WIGGINS, California HAMIITON FISH, JR., New York 

M. CALDWELL BUTLER, Virginia WILLIAM S. COHEN, Maine CARLOS J. MOORHEAD, California JOHN M. ASHBROOK, Ohio HENRY J. HYDE, Illinois THOMAS N. KINDNESS, Ohio EARL C. DUDLEY, Jr., Geoeral 0outne8     

> GARNER J. CLIM, 8taff

Dreotor   

> HERSMAT FUCHS,

CoUntel             

> WILLIAM P. SHATrUCK, (lousaee ALAN A. PARKED, 0o0MAeZ
> MAUnumC A. BWSOA, Oo00"l ARTHUR P. ENDaUS, Jr.,

Counsel 

THOMAS W. HUTCHISON, Oovneel 

DA9nL L. COHEN, Oowuei 

FRANKLIN 0. POLK, OouMMl    

> THOMAS E. MOONEY,

C nsel     

> ALEXANME B. CoOK, Counsel
> ALAN

F. CornY, Jr., Counsel  

> KsNNnT

N. KLEn, Counsel 

RATOND V. SMXNTANKA, Jouneel 

THOMAS M. BOrD, Oounsel 

Su3aMmurrry ow CivI m CONSTIUIAL ruoTS DON EDWARDS, California, CAoGrwais JOHN F. SEIBERLING, Ohio ROBERT F. DRINAN, Massachusetts HERMAN BADILLO, New York CHRISTOPHER J. DODD, Connectiut M. CALDWELL BUTLER, Virginia THOMAS N. KINDNESS, Ohio    

> ALAN A. PARKNL, 0o,8el

THOMAS P. BsaNx, Asist nt 0ounsel 

CATHRINE LaRox, Assistant Cotinsei 

KENNETH N. KLB2, Aeeooate Counsel 

(Wt CONTENTS        

> Page
> CIRCUMSTANCES SURROUNDING DESTRUCTION OF THE
> LEE HARVEY OSWALD NOTE

Hearings held on-            

> October 21, 1975 -----------------------------------------------1
> December 11, 1975 ---------------------------------------------35
> December 12, 1975 --------------------------------------------128
> Witnesses-

Adams, James B., Deputy Associate Director, Federal Bureau of Investigation -------------------------------------------- 2Bray, John M., counsel, Washington, D.C ----------------------- 124 Fenner, Nanny Lee, receptionist, Dallas Field Office, Federal Bureau of Investigation -------------------------------------------- 36 Hosty, James P., Jr., Special Agent, Federal Bureau of Investigation. 124 Howe, Kenneth C., Special Agent, Federal Bureau of Investigation- 176 Shanklin, J. Gordon, former Special Agent in Charge, Dallas Field Office, Federal Bureau of Investigation ------------------------ 59 

Prepared statement ------------------------------------ 108 Additional material-Memorandum dated October 24, 1973, krom Special Agent James P. Hosty, Jr., to Director, FBI-------------------------------- 171 Appendix-Responses from the Attorney General of the United States regarding issues raised in the testimony of James P. Hosty, Jr ------------- 209         

> ATTORNEY GENERAL'S GUIDELINES FOR FBI ACTIVITIES AND ADDITIONAL LEGISLATIVE PROPOSALS

Hearings held on- -February 11, 1976 ----------------------------------------- 251 

May 13, 1976 -------------------------------------------- 289 

May 20, 1976. --- - - - - 333 May 27, 1976 -------------------------------------------- 353 

June 10, 1976 -------------------------------------------- 467 

Witn eses -

Berman, Jerry J., Director, Domestic Security Project of the Center for National Security Studies ------------------------------- 291 Prepared statement ---------------------------------- 301 Eastman, Hope, asociate director, Washington National Office, American Civil Liberties Union--375 Prepared statement.-384 Gitenstein, Mark, American Civil Liberties Union--375 Halperin. Morton H., Director, Project on National Security and Civil Iiberties- 310 Pre ared statement ------------------------------------ 313 

Kelley, Pon. Clarence M., Director, Federal Bureau of Investigation. 262 Lambie, William K. Jr., Associate Erucuintl = retor of Amerieans for Effective Law Enforcement, Inc-.....- 474 Prepared statement -------- 467 Lawton, Mary, Deputy Assistant Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel ----------------------------------------------- 253 Levi, Hon. Edward H., U.S. Attorney General ------------------- 253 

Miller Herbert S Georgetown Law Center- .----- 334 Pyle, Christopher H., assistant Professor, John Jay College of Crimnal 3Justice, City University of New York-3,54 Prepared statement- - -- - - 359 Spann, Wiiam B., president-elect, American Bar Association-- --- 334 

(M) IV 

Additional material- Page "Intelligence Activities and the Rights of Americans-Book II," 94th Cong., 2d se-s., Senate Report No. 94-755 ----------------- 423 

Neir, Arych, and Burt Neuborne, American Civil Liberties Union, prepared statement ------------------------------------------ 418 "Political Surveillance: Cases Frem the ACLU's Docket," from the Privacy Report November 1975 ------------------------------- 411 

"Supplementary Detailed Staff Reports on Intelligence Activities and the Rights of Americans-Book III," 94th Cong., 2d sess., Senate Report No. 94-755 ------------------------------------ 438 

"Two Postal Aides Held in $800,000 Theft," from the New York Times, May 25, 1976 ----------------------------------------- 437 

United State8 oJ America v. Bernard L. Barker, Appellant (No. 74-1883), U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit__ 440 FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT COMPLIANCE BY THE FBI     

> AND PLAN TO ELIMINATE BACKLOG

Hearings held on-July 29, 1976- ------------------------------------------- 491 September 16, 1976_-531 Witnesses-Groover, L. Clyde, Section Chief, Budget and Accounting Section of the Finance and Personnel Division, Federal Bureau of Investi-gation ------------------------------------------------------ 532 lianigan, Michael L., Freedom of Information and Privacy Act.s Section of Records Management Division, Federal Bureau of Investigation ......................................- 532 Shea, Quinlan J., chief, Freedom of Information and Privacy AppeaLs Unit, )epartment, of Justice-......- 532 Powers, James M., Section Chief Freedom of Information and Privacy Act Section of the Records Management Division, Federal Bureau of Investigation ----------------------------------------- 492, 532 Prepared statement ---------------------------------------- 494 

Rogers, Richard M )eputy Chief, Freedom of Information and Privacy Appeals Unit, Office of the Deputy Attorney General, Department of Justice--------------------------------------- 532 Additional Materialn-Dodd, lion. Christopher J., a Representative in Congress from the State of Connecticut, opening statement-------------------- 513 FBI Proposal To Effectively Administer Freedom of Information and Privacy Acts Requests------------------------------------552 Kelley, lion. Clarence M., D)irector, Federal Bureau of Investigation, letter dated August 26, 1976, to lion. Don Edward.---........... 531 Tyler, Harold It., Jr., deputyy Attorney General, letter dated May 20, 1976, to Dr. James B. Rhodes, Archivist of the United States..--- 545        

> PRELIMINARY GAO REPORT ON FBI ACCOMPLISHMENTS AND STATISTICS

hearing held on-September 29, 1976----------- ------ 597 Witneses-llarris, )aniel, supervisory auditor, General Government Division, General Accounting office ------------------------------------ 600 Iowe, Victor L., Director, General Government 1)ivLsion, General Accounting Office---------------------------------------- 600 

I prepared statement----------------------------------------600 Powell, IRobert, supervisory auditor, San Francisco Region, General Accounting Office ------------------------------------------- o600 Stanton, )aniel, associate director, General Government I)ivision, General Accounting office-------------------------------------600 FBI OVERSIGHT Circumstances Surrounding Destruction of the Lee Harvey Oswald Note TUESDAY, OCTOBER 21, 1975   

> HOUSE OF REPRESENTATnw,

Su11coMfA.31'rrEEv o.," CIvIL AND Coxs'rrruTIOxA, RIGHTS OF THE COMMrrTEE ON THE JUDICIARY, 

Wa2 hington, D.C. 

'Th subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 9:45 a.m., in room 2226, Rayburn Ilouse Bufli.e building, the Honorable Don Edwards [chairman of the subcommittee] presiding. Present: Representatives Edwards, Drinan, Badillo, Dodd, Butler, and Kindness. Also present: Alan A. Parker, counsel; Thomas P. Breen, assistant 

comiisel ; and Kenneth N. Klee, associate counsel. Mr. EDwAR)S. Th. siacommittee will come to order. Today, we continue this subcommittee's-Mr. DRINAN. Mr. Chairman, if I may, I move that the Subcomnmittee on Civil and Constitutional Rights permit coverage of this hearingf in fill or in )art by television broadcast, radio broadcast, or still )liotography or any stuch methods of coverage 1)mrsii.ant to (oimniittee 1Riile V. Mr. EDWARDS. Those in favor signify by saying aye. [Ayes]. 'Mr. EDWARDR. Contrary? 

[No response]. Mr. EDWARDs. The motion is carried. Today, we continue this subcommittee's hearings on FBI oversight. Our most recent hearing involved the presentation of the General Accounting Office of their interim report on the domestic intelligence operations of the FBI. The final report and further hearings will be held later in November. Today we have asked the Federal Bureau of Investigation to report to us on four areas of interest.. One. Allegations concerning a letter allegedly written by Lee Harvey Oswald several days before the a&sassination of President John F. Kennedy containing t1iretits which i was received by the Dallas office of th.o FBI and sub.equently destroyed; Two. Allegations indicating that.Jack Ruby was a paid informer of the FBI; Three. Allegation )'v William Walter regarding a telex received by 

the New Orleans field office warning the Bureau's southern field offices t hat there would be an assassination attempt; 

(1) 2Four. Allegations that all information available to the FBI was not fully disclosed to the Warren Commission. It is for the benefit of the public and the Government agcies involved that these issues be clarified so that if legislation is needed, we will have the adequate background to deal with it intelligently. If the personnel of the FBI violated their own rules or Fderal statutes, then we must be svre that appropriate remedies for such actions exist within the Bureau and that the legal machinery exists within the Department of Justice to evaluate and prosecute if necessary. We are happy to have with us today, representing the Federal Bu-reau of Investigation, James B. Adams, Deputy Associate Director. Mr. Adams, who is your colleague? Mr. ADAMS. Harold Bassett, Assistant Director in Charge of Inspection. Mr. EDwARM.Will you both rise and raise your right hands Do you solemnly swear that the testimony you are about to give this committee will be the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth, so help you God ?Mr. ADAMS. I do. Mr. BAssEr. I do. Mr. EDWARDS. Mr. Adams, you may proceed. TESTIMONY OF IAMES B. ADAMS, DEPUTY ASSOCIATE DIRECTOR, FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION; ACCOMPANIED BY HAROLD BASSETT, ASSISTANT DIRECTOR IN CHARGE OF 

INSPECTION Mr. ADA.M.S. Mr. Chairman, I genuinely appreciate this opportunity to appear before your committee. .. fy purpose in being here is to be as helpful as I can in your efforts to resolve serious questions that have lben raised about the FBI-questions arising from one of the gravest tragedies of our time, the assassination of President John F. Kennedy at Dallas, Tex., on November 2, 1963. We welcome this opportunity because we sincerely believe in the integit* of the FBI. and that integrity requires an honest and com-plete statement of the facts for thie American people. We hope, as well, that these proceedings will help a-ssuage at least some of the momrs and conjecture and doubts that have multiplied and Qprvad so rapidly in this 12th year following President Ken-nely's death. Mr. EDWARDR. I wonder if the people in the back can hear Mr. Adams. Can they ? Fine. Very good. You may proceed. 

fr. ADAMS. The first area in which rou have expressed interest is that involving the alleged visit of Lee'Harvey Oswald to the Dallas FBI Office prior to the assassination of President Kennedy. We have just completed an exhaustive internal inquiry which leaves no doubt that Tx" Thrvey Oswald visited our Dallas Ofme ome days 

prior to the assassination of President Kennedy and he left. a hand-written note there for the special agent who was conducting our sub-versive activities investigation of him. 3Director Kelley and I first learned of these occurrences on July 7, 1975 when an official of the Dallas Times-Herald met with us here in Waslington. This newspaper official advised that an individual, whose. identity he could not reveal, had told him that Oswald had visited the FBI office in Dallas sometime prior to the assassination; that Os-wald left a note--allegedly threatening in nature-for the agent who had been handling our investigation of him; and that neither Os-wald's visit nor the note was reported prior to or following the as-sassination of President Kennedy. Having no knowledge of this event, the newspaperman was advised that we would inquire into the matter and furnish him an official response. -

Mr. Kelley immediately personally informed Attorney General Ed-ward Levi o , , these allegations. He also told the Attorney General that we were initiating an inquiry to determine the truth of these al-legations; and he ordered the Assistant Director of our Inspection Division to personally take charge of this matter. The first step in our inquiry was to conduct an extensive review of all file references to Oswald at our Washington headquarters and in the Dallas field office to determine if they contained any information con-cerning the alleged visit by Oswald and/or the threatening note. They did not. The second step was to identify, locate, and interview those persons within and without the FBI who logically might be able to shed light on this matter. Since July 1975, nearly 80 interviews, including reinterviews of some persons, have been conductedL The purpose and the thnst of those interviews was to determine the answers to these important questions: One. Did Ie Harvey Oswald, in fact, visit the Dallas FBI office prior to the assassination? Two. If so, did he leave a note--and what were its contents? Three. What action was taken regarding the note? Four. Was the note destroyed; and if so, by whom and at whose iiwtrction ?

Five. Wlhat we. the motives behind the note's destruction? 1hw results of ouir inujir. convince us that the answer to the first question is an unequiv'ocal "yes." We don't know the exact date or time, but we are confident that TAe Harvey Oswald did visit our Dallas field office in November 1963. The testimony of Marina Oswald and Ruth Hyde Paine before the Warren Commission refers to the possibility of this visit. In response to a question concerning the FBI, Mrs. Oswald testified as follows:                  

> Lee had told me that supposedly he had visited their office or their building. But Ididn't believe him.

Mrs. Paine told the Warren Commision that Oswald "told me that he had stopped at the downtown office of the FBI and tried to see the agents and left a note. And my impression of it is that this notice ir-ritated * * that he left the note saying what he thought." Mrs. Paine also testified that she "learned only a few weeks ago that he never did go into the FBI office." Interviews that we have conducted in our Dallas office support the conclusion that Oswald visited the office prior to the assassination. 4

The employee who was serving as receptionist in that office in No-vember 1963, stated that to her recollection about a week or 10 days before the assassination tin individual appeared at the reception desk and asked to see one specific agent by name. Upon being told that the 

ag nt was out of the office. this individual left an envelope for the agent. According to the receptionist, the envelope contained a note which she read and believed was signed "I"e Harvey Oswald." She stated that she recognized the person who had called at the office. as Oswald when she saw pictures of Oswald in the new--paleIs following the assassination. Another irson who was employed at the Dallas FBT office il No-vember 1963, recalled tlht while entering the office about midday sometime before the assassination she saw a slender. dlark-haire"d young man whom she later could assititie was Oswald with the re'ce)-

tionist. A third employee was alleged to have seen Oswald at tile office, ])ow%-

ever, upon interview, denied that she did. As to the wording of the note that was left at the Dallas office, ar-

counts vary. The receptionist recalled its contents to 1N-' soiewhIt as follows:             

> IA't this lW-awarning. Iwill lolrw up the FBI and,!

the T)allas; Police I -lptrt-rient if you don't stop bothering my wife. She recalls takin the note to the assistant 1lecial agent. in charge. It was her recollection that he also read the note. commented that it was from a "nut," and told1 her to give it to the agent to whom it wa, aIldressed. The a-"ista 11t )ecial a -v£'t in chlirure to whoom the reveptioni.zt said she handed the note ,leried having any knowledge of it. In addition. she exp)rs.,ed the belief that -he also showed the note to three other employees of tle Dallas office. These tree eniiployve-; were( interviewed, and each denied havinvy seen it. The agent for whom the note was intended recalled its wording as.                                

> If you have anything y.ou want to learn nloout me. come talk to me dlirct ly. If you lon't eeawe lxthering ny wife Twill take aplJrolpriate ct.i,,Pl and repoort this to proper authorities.

This agent's supervic-or. who claimed to have seen the not,,. ,-aid that hie '4Veeed to recall it 'ontaine(l soine kind of threat ut could not remember specifics. Aside from thies, thitee persons--thle receptionist, the agent. a(d the agent's supervisor---no one else who was interviewed admitted having seen the note. Sone indicated t hey understood that thie note contained a threat : however, this was hean 'ay knowledge. having coine Primarily from conversations they had 1lha(! with the receptiolli.-t. All who saw or heard the note agree there was no mention of 1Pre'-i-(lent, Kennedy or anything which would lhave forewarned of the as-

sassinat ion of the President. In attempting to determine what action was taken regarding the note, we learned that the agent for whon the note was intended took no action other tlan to place it in his workhox--where it contin wd to reside on the (lay of the assassination. This agent said that he participated in an interview of Oswald at the Dallas Police Department on th. day of the assassination and re-turned to the field office about an hour later, where he went to the office of the slecial agent in charge. He said that hi# supervisor was in the office with the special agent 

in charge. AcCordingato the agent, one of them display the threat. ening note and asked-hi to explain its contents. 

-By his account, he told them lie had interviewed Marina Oswald and Mrs. Paine on November 1, 1963; and that when he partieipated in the interview of Oswald that day at the Dallas Polic Department, Oswald, upon learning the agent's name; commented that he was the one who was talking to and bothering his wife--that if the agent wanted to know something about Oswald he should have come and talked to Oswald himself. At this point, the agent claims, the special agent in charge ordered him to prepare a memorandum setting forth the information regard-ing the note and his interview with Marina Oswald and Mrs Paine. lie stated that he (lid prepare such a memorandum, three or four pages in length and delivered it to the special agent in charge on the evening o1 November 22, 1963. The secetary to whom the agent said lie dictated this memoranduni was interviewed. She said she had no recollection of the memorandum. The agent's sul-ervi or said that it was he who found the note in the agent's workbox very soon after the assasination of President Ket-nedy. lie stated he took the note to the office of the special agent in charge but had no recollection where the note may have gone or who may isve hid it thereafter. 1The agent involved, however, stated that approximately 2 hours after Oswald had been proniounced dead on November 24, his sUl.er-visor told hin that the special agent in charge wanted to see hm. lie claimed that upon arriving in the special agent in charge's office, lie was instructed by the special agent in charge to destroy both thte note and the memorandum regarding it that he had given the special agent in charge on the night of November 22. The agent Ias told ts that lie complied with these instructions and 

dest royed the note and t he memorandum. The supervisor has told us that lie had no knowledge of the disposi-tion of the note. The special agent in charge, who retired prior to the receipt of the allegations in this matter, has denied having any knowledge of Oswald's visit to the Dallas offie or of Oswald's leaving a note there. lie maintains that lie (lid not issue any orders to destrNmy the note. In fact. he claimed to have no knowledge of this entire matter until Jluly 19Th. The wrsonnel who were assigned to the Dallas office in Novem.ber 191 3, and who have admitted personal knowledge of the Oswald visit and the note. have denied having any knowledge that the facts of this matter had been brought to the attention of FBI Headquarters. One employee did state. how ever. that she heard from an unrecalled surce that a meeting was held one evening to decide what to do with the Oswald not'. She named the purported Participants. including an inspector from Washington. She qualified this information by saying that sh blind no firsthand information, that it was hearsay, and that 6

she did not desire it included in her sworn statement. That inspector, now retired, as well as the other alleged participants in this meeting, unequivocally denied having any knowledge of the Oswald visit, including the note and its destruction. One former FBI official, who was an assistant director at the time of the assassination, has stated that he discussed the Oswald case many times with the special agent in charge of the Dallas office. According to this former official, the special a gent in charge mentioned on one occasion that he had an internal problem involving one of his agents who had received a threatening message from Oswald because the agent was investigating Oswald. The former official maintains that the special agent in charge seemed disinclined to discuss the matter other than to say he was handling it as a personnel problem with another individual who then held the rank of assistant to the director. This latter individual has denied under oath anv such knowledge or action. The same former Assistant Director said lhe thought it was common knowledge at FBI headquarters that a threatening niessage had bern received from Oswald. 'When asked specifically who at our headquar-ters might have krowledge regarding this, he stated it probably would 1e people who were concerned with the supervision of the Lee Uarvey Oswald case and the assassination. After searching hir memory for the identities of agents who had such supervisory respons-bilities, he named two such agents---4oth being in the headquarters div'Siot which he had headed at the time of the assassinationlie commented that. hc 

had no direct knowledge that, these agent-supervisors (lid, in fact. have this information, but felt it was possible they might because of their intimate involvement with the supervision of the ramifications involving Oswald. Both of these agent-supervisors have been interviewed rnd denied such knowledge. Our inquiry into this inatter has included interview'! with a large nmnber of present and former FBI officials, including the entire still-living chain of command of the two investigative divisions at our head-quarters which supervised the Kennedy assassination ease. With the exception of the above-mentioned former a.iRtant director, all have furnished statements denying any knowledge in this matter. Whatever thoughts or -fears may have motivated the concealment of Lee Harvey Oswald's visit to our T)allas office, as well as the conceal-ment and subsequent destruction of the iiote he left there. the. action was wrong. It was, in fact., a violation of firm rules that continue to exist in the FBI todav-rules which required that the fact of Oswald's visit and the text of iis note be recorde. in the files of the Dallars office and that they be reported to our headquarters to be furnished there-after to the Warren Commicsion. The facts disclosM by our inquiry have been reported in full to the Department of Justice.'The Depart'i.,ent has concluded that thigh is not ,an appropriate case for criminal prosecution at this time. W arp at this very moment making our own assp.ment of the fact'; with a view toward initiating appropriate administrativ, action. The committee has alqo ex-preesd interest in allegations indicating that ,Jnck Ruby was a paid informant of the FBI. The best answer to such assertions is to quote from letters which Director Hoover sent to the Honorable J. Lee Rankin, the General Counsel of the Warren Commission in 1964. In one such letter, dated February 27, 1964, Mr. Hoover called atten-tion to background information contained on pages 155 through 159 

of a report dated November 30, 1963 , repared by our Dallas ofice in the Kennedy assassination case. He told Mr. Rankin, This information was obtained through a search of all files in the Dallas office wherein reference to Jack L Ruby appeared. All available information concerning Jack Ruby contained in the Dallas files is set forth in the report. Mr. Hoover's letter continued: For your information, Ruby was contacted by an agent of the Dallas office on March 11, 1969, In view of his position as a night clul operator who might have knowledge of the criminal element in Dallas. lHe was advised of the Bureau's 

Jurisdiction In criminal matters, and he expressed a willingness to furnish infor-ziatlon along these lines. He was subsequently contacted on eight occasions le-tween March 11, 1969, and October 2, 1959, but he furnished no information what-ever and further contacts with him were discontinued. Ruby was never paid any monvy, and he was never at any time an informant of this Bureau. In another letter to Mr. Rankin dated Al)!il 7, 19-(. Mr. 1I,[ooer again caLlled attention to the fact that information on Jack Ruby lhad been furnished to the Commission in the I)allas offie's report of No-veinber 30, 1963. This letter stated. "('opie.s of all of the records (hwated wherein mention is made of Ruby )rior to Novenaber 23, 1963. lave been prepared and are being forwarded to you." There was nothing in these Buran records indicating that ]uby furnished information to the FBI as an informant or was ever pail any money. Aks you can tell, this question was thoroughly explored by the (' mn-

mission, and nothing to the contrary was (e velo ped. You have also inquired conceniing reports t hat Jack Ruby wa.; in-volved in a union killing in 1939, which fact allegedly had now been fuimished the Warren Commission. Contrary to a inisconception that has arisen, there is no evidence that Jack Ruby was involved as a participant in the shooting of aunion official in Chicago, Ill., in December 1939. Nor (lid the FBI attempt to conceal iiformat ion concerning Rulby's alleged involvement in this crime from the Warren ('ommission. The truth of the matter is that the facts of this shooting incident were not known to the FI at time tie (Jf the a-s;.asinat ion of Presi-dent Kennedy. A check oi the records of the Chicago Police Department di.closed no information concerning this shooting. However, on November 25, 193-3 days after the assassination-our Chicago office found in the morgue of the Chicago Tribune information pertaining to the fatal shooting of a union official in 1939 in which mention of Jack Ruby, as "Jack Ruwn'rstein." was made. Ruby was an employee of the union. lie was a friend of thi' deceased union official, and according to the news account, was in no way irtlicated in the shooting. This information was. in fact., furnished to the Warren Commission. It a ppears in the Commission's published report. In addition, you have in(mired about the uch-publicized report concerning an alleged teletvpe me.sae from FBI headquarters thiat was allegedly received in our New Orleans office on November 17, 196.3. 8 -

The teletype purportedlTy warned that a militant revolutionary group Might attempt to assassinate President Kennedy during his Rovem. ber 22 visit in Dallas. This story emanates from a former FBI clerical employee. He worked in our New Orleans field office for about 4 years ending in 

1966. During November 1963, he was assigned to the early morning shift-12:15 to 8:15 a.m.-in that office as a security patrol clerk. His story about the teletylp first came to light early in 1968 when the then-District Attorney of New Orleans stated on a television program that the former PiB clerk had been interviewed by an attor-ney andl had told the at torney of the teletype. 

On February 1. 1968,-the former clerk, who then was in Jackson-villey Ia contacted our office there to deny this televised story. He admitted *having been in contact with the attorney involved; stated that the attorney wanted hint to furnish information concerning ateletype from FBI headquarters on November 17, 193, reporting ja 

threat to President Kennedy in Dallas; and told the special agent in charge of our Jacksonville'office that he lind never received or seen a teletype or other message containing the information which the attorney sought. The following day, the fornner clerical employee also contacted our Netv Orleans office to advise of an additional contact he had had with the attorney involved. Our former employee claimed that ho told the attorney he did not approve of what the attorney and his associates were doing-and that ti e information attributed to him on the tele-vision prograni was totally false. The following month, however, he contacted the U.S. Attorney in New Orleans and told him and two associates that there was, in fact. such a teletype message. The teletype, he maintained. was received while lie was on duty as a security" patrol clerk in the New Orleans office on November 17, 1963-and that he called the special agent in charge of the office to advise him of its contents. This. the former employee claimed, caused the special agent in charge to instruct that lie eall certain agents and tell them to maintain contact with various informants. At this point-in March 196--an extensive inquiry was launched. It included a thorough check of the files at our headquarters and in the New Orleans and Dallas field offices. No record of a teletype or any other kind of communication reporting that there would ie an atteml)t to assassinate President Kennedy in Texas could be found. We additionally determined that only one communication was dis-patched from FI headquarters to the'New Orleans office on ,Novem-                                  

> ber 17, 1963. which was aSunday. Thik was aletter enclosing atrans-lation of adocument in conjunction with atrial in atotally unrelated fraud against the Government case. Since the former clerk had worked

the 12:15 to R:15 a.m. shift on November 17, 1963. a check was also made of communications distlatched to the New Orleans office on Sat-itrdav, November 16, 1963. There were only three, those being. first, a teletype in a fugitive case: second. a communication in a stolen motor vehicle investigation: and third, a communication concerning a mili. tarv deserter. None of these communications made mention of Presi-de-t Kennedy. More than 50 employees of the New Orleans office were inter-viewed-employees who" had been assigned to that office since at least 0November of 1903. All stated that they had no knowledge of any such teletype. 

. The special agent in charge whom the former clerical employee aid he telephoned on the morning of November 17, 1963, als said he knew nothing whatever about the alleged teletype. We also interviewed the former clerical employee involved. This time, he insisted that a teletype reporting a possible assassination attempt on the President was, in fact, received at the New Orleans office while he was on duty there November 17. 190. He claimed that other clerical employees of the New Orleans office knew of the receipt of this teletype, buthe refused to furnish their names. When specifically questioned as to whether he had a copy of this or any other Government documents, he gave an emphatic denial and also denied ever having made copies of Government documents. At that time-in 1968-we fully advised the Department of Justice of the allegations which the former clerical employee had made, and of the results of our extensive inquiry rgarding them. .Now, more than 7 years later, the story of the phantom teletype has surfaced again. This time it has a new twist. One of the newsmen who contacted us last month stated that our former clerical employ made available to him the text of the alleged teletype, claiming that he had an actual copy of the teletype but was afraid to furnish it for fear of being prosecuted. In an effort to obtain the document which this former employee claims to have so that it can be examined for authenticity. the Depirt-ment of Justice granted him immunity from prosecution for purloin-ing. Possessing, or not having produced the alleged document. The former employee was advised of this action on September 2,3, 1975. Even under a grant of immunity, he would not agree to make such document available to us, stating that lie was not claiming he had any such doe ument. The following day we contacted the former employee's attorney. He informed us that his client had typed a precise copy of the alleged teletype when he had access to it in our New Orleans field office. Other sources have furnished us with the text of the allege d replica that our former employee losseses. It has been carefully reviewed and compared with the format and wording of investigative and com-munieations procedures in existence in 1963. Several variances have been detecttl. This individual's story has caused newsmen and others to ask whether such a teletype ,as. in fact, sent from our Headquarters on November 17. 1.W3, and whether all copies of it subsequently were destroyed. Since the information regarding the "phantom teletype" has now ben expanded to include the text of the teletype. as w'oll as its pur-ported transmission to all FBI field office--which incidentally was not the initial alle.ant ion of the former clerk in 1968--we contacted all 

59 of our field offices and instructed that each conduct a thorough and detailed search of records and files in an effort, to determine if uch a teletype had in fact existed. FAch of our 59 field offices uni-formnly advised bas on the penetrative searches made that them was no evidence to indicate or corroborate the existence of such ateletvpe. 10 There is no doubt in my mind regarding the answer to this allega-tion. A teletype or other message of this nature sent to all of our offices simply could not and would not disappear. In the first place, FBI rules and regulations would prohibit its destruction. In the sec-ond place, the fact of its existence could not be wiped from the minds of the many employees at our headquarters and in each of our field offices who would have been involved in its preparation, approval, transmission, receipt, and the action taken thereafter. These then are the facts developed concerning recent charges that have been made about the FBI's performance of duty in the John F. Kennedy assassination case. In some instances, the facts are explicit and answer the allegations. In others, the passage of time and inconsistencies in the interviews prevent a more definite statement of truth. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 'r. EDWARDS. Thank you, Mr. Adams. Let's refer to the Oswald letter, which I believe you would agree is a very serious matter. Mr. ADAMS. Yes. Mr. EDWARDS. Now, it was reported in the newspapers that Wash-ington did learn of the Oswald letter delivered to the Dallas field office and that Mr. Hoover sent out letters of censure to 17 agents because of the incident, and that Mr. Hosty, the agent involved, was suspended without pay for 30 days and transferred. Is there any truth to any of those statements I

Mr. ADAMS. You mean because of this letter in question? Mr. EDWARDS. Yes. Mr. ADAMS. There is no truth to that. There is nothing in our files, prior to this inquiry, that in any way has referred to Oswald's visit to the office, leaving a note, which was subsequently destroyed. Mr. EDWARDS. Well, were some agents punished in the Dallas office? Mr. ADAMS. Yes. Mr. EDWARDS. After? Mr. ADAMS. Yes, there was disciplinary action taken against anumber of personnel in connection with the FBI investigation of Oswald but not in connection with his visit to the office, leaving anote nd Mr. EDWARDS. Well, on November 1--and incidentally, we are not going to try to get into names here, except where it is absolutely necessary or where a name or two has already appeared in the press-Mr. Hosty visited the Paine residence in an attempt to locate Oswald. When the FBI reported to the Warren Commission the contents of Oswald's notebook, the FBI did not say, did not report to the Warren Commission, that in his address book was the following notation: "November 1, 1963. FBI Agent" and so forth. It gave "James P. ITosty and the address of the field office in Dallas.""Why didn't the FBI report to the Warren Commission that this entry appeared in Oswald's address book? Mr. ADAMS. I am advised that the first report was a summary and it did not, appear in that, but it later did appear in information fur-nished to the Commission. I can verify that and gve you that at alater date. 

Mr. EDWARDS. Yes, would yoa, please? 11 Mr. ADAMS. I can give something for the record on it. [See response to question I of the letter dated October 29, 1975, which is included in the appendix.] Mr. EDWARDS. Because this happened to be the same agent that the note was addressed to.-_that is the missing note that was destroyed-we are interested. Mr. ADAMis. Right. Yes. Mr. EDWARDS. Mr. Butler? Mr. BuTLF.r. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. On page 3 of your statement, and on page 4, you tell us that you had interviews and reinterviews. Did the reinterviews indicate any in-consistencies from your original interviews with reference to your agents concerning this particular inquiry, that is, the Oswald note? Mr. ADAMS. Yes, some of the reinterviews were occasioned by the fact we would conduct one interview and we would get the par-ticular story. We had already interviewed someone else and perhaps some additional information would come up and then we would go back and reinterview that person. It also resulted in elaboration on the part of some who had been originally interviewed. Mr. BUTLFR. My question is directed to this. Do you have agents who gave different stories in 1963 from what they now tell us in 1975 with reference to this matter? Mr. ADAMS. No; because actually we have nothing in the files-in other words, we have nothing in our files concerning this visit. This was a completely new issue which came out in July of 1975. Mr. BtVrIER. Well, those people who had some knowledge of this in 1963 and did not, in the course of their interviews in 1963, reveal knowledge of this, are they now telling you their knowledge? Mr. ADAMS. That is right. It is inconsistent in the fact that this i atter was not properly reported as it should have been in 1963 and jiow individuals are telling us that it did, in fact, occur. There is your iiconsistency. Mr. BUTrLER. Yes, but you don't consider it was the responsibility of these agents to have volunteered that information? Mr. ADAMS. Yes, I do. Mr. BuTim. What discipline have you taken with reference to them ?Mr. ADAMS. Well, we haven't because we have been waiting for the I apartment to decide as to whether any criminal action might flow froni the.e events. We received their final opinion yesterday on that. Now, we are in the process-of reviewing the matter from an internal administrative action stand point because of the fact that you have individuals who had knowledge this took place and they did not report it at the time; individuals who had knowledge that that note was act ally destroyed. -  

> A\fr. BUTLFR.

Do you find any indication that there was collusion with reference to the failure to volunteer this information, I mean, collusion at any level? Mr. ADAMS. Only collusion from the standpoint that we do have an individual admitting that he did have the note and he makes the state-ment that he destroyed it upon instructions of his agent in charge. If that statement is correct, there would be collusion between the two. The agent in charge denies having issued such instructions and denies having any knowledge of it. You have individuals, a number of mdi-12 viduals, in the 1)allas office who had knowledge of the fact that Oswald had visited the office and had left a note of some sort. Mr. Bmu-ix.RI. I understand this is generally shared information? M[r. ADAm s. That. is right. .Ir. Bu'rjrxi. And was n~ot volunteered by anyone? .r. ikim-s. That is right. 

M. 1UtrLER. NowV was that because nobody was willing to take the initiative in this regard, or was there some general consensus, after disctssi-n, among these people that maybe this is one of the things \\'O wouldn't vo(llunteer ?Mr. ADA.MS. During Mr. Bass(ttRs inquiries, we were mial)le to come 

11l) with any evidence of a meeting actually having taken place where a decision was nade "Let's do all of this." 'T'his is one of the problems we have. Mr. Bu'riit. Well, it, is one of the questions you really haven't .Isw(r'Pl(1, it seems to ine. 

Mr. kDvms. Tait is true that-Mr. B'r'r:II. Now, you also Speculate thIe I)url))se ()f N'or inI i ry was whiat the motives were l)ehind the note's (lest met ion. I see no answer to this. What conclusion did you come to with reference to that ?

Mr. AAMS. 'Well, that was another area that 'we were mialle to 

satisfaktorily answer. rhe one individual, the individual wO) act ally destroyed the note, indicated that the motive was emunarrassment to tle Bureau and embarrassment to himself personally; that thlat was to  

> -

avoid the embarrassment of having the fact known that. Oswald lhad tgeeni in the office and no action had been taken concerning liis \ visit to th. office. Did you come up with any other facts? Mi 1. IlBssETr. No, I did not. 

M r. ADAMs. That was the only   

> ,1r. BUTLER.

That was protection to the individual's rel)utation withiin the Bureau?  

> Mr.

AAMS. That is right. And protection to the Bureau. ills motive was he felt it would be embarrassing to the Bureau and el)arrassiuig 

to) lim personally .  

> N1Mr. BLMER.

Yet, you are satisfied that the (lestruction (f vital 

e\ idncje and information of this sort does not involve a violation of amiv statute ? Is that a crime? 

Mr. \ ).[s. Well, the matter was referred to the Departnt. lt. 

results of our investigations \et(, referred to tl l)epartinenvit for con-sidleratitn of potential violations, but there is als) a lapse of I-) Years ad the 1)elpartment would have to answer-well, I can read vont. if 

Von would like, their letter which explains tle. de'lination. If you 

\would like, for me to-

.M r. B n-P.R. No, I fhink not. The staff will share that witl you later. Mr. AnAMS. All right. .Mfr. BUTrER. I would think that rather than going into expect ive sVs-Sion or a nyt!hing of that nature, if 'ou could share tiat with our staff, I thiik that would be sufficient for our Iurposes. "Mr..ki).\i.rs. I would be glad to. Mr. lu'rir..R One other question which I have here deals with thf. ,lerical employee who has gotten us involved in the "phantoil teletype." ,MIr. A,\ Ms. Yes, sir. 13 M'. BUTLE. Are his reports to you, in response to your in(juiries Under oath? Mr. ADAMS. NO, sir. Originally, he was interviewed, back in 1968. During the current resurrecNtion of the teletype issue, I was e+rs(oilally in contact with him to advise him of the fact that the Deputy Attor-ney General had authorized immunity from l)orosecution if lie would m;ike this teletype available, which he claimed to have. lie tlien claimed lie didn't have it. And I asked him if le would I)e willing to )e inter-viewed under oath concerning his allegations aud also fillnislu nie tile iamieiWs of tlese people tliat lie now claims had linowledge of it, Since lie originally lhal refused to furnish themn. Aud li, said that, he would agree to) bw interviewed lundler oath once lie received the results o our 

196S investigation, which. lie had requested under tile Freedom of In-formation Act. We have furnished him that. His attorney coitactvd 

him and he advised that he would still reserve the right to decide whether he will be interviewed under oath after le reviews tile re-suits. And he has not contacted me to (late, concerning Is willinge-s to 1)0 interviewed.   

> All'. BUTLER.

One more question, if I may, Mr. Chiairmai? Is tll(, ,rgaint of immunity still alive, or has that been witlhdrawn, or (oe's tlat 

lla'e any present vitality? M r. ADA 4 Ts. I would have to consult with the I)epartimenvt. 'rlive was o condition attached to it. It was basically, if lie would miake it avail-able promptly. Now, I don't know how long they are willing to leave it 

> )1)(1.

]lit as far as I alm personal y concerned, T feel tie (olly vav lyi is eolilol eve'r b)e 1liit to rest-wliei all iilli\ idiivil cliaillis Sollietll Iiii existed (

but had been destroyed. you lha'e an ulijill battle ever)'rovinll it 

ile v'vr exist d--is to give li hi ii ililuillityv if 1w lilts all ictilill co y,. 

wihi 11v originill cailid, a11N tii lie is wvilling to lpro)&liIe it. i1 Order to get this ililter aiiit lietil invited o dcni ied . (10t1't 1belie 'e ii exists. I was told he la i copy and that lie was ('O1ii-lC1'il- i,'si roving 

it, lecalse of his (,oncern over l)rosecution. A\idl I welt. rivilt to tile D)lplirllent to get alihority for iiuiiuity. 'll}en i 1ili1 told! Iw is 11ot  

> c'laiiiinl"

he has Suchi a ('0h)V. 

Mr. 1Tii'. 'l'lalilk voll. ir. .kdaliii. my iliie his ex pi iI.    

> 'i,', 1). )N.x.

' Iliil ouil, M 1'. Clir i i ni,1v111. 

Mr. kdallis, 111e 1'I did lit give uis this doilllllc'iv-t-ilit il tlhis iiloiliiig, 'Ont ralr 1 to I le Rules of ilie House, anil IHarold 'Tli'vr of 

time I)elparhiveilt of listi 'e also broke that. rule find al Sb'zed. So, if I aiim brinaing eiibarrasinent to the Bureail I think that inighlt 

e a goo(id )olicy in some cases. -

I think the key (iestion here is thmllotives behind tile (L.st ruictionl of the note. Yoi skirt around that, and you state' iintever tholightl. id fears- may lie jiiotivatild t li'e conieilni(it or (),wa ili' l.41t 1iid the convcelmnelit ai l siameqile, lit ilit'i tii ot tlir ote are iiknomwii. Well, tlhe aiiet in ciiallre said lvit lie (11(1 this to avoid eiiulbarrl'a's-nllit to tile Burevll. Wh,1iat kind of rlCS ilo yoll give to tllv-e people 

to avoid enllba rr. sslilent to the Blleali at Rily col ? IN1at eiliiii..s-livuit coilld iave o.e0 to the Buri'eau ?.M'..AD.[s. Well. we don't. give then any-firt. let Ie apolo. ize-Mi'. DIiXA-. Wly did ie think that way then ?2 . .!79 7 - -.. . -14 Mi . ADAMS. First, let me apologize for not giving you copies of this in advance. I was waiting for the Department to decide the criminal issues involved, which would have limited my testimony here today if further action was being considered. And I didn't get that until yesterday afternoon. Mr. DRINAN. It severely hampers our power to inquire. Mr. ADAMS. I realize that, and I try to comply every time in this regard. I have to apologize in this instance. But, we don't have any rule concerning embarrassment of the Bureau. I think what happened Mr. DRiNAN. Well, he had rules, sir. He had rules. And the only motive you have given as to this action is Mr. B tTLYR. Mr. Chairman, I must object. Can the witness be entitled to complete his answer before he is interrupted. If that would be a ruling of the Chair, I would appreciate it. Mr. EDWARit. The time is Mr. Drinan's. Mr. DRINAN. Mr. Adams? Mr. ADAMS. Yes, I would like to explain that agents who work for the FBI, both agents and clerical employees, have a tremendous respect and love for the organization. I don 't think you have to havo an official promulgate rules saying that we should all be embarrassed if we make a mistake. I think we are embarrassed when we make a mis-take. I am embarrassed over this incident where people failed t( -arrv out their responsibilities in this regard. But, there isn't any order that 

you must conceal facts to avoid embarrassing the Bureau. 

I just think that frequently it comes to a person's mind that "I hate to embarrass the Bureau by my actions." I think that is what he meant. Mr. DRINAN. Am I right in concluding that you are suggesting that the only possible motivation-Mr. ADAMS. No. sir, I am not. Mr. DRINAN. All right, what. is the other possible motivation? Mr. ADAMS. I have been unable to arrive at motivations as to why this action was taken, because we have been unable to determine. fo'r one thing, Mr. Drinan. the actual contents of the note, Hd we been able to determine, with certainty, the contents of the note, then per-haps we would have been able to shed some light on the motivation as to why the action was taken to destroy the note. Mr. Di VANA. I think you have a fairly good consensus as to what the note said. Now, them are three people involved, and I suppose the question is whom will we believe, will we believe the agent Te destroyed the note because his supervisor or the special agent in charge told him to. Will we believe the agent's superior? He found the note in the agent's workbox shortly after President Kennedy's assassination, and he says he had never heard of it since. The special agent now says that he doesn't even recall the note being delivered, and yet there is a con-sensus that the note was, in fact, delivered. So the special agent's credi-bility is somewhat open to question. You are asking us to believe one of these individuals, however, you can't believe them all. That gets us down to the question of motivation. Unless you have some other moti-vation to offer, then we have to conclude that it is the rule of the FBI, and they drill it into the agents to never embarrass the Bureau, and this is what caused the unfortunate violation of the rules. 15 Mr. ADAMs. I think that would be a most unfair assumption and Ican't agree with it. I can't see any basis for it. Mr. DrlAfAN. Well, sir, I am looking for a motivation. Motivation is the key question here. Why did this particular agent do what he did? I can't find any other motivation. From all that I have seen, he had no personal stake in this other than the fact that he didn't want it to come out to the Nation that the FBI had, in fact, been investigating Lee Harvey Oswald, that Lee Harvey Oswald had visited the Dallas office and left this note, and then this thing came up. So he destroyed it, thinking this was the best way out. It seems to me the burden is on you, sir, to suggest some other pos-sible motivation. Mr. ADAMS. I don't feel the burden is on me to do that. I can specu-late. I could say, one, he has indicated personal embarrassment. He had received the note. Admittedly, he had received the note from Oswald. He ,aid it did not contain any threat. If that is true, then there would have been no embarrassment, perhaps, in the fact that Oswald had visited the office afterwards. If the note did contain a threat, on the other hand, and he failed to take appropriate action, that would be amotive for destroying the note. Mr. DnR WAN. Could the embarrassment have come about in the irreg-ularity of receipt of that note I I assume that whenever a letter is re-ceived that it is recorded somehow. We have no record that this was, in fact, recorded, and the date that it was received. Could that have been the reason that he didn't want to bring this out because the rules had been violated? Mr. ADAMS. No, I don't think that the note would have necessarily been recorded until such time as he took action on it and included it in the official files of the FBI. In other words, the receptionist would not record the note when she received it. She delivered it to the agent and he would normally include it in a communication, or he would send it to the chief clerk's office, where it would be serialized into the files. I wish we could arrive at a motivation. I wish we could completely answer, satisfactorily, what the note said, and who ordered its de-struction. We have a conflict in sworn statements in this regard. All that we were able to do was conduct a thorough investigation. And we are never satisfied when we don't get all the answers but, as you know, this isn't always possible. Mr. DRINA;. My time has expired. Thank you, sir. Mr. EDWARDs. Mr. Kindness Mr. KIN DESS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. First, I would like to clarify a question that has come up on several occasions in this subcommittee, and I have never been able to find the rule about which we are arguing. We have been talking so much about rules here this morning, I think we'd better get our own rules straight,--112(g) (4) of the House rules states: Each committee shall, insofar as is practicable, require each witness who is to appear before it to file with the committee in advance of his or her appearance awritten statement. There is nothing that has been done by the Judiciary Committee in its rules to further supplement that action and there "is nothing that has been done bv the subcommittee. I am tired of seeing witnesses appear before thls subcommittee and be embarrassed by the talk about 16 48 hours in advance furnishing their statements, when we don't have any such rule. 

I appreciate the fact that the witness is dealing with the problem of proving a negative in some degree and it is also appreciated that agood deal of patience has been displayed here. I thank you, Mr. Clhairlnan. 

Mr. EDWARDs. Mr. Badillo; lhave you finished ?Mr. KIx)NEss. Yes. Mr. EDwARDS. Mr. Bdillo. Mr. BADI)IJ). Tliank you. Mfr. (lai rlinan. You said, in tie beginning. flatly', that you la(l just coll)leted your exhaustive inquiry and that tlere is no doubt tlt Lee Harvey Oswald visited the I)allas field office some days prior to the assassination of President Kennedy and thlat, lie left, a handwiritteii note. You stated that you md Director Kelley first learned of these occurrences on ,hJlv 7, 19T. Is that correct? Mr. ADAM5s. Yes, sir. M1r. ]XAIII.O. 'Tli1t is a very narrow list. Canl you say under oath that other people in the Washintton Bureaui did not know of these oceurrences until July 7, 1975 ?    

> Mr. ADAMs. No. I

cant. because incelu(ed in iay statement is thle stateneit b~y one fornr .Assistant l)ireetor who said that he appar-ently had some-Mr. B.)mio. What I me'an is. is tlere any evidence tlat Mr. ]hoover-I mean. have you tried to determine whether Mr. Thoover knew about. this? 

Mr. Aj).ms. No, we foun( no evidence Mr. Hoover knew. Mr. ADmJIIA. Or tle pre lecessor to Mr. Kellev? Mr. AlD.iMS. Right. We Iiave tried to find y reord or any knowl-edge on the part of aniiyoie vofleeililig FBIl1itla4l(1Ttrer's involve-mient in this issue. The only thitg we have come ul) with is the state-uiient bY this former As sistnt I )i ,reor. wlio ,eins to tliink thlat possi-bly tw"o agents ill IiS di vision iugt l)tiive known about it. 'Fhuey have denied any knowled(lre of it. hI'le forilaer As-istnnt directorr ailso says tlat lie hls 110 specific knowledge of any i' dividil l in ien(lqua rtrs knowing of this. ie iust thinks it was I)rolba)lv Couiuioll knowledge down il this 1)lrticula i st IOT t iat u'li n iiot e existed. We ,iou't know when that coainoln kowledge uig(fit l a\ve nri :e. in say, months or years after. wleI so inevoi was t 'ansferai-l to h]eadmbiar-ters from )alls a(! .. 

'Mr. 1111~o Bt t here i;: no file at vent rad iendquarters? 

M.ADAMS'. lVe h11d 1o r'eoi'cl inl Ou- files; of---

M.Nr. BAJIIt,o. Where is tis receptionist now ?Mr. ADAMs. Sh is in th)e Dallas offie. Mr. B.\nLmo. h1lhere is tle agent for whoinu the note was intended now?    

> Mr. At).v\s.

TIe is in Kansas City. Mr. LAM.r.O. And wIlat is his tiile at tle preVent time ?Mr. ADAM S. Sp~ecial agent. 

Mr. BAD.l ,TA. Still the same title? 

Mr. ADAMis. yes.  

> M(r.

BAm),Lx. Welre is thle agent's supervisor? 

M r. AD.Mts. The special agent';s supervisor is in San Diego. 17 Mr. BADILLO. What is his title? Mr. ADAMS. Special agent. lie is still a special agent. Mr. BADILLO. Where is the special agent in charge now? 

Mft.. ADAMIS. lie is retired. Mr. BADIL). Mi. Chairman, I think that in view of tie fact that the letter from the Justice departmentt indicates the basic reason for nonprosecution is the statute of limitations and that the particular people who saw the note and who have testified allegedly as to the contents of the note are there, that this committee has the responsi-bility to bring these )eophle before us and have the opportunity to interrogate theie by ourselves, rather than just getting a secondhand report. They are there. This is a crucial issue. According to the testi-niony, they reneliber having seen the note and they remember that it containedi sone indication of violence; and I think it is important that we get (iireet evidence where the, direct evidence is rea(lily available. Now, isn't. there a rule that l)rovi(les that were there is evidence of violence on tile part of an individual, and where the President is going to be coming to town, that the FBI notifies the Secret Service'? 

Mr. Ai)+mm.t this timiiie, il 1961:, otir gui(Ieliaes were rather narrow ill tils regla r(l. '1'l1(.v pj)ovithd 1,asi.allv for notifying the S(crelt. Serv-ict. of any throat against tle Presid'enlt, against his family, or the  

> Iiiiuiidiately

folIlow i ig thle assll Si Imt ion . Ml-. I loover ord ered tmi 

in(uir Ie l(Imtiedt Im" forme ('k Assistant linrector (a le, who was ill large, of the lns)lei(io i I)ivision. ani it was iiuelmiately re''oJi -l1i(t1 l,(l mid ak5) approved that our criteria for di-senlinatilng infor-Illat ion to thlie Secret Ser 'i'Pe 60 broalei(el. A,\ld tlint r.(4-ouiin11Platiol 111( l t 10 ('lit'nia were .iih jle).*iq titl\y i ic''m t,( I into a2ll agreemnint b)(teweel th FIl ali ti Secret. Service. We lave slehll a .igreemnt 

today. 1 can furnish the committee the guidelines by which we do today furnish information to the Secret Service. 

I See response to question . of the letter dated October 29, 1975, wli(ch is included in the appendix.] 

Mr. Rkmi),jo. kcv~onlill-f to thle te'-t iiioliv that %,ou uiiad(e Ilere, the' contents of tile note were of a threatening nature that is; according to t lle li stnlom. f tle revt)olliist 1111(l tile agent. IS tlit correct ?

Mr. N.Ms. 'The receptionist felt it was threatening in nature and ----

Mi. B.l)lIJA). IN WI. the worlds atre-.-

Mt. .\ki)Mld..nt it (co)itlilte, a-

Mr1'. BHAm ILo. W\-ell, tle words ar'e:                           

> Ltot tlai, he awarning. Iwill wwill) tlhe, F1 111141 ll vli ehivlla ,eiDt lmrtmzienti If yolu (m't sto) ixthelnmi lily wife.

Is that threatening ?Mr. ,i),ms. That is right. juld I 11,1 iiot arglting witlh wol. I aHil Say-

ing t he recel)tiollist didI state it. 4-mit iiilld 0lt. T e agen1t, however. says it, contained n1 thirent. 'T'lhis was the agent to wholml the note w.s 

delIi vered. Mr. HBA mrIo. ExcuseA mi, 1,i, tilue is rn'ililig out, 1t4 ll'. just coli-cl uide. Agent Ilost " testiliel before the WalTren ( 'omi-.io ln that he sMW 1M iason to i'n foir'i the Secret Service of Oswald's !)lxille ill D1)llas, becise O)swald had( never hweol shown to tae %imade any kind of violent, statement. 18 

Mr. AIAMs. Tlat is correct. Mr. BADILU). Now. if this ttimony is true, isn't tilt a contradi..-tion of whit Agent Ilosty testitied to? Mr. ADA.MS. Well, Mr. Hosty is the one who claims to date that the note contained no threats. He testtified-Mr. BADIIA0. Whoe is Mi. I lost il this seqiUence of events? Mr. ADAMS. I feel that Mr. Ilosty has been publicly identified and we discussedl this before the meeting. Mr. Hosty is the vase agent. Mr. BADII.1O. le agent, in charge Mr. ADAMS. No, the case agent in this nattor, to whom the note was delivered. Mr. BAmLLO. I see. Mr. An;\is. And Mr. Hosty testified before the Warren Commis-sion that, since lie was the case agent on the Oswald investigation, and he hal no knowledge of any violent propensities on the part of Os-Wald. In his current statement, Mr. Ilosty continues to state that the note which was given to him contained absolutely no threats. So there is no inconsistency in his statement. There is an inconsistency between what he said and what the receptionist said. The receptionist said it did contain a threat. Mr. BADILO. My time has expired. Mr. EDWAIRDS. Mr. Dodd. Mr. DODD. Thank you. Mr. Adam4, on 3ay 4, 1964, Mr. Hoover, the former Iireetor of the FBI, transmitted it letter to Mr. Rankin. Gen,vnl Counse. of the Warren Commission, along with a list specifying 69 documents con-tained in FBI Headquarters files concerning Lee larvey Oswald. Of those 69 documents, only 23 were reviewed by the Warren Commission. Did the FBI turn over the compJlete file of 'Lee Harvey Oswnld of 69 documents to the Warren Commission? Mr. ADrs. As far as I know. I have not addressed myself to that specific iissue, but let me check that. I would have to check on that, Mr. Dodd. Mr. DoDD. I would like to make a request, Mr. Chairman, at this point that that file of 69 documents be turned over to the committee or whatever procedure is in order so that the file may be reviewed. I think it is an established fact that only 23 of the 69 documents were re-viewed by the Warren Commission. Mr. ADAMS. At their decision I

Mr. Dom. I don't know. That, is the point I was trying to get. I would like to know whose decision it was. I am not sure you have the answer today, but-Mr. ADAMs. No, but I will be glad to submit afterwards for the rec-

ord a statement concerning that. Mr. EDWARDS. Very good. We will communicate with you on that subject. rSee response to question 3 of the letter dated October 29, 1975, which is included in the appendix.1 Mr. Dom. According to a transcript of the .January 22. 1964, meet-ing of the Warren Commission. Lee Rankin, General Counsel, re-ported that lie had just received a call from Texas Attorney General Waggoner Can" reporting that "Oswald was acting as an FBI under-cover agent." This report was also corroborated by the district attor-19 ney, Henry Wade. Rankin also reported that Carr told him that Oswald's badge number was 179 and that Oswald had been paid $200 amonth salary for his role as an FBI informant. Was Lee Harvey Oswald ever an FBI informant IMr. ADAMS. Absolutely not. This was thoroughly covered by the Warren Commission and was included in the conclusions: The fact that he was not an informant. Mr. Doue. Going back to a question raised earlier by the chairman, Lee Harvey Oswald had an address book of the names of various people. It has been reported that a page of that address book, contain-mg the name of the agent in question regarding this particular letter that was destroyed, was in that address book and that that page was torn out. Do you have any information as to whether or not that is afact? Mr. ADAMS. No; I don't. Again, I will be glad to submit that, be-cause, as you can understand, during the assassination investigation, we transferred 80 additional agents into Dallas, and we conducted 25,000 interviews and it is just not possible for me to have at the tip of my finge - I. Mr. DODD. You can see the thrust of my question. This gets back to the questions raised by Father Drinan earlier regarding why or what would motivate that particular agent to destroy that letter. I can un-derstand that one particular agent may get concerned about something that may embarrass him, but in fact, the address book-but in fact the summary of names-the name of Mr. Hosty was deleted as being in Lee Harvey Oswald's address book. Now that was a decision by some-one else other than Mr. Hosty, obviously, when you consider who was holding the evidence. That would indicate there was a motivation which went beyond the individual motivation of a particular agent, but rather a decision made at higher levels. Mr. ADAMS. Well, Mr. Dodd, all I can say is subsequent to the assassination there have been many, many allegations. Each time one arises, we have continued to look into them. And I am sure this allega-tion, like the one that Oswald was an informant or like the one that keeps coming up that Ruby was a paid informant of the FBI-well, all Ican do is take your inquiry and I will be glad to respond to it after review of the files. Mr. DODD. But you don't have any information or any knowledge as to the exclusion of Mr. Hosty as being one of the names in that ad. dress book, as to why that was deleted from that summary? Mr. ADAMS. I don't even know that it was deleted. Iam just not familiar with that particular allegation. Mr. DoDD. What type of precautions would the FBI normally take if they had knowledge that a particular individual was capable of kill-ing the President f We have seen a couple of instances just in the past month or so. What steps would be taken or what is your policy if they had information or if an agent was aware that someone was capable of that kind of activity; what steps or precautions would be taken ?Mr. ADAMS. If he was capable of t, if it fits our criteria for informa-tion requested of us. we would disseminate it to the Secret Service. The Secret Service has a protective responsibility and we have an intelligence responsibility of providing information to them accord-20 ing to criteria they establih for the types of information, tly want to have in order to carry out their protective responsibilities. Mlr. Don. Was that p)rocetlre followed, as far as you know, in the 

(11s(' of fee I Iarvey Oswal1 ?Mr. Ai.%Ms. Yes. As you probably recall. the FBI was criticized at lie th e although the action taken iit the criteria-I mean, we did not h ave any threat against tle 1residentl-ut the Warren Commission 

Was ('it'i(.al Of the fact that these criteria were too narrowly drawn. As a result. they have been broadened considerably concerning the types of information that we now furnish to the Secret Service. That 

Was one of th, l)i i s of criticism by' tihe Varreni ('omnlission. Mr. I)ODI. Yoll mentioned that there is a letter from the former 

1)irvctor of the FBI to Mr. Rankin apparently regarding an inquiry surrounding 'Mr. Ruby. You pointed out in your test inionv that there 

Were vi glt OCCaIsiolls between "March 11, 16.P',9. and Ovtolor 2, 1959. when Ifr. Rubw was investigated or talked to by the FBI. Now. that is o.ir, a mont h or rather less than once a monih during that period 

of tiame. Ts it normal procedure to talk to someone once a month I over a period of time such as that, and then have Ito information or results t Ihat were obtained? Is that common practice? Mr. Ar.ms. Well. h e was contacted originally because it was felt thit lie wa, Ii1 inividual who would he a )le to provide crimilial in-forimiation to tie FlI because of his employment as a night club Operator. 'lhese contacts lrle standard to (letermin i if lie is going to be 

al le to becoming all ilifo lilt for tt. FI"II. (),ce t I,,se cOntats prove igiative, although lie in(licated a willingness to cooperate. but he nevei ftinlil'ed anV illfor i it ion, then tlh. file was closed. But this 

would Ile a normal dev'elhoplnental process of regular contacts with aperson who may lb ill it positiol to furnish information. Mr. I)oD. Blut it is your statement that Jack Ruby. as well, wis not it lai(d informant for tie FIi at any time? 

Mr. Am..ms. That is right. I saw a news item on it vesterdlav, where 

on, of the Senators had 'ade a statement again on ii. And Tehecked with the Senate colmuitttvt to find out if they know of au'thiling in this regard that. I don't know, and I haven't'lgotten any 1'Sl)OI1Se in 

that regard indicating that there is anything to thft, effect. Anl Ialso called (lown to Dhallas last, night, io have them review tile file a,,ain Just to make sure that I could testif tolay flint there is noth-

ing in that, file indicating that Ruby was ever a paid informant or ever ftirnishel any information, and I 'was asselid that is tile case. Mr. I)o). 'My tine has expired. Thank you. M r. Chairman. Mr. 1'AWAr)s. Mr. Adams, continuing along the lilies of questioning Iuirstled by Mr. Dom), the letter that Mr. Hoover wrote to the Com-mission stating that Ruby was an informant and tintacted on eight occasions, that letter or tlat information did not become a part of the Warren Commission Re pt. Is that correct ,

Mr. AAms. It was su mitted to the Warren Commission. I am not sm-e whether it was in the published report. I don't. believe it was. Mr. EDWARDS. Now, don't-yon think that, was most significant in-formation and should have been in the Warren Commission Report? I know you didn't write it.  

> Mr.

Arms. No, I have no idea what might have motivated them. 21 Mr. EDWARDS. It is curious, though. Also, when did this letter come to light to the public ? I believe very recently. Is that correct? Mr. Aivss. I think this allegation has com'ie up over the years. Last December was tie first time-Mr. EDWARDS. In I)ecember of 1974? Mr. ADAMS. Yes. Mir. EDWARDS. Can you think of any reason why this letter should havA been suppressed ill of this time? Mr. ADAMS. No; I think that the Warren Commission probably had a lot of information which they considered basically work papers to go into their final report. Now, as these work papers are pro a ly be-coming more available to researchers, there will be other questions raised in the future. But I don't have any idea. Mr. EDwARDs. Well, it is rather shocking when you think about it that you find out 12 years later that both the Warren Commission and the FBI knew that. Jack Ruby had been rel)orting to the FBI and yet we have to wait all that time to find it out. It is the kind of disclosure coming about very late that adds to any paranoia that might be taking 

place in this country. Wouldn't you agree? Mr. ADAMS. Well, on reporting, I would have to be a little picky over that word because in these contacts, because all of them were al)solutely Ie native. le furnished no information of value. So lie was not an informant of the FBI. Ile was being contacted to determine whether lie would become an informant ')y furnishing us information. Mr. EDWARDS. Yes, but. this is the man who killed the man who allegedly killed the President of the United States. Mr. ADAMS. I hat is right.. .\Mr. EDWARDS. Yet the 1)eople fin(d out 11 or 12 years' later that hwas an FBI informant on at least eight different occasions. Mr. ADAMS. Vell Mr. EA)wARDs. OK. 

> "Mr.

BUTLER. "Mr. Chairman, may T? It is correct, is it not,, that these contacts with Mr. Ruby were in each instance instituted or initiated by the FBI? Mr. ADAMS. Yes. Mr. Brrr.m. And done in an effort to solicit information from him? Mr. ADA'MS. That is right. Mr. BUTLER. And you got a negative response in each instance? Mr. A AMs. That is "ight. Mr. EDWARDS. Yes; I agree. We should have been told about it. The public should have, somewhere along the line, been told. Now, Mr. Adams, we were talking earlier about the Oswald letter an(1 the fact, that a number of agents were (liscipline(1 in the Dallas office as a result of some things that happened or did not happen in the investigation. How many agents were disciplined I

Mr. ADAMS. I really couldn't answer that. I am not prepared on that 1oint. I do know that, after the assasination, Mr. Ioover asked that the niatter be inquired into. And, of course, as a result of it, every little item was covered( as to the handling of the investigation. I know that agents in Dallas were disciplined and I know that agents in Washing-ton were disciplined. Mr. EDWARDA. For what type of misconduct ?Mr. ADAMS. No misconduct as such; for failing to perhaps include Oswald on the security index; for delays of a few days in handling communicat ions; for just a review of the case as to wliether it repre-sented the professional workmanship which would normally be ex-pected, and I think the Commission in its report was critical along the same areas, that is, that the investigation of Oswald could have been more vigorous. Mr. EDWARDS. Mr. lHosty was one of those disciplined? Mr. ADA MS. Yes, sir. Mr. EDWARDS. Now, Mr. Hosty also interviewed Oswald in the Dallas jail? Is that correct? Mr. ADAM.S. Yes. sir. Mr. EDWARDS. Was he with the police for the entire time, I believe 17 hours, that Oswald was interviewed? Did you have an FBI agent there the entire time that Oswald was interviewed in the Dallas jail? Mr. AD,01s. I don't know the answer to that, but I rather doubt it. Mr. EDWARDS. Did Mr. Hosty write a report of the interview? 

Mr. ADAMS. Yes. Mr. EDWA 1As. Is there a transcription of all of the interviews of Oswald in the Dallas jail by the Dallas police and the FBI? Mr. ADAMS. I know the ballas police submitted a lengthy report on tleir lhandling of Oswald after his arrest and I would asume that all of this material is in the Commission's files. Mr. EDWARDS. Mr. Butler? 

Mr. BTJtrLUi. Thank you. Mr. Chairman. With reference to the discipline of the agents, the discipline dealt with shortcomings in reference to the investigation and not what preceded the assassination. Is that correct? Mr. ADAIMS. Well, it, was what preceded the-assassination; in other words, the handling of the investigation of Oswald prior to the amassination. 

Mr. BuT ,rx. That is the basis for the discipline Mr. ADAMS. Yes, sir. Mr. Bu q'LR. Now, were there any extraordinary advancements fol-lowing this? What has been the subsequent history, for example, of the special agent in charge? I know, I understand now he is retired, but what is the history of this man's record within the FBI following-Mr. ADAMS. He was in that Dallao office continuously since the termination of the investigation from 1963 on up to his retirement, his recent retirement. Mr. B'MrF.R. So, there was no advancement with reference to him in grade? Mr. ADAMS. No. 

M r. BT7TTmr. Tunless it was salary advancement? Mr. ADAMS. No promotion. Mr. BrrnT.R. The same is true of the other people who are involved in the inquiry with reference to the disposition of the note? Mr. ADAMSF. As far as the disposition of the note-.Mr. Btrr,?. I mean: you have answered the question several times that these people remain special agents until their retirement or until present time. Well. did any of them--well, does the record indicate that any of them advanced father rapidly ?2:3 

Mr. ADAMS. NO. 

fr. BUTixR. Or received preference in any way? Mr. ADAMS. NO. Mr. BUTLm And there is a way to determine whether there has been preference as a result of this ?Mr. ADAMS. That is right. Mr. BuTLmr. And none of that appears? Mr. ADAs. No. Mr. Burizm. I have no further questions, Mr. Chairman. Mr. EDWARDS. Mr. Drinan. Mr. DRINANL-. Thank you. Mr. Chairman. Could you tell us more about the highest official that you have inter-viewed in the FBI? You say on page 10 that he was an Assistant Director at the time of the assassination. How many Assistant Directors were there, roughly, at that time? Mr. ADAMS. I would say 8 or 10. Mr. DRINAN. So he is one of the highest officials of the FBI. Mr. ADAMS. Yes, sir. Mr. DMrIAN. He stated that he discussed the Oswald case many times with the special agent in charge in Dallas, and that furthermore, this very high official, one of the top 8 or 10 in the entire FBI, stated that it was common knowledge at FBI headquarters that a threatening message had been received from Oswald, but that the special agent in charge seemed disinclined to discus the threatening letter. Now, can you elaborate on that ? If he thought that it was common knowledge at the FBI headquarters, and I have no reason to doubt his veracity, then at what time was it common knowledge that this threatening letter had been received ? Can we draw the inference that somebody in headquarters, knowing of this, spoke to the special agent in charge and maybe that is the reason he was disinclined to discuss itI 

I mean. going fbark to what I said before, unless you give a motiva-tion, people are going to infer motives that may not be correct, but they have to infer some motives. Now what would you say about the Assistant Director? Can his veracity be questioned? Mr. ADAMS. Well, his veracity could be questioned by virtue of the fact that he says it was common knowledge, but yet we interviewed eeyone in the chain of command of the two division supervising the investigation and they all deny having any knowledge of it. I don't think it is a question of veracity. I thin it is--well, I don't know what it is. I don't know at what point he may have learned of this. Where he says he talked to the SAC many, many times, but this Assistant Director vas supervising the Oswald aspect of the investigation, so he waq on the phone frequently with the SAC in Dallas, so-

Mr. DRWI . Was this before the assassination when he discussed the Oswald oawe 

Mr. AT)AMS. No. Mr. DI NxA. This was afterward ?Mr. ADAMS. Yes. Mr. DRINAN. Obviously, that individual knew there had been athreatening letter received. Mr. ADAMS. He says a mesage. He said a message and the SAC in Dalln indicated to him that he was disinclined to discum it because he was handling it with the assistant to the Director. 24 Mr. DRINAN. Now, did le, one of the highest people in tile FIl, know at that time that the message from Oswald had been destroyed 1Mr. ADAMS. No. He had no knowledge or claimed to have no know -

edge regarding the destruction of the note. Mr. I)RINAN. Well, that doesn't quite add up because, according to tits former official, the special agent in charge mentioned on one OCCasiorl he had an internal problem involving one of his agents wl, 

had received a threatening message from Oswald. So, the Assistant Director did know in 1963 that a threatening rues-sage from Oswald had been received. Mr. ADAMS. Right. Mr. DmNAN. But he didn't know it had been destroyed? Mr. ADAMS. No. Mr. DRINAN. Why didn't he ask to see that? Mfr. ADAMS. Well, that is a good question. Mr. DRINAN. Thank you. Mr. ADAMS. And we asked that same question. And he indicated tIIt 

after the assassination, there were-rumors galore floating all alroid, 

the place; there were all kinds of rumors as to what was going on and what didn't go on. And he pointed out how busy he. was and how bilsy the agent in charge in l)allas was. And lie said that durin- the cour.4-of Iils reporting on it that it never entered his mind concerning the fact 

tlhat he had heard something about the fact, that Oswald maylbe left a threatening message at the office. But he just indicated that it ,lidni t

r11sM his mind. Mr. I)RTNAN. With all due respect, sir. that doesn't quite add lip. I)ecause, he recalls all the other details about the threatening letter: about, how this man was disinclined to discuss the matter, saying it w:is hist a personnel problem. So how could he not have reque-sted te tireateining letter? You had this great national crisis and lie di(irl': even ask to have the threatening message. It just doesn't add up. Qiies-tim isa(lld upon questions and-fr. XiMS. Well, he said that it was being handled by tle assistwit to the Director over on tle per.onnel-administrative side, and tli:t lie felt that. it was just being handled. 'Mr. DRINAN. lie says that now I

Mr. ADAMS. No, I think that is in the statement, that is, that the SAC told him it was being handled-that is, he was disinclined to discuss it because it was being handled bv an assistant to the Director, who 

would have been over on the administrative side, and le felt that the ntitter was being handled. 'Mr. YoRSn. YO adh1. is a b,,ttomn line, o) page 12: We are. at this very moment, making our own assessMniet of tipe fact with nview towards instituting altwroiwlate administrative auction. I "qss5ne you haave given us hecre all the facts you have. On the ln! is of tlese facts, sir, how do von nmake an asstnen' ?Mr. ADAMS. It is pretty difficult. but here are considerations. You have inldividlals who hav admitted they had knowledge that Oswald1 had visited the office and left, a not,,-anid thy failed to insure tlmt it was properly reported to the Bureau and to the Warren Commis-sion. So you do iave nn admission of wrongdoing on their part. Where the analysis gets difficult is that during the inquiry these people have 25 been truthful and owned up to the fact that they had such guilty knowledge-if you want to term it such, so do you now, 12 years later, discipline them for that, which some would say would be disciplining them for being honest. Also, 'Mr. Drinan, where you have a split of testimony, you can't take action because you really can't pass judg-ment. You also have a situation where over the years the FBI has ex-pected employees to report, misconduct on the part of other employees, although we have been criticized for this practice by some, and there is a question of whether you should still go in and take action to let them know that there is no statute of limitations for misconduct and thlat such wrongdoing will never be tolerated. And these are the con-siderations that Mr. Kelley will have to resolve and that we will have to lave considerable discussions on to make sure that we are fair to the employees and at the same time make sure the system is such that we iliopefully can prevent a reoccurrence. Mr. I)Ie NAN. I am constrained to ask: Will the principle of "don't embarrass the Bureau" be operational? Mr. ADAMS. I hesitate to even answer that, becaiise I think I have Itiade it very clear that we have tried; tiat Mr. Kelley has established his credibility, that we have testified on matters that are embarrasing to anyone that is a part of the FBI. And I think the fact that we la\me made. an open disclosure 'would belay any comment that we are overburdened with a great sense of "don't embarrass the Bureau." Ir. I)inNA,. My time lhas expired. Thank you, sir. Mr. EDWARDS. Mr. Kindness. lr. KINDN-ESS. Thank you., Mr. Chairman. To what extent do the FBI rules or any statutes of the United States require FBI personnel to report any misconduct on the part of F4'I l)eronnel ?Mr. A)..s. It is an iit(,'Inal rule. It is in 01r rules and regulations. 

Mr. KIXIN~ss. Is that nile available. Might that rule be made avail-able to the slihcolminit tee? 

M'. ADAMTS. Yes, isir. Mr. KINDNSS. I wolild al)re('iate it if that would h" na1ade a part of tOi record, Mr. (hairman. 

Mr. EDwvTU)s. So ordered. [See response to question 4 of the letter dated October 29, 1975, which in llid tlie appenldix.] Mr. KINDNESS. What is the sani.tiom. ordinarily, unler that rule for 

failure to report a violation or misconduct by another employee of tHe Federal Bureau of Investigation? Mr. A1W Ms. There is no sanction set out by specific penalties. It, would del)end(.largely on the type of iniscon(hct that was involved, and whether failure to report permitted it to continue. It could depend on whether you were in a position to have pre-vented this or to have brought past misconduct to the Bureau's attention. Mr. K I,,-N);Ess. In fact. it would be very difficult. to apl)ly such a rule in many cases, would it not be? Mr. AD,%As. It would lxe. but we have, on a number of occasions in the past, censured employees by writing then a letter telling them that they are reprinandel because they had knowledge that certain activities were going on and that they should have properly reported it. Mr. KT.NDNESS. In the course of *investigations of matters even of 26 great national import., is it not ordinarily the experience that you find memories become a little cloudy after 12 years? Mr. ADAMS. I can give you a good example of that, and that is in connection with MIrs. Paine's testimony. When she was contacted re-cently, she wouldn't even remember first having testified to this state-ment. And here is a person directly connect ed with the facts of the mat-ter. It required jogging of her memory. And it is just not unusual after 12 years, considering the hectic nature of the time, 80 extra agents transferred into the office and a short deadline, what with the President insisting that the FBI conduct a thorough and exhaustive investiga-tion-I mean these situations are panic situations. And so the passage of time undoubtedly had a lot to do with the inability to come up with absolute facts. Mr. KINDNF. If you were confronted today with the information that a certain individual anywhere in the United States was upset with or mad at an FBI agent in any FBI office in a city where the Presi-dent of the United States might be visiting in the near future, would you be inclined to connect that necessarily with the President's impend-

m visit? 

i'fr. ADAMS. It would depend on the nature of the threat. The criteria we have are very broad at the present time and we apply them liberally. If someone, for instance, threatened a public official, that is the type of threat that we would immediately furnish to the Secret Service, because this person is obviously directing threats against public officials. So, under our current criteria, that would undoubtedly be disseminated. Mr. KINDNESS. Had that occurred in 1963 in the case of re Harvey Oswald, could you explain to the subcommittee what action might have been taken by the Secret Service? Mr. ADAMS. Well, had we notified the Secret Service-and the criterion then would not have provided for it-but. I am not familiar with the precautions that they would have taken then or even that they would take now. This is a matter that we have testified on before Senator Montoya's committee, because it is a very troublesome area. We have 400,000 persons a year arrested for crimes of violence in the United States. We have over 100,000 people released from peniten-tiaries each year in the United States. We have 400,000 people released from mentalinstitutions, which should mean they are cured, but does indicate that a substantial number of our citizens do have psychological or emotional problems. And we have people that en gage in protest and demonstrations against government officials. Well, that could represent a person who, if you attached it to emotional instability or criminal capability, that could represent or pose a threat. And all of these things to date mean that there is a large segment of the American public which could constitute a threat to the President at any given time. And it is the Secret Service's responsibility, in considering all of this wealth of information, Mr. Kindness, to try to apply the best judgment possible to weed out those that require the closest attention. So, I really don't know what they would have done under the circum-stances, had we advised them of Oswald. Mr. KINDNES. Thank you, sir. My time is up. Mr. EDWARDS. Mr. Badillo. Mr. BADrLLO. Who else, what other people were disciplined. asid,, from the Mr. Hosty? 27 Mr. ADAms. Investigators IMr. BADUw. Of these that you mentioned, were any of the other people? Was the Supervisor disciplined, or the Special Agent in Charge? Mr. ADAms. I believe the Agent in Charge was for some aspect ; I believe the Supervisor mentioned here was; I believe the agent in-volved was; and I am sure that some-of the others that we interviewed during the course of the investigation may have been. Mr. BAnw. Of these that were disciplined, they were specifically involved with the Oswald appearance and note. Now, would these actions this discipline, be taken after a hearing? Mr. kDAMS. After a hearing ?Mr. BADILW. Yes. Mr. ADAms. No. Mr. BADIuo. They just received a letter that told them they were disciplined? Did someone investigate? Was there a written report? Mr. ADAMS. Yes, under our disciplinary procedures we obtain an explanation from an employee. And that explanation coupled with the Agent in Charge's recommendation, that is reviewed back at FBI headquarters and memorandums are prepared recommending appro-priate action. Mr. BA~mw. Discipline then comes from the headquarters in Wash-in~gon I

Mr. A.Ams. Yes. Mr. BA~mw. Was the Attorney General and the FBI Director at that time aware of these disciplinary actions? Mr. ADAms. The Attorney General would not be, because the FBI generally has been delegated the authority to manage its internal personnel matters. Mr. BADILLO. Mr. Chairman, could we get copies of the report in-dicating the reasons for discipline I ask that because it may con-tradict some of the testimony the witnesses made here. But it was areport around that time, and I think it is better evidence of what actually has taken place. Mr. EDWARDS. Well, we will discuss that with the Bureau in the days to come. Mr. BADILO. Now, you say that Mr. Ruby was interviewed nine times from March 11, 1959, and eight other times. Since you are very precise about the times, or rather the letter from Mr. Hoover, was very precise, I assume you have records of those interviews? Mr. ADAMS. Yes. Mr. BADILO. Mr. Chairman, I think we should get the 302 reports, as I believe they are called. Mr. ADAMS. Not in this case. Mr. BADiLw. What were they? Mr. ADAMS. There would be just a notation as to the dates and anegative contact in this case. Mr. BADwiO. Meaning no report was made? Mr. ADAMS. No information; in other words, it was a negative contact. He was contacted for the purpose of obtaining information and-Mr. BADUILL. Could we get copies of that, Mr. Chairman, just so we could see what other notations may have been made? 28 [See response to question 6 of the letter dated October 29, 1975, which is included in the appendix.] You make a report only when you get positive information and not when you get negative information? Mr. ADAMS. Well, no. If an informant gives us positive and negative information-I mean, once he has established a pattern of furnishing us worthwhile and substantial information, then he is actually called an informant and converted to an informant's status. Mr. BADILLO. So he didn't get an informant's status? 

M r. ADAMS. Because he never furnished any information. Mr. BADImLO. You mentioned on page 14: A check of the records of the Chicago Police Department disclosed no informa-tion concerning this shooting. You have no information concerning a shooting in December of 1939, but the Chicago Tribune has a front-page story on it. It has al)icthre of Jack Ruby and says: Leon Cook left; a lawyer and former secretary of the Scrap Handlers and Junk H1andlers Union was shot before the union offices and Jack Rubenstein, the present secretary, was seized for questioning. Mr. ADAMS. Well, we did come up with the newspaper articles con-cerning it, and the articles that we had, they indicated that the infor-mation that came on the shooting came from him, because he was afriend of either the deceased or a friend of the individual who actually committed the shooting. Mr. BADIJ1o. Yes, but it says that he was seized for questioning by tme )olice department. You say the Chicago Police Department, hasn't any record at all of the shooting? 

ilr. ADAtS. That is right. Mr. ]BADILLO. Or the people who were interviewed for questioning? Mr. ADAMS. Well, this was back in 1939, I believe. Mr. BAmr 4 Lo. You mean that the records are not available? Mri. ADAMS. The records today-I mean a check of the records at tho time of the assassination failed to reveal any record of it in the Clicago Police I)epartment, and that is why they had to go to the ILewspaper morgue to see, in view of the allegation, was there some pjublicity concerning this. And there was. And that is in the Commis-

sion' s report. M1'. l 4,\)iumo. Is that the normal )rocedure of police departments that they don't keep records beyond a certain time? M1r. ADAMR. I ain not familiar with the Chicago Police Department.    

> MrF. BA IrmLLO.

But I say other than the Chicago Police Department? Mr. ADims. Some of them do have a practice of destroying records after a period of time if no charges are filed. And in this case I don't rcall that there were. actually charges against him, or charges were placed and dismissed. Mr. B ,LI[o. i%[y time has expired. Mi. EDwAmws. I will yield to you in just a minute, Mr. Dodd. Will you check andi advise us, Mr. Adams, if there is in the Chicago police Department a police report numbered 55513 for an offense dated I)ecember 9, 1939, and a detective report dated December 8, 1939. 'l'lis, according to our information, is the file that Mr. Badillo m-ferred to. It has been reported to the committee that there is a tickler 29 on the file that says that the FBI "is to be notified if anyone asks to examine that file."' We would appreciate your advising us if the file does exist and if that tickler is there. Mir. ADAMS. Yes. [See response to question 7 of the letter dated October 29, 1975, which is included in the appendix.] Mr. J)ODD. Th ank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. A(lams. my first question to you is regarding the letter to Mr. Rankin from Mr. Hoover outlining some 69 documents that the FBI had. in its files concerning Lee Harvey Oswald. Among those docu-]nwts was alpliently a letter or a nmmorandum of one kind or another informing the FBI offices that the-I am referring to a letter specifi-cally, which was one of the items not turned over to the Commission, a letter from the New Orleans Office to the Bureau, dated November 19, 

1963, changing the office-of origin of I"e Harvey Oswald's investiga-tion from New Orleans to )allas. Now, that is 2 (lays after this allega-tion of a telex coming across. There has been a response in defense of the fact that there was not atelex to the effect that a warning of an assassination was transmitted on November 22, presumably after the assassination took place. Is that a fact? Was there a telex on November 22, after the assassina-tion took l)lace, warning of the assassination in Dallas? Mr. ADMs. No, what I think you may be referring to is in trying to analyze what could have caused this former clerk to have this impres-sion, sir, we were looking for communication which lie might have seen which might have caused him to confuse it with this. Mr. I)Onn. Correct. Mr. ADAM-Ms. And there was a teletype that went out November 02 

to all of our offices using somewhat the same terminology. This was after the President was assassinated. It said: Assassination of Presldent John F. Kennedy. All offices immediately c(mtact          

> :il informants--seeurity, racial, and crliinal-as well as other sources for Iln.

formation hearing on the assassination of President Kennedy. All offices should immediately establish whereabomuts of bombing suspects, all known Klan and hate gi'up mnemnbers, all known racial extremists, and any other indivi(inals who, on tiMe Iasik of inforrmatlon available in your flies, may possibly have been involved. Mr. 1)(,mi. This was after the assassination?   

> Mr. A.\s.

flig.,ht. And this uses similar terminology to wlhat lie claims was in tle telex, which we can't lin. Mi. D)mi). As a matter of ol)era, ing iroceture. woulld it be a C{ommll p)racti.e to ,-end :1 telex to oue" ollice or to two offices? In other Words,             

> would awarning go olt saviln" "Blleware" to Los Ang(,les or to San

Ilrancisco, 'leware,, tlere may he an assassination attepnl)t," and it 

]lot be -sent to ot her offices ? Is hhat Ipssile ?

Mrl. A OAms. Yes. For inst ;incre. on lPresidlent hennledlv's travel. I

tlhilk ve had one otice in 'llampa,. Fla.. or Nliami. where a threat was in tlat area wheie a Kiansimian was susJ~ecte(l of----

Mr. I%) on). Bu1t wou wouldn't warn Seattle, Wash., for instance ?

M1r. A .o, this was (lireted at a l)articular threat.   

> In this

j)articilar sit iatioln. thoulgh. sit'. the communication which                       

> lie claitlis went ou1t, was alle ,iedlv directedl to "All SACs" and aniong tle inconsistencies in it was that in listinie I)eolle to

be contacted, the si1)pose(d teletype said : ",Militant revolutionarv group may attempt to assassinate President Kennedy on his proposed trip to Dallas, Texas." 

S2 r.2-- 77- -...3 30 But, it did not say: "Contact security informants." This would be the first group you would contact concerning militant groups. Mr. DODD. I understand that. and I understand you wanted to check the other 59 offices, just to make sure something hadn't been sent out. But, in all likelihood-and I am just assuming here-if a message were sent warning of a potential assassination in Dallas, you really wouldn't be sending it to all of youir offices throughout the country. Mr. ADMMS. Yes, we WoUI(1. In this cas.c, based on his terminology, it indicated an unknown militant group. Therefore you would check in-formants in every office that might he able to conic up with any infor-mation having a'bearing on it, because militant groups travel all over the country. Now, if he had said: "a militant group in Dallas is attempting to" and had a specific group, that would have gone to Dallas. But, with the broad terminology that was in his supposed teletype, that would have gone to all. In fact, the COl)y e has made available, the precise copy he claims he saw, is directed to all SAC's. Mr. 1)oDD. You ment-ioned in tie questioning a few moments ago that. Mr. Iost, was one of the )cople who interrogated hee Harvey Oswald after his a)prehension. I iinderstand there were seven other FBI agents who interviewed him for more than 5 hours. I wonder if you have notes or copies of those interviews or were they tal)e re-c(lrdingrs of those interviews? Mr. AD,%is. I am siir eveiy interview that was conducted would have been included in what wi' call a 302. it report of interview form. Mir. DTmo. I)o you know if you have any of these or not? Mr.An..ts. I ali sure wo (10. 

"Mr. Do)m. 'Mr. Chairman, cold I request that that. information be 

submitted to the committee for inspection? 

Mr. EIDNw.ns. Ve will discus:" it with the ulureau in the days ahead. W't litiie soimie prollelis with securityy and soinetimns we have to go   

> ov'er t

lthre. DTr. )01w. Well. 'v r. N~y tilne has expir'ol. 

# r. PU'f' .Et. No (1nieStionIS. Mr. l'1)w.\u1)S. Mr. Badillo. . I. B.A\I)Ilto. No further (pwletions. M r. .nw.Arns. Mh'. Parker? .Mr. i, i-mt. T amk yo. 'M. AMr.dans. one niatter pertaining to Mr. Willithn 'Walter tihat, was not. covered in your prepared statement and which there have been allegations in the press that Mr. Walter was tim subject. of a polygraph vxamnidat ion. Did thi- Bureau give the poly-graph cxii inal ion to h im .Mr'. An.s. No, sir. 'liet Dallas Tiu tes Heral.d, the newspaper that 

lie oriLginally contacted utpon the resurrection of this story (lid afford him a polygraph examination. According to the Dallas Times Herald. hie lpolyra ph ex.-imination. was liinitd in the questions that. lie could hieeaism of -an a're, (nint between Mr. Walter and the poly-1r:1)l ",xaminer. And INe1 on the result of that, there were indica-tions of ,leeption ,n thme paRt of .r. Walter. However, the examiner (',0'hiided the results were inconclisive bceau ne of the limited number of (h1,'st ions thiat could I ' ',ked. 31  

> Mr.

PARKER. Is this your information due to the results of that ex-amination having been supplied to the FBI? Mr. ADA31S. It was in ti e Dallas Tiimes Herald newspaper article that their investigative reporters prepared on it. We do not have the actual examiner's report. Mr. PARRPlr. Mr. Adams, we have prepared a list of questions with regard to the procedures relating to the handling of material which is delivered to FBI offices; some questions in terms of your internal investigation; and somet matters. concerning FBI rules which are fairly extensive and thorough and which I will not have time to ask  

> yoll

at this point. There are questions also regarding some legal issues with respect to the violation of FBI rules. I would like to submit these questions to you and have them answered, either by affidavit or the continuation of the oath which you are now under. Also, we would like to have furnished to the subcommittee the names of all the in-dividuals and their titles to whom you alluded in your statement. Also, in addition, we would like a copy of the Bureau's report and summary which was given to ti Department of Justice concerning your investi-gation of the Oswald letter incident. All of that material, Mr. Chair-man, I would suggest be turned over to the subcommittee. In order to facilitate its being turned over, and also to protect the individuals involved, I would request that it he (leeliled executive committee tiaterial. Mr. EDWAmS . So ordered. Mr. ADAMS. As far as the names are concerned, we will make those available in executive session or under executive protedtion. As far as the results of our investigation is concerned, this would be a decision decided upon by the Attorney General under his procedures. We will, upon receipt of your request, convey it to him. Mr. EDWARDS. Mr. Klee. Mr. KLEE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Adams, to your knowledge, have any other papers, materials, or documents given to the FBI ever been destroyed I

Mr. ADAMS. That is a rather broad question. We do destroy material under our records (lest ruction procedures. We do obtain information that is never actually made a matter of record in the FB1, which is de-stroye(d, like informal notes, routing slips, papers like that. It is very difficult for me to zero in on a specific answer to votur question. Mr. KLEF. Well, in the context of the Oswald investigation or any-thing having to do with Jack Ruby, are there any other papers. mate-rial or documents that have been destroyed? Mr. ADAMS. Not that I know of. Mr. KLEE. OK. With respect to the papers, materials, or records that are not made a part ofthe FBI files or not made a part of the actual records, were there any papers in connection with the Oswald investigation or the Ruby case that were destroyed, to your knowledge? WVere there any informal materials or papers? Mr. A Not. that I know of. 'When agents conduct interviews, they make notes. Then when they dictate the results of those inter-views, they destroy those notes. 1' don't know of any documents that were improperly destroyed. Mr. Kir. Either documents that are not made a part of the FBI records or files that are other than these insignificant and unsubstantial 32 type of routing slips? I am referring to another context, to perhaps some of the "do not file" types of instructions. Mr. ADAMS. In years past there was a system where we had pink memoranda and blue memoranda which were to signify that the in-formation included in the memnranda was for informatio0nal purposes only andl was not to be made a part of the official records of the FBI. It 'ould be like-it wasn't anything sinister-it would be like a train-ing commitment, individuals' property records, or it could be back-ground information going up on an action memorandum. It was for information only. But it wasn't necessary to include it as a matter of permanent record and-Mr. KirE. Are there such memoranda pertaining to the Oswald and 

Ruby cases? Mr. AX.vX.Ns. Not that I know of; not that I know of personally. Mr. KLein. Thank you very much. Mir. Chairman, I lve no further questions. Mr. Enwanns. Mr. Adams. I will refer once more to tlhe address 1)0k that Oswald had at his boarding house. and in it was Mr. ]Iosty's name an(l the address and phone number and the license number of the FBI car that Mr. Ilosty was driving. I refer you to a meeting of the Warren Commission on Fel)rary 24, 1964, where Mr. Rankin says: As you recall, we Informed you before that the address and telephone number book of Lee Hlarvey Oswald had In it the name of James Hosty, the FBI agent, his telephone number; his HIhense; and that it wasn't in the transcription of that information which was furnished to us by the Fill. We have written to the FBI to ask in an official inquiry how this could happen and for them to furnish us nil the information concerning that occurrence. We have not received a rqily yet. Later Mr. Hoover did answer to the best of his knowledge as to why it, was not included in the information. But we have that, and we have this very perplexing matter of the Oswald note; and theni we have developed this morning again that the Jack Ruby information., which for 10 years was really kept. secret from the American people, that ho wns an informer for the FBI and had been reporting to the FBI on at least, seven or eight occasions. We have also the fnct, which is new to me. and I aim sure to most people, that there were a number of agents disci pl ied a fter the assassination invest igat ion. Now. in all tie FBI fil's relating to LOee llarve Oswald. is Ihere any information wllatso(ever that he might have been sonie sort of aGovernment. ngent Ol paid by any other go'erniiental agency, sucl as t he CI. ?Mr..\n..s. Tro niv knowledge, no. I have not reviewed tie entire assassination file. All I can go ol is tile fact that this allegation was  

> ilalllC

luringg tle Comlllis'sion larieai-s and tle Commission specifically adlressed itself to tilat, and in their conclusions flhey eoncl lie(ld that there was no ev\idenve wlhatsoover of ()swald eveir being an informant or ag(nt of tle Fil or ('IA or any otler governmental agency. i. i))n. Mr. Chairnian. could I pursue one point ?Mr. EonWAums. Yes.  

> Mr.

I)otn. You know the Warren Commission---looking over the record of the Warren Contnission-and the transCril)t is alive, fortu-nately-but the, transcril)t indicates that an eWlort was matqe to purge the record of any mention of the fact that Lee larv'ey Oswald was a33 paid informant. I am sure you are familiar with what I am talking about in the record itself. Mr. ADAMS. No. Mr. DoDD. Well, there is an effort to exclude that information from the transcript and to exclude raising the allegation of the fact that Mr. Oswald was an informant. Mr. ADAMS. No, I am not familiar with that. I would have to review it specifically, to see what the issue 5s. All I am familiar with is the conclusion, wlich I lhad occasion to read this morning. I hnlve not i-ead the material submitted to the Commission on this issue. Mr'. I)oin. Thanik you, Mr. Cliailnin. Mr. EDwAnmns. Are there any fuilher questions? Thank you. tlen, Mr. Adams. 

Mr. )om). Mr. Chairman, let me just read to you tle following. Mr. DIulles, on palge 2444 of tlie record says: "I thiink the record ought to he (lestrov(d. I )o you link we need a record of tlis?" I'llis dialoguee jist goes'baek and fortl. You are not famimiliur witlh that at all? Mri. A\Ais. No, I ain niot. 'I'lme fact that I am not doesnt mean tlhat I have rea( it amid forgotten it. This investigation took place ( irite it few years before I took over miy present responsibilities and I Iiadn't had ainy specific responsil)ilities in connection with the investigation until last year. And I don't thiink anyone lies gone back andi reviewed the. entire scope of it. 

Ae take allegations from time to time that coni up, suelc as tile one, for instance, )ums in a boxcar could be the inlivi(luals involved. Tliemi N'whn fiey come up., we investigate tlen'. an(l we furnish the re-sults to the Deparlmtent or. in tflat case, to the Rockefeller Commission tiet. was zoil, into tie CIA and-Afr. )om). I appreciate all thaet, Ir. Adams. It seems to me that this is a tremeldousl v significant revelation, that is, the fact that thltre werv 

(i,,.thl or nile occasions thet Mt. Ruby was interviewed by the FBI; of ti fact that the revelations of the letter warning that FBI agent in )allas of some extremelv hostile activity in the part of Mr. Oswald was destroyed, and so on. These are significant revelations, and they involve, as you pointed out in your opening sentence, one of the Imost tragic incidents in the hiistory of this country. Then we see a record wlhre again efforts are made to purge or not allow certain information to be included in the Warren Commission Report. Tlese are tremendously significant points, and I might add. tley are painful to the American public. I don't know anyone who is dyinv,, to 

s0e revelations regarding involvement by any governmental agency ;but. I think the facts should be male known. Mr. ArMS. Well, what I have offered to (10-that is to say. I didn't come here lprel)ared to (liscuss that, because I couldn't possiI)lv come prepared to discuss every aspect of the assassination. But. I will be 

glad to take your question. I am sure if tle issue has been raised before, we lhave inquired into it n1d coiducte(1 al)l)rolriate inquiries. If ]lot, we should conduct onef now. I will he glad to) inquire into it and fitrnish 

yol the results. Mr. DomD. Thank you.  

> Mr.

Ei)wrts. Think vou. Ir. Adams and Mr. Bassett. rWhereupon. at 11 :30 a.m., the suulcomm ittee recessed. slubject to the call of tile Chair.] FBI OVERSIGHT Circumstances Surrounding Destruction of the Lee Harvey Oswald Note THURSDAY, DECEMBER 11, 1975 

Housp, OF REPRESENTATIVE, SUBC03rMITTrEE ON CIVIL AND CONSTITUTIONAL RiGiTs      

> OF THE Co(mMirEI' ON THIE JUDICIARY,

Washington, D.C. 

The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at. 9:30 a.m., in room 2226, Rayburn House Office Building, tlw Honorable Don Edwards [chairman of the subcommittee] presiding. Present: Representatives Edwards, Seiberling, Drinan, Badillo, Dodd, Butler, and Kindness. Also present: Alan A. Parker, counsel: Thomas P. Breen, and Catherine LeRoy, assistant counsel; and Kenneth N. Klee, associate counsel. Mr. EDWAIDS. The committee will come to order. Mr. IIINAN. Mr. Chairman, if I mav. T move that the Subcommittee on Civil and Constitutional Rights permit coverage of this hearing in full or in part by television broadcast, radio broadcast and till photograplhy or by any such methods of coverage pursuant to com-mitte e rule V. Mr. Erw.ms. Without objection,fl the resolution is adopted. Early in July 1975, Tom Johnson, who was publisher of the Dallas Times Ilerald stated that somebody called him about a letter or note that Lee Harvey Oswald delivered to the Dallas field office in Novem-ber 1963, shortly before the assassination of President Kennedy, and although the. wording of the note was in dispute, T think that it is generally agreed it was threatening. But President Kennedy was not mentioned in it. On October 21, 1975,. Mr. ,James B. Adams, who is the Deputy associatee Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, came to this subcommittee and testified, under oath. about the FBI's inquliry into the subject of the Oswald letter. The thrust of the FBI's inquiry, according to Mr. Adams, was: Did the incident take place? If so, what were the contents of-the note, was it destroyed. and if it was destroyed, who destroyed it, by whose inst rict ions. lnd lastly, what were the motives behind the destruction of the note 

> (35)

36 Mr. Adams stated that the FBI had concluded that, yes, Oswald did visit the FBI headquarters. Ile left the note, and the note was destroyed after the assassination. The subcommittee wants to hear directly from those involvNed, under oath, what did happen. We are going to lave that opportunity today and tomorrow. I might point out that the FBI has fully cooperated in making arrangements for the witnesses who are still employed by the FBI, and we appreciate their cooperation for this important inquiry. Our first witness will be Mrs. Nanny Lee Fenner, who was the recep-tionist at the Dallas field office in November 1963, and who, I under-stand, 'was the first, person who saw and read the Oswaild note. Mrs. Fenner, would you please take the witness chair ?TESTIMONY OF NANNY LEE FENNER, RECEPTIONIST. DALLAS FIELD OFFICE, FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION MIr. EDWARDS. Do you solemnly swear the testimony that you are al)out to give to this subcommittee will ), the tritl, the, whole truth and nothing but the truth, so help you God ?Mrs. FENNEB. I do. 

M1r. EI)WARDS. Mrs. Fenner. the sul)comlit tee has )rovided you with it portion of Rule XI of the House rules and a copy of the rules of the House Committee on the Judiciary. It is ny understanding that you applear unre)resented by counsel here today', and I want you to klnow that you are entitled to be rel)resented ly counsel, if you so desire. Are there any opening statements by any members ?[No response.] Mr. EDWARDS. If not, it is the opinion of the Chair. that the best procedure to be followed since Mrs. Fenner does not have a statement is to permit our counsel, Mr. Parker, to ask a nmber of questions to set the scene. Is there any objection to that procedure? [No response.] Mr. EDWARDS. Mr. Parker, you are recognized. Mr. PARKER. Thank you. fr. KTiNDIF.S. I thought Mrs, Fenner was going to say sonetlhing in response to your 9

Mr. EDWARDS. I am sorry. Mrs. FtEN-ER. I am happy in not being represented by coinsel. Mr. EDWARDS. Thank you, Iis. Fenner. Mr. Parker.   

> Mr. PAKyR.

First, Mrs. Fenner, I think it might be helpful if you will hold the microphone a little closer to you because I had a little trouble hearing you just now. We want to make sure that we can hear you, and that everyone does hear and understand you. Would you state your full name and present aldress for the record. please? Mrs. FErN-N. Nanny ,Lee Fenner. 

fr. PARKER. And your address? frs. FENNE.R. 7021 Clhantillv Lane, )allas. Texas. Mr. PARKER. How long have .voi bee l1 vinJlovedy, iv lte F,(eral Bur(eai of Invest igation. 37 Mrs. FFN-NFt. Since May 25, 1942. M'. PARKER. Were you einployed in the )alas field office in No-vember 1963? Mrs. FENETI. Yes. Mr. PARKER. What was your position at the )allas field office on that day? 

## fMrs. FENNER. I WaS R IceptiOnlist. 

Ml'. PARKER. What were your duties as the receptionist ?Mr. F NNER. I did dictal)hone work and greeted the public. Mr I'. PAPKER. What did you say ? I did not hear vou. Mrs. FENNE)II. I (lid di(.taplhoie work and greeted the public .  

> MNfr. PARKER.

When and under what circuiiistances did Lee I [ar%'ev Oswald first come to your attention ?MI's. FElNER. ie caine to my attention first in nam only wlen le brought t time letter to tile Dallas office. Mr. PAR1 (ER. What (id Lee Harvey Oswald do or say when you first saw hi '? 

frs. FE NNER. lie caine to my (lesk and asked for S. A. Iosty. 

M r. ])I\mE F. In exactly those wor(ls? Irs. FENNER. Ill exactiy those words. Mr. PmuIRr. Did Liee Harvey Oswald leave anything with you? Mrs. FENNYR. Yes. M1'. 1ARKER. What was t hat? Mfi's. FFNN-.-E. lie not otilv left but he tlh'ew oil my desk a letter out of an envelope and said, "give it to him". Mr. PARKER. Would you describe in as mnich detail as you c-an. le iji(ideniit. itself froiif-tile l)eginnilg to the (nd? Mfi' s. FENNETn. IMr. EA)w.%Ds. Mrs. FIenner, put tle Iicroplhone a little closer. 

Mirs. FENNER. A little closer? I am sorry. I do not, have a strong voice. Mr. Er)w,RFs. You are doing fine. Mr's. FN Nfa. Mr. Oswald got off the elevator. Front my desk I Could see him clearly. My desk was right in the aisleway. lie came to my desk and he said, "S. A. Ilosty, please." And he had a wild look in his eye, and he was awfully fidgety', and he, had a 3x5 envelope in his hand. It ~was not, scaled, and in it was a piece of paper approximately this size indicating], andl it was folded, and the bottom portion of time letter was visil)le the whole time he was standing there waiting to see if S. A. Ilosty was there. Because I called a secretary. She had to call (lowustailrs to see if he was in. I)uring this time, he kept taking the letter in and out of the envelope. W'hen I informed hiim S. A. Ilosty was not in the office, he threw it like that [indicating 1 on my d ss. aMd said. "w.ll get this to him" and tried and walked back to the elevator. As the bottomr portion of the letter was visilde. I would not lelp but read the last two lines. The last two lines stated, "I will either blow   

> i1) tho

1)il.lls Poliv( ,)ai't 'wmlt 01' the 14 1H , fli,'e." 

V1, hl. with that there, T consideredd it a threat so I then took tle letter ill Iuv hand to see what was above that. I donit reiiiember the exact wor(fs, blut it wws something il)out speaking to his wife anl what he      

> WIs 1r ing to 0do if

tIe' d(li'lt stof). 38 So, I immediately left my desk and took it into our assistant agent in charge, who was Mr. Kyle Clark. I walked back to my desk in order to keep an eye on the person who had delivered the letter, because as Isaid, he acted strange. Mr. Clark brought the letter back and said, "forget it, give it to Hosty." So I put it back, began to put it back, and one of the girls in the stenographic pool came back to my desk to go back through the office to go to the steno pool. She wanted to know who the creep was in the hall, and I said, "well, according to this, it is Lee Harvey Oswald," because his name was signed on the letter. The name meant nothing to me. She read the letter and walked on to her duties, and I presume 1put the letter back in his envelope, put a routing slip on it, and put osty's name on it, and put it to the side. Shortly thereafter, Mr. Hosty came to my desk and got the letter, and I have not seen it since. Mr. PARKER. Mrs. Fenner. To your personal knowledge, who else saw or read that note? Mrs. FENNzR. Well, there were only two other people who saw it, and to my knowledge, in my presence, no one else read the note, except us three. Mr. PARKER. Us three would be? Mrs. FEN-NER. All'. Clark, Helen ilay and myself in my presence, al Hosty read the letter in my presence. Mr. PARKER. Mr. Kyle Clark was the assistant agent in charge of the Dallas field office? Mrs. FENNE. Yes. Mr. PARKE.m And who else? Mrs. FENNER. Helen May. Mr. PARKm. What was her-Mrs. FENNER. She was a secretary, and she and Mr. Hosty and Mr. Clark were the only ones who read the letter to the best of my know]-edge. She was a steno. Mr. PARKER. Who else, to your knowledge, knew of the note? Mrs. FENNER. Joe Pearce, a clerk at that point in the investigative branch, and a mail clerk, James White, but they did not, to my knowl-edge, read the letter. They only saw it on my desk. Mr. PARKER. Can you recall anyone else who either read or saw the letter? Mrs. FENNER. No. Mr. PARKER. Go back and describe a little more fully for me Lee Harvey Oswald's manner at the time of the delivery of the note. Mrs. FENNER. Well, he had a very strange look in his eyes, and he was very nervous. And to me, I would classify him as having a dan-gerotis look from his appearance and his actions. That is why got up as I did and took the note to Mr. Clark. Mr. PARKER. Were you at all personally in fear, at the time, of him? Mirs. FENNI. No. Mr. PARKER. Have you had any similar experiences in your job as areceptionist with the )FBI with the delivery of any material to you at the front desk? Mrs. FeNNFm. Oh, I have had people come in and lay pistols and knives and stuff on my desk, and it didn't alarm me. 39 Mr. PAmRm Do you recall, and can you describe the handwriting on the note? Mrs. Fz Fai. I would say it was equal to a fourth or fifth grade child's writing, and it was very uneven on the paper.  

> -

Mr. PA FaI. When did you first personally read the note? Mrs. FENNR. When he threw it on my desk. Mr. Puixn. You picked it up and readit? Mrs FFwmm. I could not help but see the last two lines. Mr. P wmt You unfolded the piece of paper ?Mrs. FNFm It was already flipped down. You could not help but read it. Mr. PAwKzR. Have you ever discussed it with anyone else inside the Bureau? Mrs. FFiNuER. Not until after Mr. Schott wrote his book. Mr. PAmRm Mr. Schott? Mrs. FE.NNE. Yes; an ex-agent of the Bureau. Mr. PAuuuK Mr. Joseph L. Schott IMrs. FNNmt. Yes. Mr. PAR.zR. What is that book you refer to? Mrs. FENNMR "No Left Turns." Mr. PARKER. Lie was an agent at the Dallas field office? Mrs. FEN-mm. Right. Mr. PARKER. He is now retired? Mrs. FrwWm. Yes; he is. Mr. PARKE. Who did you discuss it with inside the Bureau after that time? Mrs. FENNER. There was one agent in particular who brought it up, and that was Mr. Ural Horton, now retired. Mr. PARKFR. He brought the matter up to you? Mrs. FENNER. Yes. Mr. PARKER. What was that discussion about it? Mrs. FEwNER. I was on my way from my office to the water fountain to get a drink. Tie stopped ine as I got to the fountain and wanted to know if I was going to kiss him goodbye. I stid, "Well, I don't know why I should." 

'Vell," he said, "I won't be here when you come back from vacation." I said, "Well, that's all right. I haven't made it a police in the past to kiss anybody goodbye, and I don't know why I should start with you." And I went ahead and drank my water. I was getting me another glass to take back to my office. He said, "XWell, just for that, I will tell you something I haven't told anybody else." I said, "what's that?" "Well," he said, "when the boss and I"-the boss he was referring to was Mr. Shanklin--"and I wre going to Abilene to a former agent sretirement. party, he said-I mentioned to him about the Oswald note, and he mid-I thought he was going to jump out the car window." Mr. PARKER. When was this discussion you had with Mr. Horton? Mrs. FF..-ENR. That w'as in April )efore I went on actionio, a day or two before I wont on vacation. Mr. PARKER. This year? Mrs. FE N. This year. 40   

> M'. PARKER.

The discussion with Mr. Horton-he was describing-. did he tell you when that took place? Mrs. FENNER. He said when they went to Mabray's retirement party. I don't know who that was. Mr. PARKER. You do not have any idea what time that was? Mrs. FENsNER. NO. M1'. PARKER. Can you try to pin it within a recent year or two? Mrs. FENNER. I (lont know because 'Mr. Mabray had been retired a year. Mi'. P.nKuR. W at was tip, name of tie agent wlo was retiring? MIrs. FENNER. Coleman Aabray. M-a-b-r-a-y. 'Mr. P.urKiur. Was that the extent of vonir discussion with anyone within tei Bureau ?Mfrs. FExR:i. I would sa lie is the only o1e I can ldireetly say it. 

mvas discussedd with. A numb11;er of people wanted te know why Schott (li(lfnt put it in h)is book but as far as discussion witli Horton at tlat time. I was not a-%vare that an 'one in the office knew about it. Well, lie saidl el'erVone knew about it, hlit I llad no knowledge lhey knew aloit it. That is strictlv fiom whNat e said tile morning he was 

il. PARIEU. Ia1'e 1"o1 ever (liselssed the lote or its contents with anyone olitside the Bui'eau ?Mi s. FXr: tt. No. Mr. ]k.miI'%ll. When did Si)ecial Agent Hostv receive tle note ?

Ms,. FEXNEr. S ortly after Oswald left ft there, the noon hour tlat (ayv. Mr1. P.RKEH. Do yo ,have any idea. personally' wlat le did with it ?Mrs. F'NNE:t. No,sir. Mrl'. PARRFR. I)o YOU know wh\1at action was taken by any FBI )er-sonnel regarding that note? Mrs. FrE-NEIR. No.   

> It. P.'RKER.

Did anyone ever tell you or suggest to you that you were not siij)posA-d to (discios, Te Harvey Oswald's visit to the FBIT Dallas office or tie note? Mrs. FENNER. No. Mt'. PARKEr. have v'oN ever (liscuussel this mat tel' or given any other statement under oatl ?

Irs. 11xNE 1N. Only to Mr. Bassett with the Bureau. lie came down in ,TIly. 

Prr I klt l. I 1975 ?

''s. FFNNEIt. 1975. M'. lR ,'tr:.u. Do voni rememheur the (late?  

> 'Mrs.

F:nu. T ihink it vas thle htl (i)f ,11l1'. I wIs homif, ill :ed 

at tle time. M . ow TT\" can yo re all tihe exact date ,o' dis,.lssed this withl I'. Basv,:4t1 ?

M' . l'r~n' . iwas iust ot of the hospital. 

11'r. P IlKEP. Wh1.at (lte were vou in the lhos)ital? Mrs. FT;nX,,. I was in fle hbospital in Ma v. the latter )art of May. T don't know tli exact (late. T lhad suirerv. T was i'eorvcrating and ba)d to ,ro )ack tLefore leaving, an1 illn thfev (lPvi(h(l it wasn't the l ee linf,. ,':u si ii, nv trm le )iut my allries. So T was hiome taizin,.--41 I got medication, and I was taking allergy tests, and I had to be in bed. Mr. 1AiKER. This is what, through the months of ,June and July? Mrs. FENNER. Yes, off and on. Mr. PARKrM. How do you pinpoint the date exactly when you were visited by Mr. Bassett? Afrs. FENNE . Because that was the day the doctor thought he was going to have to rehospitalize me. 

M1'. PARKER. )o you rememl)er Mrs. Fi.-NNERJ. It was a Tueslay. 

fr. IP,(KElR. A Tuesday ?

Mrs. FENNER. Yes. Mr. PAIKmi. Can you identify Mr. Bassett for me ?

Mrs. FENNER. lie is a small man. Mr. IARKER. I mean who is he? Mrs. FENNEI. All I know is he is with the investigative departinient, wit lithe inspection staff of the Bureau. M[t. l.ARKER. Whlat. w'IS the purpose of his visit? Mrs. FENNR. To spe if I knew, or was I the person who received the note. if[r. l),mKEI. 'oil gave a statement under oath to Mr. Bassett? l'rs. F'E.,R, . Bight. Mi'. l)ARKIt I tow niany times didl he interview voii, and how niany stit(ements-how many times were you interviewed ?

Mis. FF4xEn. Twice. 

M r. ]'.\lrvrl. Tiwi,',,?  

> MI's.

I"EN.NH. lie cainle back Iater in August and interviewed the wlle (hiCe who was tilt'e at the tilne. Mi'. l\iRutI(. 'l14hank voil. M r. Svibe+rlill) ?. 4'Fei ier', :0 an fIv tiimeI ill th vo i'(01vI' i'51t ioul, voS had I1n 1withI tiN' 11B1 !p',olle ' l)oIt th ; Iliat ivi, ,liil :111yone c'o ,iivilt lii1,u the fact that it was  

> strange

that a e 1'-01,w '10) few (in 's iater ttitei 1 a)l(1 suvceeded in   

> assa

ssi nati ig th e l'u'eidvit. woulil ] vie coiie to the FBI for an4y 

10M ?il~iVi( (1'iSIhs  

> NMI-s.

I:N:J'. No. No, siir. Ali I Jo nlot klnow i, 'self the exac.t date that. li( cane to our office. It cmild4 have 1,eu, il Novemlbcr. It could 

have Iweii l, ifore t litt. 1 coud(1 not piil)oiit tle (ate. 

Mi'. SETB:rTlN ,,'N;. Tlhe (lite. if tlhre, is any way the (late could he pin-po intc(d. it sEvn'ii to Ine it is ven'y, very i iportani. MIs. !}EN I have racked m" lrain ili) one side and down the otlhr. und I callilot collie 1ii) with thle date. Mr'. 8E1Bi'A LiN0. Well, thank you. I h nve no fiither (questions. Mr. Chairman. ir. EI~)wvws. "Mr. Blitler. 

It. B11-1. .Just a few qiestiois. With reference to this exchange with Mr. Iforton in April 1:975 by the water fountain Mrs. FE';Nifri. lihlt. 

Mr. B,'. ir [continuing]. You mentioned the conversation with Mr. Shankl in with reference to the note. 

Mrs. FENNEA. Right. 42 Mr. BUTLER. Could you recount for us the full extent of what Mr. Horton had to say at that time? Mrs. FE NE. He said he was going to tell me something he never told me before, and he said when he was going out to Mr. Mabray's retirement party, he mentioned it to Mr. Shanklin about the Oswald note, and he said, "He almost, jumped out the car window." Mr. BUTLER. Is that the extent of it? 

Mrs. FENNm That is the extent. Mr. BUTLER. How did Mr. Horton get information about that? Mrs. FENNFE. I don't know. Mr. BUTLER. You made no further inquiry of him at that time? Mrs. FENNER. I could have cared less because to me, the note meant nothing to me after Mr. Clark told me he was a nut, and Mr. Hosty told me he was a nut. I had forgot about the letter. I did not associate it with anyone until the morning they brought Oswald out of the county jail or city jail to transfer him to the other jail. I was in my home. I was with my husband, and my husband said I jumped about 10 feet when they brought him out, afid I said, "Oh my God, that's the man who brought the letter to the office." That was my first recollection it was the individual who had been in the office. That was the first recollec-tion, and that was the first time my husband knew someone had been there with a note. Mr. BUTLER. Following that for identification. (lid you go and in the next succeeding days, have a conversation with Mr. Hostv or Mr. Clark with reference to that? Mrs. FENNER. [Shook head in the negative.4-Mr. BUTLER. You made no effort to see? Mrs. FENNER. I didn't mention it to anybody, and on Sunday Mr. BUTLER. You aiid Helen May didn't chat about it? Mrs. FENNE R. No. ir. BUTiER. What were you going to say about Sunday? Mrs. FENN.R. On Sunday, we were called back to work. I don't re-ntember the exact time, but it -eems to me like it was midday. I went back to my desk and sonm time during the course of the time I ot there and before it was dark, Mr. Clark cane out. of his office and he said, "You can forget about the Oswald note." That's all he said. I don't know why he said it. Mir. BuTrLE. Now, wait juist a minute. Mr. Clark-this is within the 

3 or 4 davs-Irs. FVENN ER. That was the day after Oswald was shot. Mfr. BurLER. And he said you could forget it. Did you take that. as an instruction not to discuss it with anyone. Mrs. FE.NER. No, he just told me to forget it, and I had already for-got ten it so why forget it again ?M[r. BUTLER. I share your curiosity on that. .Mfrs. Fzwmm. Because it meant nothing to me. Mfr. BuTum. That is your only conversation with anybody in the irmmediate time period following the assassination ?M.1rs. FNNEL .Up until that date. Mir. Brzn. With reference to this note ? Mrs. Fxwzi. Uh-huh. Mr. BuT'z Now you tell us that is the-only person you diseused it with until very recently I43 Mrs. FENNE There was one more time. Mr. Bu-rTm. When was that? Mrs. FENNmL It was sometime during-I did not work on the azvassination report. I did help assemble some of the reports. Now which one we were assembling, I did not know, but I remember we were on the floor below, on the 11th floor of our office, because we were on the 12th floor, and we had expanded and taken over part of the 11th 

floor, and the ants' room was on the eleventh floor. We were down there one Saturday, I believe. It was a hot day, and we were number-ing pages in a room, an agents' room, and everybody had a report. How many copies of the report, I do not know, but there was a man on a loud-speaker calling out the numbers, and we were numbering the pages by hand. And Hosty was at my table. The one who had been calling out the numbers, I don't know who he was, stopped for a drink of water. And during that period, I asked Hosty myself, I said, "Hosty, what happened to the Oswald letter?" He said, "what letterl" [Indicating.] Mr. BUTLmE. So you did not pursue that any further? Mrs. FENNER. No, because the man came back, and we started num-bering pages, and after that, I went home. Mr. BuTLER. No further questions. Mr. EDWARDS. Mr. Drinan. Mr. I)RINAN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mrs. Fenner, would you tell us more about Mr. Clark's comment, "you can forget about the Oswald note"? Mrs. FENNER. That's all he said. Mr. DRaXNAN.. What prompted him to comment on that? Mrs. FENw-R. I don't know. Mr. DRINAN. Did he say anything else? Mrs. FENNER. No, sir. Mr. DRINAN. Do you think it was strange he came out expressly, the agent in charge, the principal person the evening of Oswald's killing, was it? Mrs. FENNEII. No, this was the day after that. Mr. DRINAN. The day after that? Mrs. FENNFR. No, wait, it was on Sunday. It was on Sunday, the (lay he was shot, that evening. Mr. I)RINAN. In otler words, word of his killing had jus come out a few hours before? Mrs. FENNEL. Uh huh. Mr. I)urNf. Mr. Clark, who was the agent in charge Mrs. F HRE. No, he is the assistant agent in charge. Mr. IN.N. The assistant agent in charge made a trip to see the receptionist, and the only thing he said was, quote, unquote, "You can fort about the Oswald note." Mrs. F .N.EI. It only takes about 10 steps to go to my desk. Mr. DRINAN. That was the only-

Mt.. rN.v E R. That was the only remark he made. I don't know why lie made it, and I didn't ask him. Mr. DRINAN-. Will you tell us more about why you brought up the question of the Oswald letter at a moment some weeks later when you asked Mr. IHosty about the Oswald letter? What prom pted that? Mrs. F.N .%-a. I imagine I had gone back and racked mynbrain. When 44 I asked Ilosty that. I believe it. was out of curiosity more than any-thing else. I don't know actually what happened to it. Mr'. 1)uIN. In other words, you felt it, was strange Mr. Clark came and said, quote, iniquote, "You can forget about the Oswald note." Mrs. FE.NNER. I didn't think so much about Mr. Clark saying it, but the fact that Hosty said, "No letter, I don't know what letter" Mr. l)DI NAN. Prior to that, in other words, you had a doubt in your mind for several weeks about the wlhereabouts of the note and the imi-pact of the words Mr. Clark said to you? You found them strange, and youi were raising the question again? Mrs. F'NNEJR. I guess. hlit 1 really don't know. Mr. I)aIN17l. When did you first learn the note had been destroyed? Mrs. FENNER. I don'tt know that it has. I never did know uintl all 

this began in the pap~er. That was lly first-because after it left lly 

(lesl. I haven't seen it, and I don't work with the agents who lhandled it. T have no contact with1 the. agents. so I don't know.  

> .,.,

1)nIxA. )id You know Mr. Clark-you must have known Mr. ( 'lirk knew about tie note. Mrs. FENNER. I gave it to him. I knew lie knew about it. Mr. 1)Jnxx. Yot never mentioned it before or after? .Nrr.. F"ENXIII.l. No. sir.    

> .l'. I)RIN, N.

Was tlis on 0tWe sanme day that you learned of tile death  

> (,f

I've IIarvey Oswald? 

.NIS. FEN. .- 1.R. Yes, sirI. Mr 1)hir NA. And thbat morning, you ideut ified him ?Mrs. Er ,Eil. [Noddehd head in alirniative.] Mr. 1)iux. It was that afternoon or tlit evening&. 

Mrs. FENxER. 'Th1at VVvenil,,t. It was just before Mr. alley . I e- 

> 1,ieve,

Vaine down frii W11sliintot0 and was to come to th oflief. anl I10' '' iout and fold im. a1out it. Anl wlhv Ile cane. I dol't know. 

Mlr. l)i.n* N. 'll us :an ill about lr. 11eve. lie wa ; sent frol W:v.Atillfrtonl riglt a after til' assnssinat ion M rS. F\IN rr. i, i.llt. Ile Callie down. W1v It(' ('aule dowwlo I don't 

lijow. I never liId ,,k hii wlv lie cane down. Mri )N AN Ilhe w~~Sent front Ilw l nar1111ters inl 11mis~ iiugtoll. I ).( . l's 1' xx~mRight~. Mr.N I )tu.NAN. You luld voltat with) Mr Ma. llev ?.Mi ls. l"N Nut . Wult, bec ause I had to let him in. Mr. DD. . l id Mfr. Mallev niake refereln.e to the note or letter? MrIS. I EN NE. No. sir. 

.I r. l ,t"I xN. WeC li'ive pr violis testiimoiiv tlit apparently. alle edlv. 

it wa wl Iknown in Washiinitoln that this note did exist: tilat it liad COMP in. Did vo have- anv kiowledg!e fr,,n "Mr. Mallev or an-tone thaet Wasluinir ton kn,. aboutt tits note ?'s. TVE. X'm. No, sir. Notio whatsoever. M1r. Dii NAN. Ill retrosl),Ct. (10 N-On thlilk it wAs strange tile note 

I isalpeared or was (lest roved ? I lave Von0 eVer heard of siwh a thing in  

> I11V

other voriiectioi ?

Its. Ft:xxi.-t. Well. bing-in lie )o-iti(,w. I was in and i)ot working 

ini tIle vrin i nal field. I never Ilva( we des rove,1 - vt hi 1n V. 

.M1r. lhu-w~x. You never heard it on any other occasion that tliey ever (.es, roved a domutuent ?%Ii's. lr:£'ENNa I lou't kIonov vlat tle,\v dill vitl it. 45 Mr. 1)n AxX. Mrs. Fenner, I am sorry. I (1o not have the sequence of events with Mr. Horton and those events. lie spoke to you ill April 1975, and apparently le was going to Abilene? Mrs. IENNER. He had already been to Abilene. Mlr. DIKIN. Very well. Will you tell us what he mentioned to you? .Mrs. F.NNEr. lie mentioned lie was going to tell ne something he had never told me before. Mr. l)RINAN. What did Ie tell you? ,Mrs. FENNEI. That lhe had mentioned to Mr. Shanklin on the way to Abilene about the note that Oswald had brought to the office, and Mr. Shanklin almost jumped out the car window. That's all lhe said. Mr. DRINAN. Why 11 didMr. Horton bring it up to you? Mrs. FENNER. I 'don't know. Well, I guess I shouhln't say I (lon't know. We had been discussingg Mr. Schott's book, "No Left Turns." They were wondering wihy lie had not put that in his book. I said, "Well, maybe lie (didn't know about it." Mr. )RiN.A,. Tell is what niotivated Mr. Slhaiiklin to almos(xt jilfp 

out of the will(low. 

.Mrs. FENNEJR. I (lon't 10iow. I wasn't there. Mr. I)rTNAN. W 'hat did lie mean by that? Mrs. FENNEr. I didn't ask him that. I didn't ctm. 

'Mr. D)mN',x. 1)id 'Mr. Horton tell Mr. Shlanklin about tie presence 

of tie note? Mrs. FENNER. I d(ot know. I an just telling you what he tol1d me. Mr. Irx..,. I ani sorry to press 'OU oil tlis.1)11t WOll(1 you. Mrs. 1]'enier---I think it is very intilllant jiist to tike it oni'e again, tliu entire interview Mr. ][oil'oii had with you in AlPril 1975. Mis . FI ENE. Start gain? ?Mfr. W).,An. Well, Mr. Horton tol(I o01 ,r Said to You soiletlmii, 

Ile lhad 1 ever said to all Vlo(IV else. 

M vs. F:NE.R. I 'S:iit. "Well. I'll tell voi lSonietiling I never said to anVlodv else." 1lilen ile was foing to Mr. Mahrti"s retirem-ent )arty il kbilne. lie ieneitd jio to Mr. Slhank lii about tie letter thlat O.-:%%aldl 

lund 1brought to the office. 1 ' sai(I. "Il[ uea rlv jlilped out tile Car 

wvi ndov." 'i'1Cat'.; all le sail. I (li(l't press tie issue because I wasn't intereste. 

'Mr. ')Mr,,,. NI. 1 itoo01 knw that 'oil hladi received the letter. that 

YoU lad transnitteul tile letter. ''liat wils asslie(l. right ?Mirs. F'N'N..pIl uently so. hut I nieer i.c.issel it with Hnnvole 

Ibea:s4, to iuie. it va.s ('.oi*ii knowledge Ilhe letterI wag in tie office. 

'Mr. 1)ni,\.x. 1At us go iick to the author of the hook. "No Left lirns.' and y'oil spoke wit l, hlil and other? 

MrS. FENN ER. never -- SiiC Mi'. Su.liott left 0l n' ]Bulreau. Mr. I)rD x,%,. Once again, tell us. vo ad soine dealings with Mr. Jos~h-pl L. S liott. 4lidln't %'o. NMr. I F-xFr. No. sir. Mr. 1);n..N. The n ithor of the book? M[r.. FE.NN-.. No. sir. I lhave a copy of the book, but it hasnt been autogyraphed vet. Mr. )i,,%x'. 'Fell iis why there was a discussion as to the question why Mr. Suchott lad not incorporated that into his book. Who raised that and why? 

> R2-629-77-----4

46 Mrs. FzNm. I don't remember. I am trying to recall. Just give me a minute. He was in the office. I think there was a copy of the book lying on the corner of somebody's desk. I had not read the book at that time because I was saving it to read while I was in the hospital. I presume that is why lie raised it. I don't know. Mr. DRINAN. Who raised the question? Mrs. FENNER. Mr. Horton. Mr. DRiNAN. Mr. Horton, in April of this year? Mrs. FENNER. Right. I was taking my vacation early because they wanted to do the surgery in May before the pollen became so potent. Mr. DR1NAN. When Mr. Horton raised this question with you, were you alone ?Mrs. FENNER. There were some other agents in the room. They did not hear the conversation. Mr. DnRINAN. Was there any resolution of the issue or did he just raise the question? Mrs. FENNER. Ile just raised the question, and that is where it stayed. Mr. )RINAN. No one discussed it with you? MrS. FENNER. No. 

M. I)INAN. You made no---Mrs. FENNER. No. Mr. DtINAN. Did you think it was strange Mr. Horton raised that question at that time    

> AM rs. FENNER. No.

Mr. )RINAN. Did anyone else ever raise that question? Mrs. FEN Nrm. Not in my presence. Mr. DRINAN. Thank you very much. Mrs. FENNzR. Because I do not mingle in the office very much with the agents. I am in a different, category, and I have no contact. except with two agents in the office or thie. Mr. 1)J1uNwAx. Have you seen the stenographic report of your two conversations with Mr. Bassett Mrs. FzNNr.R. Yes.  

> "Mr. DRINA.%

Did you mention Mr. Horton V

Mrs. FENN VIR. Yes. Mr. DIVINAN. Did vo, ment ion all of thisI Mrs. Fr.ENNER. YeS. Mr. T)RiNAN. Is there anything else, Mrs. Fenner, in the eonversa-tion with Mr. Bascett that has not. come out this morning? Mrs. FyNNi.w.i. If tlern, is. I don't, know what it could be. 

Mr. DRINAN. I am just giving you the opportunity to add anything You like. Mrs. FrENqr!R. I am thinking. Perhaps I left something out. but Tcan't recall that I have. Mr. DRINA.. Thank you very much. Mr. EDWARS. Mr. Kindness. MNr. KJ ,r ,iss. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mrs. Fenner, when you first told about the note that Mr. Oswald left on your desk or threw on your desk. you used a psture to describe the size of the enclosure. For'the record', could you indicate approxi-mately the size of that piece of paper that was included in the envelope I47 Mrs. FENNzR. I am sure all of you have seen these little tablets that have an inch at the top and have a few lines and is about a 5x7 pad you write little notes on. Mr. KIjNEs. Five by seven? Mrs. FJxNNE. It was on that kind of paper. It was only one sheet. Mr. KINDNESS. It was one sheet of paper, and could you tell us alittle bit more about the writing. Was the writing small in size or large in sizeI Mrs. FENNER. I would say it was large in size because the bottom portion of it, which was folded about like this [indicating], you could read, "Blow up the Dallas Police Department"--I do not know which line was first. Those few words covered the whole bottom portion of the paper. Mr. KiNDNESS. When you read the whole note, did you notice or did you remember where there was a return address on the envelope? Mrs. FENNEFR. No. There was not. Mr. KINDN FS. Was there a date on it you can recall ?

Mrs. FENNER. Not that I recall. Mr. KIxDNFss. Was there a salutation? Mrs. FENNER. It was signed Lee Ilarvey Oswald. Mr. KImNsS. It was signed with all three names? Mrs. FENNE.R. It was-- I would classifyy it very illegible. Mr. KINNESS. It did include all three namesO Mrs. F NFn. Yes, sir. Mr. KIxNNESS. Lee, Harvey, and Oswald? Mrs. FENNER. Yes, and on the envelope it had S. A. Hosty. Mr. KINDNE$S. It did have that on the envelope? Mrs. FV.NN-FI. Yes. Mr. KIDNE SS. But not on the inside? Mrs. FENN-ER. ro the best of mv recollection , it did, 'yes. In another sense. I have looked back-I think it just said "losty" on the inside. Mr. KINDNESS. It was just like a letter? Mrs. F.NF.. I do not remember verbatint what was above, but 

tbere was some gesture almut talking to his wife, and if it (idnt cease or stop, he was going to blow up the FBI and Dallas police stat ion. Mr. KiNDN ss. Thank vou. Coming to another subject, when you had the conversation with Mr. Horton in April 1975, that, sounded to me, front your earlier de.ription of it, ais though it was sort of a light-hearted, joking encounter. Mrs. FN NFR. It was. He was more or less teasing. I am a big tease. and I teased back. Mr. KJiwiN.ms. Do you think there is any chance what Mr. Horton said to you aboul the note and the trip to Abilene and Mr. Shanklin, that he might have been kidding? Mrs. FE...EF. It could possibly have been. He was a great kidder. and I always kidded back. Mr. KiNDErqss. It was a friendly relationship? Mrs. FENNER. Right. Mr. KinDNEss. Let us go back again to when Mr. Oswald was in the office and when he threw the note on your desk. Did he then immediately leave your presence? 48 

if rs. FENN Ir e walked from niv desk ailk to Ow ," e'-vaf or 1lnl 

which was a short distance, and ie 'looked over his back toward 1mie. 

Ti realsol I returned to Ily desk-I went into MIr. Clarrk's desk and 

(1111 back to keep an eye on him in ease Mr. ('lark said to detain lli). Mr. KviDNE:ss. Yoi read the letter ill the envelope after it, fell olt of tie envelope or oened more or less in Mr. Oswald's presen'e? 

Mi's. FFNNEII. Rialit, lie knew I lind seen it and was looAkin.. at it. fr. KiNDNFuss. Then you left youir desk, you went to Mr. Clark's office, and returned I  

> frs. FENNER.

It was just a sec. It was fi'oin here to that window to Mr. Clark's office. [Indicating.] Mr. KINDNESS. That wag a very short period of time you were away from your desk and Mr. Oswald was still there? MNfrs. FENNER. Yes, b)eause the elevators in that !huildin.( were Sleep-

ing. They went up in(l down when they got rea(ly. Mr. KINDVss. By the time Mr. Clark turned his attention to flnt note on that occasion, it was extremely limited? Mrs. FENNER. Right. 

Mr. KINDNESS. ie told y'ou at, that timge to giVe it to 'Mr. 110.v? 

.Mrs. FE.NNEJIn. Right. 

Mr. K.NDNss. I think I have no fill her ,l stions. ''hank youl. Mr. l'ImI,,A,\ND.. Mr. ldlillo. M '. li. ttiLi,. MIs. 1]1t1('1er. 'oil were tle i'vc,'elt ionist lt tlat l ilie ill 

i1le older office? Mrs. FENIF.,. Right. f'. B1 wI l.o. Were vol i istriict d or did ol lu keep reeorls of peo,,,1e       

> wim wvorkied ol.i' ': eto I

liw ofiev in that l'iolI of t jute?     

> MrN. EsNi1-1U. SNo.

Xfiv. I It A). No I'evords were veve r' hv t n~ t a IlI? 

Mlsi. F '.NN:I. No. 

M. I l. iz . . ), i' n id! on ot ivte' 01 ,i-io i. I o)(h, woll1 coli in : Td(1        

> (11'0J 1)i',tolS antd k(i ves on voi'l ule-Ik'?

Mr's. FFNNEIIT. 'HieP, have41 done1 that onl a coiiphe of oveasions;. Mfoic 11111 a ('olipli'. Mri. W,~.'~hiat linv e voil done inl those cases? is. FF:.,'N',:. WVell. I jilst pi,'kedl 11) div Ilooie and :iid, "sendl 111    

> 11.geit i1) front."

Mr. ,uin,.o. And tle personl stood lv ?Mrs. F itN nll. ''hev wer, jslt sitting still. 

1ir. I ADI) LO. Wha tlil)l(114wl( 1vhte tlie agent caine? Ml's. FE NN 'Rl. 'The au-1t CIme i1!l right 1lwiVa-. 

Mr. BAIiA). In this ea.', when voii sawiv ti note that. said, "I'll eitl er blow ti) tlie )allas Police I1)nlm'tn iiol r tle Ili I office," ), wa id was right in front of yonl? M1rs. FEvN ' :i. l'li-hulh. Bult now le ling] gone l':Ie-k toward tl ele-

Ar. lRrl~r.t.o. lIe left 1)y then ?Airs. F'x'x. i:'. lHe had not left the floor, no. lie hnd left. my desk.   

> "Mr. ImAInr.I.o.

''liat's a da h,.rerol.s statentent to make, isn't it ?.irs. Ft:.t. l'liat 's wti\ I took it. to Mr. Clark.   

> N1r. IADiL.LX.

)oil didn'tt pick ll) (lie 1l)ne1 and call an agent \ili 

he was '4 ill standing tire? 49 M's. FEN'NER. Iwas (lting th1e lunch 11o1', 1111d there weren't many, if ally, agents in tile office except the supervisors and that is why I took it to Mr. Clark. lie was the nearest person near me who was an agent. Mr. BADILLO. When you took it to 'Mr. Clark, was Oswald still within the building ?  

> Mi's. FENNER.

Yes, that's why I went to my desk, to see if they wanted to retain him. M[r. BADmAO. Yes, Mr. Drinan. Mr. I)JA-X. If it lhad not been lunchti me, could you have called an agent immediately? Mrs. FEN N-E R. Ye0s. Mr. J)m NANX. You felt threatened by this individual ?Mrs. FN-NEJ. I did. I thought it was a ver'y threatening letter.   

> Mr. BA.DILo.

Whlen ,oll told Mr. Clark thiS fellow had a note and 

slowed hinl tie note, le said lie was a "nut"? Is that what he. said? 

3.%f's. FENNEr. T'lhat's wlat he said. Ile said, "lie's a 1111t, forget it." Mr. BAr)uLLO. Isn't it )recisely the nuts tie FI31 is supposed to 

wo rrV aloit ?

's. FENNEII. I don't know. 

Mr'. B]AI)I,rt). 'l'lley are specialists when somemi n ays they are going to blow i) a building. 

Mrs'. F HNNER. e ll, that I don't know again. 

MV. BAD)LLO. You saw the note and sat down ?

Mrs. FENNER. Yes. I know, to me, it was a threat. To me. I left it up to the discretion of a higher official than myself to make a decision. 'h'liat. is why I took it to Mr. Clark. 

Mr. B, ,u 1 .r. Have you ever received training as a receptionist, were you ever given any instructions as to what to (1o if ineone (elivers i threat to you? Mrs . FE ERx . No. hey just, sai( if vou f(,l yu nee(i to, hit the I)Itzzer. I could lit it very, easily, and I'have only had to hit it twice firingg my time as a rec(,eptionist. I am not a recep)tionist n1ow. I

liaven't blen for years. But I only hit it twice in my tenure when Iwas a receptionist. In neither of those times did they threaten inc. 

''liere was just a small railing teenwen miy desk and the outer hall. 

'ie one. time. I rang the buzzer was when a man jmnped over it. An ag(nt had already been ul) to talk to him and ,aid he could not help; it was not in our jurisdiction. lie walked hack to the elevator and then (am back and jumped over the railing. 'I'lie door was locked; I had locked it with the biwzzer. Ire jumie)d over it. Another time--oh, it goes back years--we were in the M'ercantile Batik Builing. A man of unsound mind caine iin. I knew he was of 

1I11SO u(1 mini, lie luid beii there before. And I hit the buzzer, and ag(.nts came mnid got him. "l'Imose are tie onltv two time,; that I act ually hit the buzzer cause I w.sn't afraid. Never been afraid. 1Ir. Bl,\I,.o. Was tlrao'ea notice .,Mlt arouit(I ill Niveo,)l)er 0' tl(,e-af(ter, Deceii .1963, oi dii iugy tliat )e'io(l of in vestiL'at ion, askiuig tlt, ,e.emplovees inl the office for any reollect.i l they may lhave lhad of 

any visit (of TA, eilaivev Oswald? 

Mrs. F,.rIN-Fn. Not io my knowledge. I di(tint get a copy. 

Mr'. B.\nu,.,. No (m,, a- i'(ld a u-tlili g (liiri hg tlat period ?

Mm'. F ENNr E . N o . sir. 50 

Mr. BADILLo. And-Mrs. FENNER. There would e no reason for them to ask me because I didn't work in the criminal work. Mr. BADALO. They did have a file on Oswald in the office. You knew about that? Mrs. FENNER. I did not know about that until it caine out in the papers that they (lid. 

Mr. BADILro. You knew that Agent Ilosty had been seeing Oswald, didn't you? Mrs. FENNER. I did after reading about it, but at that time, I didn't. Mr. BADHLLO. When you read the note, you knew Ilosty had been see-ing Oswald. That was before the assassination? Mrs. Fr&NNFm. Right. Mr. BADILio. And you gave it to Hosty? Mrs. FENNER. He said he was just a nut, and he walked off. Mr. BADILLr. But he certainly indicated that he know who he was. Right? Mrs. FNNER. Right. Mr. BADILLO. Therefore, it means there was some knowledge of Os-wald before? Mrs. FENNER. Right. Mr. BADIi,.o. Therefore, it means it must be in the file in your office. Ordinarily it would be, right? Mrs. FENNER. I would not know, sir. I don't know what they make film of and what they don't make files of. I only know what I make up. I don't know what they make up. Mr. BADILLO. You were not required to make any list of the people who come to your office? 

MIS. FENNER. No, sir. I did not. 

Mr. SEIlMu NO. Will the gentlentan yield .Mr. BADILX). Y".   

> Mr.. SPJEIIRIUN(.

Mrs. Fenner, when you took the note in to Mr. 

Clark, you read it-is that right? Mrs. ENNEB. Right. 

M1'. SKIBERIING. lile said to give it. to the alpprpriate special agent 

Mrs. FENNER. ie brought it tiavk to miy desk. 

Mr. S';hreNO. lieun tell us agnin exactly what you did with it. Mrs. FNNER. I put it in his envelope. Mr. S,%nIIuLx xo. Mr.I losvv's en velope ?Mrs. FE.4NII. Ill thie ejivelol)e addre l ed to Mr. Hosty, put a rout-ing slip On it, fuld piut. Ilosty's name on it, and 1ut it in the box to go. 

The clerks would pick it ul) and rike it hack in to route it,. Mr. SEiIIERiL, I'o. hlow Ing after your conversation with Mr. ('lark woll( you say you did that ?Mr s. FEEXBt. ''en or 17) 1,illutes. But Mr. Ilosty calie in arnd picked it , 1 )lii lf. 

Mr. S:,tElIL n1;. Now, at ally tinre. itaye y'ou lea ll frolic i anyone in the Fil t.ht tlere well. all Vvoi.verstious or contwts by FIl per-.solnlel with Ir. ()swald between that time and the time he Nvats ar-riste! for a.,ass*hiiat intu lPIreitledt Kennedy? Mrs. FExNE L. O)nly when 1 read it in tw papers. No one (ti5.s'lussed it in iny pixvs'nice in the ofliec. 51 Mr. SEIBFmRiNO. I am not referring to whether you heard anything before, between then and the assassination. But ifat any time there-after, whether you heard of any conversations IM rs. FENNER. No. I did not. Mr. SEmuErwixo. Thank you. fr. EDWARDS. Now, Mr. 1adillo 2N[fr. R%,DImIo. No further questions. Mr. Emixiws. M-Ns. Fenner, you ar.e still in the Dallas field office? Mrs. FENNER. Right. Mr. EDWARDS. When did you first find out this story, that there was a 12-year cover-up, that this matter was covered up? Mrs. FFNNERi. Right. 

\fV , 'Ew!tARDS. When did you first find out, about it? Mrs. FENNEr. When Mr. Bassett and Mr. Gunderson came to my home when I was ill in bed. Mr. EDWARms. You did not see the newspapers and the reports in the newspapers? Mrs. J ENNER. I had not been able to read. I couldn't wear my glasses. Mr. EDWARDS. What did they say to you? Mrs. FE&NNER. It was rather odd, to e exact. And I racked my brain. I don't know how or who or why they came to me first. They came, and Mr. Gunderson had called me and said, "Ma'am, where were you?" or something like that. And I said, "I am not very well." He said, "I notice vou are on the AL instead of SL," which meant annual leave instead of sick leave. I said, "Yes, that is due to the fact I am going to be losing annual leave this year if I don't take it. And since I am going to be off quite a bit, I wanted to take annual leave instead of sick leave." 

Ile said, "I)o you feel up to me coming out to see you ?" I said, "It's all right witl me if you don't mind the circumstances that exist." I had been told before Mr. Gunderson, before he arrived as our agent in charge, that he had a tendency to check on individuals, employees, who were on sick leave. Of course, he was not there when I had my major surgery. So Ithought ho was just checking on me to see if i was actually ill, so I

said, "Sure, come on out." I said, "I'll have someone leave the door open or unlatched because when I am ill, I am not allowed out of my bed because I am not allowed to think, and I had instructions not to leave the bedl. Everything I needed or would need was at my finger-tips. I have a hospital bed in which I sleep, and I was elevated just like time doctor had instructed me to be elevated. Well, I heard the car coming up the driveway. I heard a door slam, and I heard the second door slam. lie did not tell me he was bringing a second individual. I thought, "Well, knowing that I am in bed, he no doubt is bringing one of the girls from the office," but then when he opened the door wnd called my name, I sail, "Come on, I am in the back bedroom." I said, "Come on down the hall and to your left," which he did. I think lie realized he should not have come. lie did not see a pretty sight, I know, but since he was there-he had Mr. Bassett with him. 

Ite and Mr. Bassett introduced themselves. Mr. EDWARDS. Who was Mr. BassettI 52 Mrs. FEN . The inspector from the Bureau in Washington. And 

Mr. Bassett said, "I understand you are the best collator we hav," and 1 said, "well, I do my best. I never missed a deadline." 

Ire said, "Well, tlat's not the reason we're heree" I said, "Oh ?" 

Ile said, "No." Ife said. "I am hesitant to bring this up)." Ile sai(l. "Do you feel up to talking?" I sai(1, "Well, you cait start, and if I feel that I an getting weak. Iwill tell you." So, Mr. Gunderson got i a glass of water, and lie asked me-lie said, "ThC Bureau is in receipt of a letter"-le didnt say where it came from or anything--"stating that the )allas office. prior to the assassination of Plvrsi(lelt Klennedv received It letter from Oswalhi 

"Ind it, was handed to the recepJtionist or it secietarv, anll tile letter stated that the" did not. believe the elliployee was still eIl1lovel. tlat slw had either retired or returnedi to the New Eigyland area. lie said, "Now, we have gone through (luite an extent of investiga-tion and goinz throughl, personnel files at. the Bureaul here, in l)allas at that tine. You are the only individual that we can come up witi whm has any ties in the New England area. No one has retired or re-tllrned to the New England area." iTe said. "Your connections are 

through your husband's family." lie said. "I believe they live in Wells-lev lills, Springfield." T said, "Mv sister-in-law lives in Wellslev Itills. She has moved to 

New Iha'ifpshire this Veat." 

And then he loolced over in his little Benjanin Franklin glass. nInd said, ")o you know anything about the note?" I hesitated. I know lie noticed my hesitation. and( I said, "Well. do 

%oi want me to lie or do you want me to tell tle truth h" And before le -ould answer. I said. "hWell. let me put it this way. 1 didn't come into this organization to Ue. and I am not goin( out lying. I'll tell thle truth. I received the letter." Mr. Ew, s. Why wotild oui have said tl at ? Whyv would vol have asked them whether or not Nomu should tell the truth or not ?

Mi's. F4:-nUnIx:. Well. I don't know hoow.' you Congressmen hmoll ineet-ingts. but I know that in o r office, as well as other oflee, t. hev will (r t

ip, the main man will :et illp and say. "Well. I ist don't want this to leave I hes'e four walls. If %'ou are asked ahout it at a later (late. you can 

s:i*v you( didn't hiear it." 'luy don't tell you not to sav--thev sa'. "I (lon't want, it to leave these four walls." And th Oswald letter had never been mentioned I)dd i'l v.    

> 'Mr. EOWMA RDS.

W'0u141 v-on have expectedl tha solimeolie. h6ill i vFIBi would have as]ke'd you to wot tell tle truth alKItt le Oswaldi le ,r '? 

.[rs. F'.x ,, :n. I hope tiey vo l not ha\e lcaus, I wowli hiavc told, 

tl,(, t I-fth anyvway. 'Y r1."E )AII. D o( vll]I+ l '() II.I)%- Nlllwn,'"' w i'''Illpim-evst"'. ()f the  

> 14"M

ll , tiff, Dallas Fieldi ()fi'e ajil vl-4,wl( re. !1a\-v e, 1,1;o d,,! t, I(, 

tell tlm tr .th ?FEN * L:N 'MV rt. knowld.re. no. 

Ir. l am)v,'.il,,. h (1n (I t Iley pilt yo unlder o l .th . 4' 1F :x .. ,1t . T len. 

I'. EI -w.:ps. lighlit thon and there ?53 Mrs. FENNER. v1lien, after I said I was the one. ie said, "Well, I will have to put you under oatl. Can you raise your right hand," and I did. 

M r. EDWIWS. Isn't it kind of strange tllis event took place and then for 12 years it was covered lup and not made a part of the public record and then. all of a sudden it came oit one day. Why do you think it came out? 

Mrl s. FENNER. I never knlew it was not in ti l ie]) recoI(lrd iit il it, came out that it wasn't. I hvad never read the (swald Report. I never real the IVarren Rel)ort. l)ecaiise I wasn't interested in it. Mr. Ewv.ms. 'Mi's. Fenneir. your testimony is that Kyle Clark anl 

Ilelen May ahll M'. I o-ty all had possession at. one time and read t le let ter? 

Mr s. l,':N N h:. ] iglit. Nmv. li[elvl If: y i, an individial, I mi..glit add. 

who lives fol dav to Lay an(1 what shie hleard today slhe is not (oinlg     

> to rlelne iolTO WtIwr)'V.

I3in'. lIW '.1:r . A jam-elti lv she (]()V'S no l, lit also Mr. ('ahlrk denies 

lic ever' reild it. Ilo\w do( vol :i(''ollt for that ?

Mr IS. 14" F NFit I d 01ii't kno10W. M.r. )'M.xms. v tiile is almiiost uIp. low do \,ol account for the    

> fact wve i

e i, iig t0 get soalln v stories and from 1 SO 11a1y leoI)l alIe goi lu to ,leliv th,- iote e-l. v (xiztedl. Iow (10 \'olI aeouiit f or that?  

> Mr's.

14:x NEl?. I dont kl(nw very 11n9an\ peole, to 111N kiow~ldc,. 1don't kn, w a iivone other t ha1n th ose I named(, saw that letter. After it left niv desk, 1 don't kllmv anything. 

Mr. ,l ;'WAms. V\lien you saw on television. Oswald beingcy slot lhv 

Jack Rhl v. amid Nconizin,( Oswald as tile man who deli vere tlie  

> Ilo(tev.

d id you S11 v a n vthiinq to yourl husband? 

Mivs. PFN :. I smii. "()h. my God. That is tile man who hrollIlt the 

letter' to tlie office." Th at is tlie first tin me lie ever knew be lead been to tl' office. 

.fv. Liuns. he11 ,h'let, \ -' (went to work the next morning. .i1s. F'ENEI. No. t le very same (lay. Mr. 1,A)W'..)S. 'Tle v'erxv---tlii' sanie da\. "When 'ou walked ill flie 

FBI field office, who did 'y'oi contact \vitlm high exc-itenllt? Mrs. Fr:x'':. Nobody. I juist went to ily desk anl sat down and went to work. Mr. Ei,)Ams. Didn't \oi say to anvbodly. "My God, the guy wyho left the hitter threateningr the field office of the FIT and the police department jxist got shot." Mrs. FENNIFR. There was no one for me to talk to. Mr. EDWARDS. If you had to do it over again, would you la\'e done something different ?f's. FE-,-NNn. T doubt it. To me, what T didn't know was none of my 'business. .\It'. EDWARDS. Mfi'. l)odd. 

'Mr. DI)ODD. I have no questions, Mr. Chairman. Mr. EDWArDS. Mr. Drinan.   

> Nfr. DRINAN.

Thank you. Mr. Chairman. 

'Mr. Adams testified here on October 21 that, tie agent, involved, Mir. Ilosty. stated that approximately 2 hours, after Oswald had been I)ronolneCd (lead on November 24, his supervisor, Mr. Howe, said that. Mir. Shanklin wanted to see him. And, Mr. Hlosty went to see Mr. Sianklin. wmo was the S)le''itl agent in (ohinr,ge and lie was inistruclted 

)y M"'. Shanklin to destroy the note. 54 You indicated on that very night 2 hours or shortly after Oswald was dead, Mr. Kyle Clark, the assistant special agent in charge, came to vou and said, 'Forget about the note." Ihat colroborates with wiat we have here from Mr. Adams. Doyo u recall, was Mr. Shanklin in the office at that time? Mrs. FENNER. I didn't see him. 

M'. DRINAN.. Would you assume, since Mr. Kyle Clark said this to youl, he was retIeol ing t l e views of his Sul)perior. MrI. Shauklill Mrs. FENNEni. No, I cannot say that, truthfully. I have no knowledge to my personal knowledge about Mr. Shanklin. I did not show him the letter. I have no knowledge li ever saw it. Mr. DRINA-N. But you obviously know, Mr. Kyle Clark saw it? Mrs. F NNYR. I know he did, because I gave It to him. Mr. DRINANX. Therefore, you can assume Mr. Shanklin knew it, too. 

MI.S. FE,N N.ER. No, I cannot assume that. Mr. D.n.-iN. Thank you very much. Mr1. E1)w~m,1's. Mr. Parker. Mr. PAaKu. M'rs. Fenner, do you consider yourself a person of 

average. )elow average, or better than average meniory? Mrs. FEXNN,KR. Everybody says that I have a better than average mnem'ory.   

> Mr. PFKEm.

It was on the 8th of July, you feel, you were inter-viewed 1v Mr. llas ett of the Fl1 ?  

> MIS. PENNER.

I feel it was. As I told you yesterday, I am pretty sure I know I worked on Monday. I told my inimnediate supervisor I would not be in the next (lay, I would be on annual leave, but Ithought I night come in, providing the doctor would let me. I had aviolent. reaction to the medication. I passed out. in the car. I was not able .to go b)ack. My husband sealed him and told him. I am pretty sure it was a Tuesday. MNr. I' KER:. A 'Iues(lay ?

MI-s. FEINNER. Right. 

fr. PARKER. )o It'hiV , it was the 80 of July ?MI'S. FEN.N.. I believe it was the Sth. MNr. 1".muEci. Earlier this morning I asked you a question about what M1\r. TIosty did when lie got the note. In response to that question you told me lie had picked it up and you hadn't yet put a routing slip on it. Mr. Seiberling, 'when he asked you that question a while ago, you indicated what you lhad (lone with that letter was that you put arouting slip on it'and put it in a box. 

Mrs. FNE. I put a routing slip on it and Mr. HIosty picked it up.  

> Mr.

lPxnrK. [ie correct version of the story is you did put a-M rq. FE,NER. It, had a routin g slip with his name on it or otherwise it, would not--I would not have had it on that corner of the desk. M1"r. PARnKER. Is it Fossible you were interviewed on the first or 15th of .itlv rather than the 8th? 

Mrs. FE.NEm. No. I do not know what (late the first was on, but-Mr. PARKER. Would it help to refresh your recollection if I told you the interview the FBI has from Mr. Bassett, is dated the 15th of 

:JulyI 55 Mrs. FNN.I. Well, as I said, I could be wrong. I know that I was--well, I don't-it could possibly have been. I know I was under doctor's care both weeks. and it was on a T*uesday. Mr. PAnrER. But if you are in error on that date, which occurred earlier this year, is it possible any of the elements of this story that you have told us this morning that happened 12 years ago, may not quite be accurate? Mrs. FENNER. There might be a little discrepancy, but I (to not know where it woul(l h---Mr. PARKEM~. You would stand on the bulk of the testimony you have given here this morning? Mrs. FEN NX.R. I know I got the letter. I know I gave it to Mr. Clark. He brought it back and said he was a nut. Helen May was coming through and she read the note before I got it back in the envelope. Mr'. P'ARKER. You recall clearly the words of the note? Mrs. FENNFR. I do. Mr. PARKER. Thank you. Mr. SEIJI EI.,N(. May I ask. M.Nr. EI)WAItrl. Yes. Mr. SEIBERIuNO. Can you think of any ways we would be aide to pin point the (late when Mr. Oswald came and gave you that note"? 

N rs. FNN Y- t. I wish I could give you the date. Mr. SxiiwitiaNo. I know you can't, but are there any -Mrs. FNN R. I have racked my brain and I cannot. Mr. SKIIERtIINo. I s8l1ppO. from Mr. Clark or Mr. Ilosty, we will try to get tlir recollection. Would any other people that would know, have some way of recollecting when you got that note? Mirs. FENNEJ. It came out in the Warren Report, I believe, that. in a(liarv they fomndl he. was in the )allas ofTh'e, I think on the -,th of NoveNm0ber. hut as I said, I believe it was before then that he was in the office. MNfr. SKnuIBLTNO. So, it is conceivable, to be consistent with your testimony, he could have been in the office twice if you take the (liary, plhs the late he gave you the note. Mrs. Ft:NN.r. The reason I said it was before that, his-somehow or another I connected with the State Fair of Texas being on at the time Oswald brought that letter to the Dallas office. Now. why I don't know, unless it was due to the fact we had so ni an v. main v lwo,)lIe voin, to the office dring the fair season. Mr. qvAtRL'n;. )o you reanl what period the fair was on? Mrs. ~,NNER. The first part of October, either the second week and it lasts for 2 weeks. It. would be the middle 2 weeks of the month. To me. T have pinpointed in that area, but I could be entrel wrong. 'That is the period of time I personally feel that he was there. As I say, again, that is my pinpointing and it could be so wrong Mr. SmIFIIEmiNo. how many people ordinarily would you see coining into the office, in a day at. that particular tirel? 

Mrs. Fr-vrNNE. During the fair time, I would say 15 or 20, maybe more. Mr. Svutr.tNo. How about in November of that year? Mrs.; Fr~xrNi. It would defend uipon the direction'of the Moon. 

Mr. SmEiaEiI.No. A after a period of time. T suppose your memory of a56 face would become blurred. Was there soiwetiing with all the other faces you see, that happens to me? Mrs. FF, NER. Right. Mr. SEMMINO. I just wonder if there was any particular things, the contents of the note or something that made Mr. Oswald's face stand out in your memory ? 

> Mrs.

FE..N-,'ER. It was his eves. His eves and facial expression. even on TV, I remember specifically. It was'just a wild look like an animal that was wild, that hal been iied and turned loose. Mr. SniBFRIANo. That was true when you saw him in person? 

Mrs. FENNF .R. Right. Right. Mr. SE LUnr -. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. MI'. 1,DwArfDs. Mr. Klee. Mr. Krvr..Mrs. Fe,,i,,,''. wlen volt received 0t e l'ivelope. were there -,nv ma rlin,.,s on it other tlhanRS A. Ilosty ?

.N f .:,n. Not to II, klnowle(le. 

"Mr. Kvt:. ,w tv li rveeor (I. vold von please (lescribe wletler the  

> a

liA1 wllichl tle het tet' wa, folded wais te first crease had the middle 

wrl ion of tle lt er folded 1II) to ti le )t lohll th1e secoll( (.'rase' hNad the 1lst I)O'thi of tlie letter toward tie lottoill So it was exi)osd : is luiat 

C,)!,'4t '? 

.Ifrs. F1'iN'N . Riglt. As you fold the letter, it was like tlii. [T n, i'a t in,-,. ]

M r f;E. In all vour eXIperienee 'Is a reev)tionnist. was it yon,' fne-

tion to ()TIHTI enwlol) with the muail ?

MNI's-,. FK P,%-st I1 (lid nl't opeit 1an lyth . I li~C elp if it was tb ro'v     

> (M) MVi desk openi.
> fi:.

K,r:. )t IIvw i,, e. 'voln never opened enlvelopes ?

rsu. FI:x.:n. Never. m'r. hir::. A, reveptioitist.? Mr. T,'FN- xi. Never. unles, it was ad(ldressed to tie. 

M't. :Kr. . Ill all of , ri1 X1)erielCle opening envlinlS fllvs'w(l 

t) vo. h)as it. been voin' exPeri('n('40 letters are normal lv folded1 so no 

P41 i't of tie let ter is (x posed ? 

> Ml's.

F.ENN . Right. 'Mr. Kt.xv. So. the bottoii part is folded in. Mrs FiN~iJC.Righit. 

Mr. Km. Tnis letter was ii'regnilarly folded ?

'Mrs. FENNEJI. Right. 

Mfr. Kii:. When von took tile. letter to Mr. Kyle (. Clark, what were lis inst r ict ions to :oil ?

Mrs. FF4:x:in. li'e juist brm'ouglit it baek al said,. "lie is a nult. Give it to l, v." Mr. Kix. '[lien you put a routine g slip on it ? 

> Mrs,

Fi:-NFt- I was going,. to put it back as--that is when hlelen Iav catne Nick and I was in the proess of getting it folded. She asked  

> tim

who 'wis the ereep in td1w hall. I lhoid to admit le did look like ar('.e . 'aiet is wlen I .aid. "lie is the one who Irolglit in this letter." 

.fr. K1,%:i:. Then yot pl t it Mi.. Ft-, NF:.I. In the en elope. Mr. Ki.xE. Theui vol ltit ai routing sli!p on it witl lost's iianw on it a1l jpit it iy .omr lesk ?57 [rs. FE.NN r. I ptt it by iiiy desk for the clerk to pick up t'o take to iote it. I left a note with tli; switchboard for Ilosty to see me when  

> l(i

vaiine in ill case he came in before the mail was picked up. Ni,'. KIL::. lie Cailne to your desk and he picked nup the letter. He (li( li't come to your desk anud ask you what you wanted ? Ile just came to your desk and!picked iul) the letter? Ml'rs. FNNER. lie Said, "I hear you have something for me." Iihanded hlim tle letter. Mr. Krtmz. Your message to the switchboard didn't say anything albmit having anytliing for him ?Mis-. F:n Ni. It just said for hiim to see me. Mr. KirF. Wteit Mr. Bassett interviewed yol il Jiuly of this veal 

and askel about the note, how did you know which noe he was re-ferring to? \Its. F4bx xrN'. It was thet only iote that I knew about. 

Mr. Kli:i:. In all your cxiprientce with the FBI. you llave only ! .111(!!( 10 neote ?Ms. FEnN:i. Fromn Oswald. lie asked mi about the Oswald note. M'. J(,m:. ()1i. !he asked You alb)out the Oswahl note? Mrs. 1NtN -:Fi. I No l(led her Ia(I aflirmat i velv. I

Mi. KraE :. Wli;it itiealieatioii were you mnder at tie time that Bassett, inte 'vihw(, youl? 

Mrts. FEnn'II. I really do'it know. It was ani injectable. I had just ('Ohl)lete(I siliis---wlateven" you want to call it. They hadleilloved ut,' siuiises, I was lwuetieallv nuilil1) front the ey'eballs down. 

Mr. Ki.t'. lit y(fr jl'uirmal instructijoits from the Fil, wheut things were (lelivei-edi to yoi at t ie(lesk, wre you unler instrutions to  

> leu,,

I iiuateriials or ntot to ea(l inateriols that were incoming? 

MI. F:N.NER. Tly jlSt said to routeD them, see they get where they uure ,.4)iij~. and I dlid. Mi. i,:. W\hen Vou rea(d tile Oswall note, were yo1 (fisol)eyilig 

nniiv (14'.j1 ),11ilt onlers or directives ?Nf I . .' - ' . NF L N4). Mr. ,%(;'.:. Wliil vo '('rea( lie Ih)ttoil part of the note, was it ]lOI)r 

lrIoe(lll re for yo t) o(elt up al( ,'lad Ile entire letter? .\i's. FEN NEil. I () iit know whleir it was iro1er or not. I col(1 not Iwl1u Iilhl n-:1i it viden it was flat. By that Iimie it wn. visible. 

Mr. I'lie hottolit of the letter was visible? .Mrs. 1I;NNE:R. W\lien I e tliew it )1 t lile hot o i 1),, it st(KNl1 up l),ouit 

like Ithis I iiici,to,. W 1tei I picke(I it I), ii %vas very- it. was j tst :lblll six or sevell lilies on the )ai)er. Mr. Kh.t:r. So, you read tihe letter from the top down? Mrs. FEN'NER. Tight. Nfr. Ki t,i. Youi (1't I read te l)ottom hart first. 

.frs. i 'E nNi . I rv iti.( I)ito ,1 n rt first. 'ln t is wliei I realize,( it was a threat. 

.Nl. KI.,r. Wer, there amiv fiflice regii al lift is ()r I) ro'c!(re'1 v t1hi reg,,.u 

hitell ,r. ,- owi~l,. lilt letvi. to hleleit May in tle h111lh? M1. FE.N E' lR. NO. Mr. Ki.:. I- -is. F:' NER. I woulld n(t :-aV it wits ilt lit( liall: it was in my offi'e. Mr. K,EF,. In vour office. frs. FNN.FR. "Yes. 58 Mr. Kl-:xx. It was normal for Ielen May to return from the rest-room to wherever she was going through your office? Mrs. FE.NNER. 'rlhey had to get through there to get into our office space. Mr. M.P.& When you left Kyle (lark's office, did you take the letter hack to your desk? You said you returned to your desk because you thought. oil might haw, to detain Oswald. Mrs. P'ENNI.R. See, I left the office of Mr. Clark. I did not take it to my desk. I took it to Mr. (lark. I wken back vLilptyhllded. lie brought the letter back to ne, to my desk. Mr. K.EE. Ife lid. You went back to your desk to possibly detain Oswald? Mrs. FE.N t. Right. In ease-he told me from his desk, have that young gentleman to come in then I woulh have called him back. but he didn't. Mr. KiL:. I see. I have just one final question. It concerns the policy of the, Dhallas (flive in having agents in the office during lunch. Is it, standard procedure for all the agents in the office to taketheir hinch. at. the same ' ime ?Mrs. FE.,'NNER. Not now. Mr. KrEF,. Was it at the time of the Oswald note? M-s. F : FR. We didn't have as many agents then as we did now. Mr. Kixv,. How many did you have? 

. is. F.N NE1R. I don't really know. but I know we doubled or I ri pled in size sil.0 t hen. Mr. Ki,v:E. Were all the .a:'ents taking their lunch hour at the same t imne Mrs. FNN',R:. See, I (on1t know how many agents. I was not where I could see wher, there was anyone but Mr. Clark, who was there. He was the only agent I coeld see. The agents are on another floor in the back of the office which I could not see. So, I don't know if any agents were back there, or not. Mr. KtF:. Thank von. I have no more quest ion9. Mr. Chairman. Mr. Enw.%Rsin. The last 12 years since you remained in the Dallas Field1 Office. I am sure there have been discussions between you and other personnel about FBI activitiesover coffee? Mrs. Fi. .En. No. sir. I do not go to the coffee room. T do not have time. I am at my lesk. I have water sitting at my desk. I only get up 

-it l i .htitne and when I go home at light. Mr. EDw, rs. Has there wen any discussion of the as.sasqination the last 1'2 yeai 'ou lve been in the Dallas office? 

'M .-. FEN . n. No. sir. Mr. Enw. fs. None whatsoever? Mrs. FrEN.rn. Not. in my presence. I have very. very little contact with the agents As ai whole. I only have two agents wnlo do my work and the supervisor who signs it. Mr. E)w.RD. No further questions. Mr. DRTNAN. Mr. Chairman. Mr. EDWARDS. Mr. Drinan. MIr. DRINAN. In view of your testimony, we are faced with the situation Mr. Adams stated here. T quote. "Whatever thouights or fears might have motivated the, cnnealment of Lee Harvey Oswald's visit 59 to our Dallas office, and of the concealment and subsequent destruction of the note he left there, the action was wrong." We are left with the situation where Kyle Clark who knew about the note, who gave him the note, he came and said, "Don't "worry about it any more. Forget, about it," the night Oswald was killed. Now we have the testimony of the agent in charge who said that he has absolutely no recollection of hearing of Oswald's visit or read the note until Jily 1971.5. 

You arc the first one to indicate now that there was knowledge given to him prior to ,July 1975', aIld apparently it was given by 

the gentleman on the way to Abilene. Mrs. F.NNER. That is what, the agent told me. That is what, Mr. Horton told me. 

Mr. I)RT,;AN. Has that thought occurred to you that there is acontradiction? Mrs. FENNF:R. Well, in a way it has and a way it hasn't. Because I (io not know whether Mr. Horton could heve been joking or whether he was serious. Mr. I.)N..X. One final (11estion. It was concealed, it was destroyed, and Mr. Adams has said. fars or the apprehensions or thoughts that motivated that were wrong. 

Would you linally suggest to nme thouglits or feans that might have prompted this action which did occur? Mrs. Ff:xtui. No, lec'aum I had no fear after it left myv desk. Out 

of sight., out of mind. Mr. ni N,,. Thank y'ol very mutch.  

> I

yield back, Mr. Chairman. 

Mr. Eow.mms. 'iliank vlt very inuch, Mrs. Fenner for ,yomlr helpful testimony. 

Our next witness is Mr. . or,1on Shanklin, who was the special 

agent in charge of ti, I)allas office, in Novemer 1963. Mr. Slui:mnklin. the suiwommittee has provided you with a portion of rufle XI, of the Ilolis, Riules. and a copy of the Ruiles of the Hou. Cowninitte, mi, the .llIliciary. It is my understanding you are here with counsel today. Would you please introduce the lawyer with vol. 

Mr. SH,,NKIAN. Mr. lo0lIaialmumlh with tlira fi'in of Foley. ILarl'ler. Ilollabaugh, and Jacobs. 

Mr. Enw.umoS. Thank you. 

Mr. Shanklin is appearing wolintarilv at the subcommittee's re-quest. Will yoII raise Vollr right h1and, Mr. SAhanklin. l)o you solemnly swear the, letnhilioiv 111t Volre alboill i) give to this s*ubhcolmmittee will be tlhe Ilitli. tile whole t rilthl all( notiliir hit flit, triitli. so help vonl (odw? 

MI,il. uNKi.IN, I (10. M r'. E i.oi ll I la y p l ve,', d w itli Y o ui r st aii t le e nt. TESTIMONY OF J. GORDON SHANKLIN, FORMER SPECIAL AGENT IN CHARGE, DALLAS FIELD OFFICE Mr. SHIANKLIYN. Mr. ('hairnan and members of the su committee, in reslomns to a letter request from Chairman Edwards, I have met with the subcommittee staff and have, to the best of my ability, and (30 

recollection, answere(I tile questions pitt to me relative to the tragic events of November 1963. Since I am now aware of this subcommittee's area of interest, and for the purpose of expediting your proceedings , I have prepared a brief olpening statement. I ian pleased to cooperate, and I hope that my testimony will be of assistance to you. 

My career in the Federal Burau of Investigation began in May of M.43. As is tile ease with most agents, I have served the Bureau in ,mny different capacities and in many different places. I lhave been special agent in charge of five of the Bureau's field oflices, an(I I worked in tle Bureau's Inspection Division in Wash-ingti, D.('. From April of 1963, until my retirement on June. 27, of this year, I was tfle special agent in charge of the Dallas Field Office. I think you are all familiar with tle t ragic events of Fri(ay, Noeler 2"2, 1963. ()n tlat (ay. I arrived in my office at about 20 

limilltes after 7 o'cloo'k, tlie usual time for me. I knew that Pl'resilent Kennedyl would arrive in I)allas that morn-

iig. was going to be in a Illotor,'ade, and I direte d two le rical vlt-ployves to monitor is pirogress on tle loliee ralio frequency. 

As a result. I was infoirned tlat the President. had been shot very shortly after it, had happened. I illimeliately informed),A and contictell I)irci'tor I loover., advi.,ing hill). ()nle of his first qIestions to tue was ..- was there any statiittry lhasis for tie Bureal to asserlt jutrisdiction. I replied ill tie legfative sill,'e. i~t il the congressional enactment in 1963. tile assuasiilt ion of ile 

President was not a Federal violate ion. lie inst ructed me to jwrovide the I)allas police, the Seret Service. 

111)(1 all other law enforceniemit igelicies involved with all possible co-ol irat ion and assistance. later in tliat day, onl Novemeber '22, 1 was ordered, confirme(l lv 

((letyljie. Solie ti he later that night. to condIlct tin investigation to (1('h'rliIll(' who wits tespoiisille for tlie killing of the I i, silent. I'he events occurring on Novener 22, and thereafter moved witl .reat rapidity ald no one, let alone il'self. can. sonile 12 years later., re1etulln)cr orI reollstrit-lt all of those events with alb.solute accuracy. 

Who waste lie, tssassin or tile assasins? XVlmat W ot i vatTed the act ? WheviP  

> ('1ll

t lie I.viditce be fouind wliicl wolid lead to alpplr'letlsioll and con-vi.t io1 of the iillivid ilal. 

We facedl nI iierotis othll 1wn(evlopeled li15 :I1n( lrollel's. 

I think that you will recall, the Warren Report .ertainly shows it, thlat tle 1r1rder weapolnl was fouindl in tle S'lhool lBook )epositor.v lhihlii,,. 

The Ili,, i ll-ajor task ,a. to tirY to trace tliat wevali i. l4 roii lie e-   

> -iil ini., I

wits 1inhel.r a geat h.al of plssillre. hotdl froru my heat 1-

(ij aft er.s. to hav. tliis dle as well as to get tlie pliysitual evidlen,'e fr ot 

t he jolivi., Dl llas Polive lelartment, in order that the Bureau's Washington 0inie Laboratory could examine it on Saturdav nornin,,,. Above all, we were ordered to attempt to discover, as quickly as pos-sible, whether Oswald had--who was at that time in custody, or later 

oI in the afterlnoon in cuistolv, was tlie one who wias resmfnsilble for 

(lie slooting,. andi the otler Ibasic piroleihl. had lie acted alone. 61 Now, the problems of this investigation become further compli-cated, and the leads certainly magnified, after the murder of Oswald on Sunday. Director Hoover sent additional agents and clerical employees to Dallas on Friday and Saturday to assist. Still an additional number of agents and clerks were dispatched to Dallas on Sunday to aid in the civil rights investigation arising out of Ruby's killing of Oswald. By Monday morning, there were approximately 100 agents, which included 50 from other offices and about 50 from the Dallas Division, as well as 40 to 50 clerical employees working on these matters. As Special Agent in charge of the Dallas office, I shared the respon-sib1ility, for some 9 days, of directing and supervising the activities of all of these agents with Inspector James Malley, whom Director Iloover had sent down from Washington to assist me, for the time being. I personally remained on duty until about 4 o'clock Monday after-noon. During this period of almost 80 hours, I got no sleep at all. After Inspector Malley's arrival, he was in charge of the office when I was sleeping and vice versa. While I hope and pray that no other President, or anyone else, is ever the victim of another assassin, I am proud of the job that my colleagues did during those difficult days, who were working on spe-cial, as well as those assigned to the Dallas division, did during-these very difficult days. I take personal pride in having had an opportunity to make some contribution to their efforts. A liaison arrangement had been established with the Dallas Police Department and with the Secret Service and others. Shortly after Oswald was arrested for killing Officer J. D. Tippett, I was advised of Oswald's name and description. A search of our indices disclosed the existence of a file showing that the Dallas Office had an investigative file on Oswald. The reason now for the existence of this file, and the nature of its content, is fully explained in the Warren Commission Report. I have nothing to add to what is contained in the Warren Report. Insofar as I kmow, there is nothing to be added to that report. To the best of my recollection, 1 have never heard of Lee Harvey Oswald prior to his arrest. I have read a transcript of the testimony of Deputy Associate Direc-tor James B. Adams before this committee. According to Mr. Adams, it has recently been discovered that Oswald visited the Dallas Field Office some time in November 1903. Oswald is supposed to have asked to see Special Agent James P. Hosty. Unable to do so, he is supposed to have left a note addressed to Agent Ilosty with Mrs. Fenner, who just testified. In July, after I had retired, Mr. Thomas Johnson, publisher of the Dallas Times Herald, advised me that he had learned, through a source which he would not identify, of Oswald's visit to the FBI offices and 

the note left with the receptionist. I suggpe that he supply whatever information he had directly to Associate Director Adams or Director Kelley, and I believe he did so shortly after that. I was no longer in the Bureau. I was retired. If I did something that at that time it would look like at that tim I was  

> 82-629--77--5

62 

maybe trying to have some influence. I thought they know about it first. I have no recollection of hearing of Oswald's visit to the Dallas Office. or of the note prior to hearing of them from Mr. Johnson. I have no recollection of ever seeing the note. In short., I do not re-member discussing the note on Oswald's visit with anyone at any time prior to last July. I understand that Agents Hosty and Irowe have stated that the Oswald visit and note were brought to my attention during the period immediately following the assassination of the President. Since, at that particular time, I was overwhelmed with innumer-able major problems and duties. it is. of course, conceivable that their recollection is correct.. T simply do not remember anything like that. I would, however, like to offer the following observations. I under-stand that there is a discrepancy in what Mrs. Fenner says about what was in the note, and what Mr. Hosty says. In Mrs. Fenner's version, there is a threat to blow up the Dallas Office and the Dallas Field Office. Had I ever been shown such a note, I would assure you, I would have remembered it for the following reasons: The U.S. Attorney and the head of the Criminal Division of the Department of ,Justi'ee were searching immediately after the a.sassi-nation, anti for rome 2 to 3 days thereafter, searching for some basis upon which to predicate Federal jurisdiction. The existence of a threat from Oswald to blow up or bomb the FBI office certainly would have provided the break that we would have had a Federal violation and under those circumstances, I am certain that 

I would have notified the Department of Justice of the discovery of such a note. And, of course, I would have notified the police depart-ment. Now a !omb threat to a law enforcement officer is the equivalent of ared flag in front of a bull. I would never be. indifferent to threats against the lives of my associates in the office or to myself. After many hours of reflection and searching my memory, T have conel ided that. had the note contained threats of violence and had Iknown of it at the time, T would remember it, to this (lay. The fact that 

I do not. remember the note may therefore be of some significance to your investigation. Finally, I understand that. in one version of the story, I am sup-posed to have ordered the. destruction of the note. I can state here and now that I gave no such order. I would never have, and certainly did 

nor, order the destruction of the note. I hope that these remarks will be of some help to you, gentlemen in f raming any questions you have for me. I will be pleased to answer all 

Of your questions to the best of my ability. Mr. EDWaRDS. Thank you, Mr. Shanklin. Mr. Parker. Mr. PARKER. Thank you. Mr. Shanklin, wouhI you please describe your own duties and re-slpnsiilities as a Special Agent in charge of the Dallas Office. Mr. SITANKLIN.. Well. the Dallas Office encompasses some 132 coun-ties in the northern andl eastern Federal Judicial District of Texas. As the agent in charge. I was responsible for the overall direction 63 of investigations that were conducted as well as you might say the overall supervisor as far as personnel was concerned. Now, obviously, I was not familiar with each and every case. I made it a practice and had continued to supervise any major case, you night say, or any case where you had kidnaping, you had a victim, you fad a dangerous subject that had to be apprehened. You had hijackings of airplanes, things along that line, I supervised personally. It would have been humanly impossible for me to know every case that was in the Dallas Office. So, you had supervisors.    

> Mr. PAi RK.

How many agents were there operating out of the I)allas Office? Mr. SI[8ANKL,. I would say we had about 70. I think, at that time. Mr. PARKRV, . How many supervisory agents did you have? Mr. SIIANmv IN. We had four desks as such. The agent in charge desk, the assistant agent in charge, and one general, you might say criminal deskc and one sevuritN desk. M1. PARK R. How frequently and on what, basis would you have contact with the other supervisor per sonnel? Mrt. SIIAx N. oWell, we are all rigit tlere together. We had gen-erally, what you woild tern two official conferences, along with some of tio relief supervisors. twice a week. but I--when I was'in the office, I had to be out of the office a great. deal of time because we had-some special casA-s and one particular extortion case I was out on in late October for about 10 days, but I saw them every day, I mean as a mat-ter of fact. Mr. PARKR.R. Approximately how many cases did each individual agent handle? Mr. SIANKT.',. I would think-you know, this I wouldn't-I don't have a (lefinite knowledge. I would say 25 to 30, would be the usual at that time. Mr. lmt.m.RK. Did you carry a case load of your own at that time? Mr. SIHANKLIN. No. I have no case load. I did not have any cases as-sign d to me. I would take individual supervision of any major ease, any case involving the possible loss of life or something along that line. Mr. PARKER. Would you ordinarily be involved in or be aware of 

any of the day-to-day investigations of say a routine case? 

Mr. SAN , KLI. No, sir; I would not, because it would be up to the-the apent could come to me and talk to me. My door was always open,  

> biltt

certainly I wouldn't have had time to discuss all those. Mr. PARK:n. Prior to November 22, 1963, did you have any contact 

with or knowledge of Lee Harvey Oswald? Mr. S 1im. Li.x. I never heard of him before. Mfr. I".%itu xn. Prior to November 22, 1963, were you aware, personally aware that, the FBI had a file on Lee Harvey Oswald and that one of your agents was handling an investigation I

Mr. SlIANKJIA.'. No, sir; I did not. Mr. PARKER. Before that date, November 22, 1963, would the Lee TIzrvey Oswald case have been considered a routine security investi-gation ?Mr. SHNKLI,. Yes, sir. Mr. PARKERvi. When did you first learn that the FBI had a file on Lee Harvey Oswald? 64 Mr. SHAN KxN. I had an agent up there at the Dallas Police De-partment in a liaison capacity. He called in and said that they had brought in a Lee Harvey Oswald for killing Officer Tippett. I had the indices checked at that time, I am sure and that is when I found out we had a file. Mr. PARKER. Did you at any time after you learned about the exist-ence of the file, did, you review it yourself or have it reviewed at your di rection, by anyone else? Mr. SHANKLIN. Well, again, this is hard to answer. I never had time to review the file. Put it that way. Mr. PARKER. I am talking specifically, Mr. Shanklin, about after you learned about Mr. Oswald being brought into--Mr. S1ANKLmN. Even then I know that I probably had Mr. Howe, I think, he would have been the normal one to review it with the idea of telling our headquarters that I had to talk with them on it, exactly what their problem was and what they had. You see what I am talk-inabout ?So, I had somebody review it. There is no argument about that, I am sure. Mr. PARKZR. You have no recollection of personally reviewing the Oswald file yourself? Mr. SHANKLHN. I don't ever recall personally reviewing it, at all. Iknow I did see some of the reports that later went out. Mr. PARKER. At what time did you learn about the note that Lee Harvey Oswald delivered to the Dallas office ?Mr. SJIANKLXN. It was I believe July 5 of this year, from Mr. Tom Johnson. Mr. PARKER. July 5,1975. Mr. SHA^NKUN . Right. Mr. PARKPR. When and under what circumstances did you learn about the note I   

> Mr. SHANKLIN. Well,

as I recall, I was attending a Bar Conven-tion. I called my wife--being as I was in the habit of having to call in so much, in the FBI, and she said Tom Johnson the publisher of the Times Herald called my home and wanted me to call him. LSo, I called him some time that morning. He said, "Let's get together for coffee," and I went down, because I didn't have an office at that time, so I said, "I will stop by there." That is when he mentioned-you know -Mr. PARKFR. Then the information was given to you in person and not over the telephone? Mr. SUANKLIN. Yes, sir, it was given to me personally. Mr. PARKER. Then what ensued was in your prepared statement? Mr. SuAwxLrw. Yes, sir. Mr. PAR R. What-prior to that telephone call or that visit then, you had no knowledge of the note or its destruction? Mr. SIANKLN. None whatsoever. Mr. PARKER. What were the Bureau's procedures and policies re-garding the handling of notes of that sort delivered by Lee Harvey Oswald to the Dallas office in terms of recording it, copying it or entering it into the file system I

Mr. SHANKI.I. Well, it would have to-you would have to deter-mine as far as I am concerned, the type of note. Now if it had been one 65 threatening bombing, I think definitely it would have been a possible Federal violation. You would have immediately presented the thing to the appropriate United States Attorney, and possibly open the file. If there had been a definite -threat against Mr. Hosty, that could be a threat of assault or kill the Federal officer which would have been covered. That would have been presented. If, as I understand it said as Hosty says, if all it said you have been out talking to my wife. If you want to see me get in touch with me or I will take it up with appropriate authorities. I mean something similar to that, why I think it would have been just routed to him. Idon't know. Now certainly if you had a file you would have in some manner eventually put it in ihe file. I think the action of just giving it to him if that was what it was, would have been what you would expect to include in a subsequent report. Mr. PARKRM. Is there any rule or procedure with regard to a serial-ization or being marked as an exhibit within the Bureau? Mr. SHAN -KN. Any what? Mr. PARKgm Any rule or procedure within the Bureau for the serialization or marking that as an exhibit? Mr. SIANKAIN. Well, yes. You could make it an exhibit and prob-ably if you were going to do anything as far as possible prosecution, that is what it would be. It would be placed as we refer to as a 1A jacket, as evidence, and-be identified on the big brown envelope, and then inside it would be put in the envelope and you would save it for the purpose of eventu-ally presenting it in court. Mr. PARKER. If such procedures would have been followed in the case of the Lee Harvey Oswald note, who would have been responsible for seeing to it that those procedures were followed? Mr. SIJANKLIN. Well generally, something like that, the agent would be the one who would instruct the clerk's office as to how to handle it. Mr. PARK.R. The agent in charge of the case? Mr. SHANKLUN. Yes, sir. Mr. PARKER. In this case, who would this have been ?Mr. SIANKLINU. Well, I think it was assigned to Mr. Hosty. Mr. PARKER. What other actions would ordinarily be taken after the receipt of such a note, apart from filing it or putting it into a file or opening a new file ?Mr. SITANIKLIN. Well, I think-you are talking now about the sec-ond type of note? Mr. PARKER. No. let's assume it was the first type of note. Mr. SHANKLIN. Well, the first type of note, I'think it would open the ease and present it. Mr. PARIK R. Would that have been brought to your attention? Mr. SHANKAN. No, I don't know thlat-well, I think a bombing. if it had been a threat to bomb the office, I definitely feel there would have. Mr. PARKER. Assuming that the note was threatening and that was the threat, what precautions would have been taken? Mr. STANEKIN. lWell, we would have immediately talked to the U.S. Attorney and gone out and interviewed him, and see what to do. 66 You would try to put a stop to it, to see if there was any basis. If le brought it to the office, certainly you would want to take sonic action. Mr. PARKER. Returning to the time then immediately after P1resi-dent Kennedy was shot, would you characterize your overall and sub-sequent investigation as being in charge of it? Mr. SJIANKLIN. I was, yes. As I say, I ha(l-Inspector Malley came down on Sunday, after Oswald was killed and he helped me for about 9 days. M'. PARKER. Would you identify Inspector Malley, for us, what his role is, who he is? MrIl. SHANKLIN. lYell, lie is Inspector James R. Malley. lie at that time was the No. 1 man in the Investigative l)ivision under Mr. Alex Rosen, who was Assistant )irector. Mr. PARKER. He had been sent to Dallas by whonm? Mr. SI[ANKrIN'. Well, I presume by Mr. hloov'er.    

> Mr. PARKER.

Can you recall your first encounter with Special Agent 

I osty, after the shooting of President Kennedy. Mr. SHANKIAN. I have no recollection at all. I (1o know that in talk-ing to somebody back at the Bureau, I tol([ tlem I had one uman u) 

there with Oswald who was a criminal investigator and they said they would send the case agent up. I presume I got in tolch with Mr. Howe, 'Mr. Hlosty and told him to go ill). 

Mr. P.RKER. Did Mr. Hosty report to you at any tinie regar(ling his prior investigation of Lee Hlarve- Oswald IMjr. SIIANKIJN. I don't recall. ks I say, T know that somelody found and reviewed the file. Mr. PARKER. I)id lie report to you at all regarding his interview with Lee Harvey Oswald to ie l)allas Police l)epalmment ?fr. SIrA.XKLINs. Well, I would know the results of that in son miall-ner whether it was 'Mr. Ilostv. I know that when lie first, went ill. somebody told me. Oswald. w'hen lie was interviewed le said "Oh. 

so you are lHosty." I remneniher that becausP of some sblsequenjt de-velopments. M1r. PARKERm. My question was, whether Sl)ecil Akgent Ilosty re-

ported to you (lirectly about the results of his interviewi-? Mm'. Su.XMrKLIN. I don't remember. There was a thousand other inter-views Ieing conducted. I juit do not recall. I know that someixxly must 

liave. either he. MNr. Howe or somnel)odv. 

Ml'. P.RKFR. What was the natre of your contactt with Special Agent Howe then, during this period ?Mr. S1ANxKLtN. Well, as I recall, le was the supervisor of the case. I recall my instructions would obviously have Ixeen to get the file and find out, what is in it and give me some sort of a sumnary so I can tell m headquarters. Mr. PARKER. Did lie ever report to you on the-Mr. S i,\.KrIN. I Sem to remember that Mr. ITowe, di( yes. Mr. PARKER. What instructions (lid ,ot give either of themn, either Mr. Howe and Mr. Hlosty, regarding Lee Harvey Oswald and the assassination investigation? Mr. S.ANKIAN. Well, of course, they were primarily working as 

I recall, on the case file we had, getting that for me. Now, we were trying to determine, you see, Lee Harvey Oswald had been in the 67 School Book Depository Building. That was determined. There was a rifle found there. One of the problems that became very important was an attempt to determine where this rifle came from, who owned it, because you have a lot of other employees in the School Book Depository Building. That became quite a problem. Then of course, the next thing was getting all the evidence to the laboratory. I must have-we were following ui leads that went all over. We were getting all the background. calling other offices, getting all of the background we could on Oswald, as well as the other facts about the assassination. Mr. PARKER. Following word of Lee Iarvey Oswald's death, at the hands of Jack Ruby, do you recall any meetings or any other con-tact with Special Agents Hosty and Howe on November 24, 1963? Mr. SHANKLMN. I have no recollection of talking to either one of them on that date. Mr. PARKER. Do you recall where you were when you heard about Oswald's death Mr. SHIANKLIN. I was in my office. At that time., I did not have time to watch television. They weie moving Oswald. They were supposed to move him at 10 o'clock and they didn't move lhim until later, but at any rate, I had one agent, as I recall, over at KRLD television station watching the thing, and he called me and said they ju.st shot Oswald. I didn't believe it, but-Mr. PARKER. Do you know where either Special Agent Ilosty or Iowe% were at the time? 

Mr. SHANKLIN. I have no idea, no. Mr. P ARKER. Did you give them any other or new instructions re-garding -their roles in the investigation following Oswald's death? Mr. SIIANKLIN. I don't recall of any whatsoever. I mean, we were investigating to determine, df course, at that time whether lie was the assassin and whether there was anyone connected with him. We even had a special squad prinmarily set up for that. Mr. PARKER. Were you in contact with the FBI hIeadquarters in Washington, D.C., during all these periods? Mr. S IANKLIN. Numerous t imnesyes sir.  

> Mr.

P~niAKER. Did you receive instructions from headquarters? Mr. SIW.AKLIN. XVell, of course, the general instructions there, they woilI(l .all and they would say we want this done or that done and caused us a little bit of a l)roblem because we did not have the Federal violation and the local police had the evidence. I (lid secure it and got it on a jet plane out of Carswell that night. Mr. I)A KER. From whom would you receive instructions in the headquarters?   

> 3M1r. SIANKLIN.

Well, generally, my first call went to Mr. Hoover. Mr. Hoover asked me a time or two to do something. Ie wanted to know the President's condition. That I had to determine. le later saw Vice-President Johnson going around holding his coat, and he thought lie had a heart attack. I had to find out what his condition was. Then lie wanted to know, also, when he was sworn in as President. Those were some of the things he said. 68 Then primarily I dealt with Mr. Al Belmont, who-I think his title was Assistant to the Director, Federal Bureau of Investigation. He had general, overall supervision of all investigative matters. Most of my dealings were with either Mr. Belmont or Mr. Malley. Of course, when Malley came down lie was there for 9 or 10 days, and then when he came back lie was the liaison man as I recall, with the Warren Commission which was appointed. 

Mr. PARKER. How long did Mr. Malley stay in Dallas?   

> fr. SuANKLIN.

As I recall it was exactly 9 days. He came down on Sunday night. Mr. PARKEI. That is the only period of time lie was in Dallas you just mentioned and he returned. Mr. SJIANKLIN.. Yes, that is all I recall that lie was there. Mr. PARKER. lie spent a total of 9 days in Dallas. Ir. SIIANKLIN. Right. Mr. PARKER Mr. Shanklin, were you ever disciplined or repri-manded in any way for your role in the assassination investigation and if so, would you p lease describe the nature of that reprimand. Mr. SHANKLIN. I have two-this is a little bit of an unusual situa-tion. T got an individual letter of commendation for my handling of the assassination. The office got a letter of commendation for the handling of the assa&sination investigation. Now, as I recall, I got two letters based on the Oswald investiga-tion which would have been-Mr. PARKMR. Which was prior to the assassination. Mr. STIANKLIN [continuing]. Prior to the assassination. See what I am talking about? Mr. PARKER. Two letters in what regard? Mr. SIJANKLIN. Well, one letter from the investigation prior to it and then to show you how confused things were, on the night of the assassination, we were swamped with teletypes and telephone calls. I know when they found out where the gun was, had been sent, somebody had to come over from the hotel to tell me to call the SAC up there, that lie couldn't get a phone line in. Well, two teletypes--the SAC in Chicago, I am talking about. At any rate, I used two teletype machisies of GSA to send outgoing tele-types. I did not ask Mr. Belmont or Mr. Valley or anybody else for authority which was a violation of the rules. When that came out. Igot a letter saying I have violated the rules. I am hereby being criti-cized for it. Mr. PARKER. That is what you call a letter of censure ?Mr. SHANKLIN. Yes, sir. f. PARKER. Okay. You received two letters of censure? 

Mr. SIIANKLIN. AS I recall, that was it. fr. PARKFR J)o DO'0u1 know who issued those? Mr. SHANKIN. They all came out under the name. J. Edgar Ioover. Mr. PnK Pit. I)o you know of anyone else connected with Lee Iarvey Oswald or the investigation prior to or sul)sequent to the assassina-tion investigation who were disciplined or reprimanded by J. Edgar Iloover? Mr. STIANKLIN. No. I think Mr. Howe. Mr. Hlosty and I seem to think some relief supervisor. I don't recall except for those. 69   

> Mr. PARKER

Would it be fair to state that all the agents or super-visory personnel who were connected with the investigation prior to the assassination received a letter of censure or reprimand or discipline in some form or another? Mr. SIANKLIN. Well, you see, you are going back. I wouldn't say that. Maybe those who had anything to do with id during the year of 

1963. 

You see, Oswald, had been-this is in the Warren Report, lie had been interviewed two or thiee times over in Fort Worth, a year or 2 before. I don't know. I do not know who signed those reports. Iwasn't. there. I think he had also been interviewed once. in New Orleans. So. I don't know This whole matter of this discipline matter was handled out of Bureau headquarters. M[r. PARKEa. l)id you have any role in the decision to discipline or in the implementation of the disciplinary action that was taken f

Mr. SHIANKLIN. None that I know of. Mr. PARE.. Are there any procedures available to Bureau person-nel in appealing disciplinary actions? Mr. SITANKUN. Oh, yea. You can appeal. Mr. PARKME. Who do you appealto- ---

Mr. SIIANLN. Well, I th-nkit goes to the Civil Service Commission. Mr. PARRIER. Thank you. Mr. EDWARDS. Mr. Butler. Mr. BuTzrr . Mr. Shanklin, just as a sort of a-reference, how many reprimands would you have in your file, just approximately in your career? Mr. SHANKLIN. Well, I would have-noparticular idea because, let's face it, when I became a SAC, I got recognized and whether it was apeIsonal thing or based upon activities of employees. That was Mr. I oover's method. He also advised me that I would be given letters of commendation. I could say very-right now, without trying to blow too much. but I would have 10 to I in commendations and incentive awards. Mr. 1IOLLARAUOH. Perhaps it would be helpful to the committee, if           

> we would pass out asupplemental statement which does not purport

to be an entire statement of all the documents that relates to his 1wr-sonnel file, but I would like to place before the -ommittee this supple-mental s& ,n ient that includes among other tings, shows that. he 

lias eight outstanding performance letters which he received while he was an agent in the Dallas office. With your pennission, I would like to hand to the clerk, the supple-mental statement so the committee will have it before them. Mr. EDWARDS. That will be received by the committee without ob-jection. Mr. IIOLLAYSAtOi. This does not purport to be a complete statement of his entire personnel record, but is-we have anticipated this might arise and we would like to get this before the committee. Mr. SIJANKLIN. I would just like to add here, I think I have had avery rewarding career in the FBI. The Dallas office has been success. ful in connection with kidnaping. hijackings, extortions, vrtim-type cases where I have supervised I do not attribute it all to my ability, but I had the opportunity of working with outstading personnel, 70 agents and clerical. We generally have had good relations and cooper-ation from local police, the sheriff offices, the rangers in protecting public safety. Among other things, I think I have real good success in supervising kidnaping cases, getting victims back. 

I take a little bit of pride in my 20 or more years as an agent ill charge and supervising some good cases, some that resulted in the ir-

turn of the victim. I have never lost a victim. I never have had to kill a subject and I have never had an agent seriously hurt. I (to not know whether I am Mr. BUTLEm. I appreciate your putting that in the record. I personal-ly appreciate the dedication of all the people in the FBI, but of course, even righty Homer sometimes nods and we feel it is appropriate to inquire a little bit about this particular transaction. Ti at is why Iasked you about reprimands. It is unusual that you would Ix- repri-manded. I get that impression. Mr. SJIANKLIN. I have sort of had a fatalistic attitude that the Lord woul(nt give me a job to (1o without giving ine the ability of doing it. I call for help. That is all I can say. Mr. BUTLFIR. W-old it be appropriate to giv'e us a similar sunmarvy of the reprimands that are in your file, just numerically when you get an opportunity to review the fife. 

Mr. SiIANKLIN. I (10 not have the file. Mr. I1OLLABAU-OH. Since Inspector Adamisi has appeared before this subcommittee, reading the transcript, references are made to what was done with respect to personnel in the )allas office. We assunied that your subcommittee had already seen-you already had that. We did not undertake to duplicate tlem and siiiniit lhem lhere with t his stup-plenlental statement. If you wish, and it is true that the sulbcolmnittee has not sel the letters of censure, we will undertake to lind them and submit tieni to 

you. 

Mr. BuTTXn. I would al)preciate fliht. I would like to just get sonic i(lea from my own nind as to whether this was kind of a routine thing that was followed. Mr. SHANKLIN. Are you talking about anything specifically having to (do with the assassination ? You see. I (lon't know as I would have every letter. This would be in my file. I think I could find those deal-ing witli the assassination. Mr. EDWA RDS. Withllout objection I belieVe that it is important to have those for the file. 3r. SHAJNKLJX. You are talking about those dealing with the as-sasinat ion and the Oswald thing. Mr. EDwARms. Anything else that you think would be lwllfmml to the committee in this area.  

> Mr.

BUrj.aE. I am not fencing with the witness. I simply want to get a faii view of these things and how much they related to the par-ticular inquiry. Certainly your career does not appear to have been impaired as a result of this in any way. You are not director today, but you moved along all right. I wouid just like to put that in tile record. Mr. SIIANKLN. I will give you any I have that I can locate. 

Mr. BTLrmr. Fine. 71 Mr. SHAN KL N. I am certain I did not get more than two or three out of that year. I would have to go back to training school. I do not know if I had any there or not. Mr. BUTLEnR. How many agents were involved in this investigation of Oswald ?Mr. SIANKLLIN. I would say approximately 100. 'I'here were ap-proximately 50 sent in from our field divisions. This is in the I)allas division, you understand. Mr. BUTLER. Yes. Mr. SIANKI.I.N. Not the invest igatioll Mr. BUTLER. What was inder your supervision .Mr. SHAN.KLIN. About 100, working in this matter.  

> Mr.

Dui'ra.:a, I)o you know a gentleman called, I believe it is Ural HortonI 

Ml1'. SIIANKI 4 IN. Yes, I know I forton. 

Mr. BI-rLER. Were you with him when le went to the-in April-I don't know the time, when lie was alleged to have gone with you to Abilene, to the party for one of the retiring agents? Mr. SII.NKE.IN. I would rellneilber, yes. I think we went down there. Hforton had formerly been a resident agent there. Mr. BUTLER. Are you aware of the earlier witness telliig or tes-tifyinig that lie told you. testified lie told her t hat lie told you about this note. Are you aware of that .Mr. Sii .NKLIN. Yes. Mr. BUTLmi. What is your reference. What is your recollection of the reference to the conveIrsation 01 MNir. SliANKLIN. I liad just alut 2 weeksI before been to Kansas City to have conferences with l)irector Kelley. u;met thing came up about tlat. Mr. h'TR-:R. AolIt wht? Mr. ,"lAN K.uIN. About my going to Kanisas City. you know, to talk with Director Kelley. "l'lhen it was ment ioned that Mr. Ii"arj:s. W1o ment ioned what ?il'. SIHANKLIN. I don't know whetlher I mentionled I had be'en llp there. 

Mr. BiUTLR. %re we talking about a converse tion with directorr KlIhy or with Mr. I [orton.       

> Mr. SiEANKI1I.N No. IIln saving

this Wuai the conversation I had 

with Horton albot. making the trip to see lDire tor Kelley. i e knew that Jiosty wNas in Kansas Citv. lie said something aboit, dlid you Gee flosty. I said: Yes, I saw him: llosty said lie was still concerned abotll his a(lininistrative action. lHe feels thal matters were a little harsh with him and lie nientionedl sometliiiug about wanting to sie Kelley. I told him to write a meniorandum nid Kelley would see him, I was certain., That is all I know aloit that. . Ih' nvt. Mr. Kelley beeanme the Director, within the last 2 years; voII had a conversation witl losty with reference to the assassination investigatois ?Mr. SIANKLiN. With reference to his feeling lie ought to talk to Mr. Kelley about the discipline that had been taken against him. Mr. BUTF.L N oIw that. conversation did not conce itself with the Oswald ote. 

M.fI'. SIIAN-.IKJA. Albsoliitely no imiention iide. 72 Mr. BuTLz At the time of the conversation you were unaware of the existence of the Oswald note. Mr. SIUANKLW. Right sir, I had no knowledge of it. Mr. BuTu u. Now at the time following that you had a conversation with Mr. Horton on the way to Abilene and you have no recollection of discussing with him at that time, the Oswald note; is that correct ?Mr. SI1ANKLY. Absolutely not. Mr. BuTm. You still insist that your earliest knowledge of this was your conversation with Mr. Johnson. Mr. SIJANKLiN. Right. Mr. BUTlAF.R. Do you believe that such a note existed. Mr. SHANKLIN. Well, I have to evaluate things. I have heard Mrs. Fenner say there was a note. I can't conceive of it saying bombing, it not being handled as Mr. Hosty says. I could see where I could have been told about it and never remem-bered. I mean, I am trying to be as fair as I can about the thing. Mr. Bu'rjL If a note had showed up somewhere from Mr. Oswald to Mr. Hosty, dated 1 or 2 days before the assassination and in which Mr. Oswald said to Mr. Hosty something very kind, have a good Christmas or anything of that nature, would not the existence of that note ani the circumstances of the prior investigation of Mr. Oswald be enough to require that you retain that and put it in the file ?Mr. SIIANKLTN. I would think it would be up to the agent. I wouldn't know about it. Mr. BuTL-E. Well, I am not asking you if you knew about it. I am asking you if the appropriate people should not have concluded that that should be in the file, the destruction of it, regardless of how in-offensive the note might he, wouldn't the destruction of it be a viola-tion of your policies, if not your procedures and it would be most inappropriate in view of those circumstances? Mr.S S1ANKLIN. I would think you wouldn't destroy it if you had a file, generally. You wouldn't destroy anything that pertains to an in-dividual vou'had a file on. I do not know if there is any specific rule. If I got a Christmas card from a subject, I don't know that I would put it in the file generally. I mean it might be one of those things you might or you might not. At any rate, in retrospect, ,certainly it ought to have been. Mr. Burun. The young lady who "testified, Mrs. Fenner, explained some kind of a procedure whereby you stand around and put together a file with somebody in ch arge and five or six people sit around putting numbers on page s and things of that nature. Who did that in this pr.r-ticular instance and when does that sort of a thing take place ?Mr. SIJANIKLIN. Well, that takes place in any great, long report where voy would have a gromp of people. You would have to number the paper. pages. You would have say 40 pages or copies of the report. So you would have to have somebody number it and-Mr. Bv'r"rR. That, is clerical at the lowest level. Mr. SHAN-KI N. Maybe an agent would be there overseeing it but it would be generally' clerical in nature, the actual assembly oi the report :yes. 'BMr. Aum. Mrm Fenner raised a question at that time with Agent losty as to where was the letter. Whose responsibility would it lie to 73 explain that or would that be some kind of a violation of procedure that that question was not resolved at that timeI Mr. SUANiNu. I don't know. She asked him and he says what letter or something, well then it would be up to her whether she wanted to go 

back and ask him. I don't know that I had any rule saying that if you-Mr. BuTam. That is my question. Is it not the responsibility of eeybody in the office for a significant piece of evidence like this, which she says was a threat, isn't--wasn't it everybody's responsibility to see that that was called to the attention of everybody that was put-ting the thing together VThat is what concerns me. Everybody was sit-ting around. Somebody must have said that threatening letter, where was it. Somebody must have overheard it. There were some 20 people in the room I would judge. Wasn't everybody involved in covering up during those circumstances ?Mr. SHANKLIN. I don't think so. I don't think she said so that any-bod heard it. I don't think so. 

0r. EDWARDS. The gentleman's time has expired. Mr. Seiberling. IMr. SEmBJriLiNO. Thank you. Mr. Shanklin, I was very impressed with your statement that if there had been anything in the letter that you had seen that threatened to blow up an FBI office, that that would have been indelibly im-pressed upon your mind. Certainly that has some persuasive effect on my mind. Now let us take the period after the assassination, when of course, you knew about Lee Harvey Oswald. If there had been any letter, whether the one described by Mrs. Fenner, or a letter such as Mr. Butler has mentioned to you, which was just a congratulatory letter or a personal letter from Mr. Oswald to Mr. Hosty or any other agent, wouldn't that also have been normally brought to your attention in the course of an investigation of the assassin of tle President? Mr. S^IANKLIV. Well, if you had a congratulatory letter, maybe it would have. But whether I would remember that. You don't teke into consideration that something like that, unless it was of real signifi-cance, I have 3,000 other things-people calling, you have to find out this, that and the other. I don't know that I would remember it. Mr. SKTiBEiLTNO. Let me ask you this, don't you think that the fact, if it is a fact. that Mr. Oswald delivered any kind of a note threaten-ing the FBI or one of its agents, and that that was not brought out until 12 years later is a reflection on the FBI I  

> Mr. SHANKLar.

I think somebody should have brought it out, yes. Mr. SEIBRMANo. And Mr. Adams admitted that it was wrong. It seems to me that if such a note existed at the very time you are in-vestigating the person who wrote the note and the note was addressed to an agent of the FBI, that that would have been a fact which would have been very, very significant to anybody who knew about that. Wouldn't you agree? Mr. SJIANK.IN. Well, I would think the agent should certainly have remembered. As I say, I was answering phones and doing this. Un-less it had some threat, I don't know whether I would remember it. I have to go back 12 to 13 years Mr. SMEUIaNo. But you would not say that the fact a letter was addressed by the assassin of the President to an FBI agent a few weeks 74 before hand, who came in l)ersally to the office was something that would have been just sort of to&ed off as insignificant if you had known about it, would you? Mr. SIKANKI.N. Ohno. I julst lave to say that 1 (10 not remember the thing. I am not trying to be-

Mr. SElnF.RTANo. I an not. suggesting that you do remember. All Ihm saving is, if it had ben Irought to your attention wouldn't that have ieen a fact that wouhl have immediately have galvanized your inid ?Mr. SIIANKIN. I think I have answered that as best to my ability, and that is, if it had a threat in it. I think I would remember it. If it were just a note, I would proba)ly have said that Mr. [owe could handle it in the normal course of events. I never did take time to read every line in every report and every-thing. I am doing the best that I can. M'r. SmE.IRFANRr . I ant not trvin r to test. your memory. I am trying to test your judginelt. as to whettler or not it is--it would have been considered significant in the courSle of the investigation that Mr. Os-

wald had actually beet- in contact with people in the FBI office which 

was under vour charge, prior tothe a.ssination. Wouldn'tothat be a significant fact in your mindI Mr. SmIANKLIN. Weli, if you had that one thing, and it was one 

problem, yes. I suppo.se it wouhl be. Mr. S:anmr.r. o. Couldn't that have been something that would have 

been brought ordinarily to the attention of your supervisors, or supe-rior, if it hadn t been called to your attention' Mr. SIANKLI.. If it had heen called to ny attention, I would have not ified my headquarters. Mr. SFmu:ru 4 .I,. We have heard testimony front others that it was iroulght to your attention that. Mr. Ifosty went to your office after he had interviewed Oswald and that Mr. tiowe was there and in your preisence Mr. Hosty reviewed with them his knowledge of Os;vald and the note and you asked Mr. I[osty to prepare a memorandum. I)o you deny the ('orrectnes of that. testimony? 

r.f': SJJANKLIN. I have no collection whatsoever of it. Mr. S.IIIJRLNO. You also have no recollection of discussing this with Mr. Horton after you were on the way back from seeing Mr. Kel ly in Kansas City. "fr: S IIAN K N. I 'ts on the way from alass to Abilene with Mr. Iorton. This was some time after*I had been to Kansas City. Some-tlihing cain up about I[osty and I did mention Hostv's name to him or hk asked, (lid I see hin. I said I did and that he was concerned about whether he should go see Mr. Kelley, write him a memorandum about the previous administrative action. I told him to do so. 

Mr. SEutERIANO. You do not recall any discussion about the note? Mr. SIrANfKLI. No discussion about the note as far as I am concerned. Mr. SI:EJ ,(ONO. Well, thank you very much. Mr. EwAJDS. Mr. Kindness. Mr. KtxDN8rm. Mr. Shanklin, could you pin down a little more closely the time of this trip to Abilene with Mr. Horton. Mr. SIANKUN. This would have been in November-no, it would hve been in December 1973. I went up to see Mr. Kelley some tinm in november' of 1963. 75 Mr. KINDNESS. Turnling to another subject, the physical circum-stances in the Dallas office.7Mrs. Fenner testified that the secretary who also read the note from Oswald had to go past Mrs. Fenner's desk to return to her place of work after visiting the ladies' room. Would that also be the way that anyone would go in order to enter tile office area if they had been out for lunch. for example, to be specific, if Mr. Hosty laid been out to lunch when Mr. Oswald had come into the office and left, the note would Mr. Hosty have gone past Mfs. Fenner's desk to get to his place of work? Mr. S1IANKLIN. I do not think it would be required. He could. We had two floors at the time as I recall. Ti agents were down on the floor right under and there was a door they had a key to go into. It could hw that he couhl cone Iby there, or lie could have gone in by the back door, onl the next floor. Mr. KINDNE SS. The location of the switchboard is the next question. Where was the switchboard located in relation to the space occupied by tle agents and in relation to Mrs. Fenner's location? Mr. SI1AN K1.1N. I just don't know. We moved out of there in the next April. I know we were on two floors. I do not recall where the switch-board was. Mr. KlnDNr..s. The place where people came in the office--the public is whe'e Mrs. Fenner worked, right ?Mr. SIIANKIIN. She was the receptionist. We didn't have much space tiere. I was negotiating tie wek-the fact is we had bids the week of the assassination, earlier in the week for moving because of the in-adequate space. GSA agreed. I know there wasn't much room out there. I don't think we had much of a reception room. Mr. KiNDNF.S. Did yoil have somewhere between 50 and 70 agents at that time, plus clerical people? Mr. SIIANKI.N. I think we had about 70, but of course, you see, we had about 10 resident agencies. There were probably abiut 30 or 35 of tlem out in resident agencies. When we got the specials going, GSA, its I recall, gave me two additional offices, you know, down on other 

floors., so we would have enough roonm to handle things. rr. (INDNFss. )oes that mean that there would have been people numbering let us say close to 50 agents in the Dallas office. Mr. SIANKLIN. I think we prolbaly had alut 40. I would say 

plolaly 40 actually assigned to I)allas and then you had resident agencies where theie were some there. Sonie of them came in anti W0)rked ot it. I know there were approximately 50 agents aligned on specials. Ilblieve atout 40 were clerical employees going back to the time that it is alleRged that Mr. Oswald was in the Dallas office there would be. around 40 agents working in tie alass office or out of the Dallas office in those cnmed quarters. Mr. K i ND N.ss. Would it, he normal for all of them to be out at one time or would it be normal for some agents to be in at all times? Mr. SHtANKLIN. We had agents in all the time. It was up to the supervisor to see that somebody was there during the lunch hour. Primarily the agents had to dothe investigations. They didn't come bnck in find go out to ,unch. It was those who were working in the office at that particular time. 

It a man Ieft early in the morning and was working all day out, lie ate lunch out there. So, at any particular given time you wouldn't 76 know how many was going to be there. The supervisors certainly would not all leave. Mr. Clark and I would not all leave generally speaking. So, you have coverage. You might have--if you had a bank robbery you jump on the radio and find where cars are. Mr. KiNDNr8. When you had been out of the office and returned to the office, how would you normally get your messages that came in while you were absent I

Mr. SIIANKLN. Generally my secretary will have them. Mr. KINDNESS. In the case of agents, how were they normally handled ?Mr. SHANKLIN. Well, I think they would go through the switch-board. I know now, but I don't recall at that time. They would go by and get their card showing they were back in the office from the switch-board and they would..sy, he-re is a message for you. I think that is what ha penea at that time, probably. Mr. IINDNzSm. That switchboard was on the floor where the agents were. Mr. SIZANKLIN. I don't know. -I just can't recall where it was. Mr. KINDNSS. Thank you, sir. Mr. EDWAMM. Mr. Drinan. Mr; DRINAN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Shanklin, you ae asking us to disbelieve Mr. Hosty, disbelieve Mr. Howe, disbelieve Mr. William Sullivan and possibly Mr. Horton. I find this very contradictory and very puzzling. Where were you sir, the night that Lee Harvey Oswald was killed? Mr. SIHANKLIN. Where was I? The night he'was killed? That is on Suinay. I was still in the office. Mr. )RINAN. Did you meet with Mr. Kyle Clark that night I

Mr. STIANKLIN. I wouldn't know. Mr. DIIINAN. To the best of your recollection at this moment in time, (lid you or did you not meet with him? Mr. SIHANKLII. Certainly he was there some time during that (lay. Mr. DRINAN. What is your best recollection. Did you meet with him that night? Mr. SHANKLI.N. I have no-he was working. Ile was sort of like Iwas working 16, 18 hours a night. I would have worked continuously from the Friday morning until Monday. at about 4 o'clock in the office. Mr. DRINAiN. To the best of your recollection, did you meet with Mr. llowe that night ?Mr. STANKLIN. I have no-Mr. DIUNAN. To the best of your recollection. Yes or no, sir. We uiderstan(l that it is a long time ago. But just say yes or no to the best of your recollection. fr. SHANKLEN. To the best of my recollection, I am certain that Howe was there some time during the day, but whether he stayed as long as I did, I would not know. Mr. DIMAN. To the best of your recollection, did you meet with-Mr. Hlosty that night? Mr. SHANKLIN. I have no recollection of Mr. Hosty. Mr. DmV.NA. Do you have any idea why Mr. rowe or Mr. Hosty agree that they were in conference with you that night and this is their testimony which I assume they will reiterate tomorrow, Mr. Hlosty 77 will, and that at that time the letter from Oswald was discussed and one of these individuals asserts that you ordered its destruction? Do you have any explanation of why in their very clear memory they recollect they met with you that ni gt and that you as the superior officer in charge requested and required the destruction of that note? 4', Mr. SHANxLx. I have no reason. Mr. DRI AN. Do you think they are just deluded about this? Mr. SHAN-KL N. say, I don't know. Mr. DRINANI. Is there any motivation that you would suggest why Mr. Hosty has admitted that he destroyed the evidence ?          

> Mr. SHANKLIN. Iwould not go into his motivation. Iwouldn't know

what his motivations were. I would have no reason to destroy it. Mr. DRINAN. Mr. Adams testified here and said that "the embar-rassment to the Bureau could well have been the motivation. There ia a rule and I cite the rule from the FBI document that the FBI man-

nal says that when allegations are made against the employees of the Bureau, quote, "Every logical lead should be run out unless such action would embarram the bureau." Do you think this could have entered into this very unfortunate destruction of evidence? Mr. SHANKJWN. I don't know how it could have embarrassed the Bureau unless, as I say, it-was a threat. Mr. DnINAN. Well, it certainly is embarrassing now, sir, and Mr. Adams admits this, profoundly embarrassing, 12 years later. Then Mr. Hosty had reason to know that if this came out and the FBI had in fact neglected to follow up on this document which you admit was very inflammatory, that it would have been very embarrassing. That is the only way that I could think that it would have led to the destruction of this evidence. Mr. SHANKLIN. I can't speak as to what Mr. llosty's motivation was. I could see in no way it could have enibarrasse~d me. If it had been brought to my attention, I would have said, handle it. Mr. DRINAN. Mr. William Sullivan, sir, alleges that over a period of time he had been regularly in touch with yoti and that he had discussed this matter. Did you talk at any time during these critical days with Mr. William Sullivan, the Assistant Director of the FBI I          

> Mr. SHXANYIJN. Italked with Mr. Sullivan, on a number of

occa-sions. I never discussed this note with Mr. Sullivan, and under any circumstances Mr. DRINAN. Would you tell us what you discussed with Nfr. Sullivan. Mr. SHANKLIN. Well, Mr. Sullivan was the Assistant Director in charge of the Domestic Intelligence Division. That was where the Oswald security investigation had been supervised and was supervised. Now the assassination was I think supervised in the Investigative Division. Shortly after the thing started, I know that Mr. Sullivan was in touch with me and I would be in touch with him. Theme was never-he is mistaken on the note thing. I never discussed the note with him. Mr. DRNAN. Why is he mistaken and you not mistaken? There is aclear conflict of evidence and you are saying he is mistaken. I want areason why he is mistaken. 

> SZ-2-77-----4

78 

MIr. EDWARDS. We will stand in recems until 1:30 o'clock this afternoon. [Whereupon, at 12:05 p.m., the subcommittee recessed, to reconvene at 1:30 p.m., the same day.]   

> AFTERNOON SESSION Mr.

EDWAium. The subconimittee will come to order. We will continue with Mr. Drinan. Mir. DRINAN. Thank you, fr. Chairman. Ifr. Shanklin, let me just recapitulate where we were. I stated that in my judgment, if we are to accept your testimony, then we must reject the testimony of Mr. Hosty, Mr. IHowe, Mr. Will iam Sullivan, nnd possibly some testimony of Mr. Horton. I think we were talking about the question of Mf r. Sullivan that if Imay, could I return to the evening when Lee Harvey Oswald was mur-delci. After that it is your testimony, it is the testimony of Mr. Hosty and Mr. Howe, that they met together with you and that you directed one or both of them to destroy th e %-ih lnce. Now, would you recapituilate what you said please, about that alleged meeting. Mr!. SIIANKIN . I

Mr. TIOLLABAVOII. May I raise a question? Which testimony of Mr. Jiosty and Mr. Howe is ihe gentleman referring to I

Mr. DRINAN. As reported in Mr. Adams' statement. Mr. Adams was here on October 31.      

> Mr. 1LIABAUO. But neither Mr.

H]osty, nor Mr. Howe have testi-fied before this subcommittee, have t hey? Mr. DRINAN.No; tomorrow I think we have both of them. They both will Ie here tomorrow. 

Mf1'. 1I LOLABAUOII. Ver" well. I just wanted the record to show that as far as we have known, neither of these gentlemen have given any testimony to the subcom-mu ittee. .Mr. DUNAN. No; it is tomorrow sir, and I-you are quite right. Iam going back to Mr. Adams' testimony which I am sure you have had in full. fn that report, a comprehensive report in which the FBI inter-viewed some 80 people, they asserted as the testimony of both of these gentlemen, that on that night, they met with the witness, and that according to them, a directive was given that that particular document from Lee Harvey Oswald should be destroyed. Mr. SIfANKLIN. I have absolutely no recollection of any such meet-ing. I certainly don't recall anything. I just do not think I would ever have ordered, in spite of the" fact I had all kinds of problems im-mediately after Mr. Oswald died. 

I headquarters called and we were setting up another special squad on the basis we had a civil rights investigation and that became a separate thing. I did not know that both of these gentlemen even said that but I just have no recollection of that. I don't think I would have under any cir-cmnstances, ordered the note destroyed. Mr. DRINAN. To the best of your recollection then, you are saying %oi deny their testimony, you did not meet with agents Hosty and     

> I[owe on that evening?

1,7 

Mr. SHIANKLIN. I would not say that I did not meet with them. Idon't have any remembrance of it. Ilosty and Howe were probably working like the rest of us, 15 or 16 hours a day. If they -had any reason to come in and see me they could have because I was probably on the phone. I was setting up another special squad, I know of at that tinge. So, I just do not recall it. Mr. JiRINAN. Coming to Mr. Clark. Mr. Clark, it has been asserted, (-ane and spoke to Mrs. Fenner and said simply that you can forget about the Oswald letter. Apparently that is all he said. I)o you recall any conversation with Mr. Clark that might have prompted his subsequent remark to Mrs. Fenner? 

MNr. SIIANKLIN. I never discussed it, certainly never discussed the note. I know nothirig about it. I have no knowledge of any letter. Now, Mr. Clark was my assistant. Our offices were going like this, Ithink [indicating], pretty close together. After the-now thisprob-ably did not take effect until Sunday or Monday, when I had him generally as I recall, run the office. I)o you see what I am talking about? I spent my whole time with the assassination and related matters. I might point out here some of the things that, and I am sure if you 

look at the Warren report, you will find it, I had numerous calls from individuals who were just plain citizens. They said, well, I was at a(-O(ktail party at such and such a time and so and so said he thought soinlxxly ought to shoot the President. Now, we had to run all those out. We had to set out leads. All those things were handled. I did have a wealth of duties. Now, Mr. Malley didn't get down until, I think they sent him after Oswald was shot. lie didn t get down to Dallas until Sunday night. Then I did have some help with handling what you might term the telephone calls as well as the other things. lie particularly helped me with the telephone. We were getting calls from Australia, New Zealand, 

I,ondon, Paris, just all over. Mfr. DR]AN. In coming back to Mr. Sullivan, I am sure your lawyer anl You have heard what Mr. Adams said as a result of the compre-Iensive survey, and you indicated just before the recess that you talked several times with Mr. Sullivan and Mr. Sullivan says that you admitted that you lied a personnel problem, that you were reluctant to talk about this problem, and that it was his conclusion this problem related to the note left by Mr. Lee Harvey Oswald. Mr. SANKLIN. Well, I think Mr. Sullivan was mistaken in that. Certainly, from tiu-,- to time, as I think I pointed out, Mr. Sullivan was the Assistant director in charge of the Domestic Intelligence Di vision in which the Oswald security-type investigation was handled. I think that, the facts are that he did know something about that. I may have told him that we had gotten some letters of censure or someihing like that. lie certainly would have known it because it would have been in conjunction with his particular division. I never mentioned the note. I knew nothing about the note, and Mr. Sullivan is just mistaken. That's all I can say. Mr. DRiNAN. My time has expired, sir. Thank you. Mr. EWARI. i r. l)odd. Mr. DODD. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 80 Mr. Shanklin, I wonder if you could tell me whether or not you knew Chief Curry from Dallas. Did you know him? Mr. SIANRLIN. Oh, yes. I have known Chief Curry for a long time. Well, I mean, I had been there several months before the date of the assassination. I came April 22. Mr. DODD. Are you aware at the time of the assassination and after-ward, Chief Curry made a statement to the press indicating that Os-wald had contact with the FBI prior to the assassination. Are you aware of that statement he made? Mr. SHANKLN. Yes, there was never any denying that we had con-tact with him. He made some statement, yes. Mr. DODD. That he was capable of violence? Mr. SHANKLIN. Well, that, now you are getting into something that I don't think was in the statement. He said something about as I recall-this is separate from the note, now-he went on as I recall stating that somebody told him we had him under surveillance. Wi never had Oswald under surveillance. Someone from headquarters called me Saturday morning, I believe it was Mr. DODD. Someone called. Mr. SHANKLIUN. Well, someone watching television. I hadn't hd time to watch television. I did call Chief Curry. I called him on the phone and I said we did not have him under surveillance. There is no argument that we knew he was here. Mr. DODD. Did you ask him to retract his statement? Mr. SHANKLUN. I asked him to straighten out the thing as far as--I never asked him to etract it. I think I said, I think you oght to tell the truth about it and he went back on TV as I recall and said we did not have him under surveillance. Mr. DODD. If I told you that he said that part of his statement in- 

> cluded

the remarks that Oswald was known, or at least the FBI was aware at the time, that Oswald was capable of violence. Would you deny that was possibly the statement, or is it to your knowledge that he did make that kind of a statement? Mr. SHANKuI. That statement, as I recall, now you are getting into an entirely separate matter. Mr. DODD. No, what I am trying to do is establish-Mr. SHANKUN. I do not think that was his statement at all, because you have got something that was in the Dallas Times Herald the next day, after I talked to him and he said that in my understanding he went back and retracted it. I don't recall anything saying that there was anything we told you that he was capable of violence. I do not think that was in the first statement. The question was whether we had him under surveillance or not as far asI recall. Mr. DoDL. You did call Chief Curry and asked him to modify his statement, Mr. SIHANKFIN. I asked him to straighten out the record. because he said we hadn't told him and I said that under the current regulation we have no instructions to tell you about an individual such as this. I think he agred. Mr. DODD. You mentioned in your prepared statement or it may have been impressions afterward that you had-one of the problems you incurredimmediately after the assassination was that you had a pro-lem with the rifle. You could not identify who the owner of the rifle was. I think that was your statement. 81 Mr. SHANKLIN. I said to identify it. Mr. DODD. As to whom it belonged. Mr. STIANKLIN. Yes. Mr. DODD. Are you aware that the--there was a mail cover on Lee ilarvey Oswald prior to the assassination, part of the investigation. Mr. SHANKLI. Now I don't know that. I mean it is so far back I just don't know. I do not think that was--I do know we got infor-mation from the SAC in Chicago. I think he called me and in trying to get to me he had to call the hotel and somebody had to come over and tell me to call him. They had found where this rifle had been shipped to a post office box, in Dallas, under the name of A. Hiddell, II-i-d-d-e-l-l, I believe. That turned out to be a post office box that had been rented to Oswald, best I can recall. Mr. DODD. So, there was a mail cover. Mr. SFIANLKUN. N I don't say there was a mail cover. I don't know. I think we probably checked right quick to see who had the box. I don't think-I mean, to the best of my recollection, it was not a mail cover. We had the postal inspectors. We had the Secret Service. You had everybody in the whole cit working. When we found that out, they were able to tell me who had this post office box. Then something came up where he had used the A. Hiddell, I be-lieve in New Orleans. You are getting me into things--you see, I don't have the benefit of reviewing, but I know that the name A. Hiddell came up and the post office box was either a A. Hiddell or Oswald's name, but I am not say-ing we didn't have a mail cover. But I am saying what it was that we immediately got the postal inspectors to find out. All this was being done in a hurry. The fact it was midnight didn't make any difference. Everybody was working around the clock. The postal inspectors were working with us. Mr. Donr. My time has expired. I will come back. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. EDWARDS. Mr. Shanklin, the alleged existence of the note sur-faced on about the first part of July of this year. Do you have any idea where the information might have come from that went to the news-paper? Mr. SIrANKLN. No, [ don't. I have racked my brain on that. Mr. Johnson would not tell me. At first he said he certainly wasn't going to tell and he never gave me any indication. He said I believe it, was on a Saturday, the 5th of July, at which time I suggted he get in touch with Mr. Kelley, or Mr. Adams, and if he weren't going to, then I would just call them and tell them to get in touch wit him. I retired a little over a week before. So, he has never as I under-stand, I have probably been asked by our headquarters, but I don't think he has ever agreed to say what his sourceis. Mr. EDWAFW8. Since that time, have you discussed this matter of the Oswald's note with Agent Hosty. Mr. SHANKLIN. I have not. Mr. EDWARDS. Mr. Kyle Clark I  

> Mr. SHANKLIN.

No, sir, I have not. Mr. EDwAm. Helen May I  

> Mr. SFTANXWIN.

No, I have not. 82 Mr. EDWARDS. Agent Horton? Mr. SnANKxN. No, I have not. Mr. EDWARDS. William C. Sullivan? Mr. SHANKLIN. No, I have not. Mr. EDWARDS. Howe. Mr. SIIANKLiN. No. Mr. EDWARDS. Joe Pearce. Mr. SirANKLIv.. No. Mr. EDWARDS. James White. Mr. SITANKLIN. I think it is probably Joe Pearce you are thinking about. Mr. EDWARDS. Joe Pearce. Mr. SHANKLIN. Neither one. Mr. EDWARDS. Anyone at the Bureau ?Mr. SHANKLIN. Oh, I have discussed it at the Bureau. I mean they came and interviewed me. I made it very definite. When he told me about it, I said, look, I am not calling anybody except Mr. Kelley. If I make a call someone will say I am covering up. So, I have not talked to any of them concerning the note. Mr. EDWARDS. When the Warren Commission was set up, did you hiave instructions from the headquarters in Washington to cooperate is the investigative arm of the Warnn Commission? Mr. SHIANKLIN. Yes, sir, I certainly did.   

> Mr. EDWARDS.

Did they have any reservations on the information that you had furnished to the 'Warren Commission? 

MI'. SITANKiaN. Absolutely not. They had 15 attorneys that I recall. Mr. .J. 1Ao Rankin, I believe was the%'hief attorney. Ilie maintained liais6n with Mr. Valley, Inspector Malley. after he got. back. ITsually it, would be on a day-to-day basis. Mr. MVallev would call me and say Mr. Rankin or someone fr)m the Warren Cohnmission wanted this in addition. You know what I am talking about. MU1'. EDWARDS. Right. Mr. SHANKLIN. So I did it. Mr. EDWARDS. The. FBI kept possession of Oswald's diary or note-hok. address book, and the FBI, 1)alias. reported the contents of Oswald's laybook or addre'-s bok to the Warren Conlni sion, NO11t diid! not report that. in the book Oswald had written down Ifosty's neie, license number and the address of the FBI. Can you explain Iwhy in reporting that to the Warren Commission, that information was left, out iM'. SNANK .N. I didn't know it was. Frankly, it was all over all the newspapers. Tt was no argument. I know it was explained, Mr. Chair-nan, as to how it came in there. In other words, I know that was covered in some report. Now, Ifeel for certain. We sent all that stuff to our laboratory. I thought they hotoL raphed it and sent the results over but I also am certain flat Mr. Ilosty had to explain bow that, got in there. le went out to seel .M's. l)avne, and I don't know when, but sometime before the asqas-siuntioyi where Oswald was supposedly living. Oswald's wife was living there with Mrs. Payne. ()no of the things that T do recall is that he left his number. lie 

wanted to find out, as I recall, and tLiR again, I think his pnrpose was 83 trying to find out where he lived in Dallas. Because they said he doesn'tt live here except on weekends. So, he left his number and hp left his name there. Maybe Marina, I believe it was, maybe copied down the license number as he left. I think that is somewhere in the Warren report. There was no reason. It was in the papers, I know, pictures of the thing I think. Mr. EDWARDS. But you have no knowledge as to why it was left out of the first report to the Warren Commission. 

Mr. STIANKLIN;. No, wasn't it in subsequent reports? IMr. EDWARDS. It was in subsequent reports, I believe, yes. Mr. SHANKLIx. That is why I am saying, maybe the first one I- don't even know when we wrote it. We wrote two or three reports as quick as we can. Mr. EDwARDs. Mrs. Fenner said that Oswald's note was rather illit-erate and poorly written. That is not exactly what she said, but that is the impression that I got from her testimony. Yet, we do know he spoke and wrote Russian with moderate fluency. After all this happened, the President being killed, and then Oswald being killed by Jack Ruby, was there discussion in the office that per-haps Oswald might be a Government agent? Mr. SANKLIN. Well, the thing came up. Again, this gets us-long as it is on here, there was a newspaper reporter from Houston, '1'ex., who had interviewed Oswald's mother when he defected and went to Russia. Mrs. Oswald at that time had said she thought, now this is not Marina, this is his mother, she thought that Oswald was an employee of CIA or State Department. Now, this is to the best of my memory. He went back out after Oswald had been killed and he i'einterviewed her. le wrote a story about this, but then he said, couldn't he have been an informant of the FBI? She said, Oh, yes. So, the headlines as I recall was, Oswald rumored to be an inform-ant, of the FBI. So, we had that question. I had to submit affidavits that he was not an informant or check-the files and no record. Hosty, I am sure, did. I do not know whether Mr. Howe did or not. Nr'. 1)ODD. Will the gentleman yield? Mr. EDWARDS. Yes, Iyield. Mr. l)ODD. Wasn't it your affidavit to the Warren Commission that he was not paid I

Mr. SIIANKLIN. If it said not paid, that was the way it. was printed. I meant to say that he never was an informer of the FII. As fkir as the records that I could check. Mr. Doiw. Thank von. Mr. Chairman. mi. SIEANKI.IN. I do not know that. I do know I made an affidavit. e of the things tlat, can dispel that now. t th time, again tlis goes back to w'hen Mr. Itosty went IlI) lrolmiblv at my directionn as Irecall, and walked in and was introduced to Oswald. Oswald jumtps up and said, in a real loud voice, so you're I lost. When--this indicated to ne and part icularly when we had to answer the questionn that whether le was an informer, that he didn't even know him be ause somelbodv came along and sid he could lhve been an informer, of losty's, without Shanklin knowing it. Do you see what I am talking about.? Sure that thing camie up. It starteA out though I think from this 5m*W storT,.the newspapivi report. 

Mr. Elward. low long did Hosty interview Oswald ?. 84 Mr. SIIANKLIN. I would not know. I don't have the exact time avail-able. I know there was a report, but I don't know. Mr. EDWARDS. Was there a transcription made? Mr. SHANKLIN. Oh, yes. That is in the Warren Report, I am sure, his inteiTiew. I had another agent up there maintaining liaison, but Idon't know anybody did-well, I know he reported his interview, yes, Sir. Mr. EDWARDS. My time has expired, Mr. Drinan. Mr. DR NAN. I wonder, sir, if you could resrnd to this series of questions? Did Mr. Howe keep you regularly informed about all major developments as your second in charge? i oidd you say that lie (id tell you everything that he handled? Mr. SIHANKLIN..You mean Mr. Clark? Mr. DRINAN. That's right, Mr. Clark, yes. Mr. SHANKLIN. Well, I would presume that he was supposed to. Iwouldn't know whether he told me everything that he was supposed to or not. Mr. DRINAN. You had no reason to doubt him, his good judgment on any important thing. Ie would speak quickly and directly to the spe-cial agent in charge. Mr SH ANKLIN. Well, I was comparatively new there. I do recall that I was in Amarillo and I turned on the TV one morning and I heard where an agent had been involved in a shooting in Dallas. I was avail-able. I had a talk the night before. I did call Mr. Clark at that time. He said I thought you need not know it. I said, well, if somebody from the headquarters is calling about a shooting they wouldn't ask for you, churn, they would have asked for me. So, I want you to keep me ad-vised. Far as I know that was the only time it happened. Mr. DRINAN. So it would be highly unusual for Mr. Clark, obviously knowing about this note, that he would not tellyou about it? Mr. S HANKLIN. I know he didn't tell me. I do not know anything whether he knew about it or not. Mr. DRNN. Mr. Shanklin, another question. Would you make any comment on the fact the FBI tapped the phone of Mrs. Oswald for several months after the assassination and did not report this to headquarters? Mr. SIJANKLIN. I think you are going to have to check with head-quarters about that. I don't think that as I know. I never would have tapped the phone for anyldy without notifying lieadquarters. I can say that. Mr. DIin,,,,. This was never known to the Warren Commission. Mr. SJixKLI.,. Sir? Mr. DRINAN. This was never revealed to the-David Bell, couiscl for the Warren Commission stated it struck him as horrible that this was never revealed. 

Did you have any knowledge of a tap on Mrs. Oswald's phone for several months after the assmsination? Mr. H[OLLABAUOII. Let me interject, sir. As you know, Mr. Shanklin, along with other FBI agents signed an employment agreement which is very remtrictive as to what he can say. It is my understanding that the l'ederal Bureau of Investigation has granted clearance to him to testify before the committee having to do With the note and certain facts surrounding it. 

# we-_ 85 Mr. D16NAW. Well, I deem, sir, this to be enormously relevant to the note. After he has been murdered, you go or the FBI goes, by testi-mony that is not contradicted, that for months and months the FBI taps the phone of Mrs. Oswald. I mean that is not relevant to the note? I just assert that it is relevant and I ask the witness to answer. Mr. HOLLABAUG1. I do not know that it is so much a question of reluctance of the witness to answer a question of that kind, sir; the thing that has impressed me is that the Bureau in effect says to Mr. Shanklin, you are hereby released from your employment agreement to this extent and defines or says to him what it will be. Now, should you wish to pursue this question? Mr. DRiNAN. I wish to pursue it right now, sir. I do not want to clear it with the FBI. I want to pursue it right now and I want the witness to answer. All right. That is my judgment. If he wants to say he doesn't know about it, if he wants to invoke privilege about it, that is his privilege Mr. HOLABAUG. Well, since Mr. Shanklin is still bound by his employment agreement with the Federal Bureau of Investigation-Mr. DIINAN. Sir, this is public knowledge. I read from the Wash-ington Star. The FBI said in a statement yesterday, that is October 29, that the Agency had "conducted an electronic surveillance of Marina Oswald's residence from February 29, 1964, to March 12,1964." I just want him to comment on why this was done and does lie have an.y comment on it. It is public knowledge. Mr. HOLLABAUGII. In view of the restrictions under which Mr. Shanklin is here, I will tell him to decline to answer the question. Should the Bureau give us clearance from his employment agreement to go into these questions, then the witness will be very pleased tW come and testify. As of this moment, as we understand, the clearance given by the Federal Bureau of Investigation on the matter that the Congressman is asking the request about is, appears to be outside the scope of that. subject matter. That being the case, we will respectfully request that the committee if it wishes to go into it, have the staff contact the Bureau. If they give us clearance to speak about these things then this witness is prepared to cooperate with the committee. Mr. DRXNAX. Mr. Chairman, it would be my judgment that it would be relevant. I would request that he obtain clearance. One last thing. On the whole question of the continuing relation-ship of Mr. Hosty, that he was there for a number of years I take it or Mr. Howe too, and Mr. Clark, that they were there as your sub-ordinates, Mr. Shanklin, for several months or years after the assasi-nation I take it. I wonder if at any time this was discussed directly or indirectly. Mr. SIIANKIJN. It was not discussed with me. I never discussed it with them or anyone else because I didn't know anything about it. I think it was within the year they were all transferred somewhere else. Mr. Clark got promoted to assistant agent in charge of Chicago. I believe Mr. Howe went to Seattle. Mr. Hosty to Kansas City. Mr. DRINAM. My time has expired. Thank you. Mr. EDWARDS. Mr. Badillo. Mr. BADILO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 86 Have you ever testified before any commission about the Oswald case or the Kennedy assassination? Mr. SJHANKr. I did not; no. Mr. BADUJ 4 0. You never were called before the Warren Commission? Mkfr. SHANKLl.N. No. I gave affidavits but I wouldn't know on what though. I never was called. I wasn't actually doing the !;-vestigation. Do you see what I am talking about? I had to get it out and done. Mr. BADITJL. You were the one that was quoted as saying Oswald fired the rifle and you were the one who placed Oswald in the book depository. Mr. SIANKLIN. I don't, recall ever saying that. I mean, to whom did I say that? I der't recall ever making any such-I never interviewed him before or after obviously. Mr r. B,%Drmro. Anthony Lewis. New York Times, November 24, 1963. It says, Oswald-it was he who fired the rifle.   

> Mr. STrANKLI-N.

I dont recall. The laboratory report maybe was given out. I don't think I gave it out. 

Mr. B.DILiO. Do you recall that there was some question about the fact that Police Chief Curry said that he had spoken to a Lt. Jack Revill who spoke to ltosty and said that Hosty had said that Oswald was a nut and lie was the kind of a fellow who would assassinate aPresident. Then Curvy said you called him and told him to retract the statement. Do you remember that?   

> Mr. SHIANKrJLN.'I

answered, in effect I think I called him, I answered to .fr. )odd a while ago. I don't know whether you were here or not, or Father Drinan. I did call Curly. but there was nothing said at that time about, as far as I know, anything said about his being capable of killing anybody. Now this came up later on when Chief Curry. T believe t-estified )efore the Warren Commission, and he produced a note that Lieutenant Revill had given him. sulpposedly right after the assassination con. corning a talk lie had with Mfr. Hosty on the way up the elevator. I believe that was in April 1964. So. this was not brought to my attention. I do not recall anything about that until such time as Chief Curry brought that note ul). "Mr. 

Hosty has testified to that. Mr. Revill has testified to it, all in the Warren report. I know that was gone into in great detail. Mr. B.%rnrr,o. In the terms of the files that are kept. there was a file on Oswald because Agent lost lind been investigating him. In tle normal file, when there is an investigation of an individual and are)oit is filed by the agent. is that just dropped in the file or is there an entry somewhere. Is there any place in the file where an entry is made 'f the number of visits thmat are made to the individual? 

Mr. SITANKLIN. When your rel. is written out, generally it is supposed to bring everything up to (late. Mr. BA rLrO. I mean. does the file have for example, as a lawyer, when I keep a file on a client. I will have a section where I will say November 1. client came in. November 3. interviewed this fellow, and then there will 63 the results of the interview. Somewhere in the file there is a listing by (lay of the activities that took place. Do you have that in FBI files? Mr. SlANKLIN. Well, the agent, after an interview dictates it. Mr. BADILLO. Does he enter the fact of the interview ?87 Mr. SHANKLIN. Well, the report of the interview then goes to the file and it is then included in a report. So, if he made an interview, he is supposed to write a report of it. Then you have a number of copies and they will be there. Mr. BADmLO. In other words, then, if a report is missing there is no way you could verify whether or not the report should have been there. That is my question. Mr. SHANKLIN. Vell, if-if it is charged out. Mr. BADILLO. I mean within the file. If I am a lawyer and I keep a record of what is happening with my client, and I know that an interview took place say on November 1, and then if I don't see aNovember 1 report, J know something is missing. In other words, do any of your FBI files indicate what is supposed to be, in the fileI Mr. SHTANKLIN. I would say, no. I do not know if he has what vou are talking about there. le is supposed to report the interview. 3ow at that time -Mr. BADILO. Well, let's make it more specific. If there was a letter sent by Oswald, was there any indication as to whether or not there should be a letter in the file? Mr. SHANKLN. No; not unless he entered it into the file. If it was serialized then it would be charged out. You see, it would either 

be in the file-Mr. IIADILLO. lie is suppoSed to enter it in the file in some way. rfj. SHTANKLI-. Yes. If it is entered then it becomes a serial,4, for examl)le, or if he put. it in what we refer to as the evidence. If you 

are an attorney you probably have one saying evidence and another one pleadings and so on. 

Well. we would have something if it said evidence. then you would have a folder to hold it. You would have on there -Al or something like that. Mr. BADnri ). Letter of so and so. M r. SHi KLIN. Yes. Ir. BADILLO. Have voU seen the Oswald file? Is there any indica-tion that a note was received from Oswald on the (late Mrs. Fenne' testified?   

> Mr. SIANKI01N.

I lave not seen it, since. I (1on't recall. I prestiine that would have to 1w answered by someone who has the files available   

> Mr. BADILO.

My time is u). I think it might be iml)orant to get the file, because as I understand what he is saying, you are supposed to make an entry of the items in the file. It would be important if the note was received, it would indicate note received now in the entry. Mr. SI LANK 1AN. I under-stand they checked that. Mr. EI)w.am)s. Mr. I)odd.  

> Mr.

)ODD. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Shanklin, I am trying to ptit. this in perspective in my own mind. You had no knowledge at all and. orrect me if I am wrong. no knowledge at all of Lee Ilarvey Oswald prior to the (late of assassina-tion. you personally. MI'. S AKtIN . Absolutely. I had no knowledge of him at all. Never heard the name before as I recall. Mr. DODD. At the time that Oswald was apprehended in the theater in Dtllas, there was an FBI agent by the nn-_ne of Barrett who was on 88 the scene. Have you ever talked to Agent Barrett about why he hap-pened to be there? Mr. SHANKLIN. Well, the thing is we were instructed to cooperate with other agncies. I think the first thing Mr. Hoover said, and this was before they told me to investigate it completely, was to cooperate with the police. I talked to Agent Barrett. I think Barrett heard on the radio some-thing about a police officer being shot. He was out in that area. He worked with the police regularly. I think that was the reascon he went there. Mr. DODD. Is that normal operating procedure in an area that would not be normally in--the concern of the Federal Bureau of Investiga-tion, for an agent to involve himself I   

> Mr. SHIANKMI. I

would say any time a police officer was shot, as closely as we work with the police, I wouldn't criticize the agent for going and Mr. DoDD. Not criticize I am just wondering if you talked to him about why he happened to be there? Mr. SITANKLIN. Well, I think that was it. I can't say definitely. You see, it was not a big issue because here is a police officer who has been shot. It was all over the radio, I guess. I t ink it was, he was in the area and he went there; yes. Mr. DorD. This happened after word already came out, the fact the President had been just shot. Mr. STIANKLIN. Right. Right. Mr. DoD. So, you had news all over the radio that the President had been shot. Mr. SJ1ANKrTN. Right. Mr. Donn. 'rht, n you get word that a policeman had been shot.  

> Mr.

SATANKrYTN. Now, of course, there is a lot of-Mr. DoDe. 1 would think, don't you, that the emphasis would be on the former rather than the latter. Mr. STIANKLIN. Yes; that may be true. Also, now of course, nobody knows, far as I know, why Tippett was shot. I do not think it has ever been pinpointed that Tlppett was--actually knew that this was some-body who killed the President. -

Mr. Domn. They never knew at that point. They didn't have Oswald's name, the name Oswald wasn't ir anyone's mind at that particular time. The only reason he gave you for having been there was because he heard over'a police, radio. Mr. SIAIKLN. I recall that would be it. As I say. I didn't insider it a major thin at that time. Then, of course when'they brinrv Oswald in and von find he worked at the School Book Depository Building, I mean it became pertinent subject. 

Mr. Do in. Once they brought Oswald in. did you ask them, was it at thnt )noint. thenT was this on Friday or Saturday. to the best of youir reeollection, if you can he more specific it woldi he helpful, what point dil voi dicenve'r that there wa. a file on Oswald. Mr. WeTYANKJtN. Wll, immediately when the agent who was main-tnininv liaison then. I dn't know what time Friday afternoon it was.  

> Th1t

he called me and said they had brought in Lee Harvey Oswald. T gsm he gave me the devript've data. He had shot Tinpett. Ichecked-had the indexes checked. Tat is when I came up with a file. 89 As I recall, this is pretty hazy, but, as I recall, I-the file wasn't in the jacket at the time. So-Mr. DoDD. It wasn't in the jacket I    

> Mr. SHANKLIMN. Well, I

mean it was out with mail on it or something like that. I seem to recall that. Mr. DODD. Why would that be out of the jacket? Mr. SHANKLIMN. Well, you have a jacket with a file and if it is listed as being in use or charged out, or if mail comes in on it, why it goes to the clerk's office. I mean you get into all kinds of procedures. So, as I recall, they found the file. Then I know what I would have done by that time, I would either ask Mr. Hosty or Mr. Howe to review it and tell me what was in it. Mr. DODD. You wouldn't review it yourself? Mr. SIHANKLIN. I wouldn't have time. I mean, here are people calling from headquarters. I am getting blasted all over the place for this, that and the other asking me things. I know I never had time to re-view any individual file. Mr. DoDD. You never reviewed Oswald's file? Mr. SIANKLIN. I wouldn't say that I never looked at it, but I had to rely upon someone else to give me a summary. Mr. DODD. Well, did you look at it or didn't you ?Don't you ever recall looking at that file one way or the other, yes or no. I would think that you would remember that. I can understand a 12-year lack of recollection, but I would think you would remember looking at a file of the man who has been accusedof assassnating the President. Mr. SHANKLIN. Well, I think I probably did, but when you try to pin me down with saying when, I would not know. Mr. Dow. Well, let's forget the when; in that 3- or 4-day period, would it be safe to say that you looked at the Oswald file I Yes or no? Mr. SHANKLIN. Well, I think I probably did. As I say, I can't say definitely that I did. I am sure I did. It is just that-Mr. DODD. My time is up. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. EDWARDs. Mr. Shanklin, shortly before the assassination do you recall whether or not a Telex was received that was sent by the FBI Headquarters in Washington to ail of the southern FBI offices to the effect that there was going to be an assassination attempt on President Kennedy Mr. SwiHANKLIN. I have no recollection of that. This thing came up Ithink first in 1968. All I could do then, I was still agent in charge, as I recall, I had records searched and people were interviewed, no record of it. Mr. EDWARDS. Had you met Jack Ruby before you saw him on tele-vision I  

> Mr. SIJANKLIN.

I never met him. Mr. EDWARDs. You never had met him ?Mr. SKANxLmN. Never met him. Mr. EDWAM. how soon did you find, after he had killed Oswald, that he had been interviewed six or seven times by the Dallas field of-fice as a prospective informer. Mr. SIJANKLIN. I don't know. I would think that probably very shortly thereafter, again we would check and search our indexes. I see no reason why I wouldn't have found that. As you say, I think he was 90 

called a potential informer. This was done a year or two before I ar-rived at Dallas. Mr. EDWAnrs. Did tile Dallas field office furnish any names of dan-gerous persons to the Secret Service or to the local police before Presi-dent Kennedy arrived there I

Mr. S11ANKLI,. As I recall there was sonie fellow-the night before there was some man up at Sherman. I wouldn't know his name. I think the Secret Service maybe did pick him tip. There was some kind of abooklet, not a booklet, a pamphlet being passed out on the street, trea-son or something like that. We picked up some of those, maybe. I just seem to remember Mr. I [osty took those to the Secret Service. 

'We furnished them everything we could get. I don't think we had any-thing that was maybe pertinent. I know those two or three thing.,s were done. Mr. EDWARDS. If you hfad seen the Oswald note that he delivered to the FBI field office'in l)allas several weeks before the assassination, and you found out it did say. as Mrs. Fenner stated it did, that lie was going to blow up the FBI field office., et cetera. in other words, indicat-ing violence, would it have been your regular procedure to have told the Secret Service about that before President Kennedy caine to D1allas? Mr. SIIANK I. I don't believe tt that time that we had any regula-tion to that-effect. I would have certainly have taken some action which wo ld have been to present it and to inlvestigate it. Do you see what Iam talking about? One of the things the F BI was criticized about by the Warren re-port was the fact we were not disseminating as much information as they thought we should. That as a matter of fact, is in the report. But I don't think-I certainly would have called the Dallas Police Ipart-ment and--if it said they were gring to blow up the Dallas Police )e-partlnent. This would be commonsense. I don't core what the book says. There wouldn't be anything in the book nmybe that covered it, maybe, but it is natural if lhe says it lie is going to blow up anybody, I

would notify them, at that time. Mr. EDWARDs. Mr. Kindness. Mr. (uiNoxs. No questions. Mr. EDWARDS. Mr. D rinan. Mr. I)RJAN. Sir, I wonder if you could wake any suggestion that Mrs. Fenner possibly might exaggerate. In fairness to everybody here, she is the only one really that has stated the exact words or suggest ions. 

Mr. iostv hias assertl in the Warren (omiission report and also in the development of the Department of ,Justice investigation, that there was really nothing srpcifically threatening. I am wondering if you would want to" make any observations about my question. Mir. SmrANKL1N. Well, I would say I can't conceive of any employee of the FBI having a statement that I am going to blow up the office without bringing it to my attention. I can't conceive of anyone that would not want it handllel because you are working there. This would be self-preservation. I am trying, I think, in my opening statement, to point out any threat of-any note containing threats of violence and had I known of it at the time, and I feel if there had been real threats of violence, 9i I can't conceive of even two or three people seeing it without bringing it to my attention. I was the agent i11 charge. So, if there had been a note of violence, I don't think there would be any doubt that I would remember it. I might point out just about the middle of-the latter part of October, we had had an extortion case in Sweetwater, Tex., involving a threat to bomb four schools. This thing had the town-practically ran the town out. Everybody was scared to death. I know that was all over the office. We handled it as aspecial and finally apprehended him. So, I mean, bombing and things, I just don't think Mr. DwNAN. Well, sir, the contradiction is this, that Mr. Hosty said before the Warren Commission, and I quote, Mr. Adams, the note which was given to him contained absolutely no threats, yet why therefore should he destroy the note if it contained no threats. Mr. SHANKLIN. I don't know. I have no idea. Mr. DR NAN. Well, after the last meeting here we had with Mr. Adams, when he was here, a press account concluded this way, there seems to be one uncontroverted fact that. emerged from the first full-scale congressional hearing to examine the part played by the FBI ii 1the assassination. That one undisputed fact is that somebody lied to FBI investigators this year about a 12-year coverup in the FBI Dallas field office. I just had great difficulty in finding ot the motives for the lies. I suppose Mr. Hosty might lend some, give some light on it tomorrow. Somehow this has to be resolved. It seems odd to me that you have never discussed this with Mr. Hosty when he came up. Why didn't you? Was there any fear or why didn't you discuss t lie Dallas morning paper story with your former associateI Mr. SIHANKLIN. Before this-I elt if I called him one. of the first questions you gentlemen would ask if I tried and called and tried to intimidate him. I have not talked to anyone of them. I did not in-tend to. They can hear what I have said. I am in the position thal Idid not feel that it was advisable to do so. In the beginning of your question you said something about Mr. Hosty testifying before'the Warren Commission on this note. I don't think he ever testified on the note in question here. Now you are talk-ing about the one from Revill? Mr. DTN .N. I am not. I am quoting Mr. Adams in the previous thing. Mr. losty testified before the Warren Commission that since he was the e.-se agent on the Oswald investigation, he had no knowledge of any violent propensities on the part of Oswald. Mr: SIANKL. That is why I am saying, yes. Mr. DR iN A N. Mr. Adams could be wrong. I don't know. That is his position. Mr. SrANKtrN,. ie testified to that. I thought you said he testi-

fled that the note-T did not know he ever mentioned the note until 

aafter this thing in July. Mr. DrT.,;. You are quite right sir. That is a subseanent sentence. That raised another inconsistency. Why did he not tell the Warren Commission of what-about this particular note, to which he was privy. Mr. SHA KL N. I have no.-I can't answer for Mr. Hosty. That's it. Tit would 1w up to him. 92 Mr. DRLwaN. Would you agree with Mr Adams, who said that he really doesn't know why the note was destroyed, but that he feels that Mr. Hosty sought to avoid embarrassment either to himself or to the Bureau. Mr. SHANxELI. That again, would be up to what his thinking is. If it had been brought to my attention on the day of the assassination, if it was a note such as Hosty says, I would have probably have said, handle it aAd include it inyour next report. I am being very serious about it. If it had no threat I would have said to includeit in your next report, and probably never remembered with all the other things that were going on. Now, why he decided to destroy it, I would never know. Mr. DRINAN. As you know, there are 69 documents about Oswald in the FBI file, and this one was, as far as we know, the only one that was eliminated or destroyed and that goes back to the central question. My time has expired. Thank you. Mr. EDWARDS. Mr. Badillo. Mr. BADnO. You said that it would be inconceivable that if the note contained that kind of a threat, it would not be called to your attention. It seems clear that there was a note and the message was not a pleasant one because Mr. Hosty says different wording was con-tained in the note, that the wording was that Hosty should stop talking to Oswald's wife or otherwise Oswald would take appropriate action and report him. Mr. Howe says that he saw the note, remembers that it contained some threat, but he couldn't recall the specifies. Now how is it con-ceivable that the note could be missing, in your opinion ? Even if the threat was not as blunt as Mrs. Fenner has testified V

Mr. SHIANELL. I didn't know Mr. Howe said-it had a threat. Mr. BADiLLO. He says he remembers the note. Mr. SHANKU2N. If it said to take appropriate action could mean an awful lot of things. I am agent in charge and I have had any number of calls and someone wants to report something about an agent out here. I have had to call him in ana find out what was happening. The appropriate action would tell the agent in charge about the way he conducted an interview. I don't know. Mr. BADILL0. We have had other testimony in connection with other matters where the FBI personnel and supervisors have testified that it is a crime to destroy letters or notes in the files. We have sked-tfh-lm why have they kept material on for example, certain Members of Congress. Some of them are dead in the file. The testimony was it was a crime to destroy it. Is that your understanding, that it is a crime to destroy it. Mr. SHANK IN. I would presume any evidence certainly it would be. I don't know exactly now, but we have had, have to have some kind of destruction as they call it of files within 5 years you destroy certain types for room. Mr. BADILLO. Other than that. Just to take it from a file and destroy it. Mr. SIKANKLIN. I would think it would be some kind of a-Mr. BADIhLO. Even if done by an FBI agent. 93 Mr. SHANKIIN. Yes, I dont think the FBI agent had any more right to destroy it than anybody else. Mr. BADILLO. Now tel me, what specifically was it that you were criticized for, the letter of censure in the Oswald investigation. What was the reason that you were censured? Mr. SITANKLIN. I guess-I would have to find the letter. Generally, I think they felt we had too-I don't know-it is hard for me to answer. I will get the thing. Mr. BADILLO. Was it tou or the office who was criticized? Mr. SIANKLIN. Well,it came to me as the SAC in the office, special agent in charge. Any time if they are criticizing the agents under you in something like this, they would probably criticize me. All I recall when-they asked me when I first heard of Oswald and I told them. I can get the thing. I wouldn't know. That goes back again. I can find it, I am sure. Mr. BADILL.O. You say as late as 1974, Agent Ilosty, was concerned about his letter of censure. He asked you whether he should take it 

up with Mr. Kelley. What was Agent Ilosty criticized for? Mr. SIIANKLIN. Well, I think it was the general thing again. Ihaven't seen it. Persoiially, I don't know as I saw his particular letter. Mr. Bum.LO. Wouldn't you, as the agent in charge? Don't you get copies ?

Mr. SHANKLIN. I think I would have, yes. On the other hand-I probably would have seen it. I guess it said general mishandling of the investigation. I don't know. I know later on when I came up, some-thing was said that we should have had him on a certain index. Well, it wouldn't have made any difference if we had,-as to dissemination. Mr. Hoover was of the opinion that we should have disseminated the fact that a defector was in the area. That is generally what we had. Now you would have to get this from headquarters, but I think that is what we were criticized for in the Warren report, our dis-semination policy. Mr. BADIMLO. Should you have done it or not? Is that just Mr. Ioover's opinion and nobody else's. Mr. SHANKLIN. Under the then regulations, we couldn't have, or shouldn't have; just on that. At that time, as I recall, them was no--if there was anything that was indicated as a threat against the Precsi-(lent, we called Secret Setvice immediately, any kind of a threat. If there had been any indication at all, that Oswala or anyone else might hurt the President, we would have called them. Somebody asked me about conference. I know I had a conference ahead of time, telling me, coming up with any indication that some-body woul do anything against t le President, get with Secret Servicei I had very close relations with the then special agent in charge of .Secret Service. We talked daily on anything that came up. Mr. BADILLO. You feel that Mr. Hoover's criticism of you was improper. fr. SHANKrAN. No, I didn't say that. I have never said that. When Itook over the job as special agent in charge I expected to get criticized if he felt my performance in a particular situation wasn t up to date or up to what he thought was standard. 

> 82-629--77T-7

94 I expected to get commended if it was better than that. So, that is all I can say. I mean, Mr. Hoover believed in discipline. I personally think you have to have discipline in any organization such as the FBI if it is going to be effective. Mr. 3ADILLO. My time is up. Mr. EDWARDS. Mr. Kindness. Mr. KINDNESS. Mr. Chairman, if I might just get one question cleared up. Mr. Shanklin, if the note in question that Mr. Oswald is alleged to have delivered to the desk of Mrs. Fenner never became a part of tile file, there would not be any other record of that note available, would there'? Mr. SHANKLIN. Not that I know of. I don't know how there woull be. 

Mr. KIN.-DNESS. But if it did become a part of the file. I am not quite sure of the response that you gave to Mr. Badillo a little while ago, as to whether there would be an index of that, files contents. Mr. SHANKLIN. Well, I don't think there would be any index of every serial. You see, this would have become either a serial or a piece of evidence like he is talking about in his law firm. If it became a piece of evidence then it would be listed. Now, in connection with the assassination investigation, after the assassination, I did have special indices, I would index each serial and who was interviewed in it. But you can see the tremen(dous p)roldelfl that you would have running all of your oases that way. So there is no, or was no requiirement on a routine case, that you do have at tle time. Mr. KINDNESS. If, following--Mr. SHrANKLIN. Now if it had been serialized then there should be. 

something if it is out, there should be something that shows this is aserial, and it is missed. If it was charged out and only-the only copy, then it would be shown what it was during the time that it was out of the file. Mr. Ktintrxss. If, following the assassination of President Kennedy the note (lid exist, was still in existence, would it have been lets .ay would it be the responsibility of Mr. lIosty that is, according to tie testimony we ha\ve ul) to this time, the note had been turned over to him and was l)resurnably in his possession at. least for some period of time and presumably some period of time extending after the assacssi-nation of President Kennedy. If at that. point it was in his custdy, would he lave l)een the sole )erson to decide what to do with that noie as to whether it went into a tile ?Mr. SxI.XKLI,,. I think if the supervisor knew about it he would probably assume sonic responsibility. Generally speaking sonietlf iing like that if it were handed directly to the agent, you would expert hlim  

> to

exercise judgment in handling it. Ir. IINI N Would there be any rules that were in etfcct at til-It tilme that would tend to control his *decision as to whetlier to plut it iII 

tle file or not to plit it, in the file? Alir. SII. x. I think most of the time it would be good juglgment. I see no reason why this wouldn't have gone in tle file under tle cir-cumstances. I (dont know how yol want to look over ever'l)odl"s shoulder completely. You see what I mon talking about. Tl'lie I'ess,,e center ,ave him the note. lie should have taken appropriate action. 

Mr. Kxnx:ss. Was there it efTet at that time any rile as to wlat. 95 you do not file in a file so as to keep from gathering excessive amounts of paper in the file? ,,fr. SITANKLIN. I do not recall that. I think later and I think Ihave seen testified they had something here in Washington that would not be filed. I do not know. That is just routing slips, thin i ke that. If I sent a routing slip to an agent and said you do this by such and such a date, ordinarily you don t put! that in the file. I mean, you expect him to do it. Maybe you have a tickler and if he has not done it then you call him to task for it. You do npt clutter up the file with every little thing. Mr. KINDNEss. As a matter of judgment, going back to the point that the agent would be expected to exercise good judgment as to whether to put it into a file, would it-if the note was in existence after the assassination of President Kennedy-would it not have been ,,oodl jll(lgnment to retain that note in the file because it was written 

h)v or purportedly written by Lee Harvey Oswald and contained at. least an example'of his handwriting at a time tlat was fairly close to the point in time in which the assassination of the President    

> (Crri 'ed?
> ,%Ir.

SIKANKLIX. I would think so. 

Mr. KNDN,'ss. Thank 'ou. No further questions,-Mr. Chairnman. 

ir. EDWAiS. Mr. Dod(T. 

Mr. DODD. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Shanklin, you told us you talked to Chief Curry in the Dallas Police I)epartnient. )id lie ever tell you that lie had ever had any con-tact with Oswald subsequently? I do not mean prior to-have you ever heard of it? Mr. SHANKLI-N. I never heard of it, no. Mr. 1)ODn. Did any other organization, agency down there ever niention that to you that they haid a contact with him? .%r. SIA.NKIN. I don't think so. Mr. )Onn. We have some reports--Congressman Badillo made some reference to soon after t lie assassination-there were reports regarding I)arItflll tests on Oswald. There were reports regarding fingerprints od, 1 gueas the soda )o) Iottle an(l sone chicken bones that had been on the sixth floor of the roomi, of the book depository. 'Tlie first, reports that.-aine out a couple of days atter the assasina-tion reporting, or at least indicating, that evidence showed that in fact Oswald had been in the, room, paraffin tests had been performed on. Ir. S ii.. A-Nxi. Evidence? Mlr.* ),. Evidence of positive paraffin tests of the cheek and hands of Oswald. fingerprint evidence on the soda pop bottle and chicken boyes, food in that room. Tie statements from the press-and again, perhaps you have no recollection, but-the statements were attributed to you iii the press reports. I am looking back on a Xerox copy of the November 25, 

M6t,3 edition of the New York Times in an article by Anthony Lewis. I am quoting from the article, "Already authorities have collected evidleicie of all sorts. Gordon Shanklin, FBI agent in charge of Dallas said today the rifle that killed the President had been traced to Oswald." 

I le goes on down, speaking of you, "the FBI agent noted these other pieces of evidence which have f*en assembled by the Dallas Police, the FBI. and the Secret Service." lie goes on to mention spetcifically talking about a number of things that apparently you had indicated as evidence pointing to Oswald. Among those included a palm print on a brown paper bag found at a window of the schoollook warehouse. On lown further it talks about paraffin tests used to determine whether a person has fired a weapon recently and this was admninis. tered to Oswald shortly after he was apprehended Friday, after the assassination, and it Showed that particles of gun powder from-a weapon, probably a rifle, remained on Oswald's chee and hands. Subseqjuently, t was coveredd in fact, the brown paper bag and palm print be, lnged to a Bonnie tay Willians who had apparently eaten in the room. Subsequent examination indicated, in fact, thme paraffin had only really Ieen showing i Ksitive on the hands of Oswald, and not on his eeks. 

)o you recall the information, where he got the information initialh? Mr. SHANKLIN. I would not have known anything about the paraf-fin tests. rhe only thing th~at I would recall, there was an awful lot of misquoting that went on around that time, is that I got the evidence on the night of the 22d, early morning of the 23d. It was brought to our laboratory. It was examined and returned. I do not even know what was the evidence. We did not make any araflin test. That would have been the police. The bottle and the paper ag and that, that-then the report was given to the Dallas Police Department on Saturday afternoon. I know that was given out. But I didn't give it out. I delivered it or had someone deliver the lab report, as I recall and had it delivered to Chief Curry and maybe District Attorney Wade. I never said anything. I know this. I never said anything about paraffin tests. I knew nothing about it. What is the date of that? Mr. DODD. That is the 25th. That would have been a Monday. Mr. SJIANKITN. I made no press release on it. I say, I do know that I probably referred them if they asked me, to either headquarters or to, I know Chief Curry did have the lab report. because that was one of the things we agreed to, immediately furnish the lab report to him. Mr. DODD. You never gave any statements? Mr. SHANKIAN. I never recall giving any such statement. I would have known nothing about a paraffin test. That would have been conducted by the police themselves. Mr. DonD Thank you, Mr. Chairman. That is all. Mr. EDWARDS. Mr. Parker. Mr. PARKFR. Yes, thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Hollabaugh, I want to go back to an unfinished piece of busi-ness and ask you once again what the basis was on which the declina-tion to answer Father Drinan's question was. Mr. HOLLArAlUOH. I believe you have seen the standard employment agreement which FBI agents suin with the Bureau of Investigation. If you have not, I will immediately get a copy to you. Mr. PARKIR. We have asked the Bureau for a copy. They have not yet provided it. Mr. HoZLABAUOH. We have a copy. There is no reluctance at all to give it to you. Now this employment agreement-97 Mr. PARKxrt. Let me stop you, if I might. We will get a copy of the employment agreement. We were informed by the Federal Bureau of Investigation, aud we did agree to four limitations on the appearance of any witness before the committee. We disussed this with you and your client, with the Federal Bureau of Investigation. Those four limitations were that there would be no discussion of any ongoing investigation; there would be no discussion which would reveal any kind of confidential source; there would be no discussion that would reveal third bureau or third agency information without the approval of that third agency, and there would be no divulgence of any kind of sensitive techniques of the Bureau. On which of those four bases are you declining to answer ?Mr. HoLLAnArc,[. None of those bases. I am relying on Mr. Shank-]in's employment agreement. When we were asked to represent, Mr. Shanklin in this matter, Mr. Shanklin caie to us. we went to the Federal Bureau of Investigation. The first question I asked was, what part or how mush of the employment agreement that Mr. Shanklin is under. has been cleared or in fact, released insofar as this particular hearing is concerned. I was advised the subject matter this subcommittee wished to go into was the visit of Oswald to the FBI office and the note, if one existed. I asked that question two or three times and I was so advised-and it was my understanding that that was the understanding between the lDureau and this subcommittee. As a result of that. and I think when Mr. Shanklin came to your 

office for an examination. my recollection is that your line of questions was limited to these two subjects. 

N'ow. the problem. as counsel for Mr. Shanklin. is that, I feel he is still under this broad employment agreement with the Bureau. It says specifically he will not discusq matters that came to his knowledge f'hile he was with the Bureau. and I feel that he is-until the Bureau re, leases or says to him you may also discuss this, I think that Mr.  

> S

li anklin is bound by this employment agreement. If the Bureau .avs. I am simply twing cautious in that I would like, if you gentlemen would wish to go ahead into other subject mat-ters. and if the Federal Bureau of Investig nation says he is releasd from his employment agreement. to allow him to discuss any such matters. then I would discus with Mr. Shanklin as to what he knows. Mr. PAxr.u. If there were to e a violation of that employment agreement. what sanctions would there be fr. Ilollabaugh? Mr. HOLLABAUGCH. Well. that is a very good question. Mr. PAr xr.R. would d you simply tell me the answer. fr. HoLmARAU0oT. The employment agreement recites several stat-utes by citation, 18 'U.S.C.. and certain other sections. Now as to all that I am attempting to do is keep the lines clear. I would be very happy if you gentlemen wish to ask Mr. Shnnklin about the wiretap r-mtter that the Conaressman from Ma.sachlLsetts was asking about. and if the Federal Bureau of Investigation says, yeS, you are released from that )art of your employment agreement 98 

to testify about it, then I would discuss it with Mr. Shanklin and we will go on from there. Mr. PARKER. Thank you very much, Mr. Hollabaugh. Mr. Shanklin, you testified the first you knew of the note was when 

VoU received the phone call from Mr. 'homas Johnson, of the Dallas Times Herald on July 5, 1975. Can you tell the date or the dates you were interviewed by Mr. Bassett subsequent to that (ate? Mr. SHANKILIN. After Mr. Johnson had told them. I came to Wash-ington, I think-he said he would talk to them and I said, well, you go ahead and do it. Then I came up to Washington I think on the 8th of July, I believe. Mr. PARKER. Was that, a trip voluntarily made or were you sum-moned to Washington? Mr. SUANKIaNx. They called me. I wasn't summoned. I talked to them about this at that time. They said hie had been up and told them. Mr. PARKYR. W8ho is "they." Mr. SHAN-KLIN. I believe it was-I don't know whether it was Bas-sett or not at the time. Maybe it was Bassett or Jim Adams, one of them. Mr. PARKFR. Then you did come to Washington. 

Mr1'. SIIANKIAN. Yes. Mr. PARKER. What date was that, sir? Mr. SIIAN'KLI.N. I :1ink it was July 8. Mr. PARa K. Were you interviewed in Washington at that time? Mr. SIIANKIAN-. They asked me if I knew anything about it. I said-tle question is where to start, you might say. Mfr. PARKF . Who did you talk to in 'Washington? Mr. SIl.\NKN. Again, Bassett and Adams. Mr. P.m1 KrR. Was there anybody else you talked to in 'Washington? 

Mr. SA.N'KLIN. I don't think so. Mr. Connellv who is in the Inspec-tion Division. Mr. P,%nKER. Wo1ld you characterize this as a meeting? Mr. S I tANKLN. It was a meeting, yes. Mr. PARKER. The question or subject of which was the pending revelation of the Dallas Times Herald? Mr. S11.%NKLI.. Right. They went into more detail what they talked to him about than I did. I tried to stay clear from the thing. Mr. P.%RKER. What was the subject matter in that meeting with 'Mr. i(ntns and" Mr. Basett ?Mr. SHANKIAN. I guess they asked me if I knew anything aLbout it. I said I didn't know anything about it. have they looked in the file. was- the thing reported? Mr. PARKER. W'as your statement given before or after that meeting? Mr. S ANKI-N. I'don't think I gave a statement. I gave them two statements. I came back in July. I think you probably know-I do not have a copy of my statement. It -seems to me it was July 21. Mr. PARKER. Your statement was given in Washington, D.C. Mr. S11ANXK1Xx. The first one was. Mr. PARKMR. You were reinterviewel? Mr. S T.xLt.1x,. Yes, I was interviewed then. Mr. PAPRKER. Whlien were you re:nterviewed? 

Mfr. S.ANKLIN. In Septeiner. the last week as I recall. 99 Mr. PARKER. Did anything else transpire at that meeting? Any other subject discused? 

M I'. SHANKIAN. No. Mr. 1PARKErt. Is it correct. Mr. Shanklin. and we have gotten some-what of an education here today as to how the Dallas Office functioned, S that all information that wotild have flowed from the Dallas Field Office to Washington. would have flowed through your office. Mr. SHIANKL1N. No, not necessarily. You have the Assistant Agent in Charge. I couldn't sign everything that goes out of there and the 

siper(i, rs sitgn things going out of there. reports out. Mr. PARKER. T1'ho, would go directly to V11 ashington without your seeing them ? 

> .M[r.

.1N .X. Sorne of them (o, yes. they would. I was supposed to see all matters that-it is a jundlneit call. Mr. P.%viiv. lVoil it 1e safe to say thoumgl. on a case in the nature of tle assassination of tile 1residetli of tile United States. that all material and informnat ion flowing from the l)allas Office to Washing-ton. ivotld have gone through your office? MI1'. StA NKI.IN. No. No. I couldn't say th at. Because Mr. MaIler was down there for 9 days. lie probably sigme out some teletypes. 'Mr. l1.\tKv:u. Wit-l the exception of Mr. Malley '

Mr. SIANKIAN. W1"ell. if it were a major importance. ves. I couldn't-let's face it. again. I depended ulpon Iwing advi."l. I put two men in charge aii(1 t wo sJpewials. I had one of then in charge of one type and on(' of thviii the civil rights thing. Now, when you bring in a thou.and page report. I wolld re-ad tile synopsis and ask him alxout anything. trying to determine-I might have initialed it without reading the thing, every" page.. Mr n.ever. It would lha\ e gote through your office : is that corvect ?

.Mr. S~.l.NKmN. It w,,old have-  

> .Nfr. PARIKER.

Special agents vere not empowered to deal directly with Washington.    

> Mr. SII.ANKLIN. 01.

noe no. 

Mrt. P.ArER. Is it also sfe to say then, that all information or re-quests or authority that ('anie from Washington to the Dallas Office wold conie to Voll ?

'Mr. SI.K. It should, yes. 

Mr. lA +KER. "I'iv did 110t get in contaet with spwial agent Ilosty directlv or Mr. howe or' anyone else. Mri. S..x . No. 

M'. P.ARKER. A iNv ilst i'lct i0T1 Mr'. Sii.AKIIi . 'Well, a Slipei'visor iMiight talk witt ,oinelxAl. lie mi.,hit. but generally nt,. al particularly in connection with this.   

> .MI'. Pl.\IKYR.

If there was in fadl a note from Lee Harvey Oswald which was received in the H)allas Office an(l was communicated to Washintion, I).C.. an' instructions with regard to that note would have co'oile through you. .Mr. SH i NKI.AN. I think . .

MI'. P.I KFR. Th a nk 'out very much. 

'Mr. Ewv.%ws. Mr. Shankin. recently there have been %(me ditress-in ,lislosures about the FBil. and indeed. albmt the CIA and Solli 

oth'ir Goveniment agencies. These dilfwssures have added to the fuel of the American Jpiiblic's reserat ions alouit tie investigation that was 100 made after the Kennedy assassination, and the integrity of the War-ren Commission report. Indeed, it has gotten so bad recently, so severe recently, that pending before the Rules Committee of the ltouse of Representatives is aresolution that if passed by the House and the Senate would com-plelely reopen the investigation and create a new select committee, or new commission or something like that.. Now, in the 12 years since this murder, this assassination took place in Dallas, Tex., aind you were the SAC in charge, do you have any second thoughts. I)o you have any reservations whatsoever about the investigation that took place and the conclusions and findings of the Warren Commission? Mr. SIIANKN. Well. of course, I ain in that position that I was th-supervisor of the FBI's inve-.igation. J)o you see what I am talking about ?

Now. the Warren ('olluli sion ]a(l. as I lpoilted out. 15 attorneys, They had available information oI. ('IA. 1a'), the State I)elpalment tiht I dil not inldividilallv have. Now, ba.d on tle leads and evervtlking. I have seen nothing that would indicate that wotildl ch1antge thie decision . Blt. oil thle other hand, they were in posit ion of being the jpidg .r,. 

As I say. Ihere was nine of them I believe. anld thly had 15 lawver'. Mr. Ratnkin was a very capable lawyer, lie was going all out. Each day almost we would Lret reqluests for something that they would want 

us to (10, il addition to naybe what was ill the report. 

I ;l*rsonally. ju,t from ly oh-servation. I (o not think there lis ever been anyt hi ng as fully' in ve.stigated. 

Now you always have this. Nob(xlv knows whiat was in Oswald's mind. I had people tell ni1v tile same thing. I saw wi, ra sollibody is wriliglr a lxbok in England and we have the wrong man buried ill Fort Worth ow. I (1o not know whether vo all have seen that. So. I have sen nothing to change it. 

r. . LuwADS.tMr. 1(l1c. Mr. Ki,:j.. Thank You very nich, Mr. Chairman. Before I lbegin *my questions. I would like to ask the witness, if lie woulld submit a copy of his employment agreement with the FBI for the recor(l, I will not purse that, if that is all right. 

,M fr. SIIAN'K IN. No problem. Mr. I[OLAn.1m . iVe wold be pleased to give yoU one. Mr. EDIwARni. Without objection it will be received. 

Mr. KLrF. Thank von. Mr. Shanklin. you ran the Dallas division office. I would like to explore with you some of the rules antl regulations in effect then with respect to the powers and capacity of a receptionist such as Mrs. Fenner. Mr. HOLLARAU'GIL. Excuse me. Could we have Just a moment's break. Mr. Ki,,. Yes. Mr. EDAVA RQ. We will recess for 5 minutes. [A brief recess was taken.] Mr. EDWARDS. The sulcommittee will cone to order. Mr. Klee. Mr. Kjir.. Tlhank von. Mr. Chairman. 101 Mr. Shanklin, I was about to probe the FBI Dallas Office regulations and orders under which Mrs. Fenner would have been operating when she received the alleged note from Oswald. If someone had come into the office and thrown the letter addressed to a special agent onto the desk, would any rule or any regulation have required or precluded the receptionist from reading that letter? fr. SIANKLIN. Vell, if it dropped out in front of her, we just wouldn't have any regulation saying I think you wouldn't be ordinarily reading other people s mail. But ifit dropped out in front of her like she said, she obviously saw tie thing, well then, I don't know what good she could do about it. I didn'thave any rule. I thought it was coinlonsense if there is an envelope addressed to me personally, why people wouldn't be opening it. The mail is opened ordinarily, routine mail would be opened in the chief clerk's office. Mr. K1Lx. Yes. she stated it is not her normal routine to open letterns. I was wondering i f there were any regulations or .J. Edgar Ioover and the National Bureau had any regulations about mail addressed to an agent I ,ing opened by a receptionist. Mr. SHAN,.KIJN. I 'did not know of any regulation. I did not know we needed any. You can have so many rules you can't keep up with them. I do not know where there would be one. I would say, if you didn't have it sealed and it is falling out, you have an opportunity to read it, fine, M[r. KiYE.. In your experience, did many people bring things into the Bureau Office'in an envelope that wasn't sealed? Mr. SIANKrAN. No. M r. KLI:YF. Usually if they took the time to put it in an envelope they would seal it ?  

> .Mr. SIIANKIAN.

,Most of the time, in my experience, yes. 

Mr. KLIY. Were their any niles or regulations governing Mrs. Fen-ier's conduct whel sip received the letter, and discussing with other Bitureau employees such as Helen May or showing the letter to Helen 

Mav? Was that kind of a thing done all the time? Mr. SIANXKA.S. Well, I don't think it would be done all the time. Oil the other hand, it is not a personal-well, it would be personal, 

I guess, but it is just the question of.judgment. Mr. KLE. In your experience, in running the FBI field office, if an employee such as . m. Fenner had recognized that the person that delivered the note, Iee Harvey Oswald, was the same person that had assas&inatedl the President, when a person such as that came into the office the next day. would you expect a person at least to gossip around and mention it to another employee that that connec-tion had been made. Mr. STIANKLN. Well, I don't know that-I don't know that she saw Oswald being shot. Is that right? Mr. ILrAxr. Mrs. Fenner test ified that when she saw that Le htarvev Oswald was the person that a.csassinated the Pre.,sident on TV, that she jumped up and said something to the effect that, "My God, that is the man who gave me the note." Then she went on to work later that day. Mr. S it.%x'KLI. And didnt mention it. Mr. I{LVF.. And didn't. mention it. Io vou find that extraordinary? Mr. SHANKLIN. Mrs. Fenner, she didn't go into this. She didn't get 102 along with employees too well. She had her own little office. She pointed out here this morning that she was working on applicant type investigation as she has been for the last several years. So, -don't know. She will talk to certain people maybe and maybe she wouldn't with others. She is an experienced employee. Mr. KLE., I have one other question about her function. She testi-fied this morning that she was numbering pages on a report of some form with Special Agent Hosty. Do special agents normally do clerical things like that? Mr. SIIANKLIN. I would say he was out there seeing that the pages were placed in the proper order. I do not think-if it would have been something in connection with this case, that is what he was doing. That is what, I would think he would be. doing, seeing that these reports were txing assembled. There is probably 10 or 15 copies. Ife might juot be overseeing the whole thing. Mr. Ki.rr:. Did you ever order Itosty to interview Lee Harvey Oswald? Mr. SAN'KLIN. I told him-after Lee H1arvey Oswald was found to be in the police department in the afternoonn and as the murderer, charged with the murder of Tippett, and I found we had the case. Mr. KL:r. Is that the 23d   

> Mr. SIIANKLIN.

No, it is the 2'2d. That is that afternoon. I talked-I am sure with Mr. Al Belmont and told him we had a file. He sug-gested that the agent. the case agent file, the agent who had the case file should go up and try to interview him. So, I am certain that Itold Mr. llostv to go and sit in on the interview. Mr. Kixy. Pid you ask him to summarize the file for you? Mr. SHANKLIX.<. I don't know as I did at that time. I would be more inclined to think that I asked Mr. Howe to summarize the file. You see, things are breaking and somebody is telling me to get the rifle and soinebody is telling me to get. somebody up there. We knew that, Oswald. I don't mean that Oswald, but Marina lived out in Irving. We were trying to find out where Oswald lived. I mean everything is -Mr. Ku:F.. You were MITnnin the entire operation. Mr. SHIANI 4 I.N. I was having to. The phone calls were coming in to me. Mr. Kt.:.,. You stated that you had been there approximately 7months. Mr. SIJANKLIN. Yes, sir. Mr. Kr,,. As the special agent in charge. Mr. SIHANKLIN. Yes, sir. Mr. KIFE. Was this the first time that you had been a special agent in any field office? The Dallas office? 'Mr. SIIANKLIN. Oh1. no0. Mr. Ki.x.r. Had you-how long had you been a special agent by the time the President was assassinated? '

Mr. SHANKLIN.. Well. I entered in May 1943. Mr. KiZ. Special agent in charge. Mr. SHANKLIN. Huh? 

Mr. Kiyr,. Htow long had you been special agent in charge. 103 Mr. SIIANKLIN. MSfy fiist office as agent in charge was in November 1953, in Mobile. Then I stayed there until 1955, and went to Pittsburgh as agent in charge. Then they brought me back on the inspection staff. I served and stayed on the inspection staff about. 18 months, inspecting other offices all over the country. I went to El Paso for 1 year. I went to Honolulu for 4 years. I came fiom Honolulu to Dallas. I was agent in charge of all those places. Mr. Ki.xv. After the assassiation, what was your progress since then in terms of being a sl)pecial agent in charge ?

Mr. SIJANKLYS. I continued as special agent in charge in Dallas. Certainly it is a good office. I got my within grade. I was already in the .,cond step of grade 17, when the a sassination occurred. Mr. KL.r,. I do not mean to cut you off, but my time is limited. Iwould like to proceed. When did you retire? Mr. SIHANKLIN. I retired I think. June 27, 1975. Mr. Ki F:E. In your 2.5 yetrs of experience of all of the investigations that you sulervised as a special agent in charge, did you have anything tlat was more monumental or made a greater impact on your career tian this ()swuld and the Kennedy assassination? Mr. SNo.xLI.. No, sir, I could not have. I told them I should have an extra year of longevity, kiddingly. I put in approximately 2 years work within the 11 months. Mr. KLE. From the time of the assassination, you worked for 80 straight hours without any sleep at all. M'r. SuANKJ.. That is right. I never got any sleep until 4 or 5o'clock in the Monday afternoon, after Malley got down there and Ileft. the office. That is the first time. I left the office once before. I ran home on Saturday night about 11 o'clock and while taking a shower I get a call that someone said they are going to kill Oswald, better move Oswald, they were moving him. I came back to the office after Icould not get the police chief and I stayed there until I finally did get him. 

Mr. KLEF. If, during this 80-hour period you had ordered a note destroyed or became aware of a note pertaining to Oswald and the assassnation, that is certainly something that you would remember today; isn't it? Mr. SHANKIN. I think I would certainly have remembered not or-dering any note destroyed. or ordering any note destroyed. I am tioing to have to say that I feel that if I saw the note and if it were as Hosty said, I would have said, handle it, take care of it in the next report and that would have been it. I may have forgotten it. I think I would re-member any instance of saying destroy anything. Mr. KiY. Well, also, since Oswald was the subject of the assa&ina-tion threat, if there was a file on Oswald, wouldn't you remember whether you had looked at that file ? Isn't that an extremely important t hing in the course of supervising an inv,,tigationI Mr. SITANKLIN. Well, here is the thing. You have to-you have to delegate some things. I was being told to do 3,000 things or something similar. I don't know. I think I would probably have asked Mr. Howe. lie is the supervisor. I think I probably said. get this out. I have to call Belmont I want a summary, or somethiing. Do you see what I am talk-ing about? 104 Mr. KLEz. That is reasonable. Would you have remembered reading the summary of the problem? Mr. SiuN&Kw. I am certain that I told Mr. Belmont what wa&3 in the file. They then started looking for their file in Washington. Mr. KLEE. Thank you, Mr. chairman. I have no further question. Mr. EDWARMS. Are there other questions? Mr. DI AN . Mr. Chairman, just one last point. We are in a quandary here because we will have evidence tomorrow and testimony. We were told on October 20, and I have the document here before me that the Department of Justice is not going to follow through with any prosecution. I quote from the Deputy Attorney General, Mr. Harold Tyler, The only possible theory of prosecution will be by way of a perjury Indictmient for false testimony relating to events that occurred 12 years Ago. In all candor, sir, at lunchtime I looked up the perjury statutes and what are witnesses required to say. There is a section here when the exarninee's answers are unresponsive during the inquiry concerning acts or conduct and that is not to be measured by the same standards. I wonder if you have any explanation why you are so ambiguous and hesitant. Vou said a moment ago that you may have misunder-stood. You really would not answer categorically my sole questions about whether or not you met on the itight of Lee Harvey Oswald's murder with your two associates. I am just. wondering if you want to respond to the questions that are in my mind. Mr. SIIANK NLIN. Well, if I know what they are, I do. Mr. DRiN AX. This simple question. Why are you so equivocal? 

M1'. SIIANICLIX. I do not think I ani. I mean, I am trying to tell you the truth. Mr. DRI.NAX. We have to believe you sir. or we have to believe four others who contradict you. We can't Yave it both ways. Mr. JIOL.LABAUOH. I wish to state the definition of the issue here is not entirely as the gentleman from Massachusetts seems to make it. If you are asked sir, what you did on the night of November 22, 1963--Mr. DRINAN. I could tell you categorically every moment. Mr. TIOLILABAUGO1. Yes. Mr. D IAN. I, as a private citizen. I think every American remem-bers precisely and it was not November 22, it was November 24, when Lee Harvey Oswald was killed. Mr. HOLLADAVUau. The 22d was when the President of the United States was killed. Mr. DRINAN. I know. But I am asking two nights later. Mr. TIorJAnAoII. Well, I would just like to refer to one thing. Mr. DRIVAX . I am asking the witness, sir. Mr. ITOLLAJArOI. Well, I am about to read what the witness said. Mr. DRI N,. All right. Mr. TIOLxAB .otit. In his opening statement he said:             

> Iunderstand that agents Hosty and Howe have stated that the Oswald vttt
> and

note were brought to my attention during the period Immediate)y following 

the aqias'inatlon of the President. Since, at that particular Hme. I was over-whelmed with Innumeratile major problem. and dntles. It fi. of eonrse, comeelvahlo             

> that their recollection IF correct. Isimply do not remember anything like that.

'No W--105 Mr. DjRIAK. You are verifying exactly what I am a g the witness. You are verifying exactly. He doesn't categorically deny. He doesn't say they are wrong. He doesn't say they are right. It is very ambiguous. I am just wondering why he wouldn't remember. It seems to me if he met on a matter of this moment, that he would remember. If he wants to say that he never met, that is perfectly all right, but he is not going to say that, or he hasn't said that. Mr. HOLL&AU0H. If you were in charge of this investigation and that night the mait had been working for some 48 hours without any sleep-Mr. DRINAN. Sir, it is not that night. It is--Mr. HOm.ABAuGH. It is the 24th. Mr. DRi.N-AN. The 24th. Mr. HOLLAB.wOAu. lie started the 22d. lie did not go to bed until Monday, the following Monday. What you are insisting upon is aconfrontation of trying to make it, appear that somebody is an out and out liar. ir. DRINAN. That is what Mr. Adams says. It is not my words, sir. Mr. Adams, who prepared this and who testified, said that. Obviously you come down to that. We can't believe them all. You have to believe one group or the other. There is totally contradictory evidence. If the Department of Justice is not going to resolve it, they are not going to prosecute at all, so it is left up to Conre We represent the American people here. We are not going to sit back and tel them and allow totally, Rbsolutely contradictory statements to go un-challenged. It is our duty not to do that. Mr. IHOLLAIIA'UI. Well, when you are now speakin of events that occurred 'ome 12 years ago and the circumstances under which these events occurred, I am surprised that the gentleman from Massachu-setts would think soiel)d could have such a definite effective mem-ory of a matter of that kind. I think tie record will show that we have never claimed for Mr. Slanklin that. le is infallible, lie is simply attempting to tell this committee, to the best of his ability, exactly wvlwat lie recollects. That is precihly what he has (lone. 

M r. ID'INAN. Well, he hasn't (lone that, sir. I asked time and time gain and lie-if you want I will ask your client once again, to the best, of your recollection, did you or dil you not meet with your two lostat asociates on that eveni ng : yes or no. Mr. SHANKLIN. I am certain if they were in the office obviously we were close togetlmr. We would have iet. But I have no independent recollection of having a meeting in my office. '[ey were running in and out. Everbo(ly was. Mr. I)DRINAUN. You are v(.rifving my point, sir, that you are not saying yes or no. You ar not saying that you had a meeting. You are not saying you didn't have a meeting. Mr. SIHNKLIN. I don't think that I had any meeting as such. People would be coming in and they would be saying something. The phone was ringing. Again. we are setting ul) a new special. You are talking about the ( a swald was killed. Isn't that right I I am being called. I have to get another special squad set. up. I have to get GSA to get me the space. I have to get teletypes. I have to get everything else going. So, I don't think I had any meeting. I had everybody coming in. They were running in and out. I wouldn't call it a meeting. I had no 106 

time for conferences as such. If someone wanted something they would come in and I would make a snap decision and that wou ld be it. Mr. DmNAN. Well, I thank you, sir. yield back the balance of my time. Mr. EDWARDS. Mr. Dodd. Mr. I)oD. Mr. Shanklin, you said you were taking a shower Satur-day night and you got a phone call from someone telling you they were going to try and kill .e Harvey Oswald. Can you tell me who the phone call was from ?Mr. SIiANKLIN. I don't know. The office got the call. This has been taken up in the Warren report. I called the office. I was home about 11 and I was tning to take a shower. This is the first time I had any chance. Mr. )ODD. This is Saturday. Mr. SHANJKLIN. Right. Mr. )ODD. Yes. Mr. S INKAN. I came on back down because they could not get the police chief. I came on back and then I finally got in touch with the deputy chief and I said I want to talk to Curry. The next morn-ing I got him and told him I wanted to report this directly to him. lie said he had everything taken care of. lie had two armored trucks. Mr. DODD. Were you able to determine who the call came from ? Was it an anonymous call? Mr. SIIANKIAIN. It was an anonymous call. It came into the clerk that operated the switchboard. Probably the same individual, I found out later, called the sheriff's office. Nothing ever happened. Mr. DODD. Something happened. lle was killed. Mr. SJIANKIJN. Never happened on that. I know that evervblody that got the calls listened to Ruby's voice and they said it wasn't Rub*. 1 don't know. Mr. EDVARDS. You said that maybe you did have a conversat ion with 

Mr. liosty and he misunderstood what you told him? Mr. SHANKIAN. I am not saying-I an saying, as I just finished up iwre. with people running in. Mr. BADrLL. In other words, you are saying maybe it did happen and maybe Agent Itosty thought he heard you say to destroy the note when in fact you didn't. Mr. S ANKLEN,. I know I never said destroy the note. Mayle that is tle interpretation he got, I do not know. Mr. BADTIUA. You think now maybe hie thought you said destroy the note? Mr. SKANKL.N.,. I don't think because I do not recall saying-Mr. BA,,LLO. The last round of questioning you said that it is illegal for FBI agents to destroy evidence. Mr. SHANKLIN. Right. Mr. BADILLo. Therefore, if in fact the note was destroyed, whoever destroyed it committed a crime, even though he was an FBI agent V

Right Mr. SANKLEN. Well, that would be up to the U.S. attorney. Mr. BADrLLO. He said you told him to destroy the note and you told him to commit a crime. Mr. SHANKLIN. I did not tell him to destroy the note. Mr. BADiLO. That is what is involved here. That if the note was destroyed, a crime was committed, assuming that it happened as you have suggested Agent Hosty misunderstood, he had no right to destroy the note even if you told him to. Isn't that soI 107 Mr. SIHANKLIN. I would think so. I would think committing a crile, I would think h--I am trying to point out is, I do not know. You are trying to say that one person's lying and this and the other. Idon't know that I talked to him even. I would imagine that I did se him if he was working at that time. You see, this is 12 years now. We kept maybe records for I think 2 or 3 years time in the office. Mr. BADILLO. Now you say it is possible you may have discussed the note? Mr. SHANKLIN. I am trying to say here Mr. BADILO. You say it is possible, right? Mr. SHANKLIN. I am not saying it is possible I discussed the note. No, I don't think so. I am trying to point out in this thing that if the note said anything about it had a threat, I do not think I would have forgotten it. I)o you see what I am talking about? If Mr. Hosty came running in there with innumerable other things or Mr. Howe came in and theV said we have a note here from Oswald that says don't bother my wife Iut talk to me or I will go through proper channels, I do not. know that I would remember that. I would have said, handle it, which in ily opinion would have been to include it in a report and that would have been it. Mr. BADIIJO. There is no conceivable phrase he could have said that miight have led Agent Hosty to think you meant to destroy the note? Mr. SIIANKLIN. I don'tt th ink so. Mr. BADILO. On that issue, there is no language that he could have 

uised?    

> Mr. SHANKLIN. I

don't know of any I wold have. I am just saying I don't know anything along that line. Mr. KiNN-r-,Fss. Mr. Chairman. Mr. EDWARDS. Ye-S. Mr. KINDNE;ss. There is one thing that seems to keep recurring in the questioning of the committee that concerns me. I think we need to ask counsel for the committee for clarification of the record in relation to Mr. Shanklin's testimony and that is there has been reference repeat-edlv to a crime being committed if a note was (est royed. 

Can counsel point out what crime we are talking about and what statute we are talking about or whether we are ally talking about the archives regulations. Mr. PARKR. Yes. Mr. Kr.ID)N..-F. The .cond part of the question i . if it wes never apart of the file, maybe it should have been part of the file, but if it never became a part of the file would the stat ute apply. Mr. BADILLO0. Would the chairman yield before counsel answers the question. You may remember we had ain earlier hearing this year where the question came up as to evidence in the files of the FBI which had nothing to do with the commission of a crime, it had to do with the quest ion of Members of Congress. The testimony at that time by the FBI personnel was that even if the evidence had been properly secured, because there, were wiretaps, or because it was, there was no basis for opening up the file, that it-they vould not destroy that evidence because it would constitute the commission of a crime, unless they followed specified procedures which were outlined in the FBI manual. 108 Once the evidence gets into the file, even if it is improperly secured it is, thoy testified, a crime to destroy it. Mr. ] rxn~ss. That is not an answer to my question. I direct the question to counsel as to what he would advise at this point as to what statute if any statute is involved. Mr. PARK. Mr. Kindness, I think I will have to respond to that in writing. I think each of the hypotheticals you posed may well have a different answer. It would depend on what the note was. Whether it had been serial-ized. Whether or not it was in the file. Mr. KiNDwEss. Yes. Mr. PARKER. We will prepare a memorandum for our members. Mr. KIND SS. I would ask counsel if he has been consulted by any member of this subcommittee for advice as to whether this does con-stitute a crime, the destruction of anything that was not part of the file or was not part of the file, prior to this time. Mr. PARxLM. Is your question whether I have been asked specifically for advice.-Mr. 'liw'mss For advice within respect to preparation for this hear-inr .. PARKER. Yours has been the first question. Mr. KiNDNSS. Thank you. 

Mr. DRxNAN. If I may, Mr. Chairman, I think we should put this in. Mr. Adams says that the concealment and subsequent destruction of the note, the action was wrong. It was in fact a violation of the firm rules that continue to exist in the FBI. rules which require that the fact of Oswald's visit and the text of his note be recorded in the files of the Dallas office and that they be reported to our headquarters later. So, I am not certain of the crime, the point Mr. Kindness makes, but it certainly was in violation of the rules of the FBI. Mr. KI DNESsp I think that is really the point in question, the rules of the FBI and not-rather than the statutory provision. I do think the record should be clarified on that point. Mr. EDWARDS. This concludes the hearing today. [Whereupon, at 3:30 p.m., the subcommittee adjourned, to reconvene at 9:30 a.m., the next day.] [Subsequent to the hearing, the following statement by J. Gordon Shanklin was supplied for the record:] SUPPLEMENTAL ATAT[IEENT Of J. Gozoi SHANKLIN )urlng his testimony before this committee, Mr. Adams was asked about my record of achievement in the Federal Bureau of Investigation. I am proud to have served my country for over 32 years as an agent of the Bureau, and I am proud of my career within that organization. In order that the facts with respect to my service as special agent in charge of the Dallas office be entirely clear to this committee, I ask that the following documents be entered into the record :                                                                                       

> 1. Eight "Outstanding Performance Ratings" which Ireceived while agent In charge of the Dallas office. 2. An official resolution of the Federal-State TAw Enforcement Committee of the State of Texas, dated September 4, 1975 together with aletter forward-ing the resolution to the Attorney General and to the Director Af the F.B.I.; And
> 8. Aletter addressed to Director Hoover from Harding L. LAwrence and Mr. Hoover's reply thereto.
> 4. 1etters from Joe M. Dealey to myself and to the President of the United States, and aletter from Acting Director Gray to Mr. Dealey.

109 

U.S. DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE, FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION, 

OFFIcE OF THE Diuzoroz, 

Washington, D.C., April 2, 19G8. 

Mr. J. GoRmDO SHANLKLIN, 

Federal Bureau of Investigatlon, 

Dallas, Tex. 

l)iAA 81iANKL1N: I am very pleased to advise that your services for tie period April 1, 1967, to March 31, 1968, have merited an Outstanding Rating. There Is enclosed a copy of this rating which you may retain. In addition, and in recognition of your exceptional performance, I have ap-proved an incentive award for you In the amount of $450.00. A check representing this award will be forwarded to you at a later date. I do not want the opportu-nity to pass without letting you know that I sincerely appreciate the superior and dedicated fashion in which you have discharged your many rimponsibilltles. Sincerely, 3. HDoAR HOOVER. FFDERfL .. U ,U OF !:JVFS1IGATION UNI LD S1 ,I[.S !LAJ¢ ',-Nr OF'JUSTICE RU"ORT OF PE RIFOMANCE RATI04G 

,c of l;,l,).e: of J. (;ORI)ON SIIAN'KIN WL,erc A'.si wrd: -------)AI AS ........ . .. qlJ, Jii r~ (,Sac io, L'nliD 

orrc~al -, ion "te ,,I ,,~, ........ SP .CIAI AG _,N '_!N CIIARGE 

Vai-,, lpcr'oI: fron ApI'ii 1 1967 , _ March 31 A0I 8

> Employees

ADJECTIVE RATNG: .... OUTSTANI)ING . .Initiols            

> L,ts g,, E,rc ll'nt. ."i ni jftury. U'a rji$ucilory

Ass;istant to the ) .< ,. : ,.,€'leftPilt I t~ r A .J c yb) *'. -. . .- -. J. .. ;...a,.'...)ircCtor ___ 4/2.,I8 TYPE OF RCORT   

> ]'..;en. rr0-1S.u

82-629--77----

# 5 BEST COY VMADr 110 

J. GORDON SHANKLIN, SPECIAL AGENT IN CHARGE, DALLAs DivsIoN As Special Agent in Oharge of the Dallas Division, Mr. 8hanklin has discharged the varied responsibilities of his position in a definitely superior manner during the past year and is entitled to an Outstanding rating for the period April 1, 

1967, to March 31, 1968. Mr. 8hanklin has demonstrated that he is completely familiar with all matters within the Jurisdiction of the FBI In his territory and has properly distributed his Indomitable energies between investigative and administrative duties with equal effectiveness. Knowledgeable of his responsibilities and selfless in his deter-nination to do a superior Job, Mr. Shanklin has achieved an impressive record of accomplishments. These successes have been Justifiably attributed to the splendid es[)rit de corps developed in his subordinates. ir. 8.hanklin's most capable leadership Is characterized by sincerity, dedica-tion, stability, industry and the ability to get definite results. A succeful career employee who has served the Bureau with distinction for many years, he has discharged his responsibilities in a most creditable fashion which certainly mer-its the rating of Outstanding. FEDERAL BURE.AU OF 1iVESTIGATION UNITED STATES DLrPAR i'ENT OF JUSTICE          

> REPORT OF PERFGRP.,ANCE RATING
> Narne of :r.i)ue: ....

.1. G(RDON SITANKIN 

Whcrc A eivid: .- - DA LEAS    

> IV)., i')1,qn

SIDECIAL AGENT IN CIIA1GE 

APIL 1, 1968  

> ADJECTIVE RATING:

t ..... NA .C 31,1969 

OUTSTANI)ING Employee's 

Assistaiit to    

> -. ~-; .j{,

-c .r 

> r

..... 4/1/69 f:it 4/1,19 

> ;,Gtc

## ./c __ TYPE OF REPORT      

> 1 _ "ri,ofoircr
> [-SI'Itjtr It loa swviie

L3 S;,cil P.kt..d by: 

IX .1f . 1t 

'X .,.:., officiaI Po.,ition Title ;ond C:. ,o-.             

> Ilatinlg irol: froin .. .:C'\' ' , ,.'d !,y: .~~ -. 1..

111 F ED1 RA - F, Cr, F IiV ESTIGATIO UNIT E0 ST A] TE,,' T OF JUSTICE 

RE ORT L. P3R ' ".C F, RA.CE EATING    

> N~.i~e orEr'plG)ce: -

-T. CGO JX)N s:AHNKLIN      

> (Seecro,, UA iW)
> Official Position Title

;id(;a, - SIE('1AIA. AG N' IN CITARGE 

o _. IAI , It3J,1 970 ....      

> ADJECTIVE RATING: -
> Emp aye e'

S0 11," ) i N G ...... Initiall 

Assistant to the Di 'ctor  

> ie

,'4111 Dr uW, .!/ 70       

> *i~ ~*c *. I ~
> Ai
> r ] GO,,;..cyi

(] t',-t ,,, L .] ra,.rie r vic 

J'j cl U.S. DEPARTMENT or JUSTICE, 

FEDERAL BUREAU OF IxVESTIoATION, Ounos OF THE DIRECT0K, 

Wash4ngton, D.C., Aprill 8, 1971. 

Mr. J. GoRDON 81ANKLI, 

Federal Bureau of Investigation, DaUas, Tex. 

DrA BHAXKIX: I am taking this occasion to advise you that you have been afforded an Outstanding performance rating covering your superior services for the period April 1, 1970, to March 81, 197L You may retain the rating which i

enclosed. It Is also a pleasure to inform you of my approval of an incentive award for you in the amount of $4W.00 In recognition of your exemplary achievement and a check representing this award will be sent to you at a later date. You should take pride in your noteworthy performance which has contributed in a large degree to the successful handling of our many responsibilities and I am appreciative. Sincerely, I. Ena.& Hoovia.  

> Whcrc As~i6gcd:

DAI,I,AS M I v4. 4 C, nRating 1',riod: rr(, n -- APIL 1, 10 

# .- -- --z---   

> .. .. .----
> :"" .,ire

4/l/7 ! .... ! t ),: 

Eli.. . ,. Ct • "- .'- - , I (., i,.v. (..d by: . ! r, p..i .,. 112 FEDERAL %AJ OF AVj0F TICATI' UNITED STAli SA I PAt' A , r OF USt1CE REPCRT OF PEF'C R'.'AkCE RATING 

J. GO lr)ON SI!AN KLIN 

ihcre Assignd: . J)A , 1,AS   

> (D I.L

I .. )

SPECIAL. AGJ-'NT IN CIHAIRGE 

AP111, 1 1 1970 .o ... -MARCH 31,_1971 

Ou'rU STANDING - .. le 'l 

A.,:;ist ant to the 

Y) rocu I) l,-t Hfr 

rifle 

# I, . ". or 

4/1/71 

Date 

[-"I' 

__ _4/.1/71 -Valet  

> Af -,

. ur. 'Ton. ,:r,, ice 

TflREE 

# BEST CY VUmk 

-fili g P( rid: 

ADJECTIVE RATING: - -. -

R,! d by: ,:,Ig "'-,4 .('d jy: 

TYPE OF REPORT 

x ~'.-

> L~A.

Official P(,,iion Ti tle,,,1 :.h: -- Initials /•.. .jl 113 

J. GORDAN SHANKLIN, SPECIAL AoENT IN CHARGE, DALLAS DivIatoN He makes a most Impressive personal appearance, always being dressed in proper business attire and this, coupled with a warm, friendly and outgoing personality, serves to make him a most effective representative of the Bureau. In his contacts with law enforcement officials and civic and business leaders, he engenders a feeling of confidence and respect He has served as Special Agent In Charge in such a truly superior fashion during the period April 1, 1970, through March 31, 1971, as to fully deserve this rating of Outstanding. 1I has the primary responsibility for all administrative and investigative matters within the limits of his field office territory. It is incumbent upon him to be thoroughly conversant with all important developments and it is necessary for him to provide on-the-scene supervision of major cases. Of necessity, he must make quick and independent judgments on matters affecting not only the welfare of his field office but the entire Bureau as well. His qualities of leadership are particularly admirable and, by example, he instills in employees working under his supervision a desire to excel and to do the best possible job. He is ever willing to set aside personal considerations in order to insure that the Bureau's interests are protected and advanced. His dedica. tion to the purposes and ideals of the FBI and his enthusiasm for the tasks at hand have earned for him the respect of superiors and subordinates alike. U.S. DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE, FEDERAL BUREAU OF IN VESTIOATION, OrrIcE or THE DIRzTrOR, Washington, D.C., April 4, 1972. Mr. J. GoRDaoN SIKANKLIN, Federal Bureau of Investigation, 

Dallas, Ter. 

MI)AR SHANKLIN: It is with considerable pleasure that I Inform you that your exemplary services for the period April 1, 1971, to March 81, 1972, have merited anl Outstanding performance rating for you. You may retain the original of this rating which is enclosed. In recognition of the superior manner in which you have discharged your important responsibilities this past year, I have approved an incentive award for you of $450.00 and the enclosed check represent, this award, I do not want the occasion to pass without expressing my appreciation for your continued devotion to the work of the Bureau. Sincerely, 

J. EDGAR HOOVER. 114 FEDERAL BUREAU OF I'q'ESTIGATtO; 

UNITED STATES DEPAR2"1:.T OF JUSTICE REPORT OF PERFOR'.'.ANcE RATING 

Name (if l'mplo)c: . ... J.. GORl)ON S!IANKLAN-

Mihcre Af igoll d" I)A L ~jI.,A 

Offici.| 1'osh. iCte ua, (,,k: ...... SI1CIAI, AGENT.IN CIIAROE 

1., iig I'rlNI: fr,-- .. . . L 1, 1971 ADJECTIVE RATING: -

## ,MA,,_ 31,1972 OUTSTANDING -, - -ro's 

.. . ........ %,ln, 2l$ SAto the ... .. .... . ,//, c... .I,'i', I,1 b

1. * --,,) .fC T-ir,:,:- - 4/3/72.    

> hSlrt Tar eL2Le

R.Ptir.g AFp'cd R .: K" 

"TYPE Of- RE1PORT D i €rfw,',a, X A'l,,,,.J ..... . r,._4/     

> LjAl r.rr~.i, :,rc

J. Gouazo SHANKLIN, SPECIAL AGENT IN CHARGE, DALLAS Divislox As Special Agent in Charge he performed In such an exemplary manner during the period from April 1, 1971, through March 31, 1972, as to definitely merit this outstanding rating, He is a most impressive representative of the FBI by virtue of the fact that he possesses avery effective personality and W1 always properly attired in con- 

> fSecijus* iJ~jg~

115 

servative, businesslike dress. He instills a feeling of confidence in all with whom be comes in contact and his proven competence has earned the respect of one and all. lie consistently demonstrates on a daily basis remarkable leadership qualities and is obviously dedicated to the ideals and purposes of the Bureau. Ile engenders in his subordinates the same desire to do the best possible Job at all times. Ile is totally selfless and quickly and cheerfully subordinates personal considerations  

> h.

to those of the organization. As Special Agent in Charge he bears the responsibility for all administrative and investigative matters in his field office territory. He must be thoroughly knowledgeable with respect to all major developments, and he is obliged to pro-vide on-the-scene supervision of vitally important cases. It is necessary for him on numerous occasions to make instant and independent judgments on matters affecting not only his field office but the entire Bureau as well. He has proven himself to be a most valued member of our FBI. U.S. DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE, FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION, OFFICE OF TIE DiawrOn,            

> Washington, D.C., April 17, 1973. Mr. J. GoRoN STIANKLIN,
> Federal Bureau of Investigation, Dallas, Tex.

DEAR GoaoN : Your service during the period from April 1, 11)72, to March 31, 

1073, have been superior and have earned for you an Outstanding performance rating. The original of this rating Is enclosed which you may retain. I have also approved an incentive award for you in the amount of $450.00 In recognition thereof and the enclosed check represents this award. You have continually carried out your assignments in a most dedicated and skillful fashion this past year and I want you to be aware of my appreciation for your fine efforts in behalf of the FBI. Sincerely yours, L. PATRICK GRAY, III,  

> Acting Director.

110 FD1$5(Rcv, 1-Y.;Q1 

FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE REPORT OF PERFORMANCE RATING Namo ot Employce: J._G DON-1ANKIAN Where Assigned: Dallas .. ....   

> liviujlon) (section, Unilo

Official Position Title an,! Grade: Spec-a--A.rnt .in.Cae Gs17_._-_2---

Rating Pcriod: from .. 34-3 __1-72 _ __3-31-73 

ADJECTIVE RATING: .. OUTSTANI)ING Emnployl     

> outown-ting, I. rcelleit, Stlisfactory. Untacisftclory

Rz:tcd by: I. g. 

TYPE OF REPORT    

> ot! ial
> 2;: ". -

(2, 

Mr. J. GORDO, 8HIANKLIX, 

Federal Bureau of Inveatigation, Dallas, Tex. 

> Ii,r-!,.. Cr..

U.S. DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE, FPMDAL BuaRmu or INVESTIOATIoN, Orricz OF TIE Di  s1roit, 

Waahlngton, D.C., April 15, 1974. 

T)1AR GORDON: I am especially pleased to inform you that your services for the period April 1, 1973, to March 31, 1974, have been superior and have merited an 

Rcviewoe by: 

Rating; ,Ap ;rcve _ Acting D ,rector 4-2-73 .. . . . .. •". ,'.': ,€ ' ¢J . .. .. . . I al . . .. . . c' 117 

Outstanding performance rating for you. The original of this rating is enclosed which you may retain. It Is also my pleasure to advise you of my approval of an incentive award in the amnout of $450,00 for you in special recognition of your exemplary efforts In behalf of the Bureau. A check representing this award Is enclosed. The skillful and dedicated fashion in which you have carried out your assignments is certainly appreciated. Sincerely yours, CLARENCE KEI.EY. 

FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION UNITED STATES DEPARTMIENT OF JUSTICE REPORT OF PERFORMANCE RATING 

N,'ame of Employee: J. CORDON_,SIANKLIN. Mlicro Assignied: .... DAI-LAS    

> Wi~u. ion) (Seclion, Unit)

orricial Position Tite ad Grade: -__$PE.CIAL AGENT LN CHARGE, .JS-17 rating Pvrinl: r .om __ 4-1-73 . . . . 3-31-7 4..... .. . .ADJECTIVE RATING: .OUTSTANDING Epfcys 

Iul st liddny, icllent. buli ,Italcd by : . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .SJIA 1,uli.,t¢ rfj ba le     

> -) --'I /'

( Assistant Direcf,;r 4-1-74     

> FL oie
> F+T. -F RE OR T. V x-

"'YPE OF REPORT 

v: . All.Jt.t t      

> K.. i..y
> A0 t-r i toI ,vly
> U'

ro~. r

S r It,. ro. , p. Er  os. :viv   

> LJ ,,vc ;.I

f£c.ic~cd by: 

jt.Iting Appr, vi bdhY   

> S.hr ZtA'c
> It

[J OfAnnfiul LZOJ Annual 

In I RE118 

U.S. DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE, 

FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION, 

OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR, 

Washington, D.C., April 7, 1975. 

Mr. J. GoRDoN SUIANKLIM, 

Federal Bureau of Investigation, Dallas, Tex. 

DEAR GoRDON: For the superb fashion in which you carried out your duties during the past year, you have earned an Outstanding performance rating and the 

original of this rating is enclosed for your retention. Furthermore, I have approved for you a $450.00 incentive award which Is rep. resented by the enclosed check. You have continued to demonstrate a large degree of dedication and enthusiasm in handling your assignment thus being of considerable benefit to our organization and I am most appreciative. Sincerely yours, CLARENCIE M. KELLY. 

FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION 

UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE REPORT OF PERFORMANCE RATING 

Nrne of L',lto),ve: . G.ORDON_SHANKI,!N 

Where Assigiicd: _DALLAS-................... 

, I,, I IuJ i.s cIon, Uit, )

orncial Iositiu, TitLic and (;r.ac: -SPFCJAL AGELNT.IN CIIABGE, GS-.17... Hating PcriWd: rim --APRIL 1, 1974. _.MARCH 31,. 1975 ....   

> ADJECTIVE RATING:

.OUTSTANJ)NG ,. ... Eh-,olye £         

> Outstantni, k" icellecJ{ s'u: ssuctory, '~ ls ir R-d4,1 Iky:

S ;1, 1 ,- 4 r6      

> Rcvie lcd Ly: Mi.ting .\pirk-%c h

9.,: life:.      

> :-,,, tr
> Talc Date
> "r 'e

Assistat 

.o ° I."t 0c to .4/j/75      

> Vale '.1.5'i~~
> TYPE OF REPORT
> 1IX (., .i

f_. ^ ",'i,, 

C .rvi.,:,.i r, V. F,' a

> TIUX

119        

> ONFICUL RESOLUTION Or THE TEXAS FzDzEAL-STATE LAW EmmOaozXrT
> CoMunrr

Whereas J. Gordon Shanklin, a native of Elkton, Kentucky, having received a Bachelor of Arts and a Juris Doctor degrees from Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee, and Whereas J. Gordon Shanklin did engage in the private practice of law in Nashville, Tennessee, and Whereas J. Gordon Shanklin did enter duty as a special agent of the Federal Bureau of Investigation in May, 1943, and Whereas J. Gordon Shanklin has continued to serve his country faithfully in the Federal Bureau of Investigation in the following assignments: 

1. As Agent in West Virginia and New York City; 2. As Supervisor assigned to the Federal Bureau of Investigation Head-quarters in Washington, D.C. from 1947 until 1951; 3. As Assistant Special Agent in Charge of the Mobile, Alabama office from September, 1951 until November, 1953; 4. As Special Agent in Charge of the Mobile, Alabama office beginning in November, 1953; 5. As Special Agent in Charge of the Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania office; 

6. As Inspector at the Federal Bureau of Investigation Headquarters In Washington, D.C. in 1056; 7. As Agent In Charge of the El Paso Division during 1958; 8. As Agent in Charge of the Honolulu, Hawaii Division from January, 1959 until April, 1963; and 9. As Agent in Charge of the Dallas, Texas, office from April, 1963 until July, 1975, and Whereas J. Gordon Shanklin during the entire period of time in service to his country has wvell and faithfully performed his responsibilities above and beyond the call of duty, and Whereas J. Gordon Shanklin has served as a devoted and participating mem-ber of the Federal-State Law Enforcement Committee: Be it resolved, That the Federal-State Law Enforcement Committee hereby expresses its ap-preciation and gratitude to J. Gordon Shanklin for service to his country and to his fellow Americans; and further, be it resolved, That the Committee transmit a copy of this resolution to Mr. Shanklin, Mr. Edward H. Levi, Attorney General of the United States, Mr. Clarence Kelley, Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, and that a copy of the resolution be made a permanent part of the minutes of this Committee. Tim ArroRNEy GENERAL Or TEXAS, Austin, Tex., Ootober 8, 1975. lIe J. Gordon Shanklin: Commendation resolution from Texas Federal-State Law Enforcement Committee upon retirement from FBI service. Hon. EDWARD H. LrvI, 

Attorney General of the United states, Department of Justicc, Washington, D.C. 

Hon. CLARENiCE KELLEY, 

Director, Federal Bureau of Invelstigation, Washington, D.C. 

GENTt mz: Mr. J. Gordon Shanklin, former FBI Agent in Charge, Dallas, Texas, has recently retired from active duty after thirty-two years service to his country. Mr. Shanklin has been an active member of our Texas Federal-State Law Enforcement Committee. Pursuant to unanimous vote of the Committee, the enclosed commendation resolution was presented to Mr. Shanklin at the Com-mittee's September 4, 1975 meeting. Further, pursuant to said vote, the reso-lution is herewith forwarded to you for your information and files. We have been pleased to have Agent Shanklin in our organization and at work for our government and citizens of this country. Very truly yours, JOHIr W. ODAM, 

Secretary, Federal-State Law Enforcement Comm4ttee. 120 

JANUARY 24, 1972. lion. IIARDIN0 L. LAWRENCE, Chairman of the Board and Chief Executive Officer, Braniff International Ex-

change Park,Dallas, Tea. 

Dmn MR. LAWRENmcE: Thank you for the very kind remarks In your letter of January 17th concerning the work of Mr. Shanklin and my associates in our Dallas Office following the hijacking of one of your aircraft. I am pleased by the high regard you have expressed for their efforts and they share my apprecia-tion for your thoughtfulness in writing. Sincerely yours, J. EDoAa HOOVER. JANUARY 17, 1972. Mr. J. EDGAR HOOVER, 

Director, Federal Bureau of Investigation, Department of Justice, Washing-

ton, D.C. 

Dr.Aa MR. HoovzR: Yesterday a 22 year old man commandeered the B-727-200 aircraft we were operating as Braniff Flight 88 while it was enroute from Houston to Dallas. Approximately seven hours later the pirate was in the custody of your representatives here in Dallas. Much of the credit for the timely, safe and humane manner in which this Incident was terminated goes to Mr. J. Gordofi Shanklin, Special Agent in Charge. He and members of his staff worked in close and continuous contact with my organization from the outset and were uniformly professional in the discharge of their responsibilities. It Is a distinct pleasure to associate with men of Mr. Shanklin's caliber and I

request that you advise him and he in turn his subordinates of my deep and sincere appreciation of their most effective work. Very sincerely, HARDINo L. LAWRENCE. Tui DALLAS MORMNO NEws, 

December 26, 1972.    

> Mr. J. GORDON SHANKLIN,

Agent In Charge, Federal Bureau of Investigation, Dallas, Tex. 

DEAR GOaDOwq: For all of us Joe Dealeys I say once more how very grateful we are for your inspired leadership last week. You performed mnsrnflicently under trying circumstances both professional and personal. You will be long remembered in our thanks and prayers for effecting Mandy's release as well as apprehending the kidnappers and recovering the ransom money. Many, many thanks. Enclosed with this brief and restated word of sincere appreciation is a blind copy of a letter going forward today that probably falls far short of expressing all that I'd like to say about a man I much admire. You and those who asmisted you so admirably helped make our Christmas atruly memorable one and we, the families, join altogether In hoping that you and yours enjoyed a blessed day filled with thanksgiving and all the good things you have earned and deserve. Kindest personal regards. Cordially, Joa M. Dr...mr, President. 

THE DALLAs MoRniNo Naws, 

DaUas, Tex., December 6, 1972. 

ion. RICHARD NIxoN, 

President of the United States of America, 

Washington, D.O. 

DrA Ma. PRSMIENT: After some sixty hours of terrifying suspense, it was finally over. Tbe horrible nightmare of Mandy Dealey's kidnapping was ended. She was home--unmolested and unharmed-with her husband and a few friends who had kept the long vigil beginning with her disappearance two and a half days earlier. Now the poUce work would start In earnest, leading, hopefully, to the appre-hension of those Involved and the recovery of the ransom paid to Secure Mandy's release. T. Gordon Shanklin, Agent In Charge of the Federal Bureau of Investiga-121 

tion at Dallas, the man who had personally captained the entire operation, was centered in a knot of officers In a corner of the room that had served as acommand post. This man, haggard from lack of sleep, suffering from intestinal flu, dropped his head and offered a prayer, saying simply: "I thank God for Mandy's safe return and for His supreme guidance throughout this terrible experience." With that he turned away and strode into the action that ended successfully within the next five hours. These details I furnish here as my high personal commendation of a man who gave of himself so unselfishly and in the doing gave such a great measure of confidence and hope for those directly involved. He Is a tremendous credit to the organization he serves, and I am proud that as a citizen of these United States I share a comradeship with him. Also, these words of sincere gratitude and appreciation I address to you as President, the highest officer In our land, that you may make your own personal evaluation of what I consider a truly great and competent individual and man. With warmest personal regards, I am, Cordially yours, JOE M. DEALEY. President.          

> JANUARY 3, 1973.
> Mr. JOE M. DEALEY,
> Presiden t, the Dallas Morning News, Dallas, Tcx.

DEAR Mh. DXALEY: Thank you so very much for your courtesy in sending to me a copy of your December 26th letter to the President. As Acting Director of the FBI, I know of the magnificent dedication to duty of men like Special Agent in Charge J. Gordon Shanklin, and it is especially gratifying to know of his actions during the recent traumatic episode involving your daughter-in-law. I want you to know that your expression of support and confidence in SAC Shanklin is deeply appreciated. With my best wishes and warm respect. Sincerely, PAT GRY. FBI OVERSIGHT Circumstances Surrounding Destruction of the Lee Harvey Oswald Note    

> FRIDAY, DECEMBER 12, 1975

House OF REPRESENTATIVE, ,SUw'OMM ITTEE ON CIVIL AND (sONSTITUTIONAL. Ri(;IITS OF TIlE COMMITTEE ON TIE JUDICIARY, 

Wa8ington, D.C. 

The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 9:40 a.m., in room 

2237, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Don Edwards [chairman of the subcommittee] presiding. Present: 'Repre.sentati -es Edwards, Seiberling, Drinan, Dodd, Butler. and KindInes. Also present: Alan A. Parker, counsel; Catherine LeRoy and Thimas 1. B]en, assistant counsel; and Kenneth N. Klee, associate counsel. Mr. E6WARDS. The subcommittee will come to order. Our first witness today is James P. llosty, special agent, Federal Bureau of Investigation, who, we understand, between November 1and November 9, 1963, was the recipient of the letter written by Lee Harvey Oswald and delivered to Mrs. Fenner at the field office of the Fil in I)allas. We will commence, as yesterday, with questions by counsel, Mr. Parker. Vill you introduce the people with you, please, Mr. lfosty? Mir. BMct.-. .Iohn M. lrav. ,oiniisel, of Washington, D.C. Mr. Lrjxy. And Francis X. Lilly, of Washington, D.C. Mr. K.,DnEss. Mr. Chairman?' Mr. EDWARDS. Yes, Mr. Kindness' Mr. Kit.,-s-S. May I submit this resolution regarding media cover-

age. television and radio, to the subcommittee for its acceptance? Mr. EDwAARD,. Without objection, the resolution offered by Mr. Kind-nem regarding TV and radio is accepted. Mr. llostv, will you stand so that we can give the oath? Mr. Ilosrv. Yes, sir. Mr. EDwAR R. )o you solemnly swear to tell the truth, the whole truth. and nothing bnt. the truth, so help you Go4? Mr. lIoSry. I do. Mr. EDWARMS. Mr. Parker, would you begin. 

> (123)

124 TESTIMONY OF JAMES P. HOSTY, JR., SPECIAL AGENT, FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION, ACCOMPANIED BY JOHN M. BRAY, COUNSEL, WASHINGTON, D.C. Mr. PARK. Mr. Hosty, would you please state your full name and address for the record? Mr. HOSTY. James Patrick Hosty, Jr., that's H-o-s-t-y. I live in Westwood, Kans. Mr. PARKER. When did you first become an FBI agent? Mr. HosiT. On January 21,1952. Mr. PARKER. When were you assigned to the Dallas Field Office? Mr. HosTY. In the early part of December 1953. Mr. PARKER. And where are you presently assigned? Mr. HosTy. I am presently assigned to the Kansas City Office of the FBI. Mr. PARKER. What were your duties as a special agent in the Dallas Field Office? Mr. HosTy. I was assigned to what we call a security suuad. whieh handles matters in the domestic intelligence field. Mr. PARKER. When and how did Lee Harvey Oswald first come to your attention? Mr. IiosTy. Ile first came to my attention in approximately June 1962, when I saw a newspaper article concerning his return to the United States from the Soviet Union with his Russian-born wife and child. Mr. PARKER. Did you have a case at that time on Lee Harvey Oswald? Mr. HosTy. No, sir; I did not. Mr. PARKER. Did you at that point open a case on Lee Harvey Oswald? Mr. HosTy. No, sir; I did not. Mr. PARKER. Did the Bureau open a case on Lee Harvey Oswald? Mr. IIosTy. Yes, sir; they did. Mr. PARKER. Was there a previous case opened on Lee Harvey Oswald?        

> Mr. HosTY. Idon't believe so. Mr. PARKER.

The first case that would have been opened was sub-sequent to his return from Russia with his wife and child? Mar. Iosry. I believe so. Mr. PARKER. Was that case assigned to you? Mr. H1OSTY. No, sir. It was not. Mr. PARKER. Who was it first assigned to? Mr. HosTy. Mr. John Fain, that's F-a-i-n. Mr. PARKER. Was Mr. Fain in the Dallas Field Office? Mr. HosTy. No, sir. He was in the Fort Worth Resident Agency, which is a branch of the Dallas Office. Mr. PARKER. Did you also have a separate file on Marina Oswald? Mr. HosTy. I did not, sir. No; not at that time. Mr. PARKER. Did the Federal Bureau of Investigation have a sep-arate file? Mr. HosTy. At a later date, yes, sir. Mr. PARKER. And who had that file besides you ?Mr. HosTy. It was first assigned to Mr. John Fain. Mr. PRK. Could you define the security case for me, pleaseI 125 Mr. HosTY. The security case on Lee Oswald was a case concerning his possible recruitment by the -Soviet Union by the KGB, and we were looking into the possibility of his working for them. Mr. PARKER. And why the file on Marina OswaldI Mr. HOSTY. Because of the fact that she was newly arrived from the Soviet Union. It is a policy to open selective cases on people that fall within certain ate and educational levels to determine if they also have been sent over here, have -been recruited and sent over here. Mr. PARKER. Approximately when did the file on Lee Harvey Os-wald first come to your attention or have been assigned to you? Mr. HosaT. It was first assigned to me on March 31, 1963, when Ireopened a closed case on Lee Oswald. Mr. PARKER. And who assigned that case to you? Mr. IosTy. Mr. Kenneth Howe, the supervisor, actually assigned it to me. Mr. PARKER. And when did the file on Marina Oswald, the case on Marina Oswald first become assigned to you? Mr. HOSTY. That case was assigned to me in October of 1962, when Mr. John Fain retired. There was what we call a pending inactive case on Marina Oswald and when he retired, that was reassigned to me. Mr. PARKER. Did you ever interview Lee Harvey Osiwald prior to the assassination of President John Kennedy? Mr. Hosary. No, sir. I did not. Mr. PARKER. And did you ever interview Marina Oswald prior to the assassination? Mr. IIosw'. I talked to her briefly on November 1, 1963. Mr. PARKER. And did you talk to her on an other occasions? Mr. HosT. I saw her and nodded to her, but did not talk to her on the 5th of November, 1963. Mr. PARKER. Did yoti eir interview Mrs. Paine prior to the assassination?    

> Mr. ITosTY. I

did on November 1 and November 5, 1963. Mr. PARKER. Was the occasion of your seeing Mrs. Oswald the same as the occasion of your seeing Mrs. Paine? Mr. JIOSTY. That is correct. Mr. PARKYR. Would you describe those for me, please? ,1r. losrY. Yes. I was, on November 1, attempting to locate the wliereabouts of Lee Oswald. We had received information that his wife was living with Mrs. Paine in Irving, Tex., but that he was not there. ,A after first checking Mrs. Paine to see if she was a reliable person, I then went to her house and asked her for the whereabouts of Lee Oswald. At this timn, Marina Oswald came into the room, and Italked to her th rough Mrs. Paine. Now. Irs. Oswa d could not speak Enelish, or not a sutfficient amount of English, and I had to talk to Mrs. Oswald through Mrs. Paine as interpreter. Mr. PARKER. Were you directed to interview Lee Harvey Oswald or Marina at any time? Mr. loTqry. No. sir. I was not directed to interview Lee Oswald at any time. I had a lead to interview Marina Oswald. We were attempt-ing. to interview her. Yes, sir. Mr. PARKER. Would you describe for me the investigation that you did conduct concerning Lee Harvey Oswald or Mirina prior to Novem-ber 22,1963? 

> A2-029-77-9

126 Mr. HosTy. The first time I did any investigation on Lee Oswald was a lead request from Mr. John Fain in approximately August of 

1962, following his first interview with Lee Oswald. He requested that I check the Immigration and Naturalization Service files on both Lee Oswald and on Marina Oswald over in Dallas. I did that and prepared a memorandum as to the information I had obtained and furnished that information to him. At that time I also made a recommendation that a case be opened on Marina Oswald for future interview. Mr. PARicR. And you mentioned a short time ago that the Lee Harvey Oswald case was reopened? Mr. HosTy. Right. And then-all right. Following this request to interview Marina Oswald, a decision was made to let her wait approxi-mately 6 months or longer, until she had a chance to familiarize herself with the English language and American habits and customs. So, it was decided that she would be interviewed sometime in the latter part of February or sometime in March. It was in this capacity that this case was reassigned to me on Marina Oswald. In March I went to Fort Worth, Tex., to try to locate the Oswalds, which was their last known address, determined they had move to Dallas, went back to Dallas, and went to their address in Dallas and determined from the landlady that she had just expelled the Oswalds from her apartment building because they'd been having domestic quarrels; and she told me where they had-moved to, just down the street. Now, because of the fact that we're told not to interview these forei immigrants under any but tranquil conditions, not when they're under a stress or a strain, I notified the FBI Headquarters that I'd located them, and because of the difficulty, that the interview would be delayed. And then, at this time, I had a chance to review the closed file on Lee Oswald, and noticed that during the time it had been closed, in-formation had come to our attention indicating that he was either on the mailing list or was in contact with the Communist. Party "Daily Worker." I felt that, this was contrary to the statements that he'd made in August of 1962, when the case was closed on him, so recommended on this basis that it 1e reopened to reexamine his position. I then, later in May, went out to recheck to see if the Oswald domes-tic difficulties had subsided, at which time I determined that they had left the Dallas area for a place unknown. Later we were able to dater-mine-our New Orleans Office was able to determine that they were in New Orleans, at which time I furnished the background material oui the Oswalds to the New Orleans Office and furnished the proper material to them, and the case was transferred to their jurisdiction. And then it became completed as far as the Dallas Office was con-

> COTenedl.

Now, in approximately October of 1963. the New Orleans Office notified us that Oswald had disappeared and his wife had disappeared from N'ew Orleans. and that Marina Oswald had left with a woman sieaking Russian who was driving a station wagon with Texas license plntes, and they did not know wherl Lee Oswald was. That's what I was doing on Novemlbr 1, trying to locate tee Oswald oil the basis of this lead. that we finally determined the woman was MNrs. Paine. who had picked up Marina Oswald, and we were trying to determine from her where Lee Oswald was. 127 Mr. PARz. Would you recountyour conversations or the substance of your conversations with Mrs. Paine then on the 1st and 5th of November? Mr. HosT. Yes. I went to her house and identified myself as aSpecial Agent of the FBI. I was alone. I was the only agent there, and told her what I was interested in. She was very friendly, and cordial, and cooperative. She told mo that Mrs. Oswald and their two children were living with her. They were temporarily separated from Lee Oswald, and that he visited them on weekends, and that lie came out most weekends to visit, and that he was working in Dallas in the Texas Schoolbook Depository. She did not know where he lived, other than he lived in a rooming house somewhere in the Oak Cliff section of Dallas. During this con-versation Mrs. Oswald came into the room. She'd apparently been napping or beIen somewhere else in the house, and Mrs. Paine then advised her in Russian who 1 was. I could see she was upset and Iassured her not to be worried, that the FBI wasn't there to harm her, we were there to help her, this was not a police state, we were not the Gestapo and reassured her. We just had general conversations along those lines, sort of a conversation to reassure her. I intended to inter-view her, but I didn't have all the proper material at this time. So, Iindicated to her I might be back to see her again at a later date to talk to her in detail. Mrs. Paine said she would try to find out where Lee Oswald was living and let me know. It was for this purpose on Novembxer 5, while I was en route from Dallas to Fort Worth, the Paines' residence is just a short distance from one of the main highways between Dallas and Fort Worth, I just deviated slightly from my path, drove over to the Paine residence. I had another agent with me at the time. We drove up into the driveway of the Paine residence. I went up to the door and just briefly asked Mrs. Paine--this was on November 5--if she had any further information on Oswald; and at this time .1 saw Marina in the background. She was in the living room and I could see her briefly. The only-Mrs. Paine did not have the address of Lee Oswald, but she did furnish the additional information that Lee Oswald had identified himself to her as a Trotskyite Marxist. That was the only other pertinent information. Mr. PARKI'R. Do I understand correctly, then. Mr. Hosty. that if you had not had information that lee Harvey Oswald had had some contact with the "Daily Worker" that the Ie Harvey Oswald file would have remained closed prior to November? Mr. Ho-r. Probably. Yes, sir. Mr. PARIKE. Who was present at the interviews that you had with Marina OswaldV Mr. Ho, r. The first interview-it was Mrs. Paine and myself. as well as Marina Oswald: and the second time, when I talked to Mrs. Paine and saw Marina briefly, there was another agent named Gary Wilson who was with me. Mr. PARXFR. What was your caseload approximately during Octo-ber, November of 1963? Mr. Horn. It would vary between 40 to 50 cases. 128 Mr. PARKER. Was Lee Harvey Oswald or the Marina Oswald case active compared to the other cases assigned to you I

Mr. HosTY. Yes sir, They were both pending cases. Yes, sir. Mr. PARKFR. ROW many pre-November 22 reports or memos did you make to the Lee Harvey Oswald file ?Mr. HosT'. I beg your pardon, sirI Mr. PARKER. How many pre-November 22 reports or memos did you make to the Lee Harvey Oswald file? Mr. HosTy. I'll try to recount them to the best of my recollection. The first one would have been a memo concerning my contact with the Immigration Service. It would have been in August of 1962. The next communication would have been a communication I sent to FBI Headquarters at the end of March 1963, in which I reopened the Lee Oswald case and told them of his location and domestic dif-ficulties, et cetera. The next communication was a memo to the SAC reporting that they were no longer residing in the Dallas area and had moved to an unknown address. The next communication would have been to the New Orleans Office in approximately June of 1963, advising the" New Orleans Office 

of the background of Lee Oswald since they had located him in their division. Some time in the month of July, I wrote a full report setting forth all of this information in report form to the New Orleans Office, at which time we transferred the case formally to New Orleans. Then, the next communication would not have been until Novem-ber 4, in which I reported my contact with Mrs. Paine on the previous Friday. I contacted her late on Friday and was not able to get out acommunication until Monday morning, November 4, advising head-quarters in New Orleans that I had located Oswald. That was the last communication prior to November 22. Mr. PARKr.R. How many pre-November 22 reports or memos did you make to the Marina Oswald file? Mr. Hosa. I would have made the memo on the. Immigration contact; the letter on November--excuse me--March 31, 1963, would have actually been a joint letter; it would have been to both files; and also the one to New Orleans in June of 1963; and the memorandum in May of 1963 would have been a joint momo to both files. Mr. PARKIPR. Prior to November 22, 1963, with respect to the Lee Harvey Oswald and Marina Oswald files, what was the frequency of your contact with either Mr. Howe or Mr. Shanklin? Mr. HosTy. I would see Mr. Shanklin very infrequently, an agent in charge, he was concerned with the overall operation of the Office. However, Mr. Howe, I would see on a daily basis, but not in any particular conversations on that case, though, on the Oswalds. Mr. PARKER. I'm talking about these two cases. Mr. Honrr. The only time I remember talking to Mr. Howe prior to November 22. 1963. on this case was when I reopened the Le Harvey Oswald case. I brought it to his attention and recommended I wanted it reopened, and lie agreed with it. That was my only time I talked to him about it. Mr. PARKER. Mr. Hosty, was a note from Lee Harvey Oswald delivered to you in the Dallas Field Office? 129 Mr. Ho'r'. Yes, sir. Mr. PARKER. When did that occurI Mr. Horn. It would have been, I believe, sometime after Novem-ber the fifth; probably November the sixth, seventh, or eighth. It could conceivably have been delivered on the fourth or fifth; but probably the sixth, seventh, or eighth of November. Mr. PARKERa. What is your reference point for those dates? Mr. HosTY. Well, my reference point would be that my interview with Marina Oswald on November 1 was what precipitated the note, and he couldn't have possibly come to the office before Monday, Novem-ber the fourth, at the earliest; and the reason I say it had to be before the eighth is because of a letter that he wrote to the Soviet Union in which he-the Soviet Union Embassy in Washington, D.C.-in which he referred to this protest. Mr. DRINAN. Would you yield, Counsel? Mr. PARKER. Yes, sir. Mr. DRINANq. Thank you for yielding. I want to have this question before we develop something. You wrote in November 5 and yet you saw Mrs. Oswald, you wrote the note, the memo to headquarters on November 4, and yet you saw her again on November 5? Mr. Horn. Yes. sir. Mr. DRINAN. Well, the information that you required from Mrs. Oswald and from Mrs. Paine on November 5, was that ever trans-mitted to the FBI Mr. Hoerw. Yes, it was, after November 22. 1 hadn't officially and formally written it up as of November 22. Mr. DwlNAW. But why did you write the memo on November 4 when you knew that you were going to have another interview with both of them the next day ?Mr. HosTy. I didn't know specifically I was going to go back that next day. But the reason I sent the communication to headquarters in New Orleans was primarily to notify then we had located Lee Oswald. That was the primary purpose of that coninunication. You see, he was missing. We didn't know where he was, and I was notifying New Orleans we had now located him, and for the New Orleans Office to furnish me with the material they had and notify headquarters we had located him. Mr. DRINAN. Well, on the date that he apparently came with the note, you say the sixth, seventh, and eighth, are those dates much more prob ble than dates prior to November 5? Mr. Howry. I think so because I think there is some indication that my second visit out there agitated him further. and I think this is based upon what Mrs. Paine and Marina had said that further agi-tated h im. Mr. DINAN. Thank you. Thank you for yielding. Mr. PARKF.Rl Mr. Hosty, after that note was delivered when did you first see it ?Mr. Hos'y. Some time that afternoon when I returned to the office. Mr. PAax . And what did it say? Mr. oesT. Well. it was in an envelope, a business-type envelope, aIlank envelope, and it was on plain bond paper. I don't-I do not recall a signature on it. I belkve it was handwritten. Tt was quite short, no more than two paragraphs in length; and the first part of it stated tmt 130 I had been interviewing his wife without his permission and I should not do this; he was upset about this. And the second part at the end he said that if I did not stop talking to his wife, he would take action against the FBI. Mr. PARKER When you first saw the note, was it contained within the envelope or ust attached to it ?Mr. Hosr. It was in the envelope; folded and within the envelope. Mr. PARK. Was there anything else attached to it? Mr. HoSTy. No, sir. Mr. PARERO. Was there a routing slip? Mr. Hosrx. No, sir. Mr. PARxi. And where did you first see the en velope? Mr. Hos8n. It was handed to me by Mrs. Nanny Lee Fenner. Mr. PARER. At her desk in the reception room? Mr. Hoary. At the reception desk. Right. Mr. PARKER. And was the note folded inside the envelope I

Mr. Hoerr. I believe it was folded three ways and put inside the envelope. Mr. PARER. Can you describe to me how it was folded? Mr. Hosr. It was folded like any communication would be folded. Folded like this three ways; folded over and put into the envelope. Mr. PAtRE. What did you do with the note at that time ?Mr. Ho@'r. I read it. It didn't appear to be of any serious import. It appeared to be an innocuous type of complaint which, I might add, Iget many of. This is not unusual. I looked at it. It didn't seem to have any need for any action at that time, so I put it in my workbox. Mr. Pmzxt. Can you tell me before November 22, 1963, of your knowledge, who else would have seen that note and under what circumstancesI Mr. Hoor. To my knowledge, I couldn't say that anybody had seen it other than myself. Mr. PmAKE. And did you know at that point in time whether Mrs. Fenner had seen it or not? Mr. Hoa-r. She didn't indicate that she had. Mr. PARxw. What did you do on November 22, 1968, prior to the assassination ? What were you doing that day ?

Mr. Hon'. All right, fll start with the time of the--do you want me to start with the morning ?

M r. PARKEiR. Yes, please. Mr. HoarT. The first thing in the morning we had a conference of all agents. It was a regular conference, which Mr. Shanklin had every other Friday. Among the things he brought tip was the fact that the President was coming to town. Although the FBI had no responsibil-ity whatsoever for safeguarding the President, he advised us again, as he previously advised us, that if we had any information indicating any possibility of violence against President Kennedy, we should immediately report it to the Secret Service. I then left and joined an Army Intelligence officer and an agent from the Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms Division, in which we were discussing a case of mutual interest to our three agencies. This con-ferenee took up the rest of the morning, and we then went--T then went to lunch and was having lunch when a waitress came and told me that the President--excuse me, I then went and watched the President 131 go by on Main Street. I was present when he passed by, and then Iwent to lunch. I was having lunch when the waitress came and told me the President had just been shot. I then proceeded immediately to the office. I knew that although we had no jurisdiction over this matter, that we would probably be called to assist the Secret Service, so I headed back to the office. As I came up to the office I met one of the supervisors, who told me to go and get a radio car and get out in the street, call in and stand by for further orders. I took the radio car and headed in the general vicinity of the Trade-mart, where the luncheon was to be, where I knew many of the police officers were. I got out briefly at the Trademart to see if anybody was around who I could find, and nobody was there. They had all moved out. Then got back in the radio car and received a call from headquar-ters. They wanted four cars to proceed immediately to Parkland Hos-pital, where President Kennedy and Governor Connally had been taken. I was close by and responded. I was one of those cars to go there. I drove to the hospital an called in that I had arrived at the hospital and was asking for further instructions. At this time, Mr. Kenneth Howe got on the radio. He recognized my voice and told me to immedi-ately return to the Dallas office, which I Aid. I got back to-the office. Mr. Howe told me that since I was the one that had the most knowledge of rightwing extremists--I might add that I spent approximately two-thirds of my time investigating right-wing extremists, such as Ku Klux Klan, and organizations of that type. He said since I have the most knowledge in the office of these type people that I was to immediately start reviewing the files for suspects in the assassination. Well, I was doing this, and I was talking to people at the police in-lelligence unit when word came through that the police had Lee Oswald in custody. I immediately recognized him as one of my cases. I previously heard that the shots had come from the Texas Schoolbook I)epository and, of course, I knew that lie was employed there, so Irealized that this was very pertinent and attempted to locate the Iee Oqwald file. It was out of its regular file jacket and, after some minutes of looking around, one of the supervisors located the file in the chief clerk's office. Some new mail had just arrived from FBI headquarters, and the file was taken out to put this mail with it. I then took the file immediately to Mr. Shanklin's office and advised 

tim that we lad a case on Lee Oswald. He was in on the phone to FBI headquarters, and I sat at his side while he called and furnished him the information. I went through the file to get the various information concerning Lee Oswald from the file and give it to him so that he could relay it to headquarters. It was during this period that somebody at FBI headquarters-I don't know who-instructed Mr. Shanklin to send me and another agent immediately to the Dallas Police Department to furnish them in. formation on Oswald that we had and to sit in on the interview of Oswald at the police station. I then proceeded to the police station at which time, upon entering the building, I met Lieutenant Revill, ad a short, conversation with Lieutenant Revill concerning some of the background on Oswald. I132 then proceeded-Lieutenant Revill then took me to the third floor, where Captain Fritz had his office, and I then went in-after a short delay, I wvent in and sat in on the interview of Lee Oswald. According to my records, it shows that I entered the interview at exactly 3:15 p.m., and it lasted exactly until 4:05 p.m. This would be central time on November 22, 1963. The outset of my entering the room with another agent, Agent James Bookhout; when I entered Iidentified myself immediately as special agent of the FBI, I identified myself by name. Lee Oswald immediately reacted to me and said some-thing to the effect: "Oh, you're the one who's been interviewing my wife. I've heard about you." He got upset, and it took a little while to get him calmed down. We then proceeded to sit in on the interview. Now, Captain Fritz asked most of the questions. It was his prisoner and he conducted most of the questions. I sat there and furnished him information that he could ask Oswald and pointed out things to him to help him along in the interview, but primarily, it was his interview with myself assist-ing. When the--Mr. PARKER. Who else was present With you in that roomI Mr. Hos-rr. There was Captain Fritz, of course: two of Captain Fritz' detectives, whose names I can't recall; Special Agent James Bookhout and myself. Mr. PARKER. And Lee Harvey Oswald I

Mr. Hosr. And Lee Harvey'Oswald, of course. Mr. PARKER. There was nobody else in the room? Mr. HIos y. No, not in the inner office. .Mr. PARKER. Was there a stenographer in the room? Mr. losTry. No, sir. Mr. PARKER. Was there a recording device of any kind? Mr. Ho'sTy. Not to my knowledge. Mr. PARKER. Was anybody making notes in the room? Mr. Hosn. I was. Mr. PARKER. You were the only person making notes? Mr. Hosn'. To the best of my Knowledge. Mr. PARKER. Continue please. Mr. HosTY. All right. At 4:05 p.m., one of Captain Fritz' detectives came into the room and said that they were ready for the lineup. For this reason the interview was cut short and Oswald was taken out for the first of many lineups. I then came out and made a brief telephone call end had a conversation with some of the agents to furnish me in-structions from headquarters. I looked at some of the evidence that they had. including the address book with my name in it, I learned of my name being in the address book at this time. I had a conversation with Forrest Sorrells, of the U.S. Secret Serv-ice, and some of his agents that were with him, and then shortly there-after returned to the FBI office in Dallas, where I met Mr. Howe and Mr. Shanklin. Mr. PARXK.R. Did you dictate an official memorandum of that day's activities? Mr. HoPrY. Of the interview, yes. sir, I did. Mr. IPARKrF-. And that was placed into the file? Mr. Hosr. Yes, sir. Mr. PARicR. Did that conclude your activities on November 22? 133 Mr. HosTy. Well, sir, it was this time that I returned to the office that I was confronted by Mr. Shanklin and Mr. Howe with the note which I had left in my work box from approximately November 6, 7, or 8. Mir. PARKER. Where did that take place? Mr. HOsTY. Where or when? Mr. PARKER. Where? Mr. HosTY. In Mr. Shanklin's office. Mr. PARKER. And you were in Mr. Shanklin's office when both Mr. Howe and Mr. Shanklin discussed with you the note? Mr. HosTY. Yes, sir. Mr. PARKER. Would you describe that for me? Mr. HosTY. Well, MAr. Shanklin was quite agitated and upset about it, and lie asked me about it. I explained to him the circumstances of my getting it, the circumstances of my visit to Mrs. Paine and talk-ing to Marina. He then directed me to put it in writing, prepare amemorandum for him, setting forth allthe details, circumstances, which I then did-dictated a memorandum in duplicate. Mr. PARKER. You said he; who actually is that? Mr. HosTy. I'm sorry, Mr. Shanklin. Mr. PARKER. Mr. Shanklin, right. Mr. HosTy. Directed me to prepare a memorandum, setting forth the details, the circumstances surrounding my reception of the note. I then prepared this memorandum which ran at least two pages, pos-sibly three or four par, setting forth my explanations. It was in dupli-cate. I furnished both copies of the memorandum to Mr. Shanklin. Mr. PARKER. Was that memorandum dictated? Mr. HosTY. Yes, sir. It was dictated to, I believe, Martha Connally ,was the stenographer. Mr. PARKER. And then what did you do with the memorandum? Mr. HOsTY. I gave it to Mr. Shanklin. Mr. PARKER. On the same day? Mr. Hosry. On the same day. Mr. PARKER. All right. What were your activities on November 23, 

1963? Mr. HOSTY. We first had a conference. 31r. Shanklin called all the agents together the first thing in the morning, around 8 o'clock, and passed on certain instructions from FBI headquarters, and we imme-diately following that, I dictated from my notes of the previous day of my interview of Lee Oswald, dictated that interview to a stenog-rapher, at which time, in accordance with Bureau regulations, I then destroyed my original notes since the memorandum concerning my interview was now to be the official record. I was then instructed to go out and interview Mrs. Paine in great detail, so approximately midmorning, 10:30 or 11, I arrived at Mrs. Paine's residence in Irving, Tex., with another agent, Special Agent Joseph B. Abernathy. We then proceeded to interview Mrs. Ruth Paine and her husband, Michael Paine, who was then there. We inter-viewed them both in considerable detail as to the background data on Lee Oswald and Marina Oswald, everything that they knew about this matter. Mr. PARKER. Was the note and your memorandum brought to your attention on the 23d of November in any way I134 Mr. Hosrr. I don't recall any time it was brought to my attention. Mr. PAmRE. When was it next brought to your attention again I

Mr. HosTy. The next time I recall it being brought to my attention was on Sunday, November 24; it was at least 2 hours after the an-nounced death of Lee Oswald. It could have been 3 or 4 hours after-ward. It was sometime that afternoon of November 24. Mr. Howe told me that Mr. Shanklin wanted to see me and Mr. Howe in his office. We then proceeded from the 11th floor, where my desk twas, and Mr. Howe's desk, to the 12th floor to Mr. Shanklin's office, and we entered Mr. Slianklin's office. I went in first; Mr. Howe was behind me. Mr. PARwo. Was the door open I

Mr. HosTr. Yes sir. Mr. PARmm. Were the circumstances in that area crowded or was there much activity? Mr. Hosr. No, sir. It was on Sunday and most of the stenographic and clerical personnel were off. They had worked late hours on Satur-day and Friday, as the agents had. Most of the agents were on duty, but nearly all of them were out covering various leads. There were very few people in the office at the time. Mr. PAKE. Then present in Mr. Shanklin's office were Mr. Shank-linI Mr. Hosrr. Mr. Howe and myself. Mr. PARK R. Was Mr. Shanklin seated or standing ?Mr. HosTr. He was standing behind his desk. Mr. PAmKmR. Were you seated or standing I

Mr. Honry. I was standing in front of his desk. Mr. PARKER. And Mr. Howe, where was he placed? 

Mr. HOSTY. To the best of my knowledge he was behind me, back by the door. Mr. PARKER. What transpired then? Mr. Hosry. Mr. Shanklin reached down into the lower righthand drawer of his desk. It's a large double drawer, in which lie has numerous manila folders, where they keep various notes. There is afolder for each agent, and they keep various notations and routing slips and error forms, and other things like that in these folders. He reached down and took out the memorandum and the note in question. le handed it to me, and he said, in effect, Oswald's dead now, there can be no trial; here get rid of this. I then proceeded to tear it up in his presence. Ile said, "no, get it out of here; I don't even want it in this office; get rid of it." I then took it out and destroyed it. Mr. PARKER. And how did you destroy it, Mr. HosTy. I took it into the washroom and flushed it down the drain. Mr. PARKER. Did you find the directions to you from Mr. Shanklin quite clear ? You understood him? Mr. Hs'rr. Yes; there was no doubt in my mind he wished me to destroy it. Mr. PARKr.R. Do you believe when you did that that you were in violation of any FBI rule or Federal statute at the time? Mr. HosTry. No, sir. Mr. PARKER. Did you discuss what you did with the note with any-one at any time, or have you since I135 Mr. HosTy. On one occasion, with Mr. Shanklin. Several days later hie asked me if I had, in effect, destroyed it, and I assured him I had. That was the last time I have any recollection of discussing it. fr. PARKE . Can you pinpoint that time for me more preciselyI Mr. HosTr. It would have been a week or two afterward; that's all               

> Icould say. Mr. PARKER. Was it just aconversation in passing, or were you in

the room for some specific reason? Mr. HosTy. Well, yes, sir. It had to do with another comniunica-tion, which lie had also asked me to destroy, which I hadn't. Mr. PARKER. What was that communication, Mr. Hosty I

Mr. Hos y. It's the Commission Exhibit 103. Mr. PARKER. Would you describe it for me? Mr. HosTY. It's a rough draft of the letter that Lee Oswald wrote to the Soviet Embassy on November 9, 1963. It's a rough draft in his handwriting, which I obtained from Mrs. Paine on the 23d of Novem-ber 1963. Now, the rough draft is Commission Exhibit 103, the typed copy is Commission Exhibit 15. 

MVfr. PARKER. Commission exhibit what number? Mr. Hosry. Fifteen. Mr. PARKER. Would you describe that for me more fully ? On what occasion did he ask you to destroy that record ?Mr. Hosr. That was sometime on, I believe, the Tuesday following the assassination. I was having, 1 was writing up my interview with Mrs. Paine on the 23d. She had given me this letter, this rough draft letter, and I was trying to figure out how to work it into the report form, whether I should quote it. directly or refer to it, and make it a separate addendum. I went in and asked him just exactly what form he wanted me to do this in, and lie became highly upset and highly incensed and appeared to be almost on the verge of a nervous breakdown, and said, "I thought I told you to get rid of that, get rid of it." I then left his office and didn't know quite what to do. I felt that he'd misunderstood what I was trying to tell him, and another agent, named Bardwell Odum, had apparently overheard the conversation. 

He came up to me and said that he had taken a similar letter that he had received from Mrs. Paine. Now, let me explain, Mr. Odum had been sent out to interview Mrs. Paine late Saturday night or early Sunday morning after my interview. Mr. Shanklin had sent him out to-I guess you might say--doubleclieck my version of my contact with Marina Oswald to make sure I wasn't trying to play down my p art, and he went out and reinterviewed Mrs. Paine, at which time .[rs. Paine told Agent Odum that when she had given me this rough draft before, that she had made a copy in her own handwriting of this letter, and Agent Odum said, "well, she had better give that to him too." So he took that and then sometime, apparently on Sunday or Monday.he had brought this note to Mr. Shankain's attention, and 

M r. Shan kin said to him in effect-this is according to Mr. Odum now-"I thought I told Hosty to get rid of that thing." We then discussed what we should do, and we decided that we would not get rid of these notes and I made an exhibit out of Commission exhibit 103 and placed it in the file under the heading of "Handwriting Specimens of Ie Harvey Oswald." I then referred 136 to this in my report to the Bureau, and about 2 weeks later they came -down and noticed this and asked where this was, and I was unable to produce the letter and send it in to the, in to headquarters, and it was following this misunderstanding, he again brought up with me -vwhat had I done with the first letter. Mfr. PARKER. Mr. Hosty, were you asked by Mr. Shanklin or anyone else in the Bureau to destroy any other note or document, piece of paper, exhibit or any other thing during the course of this investigation? Mr. HOSTY. No, sir. No, sir. That would be all. Mr. PARKER. Have you ever been asked by anybody within the Bureau in any other case that you have ever had to destroy any other piece of evidence, document, piece of paper or thingI Mr. HOSTY. Well, not evidence. Of course, we periodically destroy serials on a routine basis. If something has not been-Mr. PARKER. Other than on a routine basis?  

> M

r. HIosT y. Something that has not been put in the record as this, it's done quite frequently, yes. Mfr. PARKER. You were asked by Mr. Shanklin to destroy two dif-ferent items? Mr. HOSTY. Right.    

> Mr. PARKER. You

did destroy one; you saved the other. Why did you do that? Mr. HosTy. Right. The reason I didn't the second time is because it was obvious to me that the second item was highly pertinent. It confirmed Lee Oswald's contact with the Soviet Embassy in Mexico City. Also because of Mr. Shanklin's demeanor and temperament, it was obvious to ine that lie was verging on a nervous breakdown. He obviously didn't know what lie was saying. He was quite upset, and then, of course. my conversation with Mr. Odum following which he said the same thing, we decided that we would not follow the proce-dure here. Mr. Blny. Counsel, may I interrupt for a moment? Mr. PRKnF, r. Yes. Mr. IoSTY. I also wanted to clear uI) the point that in addition to the note that was (estroye(, I also destroyeed my memorandum that I had prepared , that 2 to 4 page memoran(lum setting forth the explanation; that was also destroyed at the time the note was dest royed. M r. PARKER. Yes; to clarify that for my understanding, when you destroyed the note, you also destroyed the memorandluni about that note? Mr. JIoSTY. Of explanation, correct. M[r. PARKER. l)id you play a role in the assassination investigation after November 24, 1963? Mr. HosTy. Yes, sir, very much so. [r. PARKERI. What was that? Mr. 1IoSTY. As I said, I interviewed Mrs. Paine and Michael Paine in great detail on the 23d. I was the first one to interview Marina Oswald in great detail. I believe it was on the following Tuesday. I was the one of two agents who Mr. Howe sent to get all of the evidence from the Dallas Police Department to catalog it, photograph it and enter it into the record; all the evidence that they had obtained, and 137 continued to be primarily responsible for many of the principal inter-views in connection with the background of Lee Oswald. Mr. PARK. What was the last activity of yours, about what date, with respect to that assassination investigation? Mir. Horry. I don't recall any interviews after, say, June or July, maybe probably an interview with Mrs. Paine. Mr. PARXEtR. In 1964? Mr. HosTf. 1964, yes. Mr. PARKER. When was the last time you reviewed either the Lee Harvey Oswald or the Marina Oswald files? Mr. IlosTy. It would have been sometime in the summer of 1964. Mr. PARK.Fm. Did you testify before the Warren Commission? Mr. HoSwy. I did. Mr. PArKER. Did you volunteer or give any information about the note or its destruction? Mr. HosTy. I did not. Mr. PARKER. Why not? Mr. Ilosry. I wasn't asked. Mr. PARKER. Did you give any information or volunteer any infor-mat ion with respect to your instructions regarding Commission ex-hibit 103? Mr. IosTY. No, sir. Mr. PARKER. Why not? Mr. HosTy. I wasn't asked. Mr. PARKER. Did you think about volunteering the information? Mr. IlosTy. No, sir. Mr. PARKER. Why not? Mr. HorrY. I was instructed when I went up there that I was to only answer the questions that were set to me, and I was not to expand on anything and not to elaborate, only to answer the questions that were )ut to me. Mr. PARKER. And who gave you those instructions? Mr. Ilosry. They were given to me by at least two officials in Dallas and at least one in FBI Headquarters. They were given to me by Mr. Shanklin, Mr. Gemberling, who was a supervisor who succeeded Mr. 

Ilowe, and also by former Assistant Director Alan Belmont. Mr. PAiMEr,. Mr. Hosty, did you receive any reprimands or discipline for your handling of any phase of the Lee Harvey Oswald case? Mr. IIoATY. Yes, sir, I did. Mr. PARKE.R. What specific discipline did you receive and when? Mr. Howry. I received a letter of censure in December, I believe around December 12, 1963. I received the first letter of censure, )laced on probation. I then received two letters of commendation, and was then taken off probation 90 days later. I received a second letter of censure on, dated August 6, 1964, which was the same thing. It was for the exact smie violations with one addition. That was on October 6, 1964. 1 was placed on probation and suspended for 30 days. Mr. IARxL And were you transferred? Mr. Hosrr. I had been transferred the previous week to Kansas City. That transfer came through on September 28 and then the letter of censure came through on October 6. Mr. PARKER. Do you have copies of your letters of discipline? Mr. tlosTr. I do. Mr. PARKER. In your mind was your discipline justifiedI 138 11r. Hon-Y. No, sir. Mr. PARKER. Would you explain that to me? Mr. Hosry. Yes, sir. I received instructions from Mr. Shanklin on or about December 5, 1963, to answer, I believe there were 16 questions, which had been telephonically furnished to Mr. Shanklin by Assistant Director James Ga e, who was the Chief Inspector of the FBI. He posed 16 questions, based upon his review of the FBI Headquarters file. Some of these questions pertained to the handling of the case by 

agent John Fain, who is now retired. Mr. Howe, who had been the supervisor over both Mr. Fain and myself, who was instructed to answer the questions dealing with the Fain phase of it, and I was in-structed to answer the questions dealing with my phase of the case. I put my answers to these questions in a memorandum dated I be-lieve, on or about December 6, 1963, which questions pertained to Fain, I said something to the effect of "handled by Fain," and the ones 

t hat I handled I have made answers. Approximately 2 days later, on or about December 8, 1963, Super-visor Ken Howe came out of SAC Shanklin's office. He was obviously perturbed and upset, and he handed both copies of my memorandum of )ecember 6 to me and said, here, keep these, you might need these someday. I took his advice and kept the memorandum. Approximately 5, maybe 6 years ago I had an opportunity to review my personnell file. I might a[dd that agents are not allowed to see their personnel files, but this was accidentally left out of the safe and left on the supervisor's desk. I got a chance to read it. I was always curious as to why I was censured. It had never made sense. The questions that I had answered seemed to be cleared up. I then looked in the file and found the memo-randum purportedly setting forth my answers and -the answers were not the ones that I gave on December 6, 1963. There were two points in question. The data stated that I had stated, that I felt maybe I was wrong and should have done it differently. I did not state that, and the letter of censure was based upon these false and changed answers. Mr. PARKER. You're indicating to me then, Mr. Hosty, that the document in the FBI personnel file regarding yourself is different from the document which you preregard and submitted to whom ?

Mm. HOSTY. I prepared and submitted to SAC Shanklin. 

Mr. PARKE. Doy ou have a copy of the original document which you prepared? Mr. HosTy. Yes, sir; I do. My attorney does. Mr. PARKER. Would you furnish that to the subcommittee? Mr. BRAY. Yes, sir; we will. Mr. PARKER. Along with your letter of censure? Mr. HosTY. Yes, sir; we have that. [The material requested follows:] LAW OlrrCEA or ARENT, Fox,       

> KINTNra, PLOTjcN &KAIIn,
> Waahiligton, D.C'., January 14, 1976.

-Representative Dor EDwmAws,                      

> Chairman, Subcommittee -on Civil and C0cmtitutional Rights,
> House of Representatives, Washington, D.C.
> DEAR Ms. EDWAIMS. In response to your letter of December 15, 1975, enclosed

please find copies of the following documents: - 

> 1.

A letter dated December 1, 1963, addressed t Mr. Hosy signed by  

> J.

Edgar Hoover placig Mr. Hosty on probation; 139 

2. A letter dated September 28, 1964, addressed to Mr. Hosty signed by J. Edgar Hoover notifying Mr. Hosty that he was transferred to Kansas City, Missouri; 3. A letter dated October 5, 1964, addressed to Mr. Hosty signed by J. 

Edgar Hoover notifying Mr. Hosty that he was being suspended for thirty (30) days without pay and again placed on probation; 4. A letter dated October 8, 1964, addressed to Mr. Hosty signed by J. Edgar Hoover notifying Mr. Hosty that his request for a transfer to a city with a warmer climate than Kansas City, Missouri was denied; 

5. A letter dated October 9, 1964, addressed to Mr. Hosty signed by J. Edgar Hoover wherein Mr. Hosty's offer to provide his services to the FBI during his period of suspension was refused; and, 6. A memorandum dated 12/6/78 to: SAC, DALLAS (DALLAS 100-10461) from: SA JAMES P. HOSTY, JR, SUBJECT: LEE HARVEY OSWALD, aka IS-R- Cuba, which is a self-explanatory memorandum containing the 

"... answers to questions as set forth in the memorandum of SAC SHANK-

LIN to the File, 12/5/63, at the request of Assistant Director JAMES 11. 

GALE". I have contacted Mr. Hosty who returned from his vacation on Wednesday, January 14, 1976, and requested him to supply me with a written authorization for you or anyone acting under your specific direction to review his FBI per-sonnel file. Please contact me if you have any questions concerning the materials which we have furnished or other matters. Very truly yours, - ]FLAwcxs X. LrrLrY. U.S. DEPARTMENT OF JUsRTICE, 

FEDniAL BUUB4AU OF INVESTIGATION, 

WWashington, D.C., December 13, 1963. 

Mir. JAMICs P. HosTY, Jr., 

Federal Bureau of Investigation, 

Dallas, Tex. 

DEAu MR. HOSTy: It has been determined that your recent handling of asecurity-type case was grossly inadequate. Specifically, there was an unwar-ranted delay on your part in reporting certain pertinent Information and the Investigation you conducted was most Inadequate. Furthermore, the explanation which you furnished as to why you failed to conduct a certain Interview was absolutely unacceptable and your judgment In connection with this aspect of the case was exceedingly poor. Moreover,-Id view of the information developed concerning the subject of this investigation, It should have been apparent to you that he required a status which would have Insured further investigative attention. In view of the slipshod manner in which you handled this investigation, you are being placed on probation. It will be Incumbent upon you to handle your future duties at a higher level of competence so that further administrative action of this nature will not be necessary. Very truly yours, J. EDaGA HoovER, Director.       

> U.S. DEPARTEurT or JusTICE, FrDMAL BUREAU or INVESTIGATION,

Vashington, D.C., September 28, 1964.     

> Mr. JAMES P. Hosr'r, JIr.,

Federal Bureau of Investigation, Dallas, Tex.           

> Dr&n Ms. HOSTY: Your headquarters are changed from Dallas, Texas, to

Kansas City, Missouri, effective upon your arrival there on or after this date. This change is made for official reasons and you will be allowed transportation expenses and per diem at the rate of $10.00 per day within the U.S., $6.00 per (lay for air travel, rail travel, and ocean travel by steamship outside the conti-nental limits of the U.S., transportation expenses for your immediate family, and transportation costs of household goods and personal effects as provided for in Public Law 600 dated August 2, 1946, and Executive Order 9805, dated Novem-ber 25, 1940, as amended. You are authorized to use your privately owned auto-mobile and you will be reimbursed at the rate of ten cents per mile plus inci-140 

dental expenses, not to exceed the cost by common carrier, as prescribed by Section 8.5b(2) of the Standardized Government Travel RegulaUons, over the most direct route for all persons officially traveling therein. Should your de-pendents travel separate and apart from you, expenses will be allowed under the same conditions as above. Very truly yours, J. EDGAR Hoovxi, Director. 

U.. DEPARTMENT Or JUSTrC, 

F=Exi BUREAU or INVESTIGATION, 

Waehington, D.O., October 5, 1964. 

Mr. Jmzs P. HOsTy, Jr., Federal Bureau of Inveetigation, Dallas, Tem. 

DEAR MR. Hosry: Further consideration has been given to the facts relating to your handling of your duties in connection with an Internal Security case which was assigned to you in the Dallas Division and it has been determined that your shortcomings In this matter was most reprehensible. An unwarranted delay occurred on your part in reporting certain important information and the Investi-gation you conducted in this case was completely inadequate. Your failure to conduct an interview of the subject's wife was inexcusable and your judgment with respect to this phase of the investigation was very bad. In addition, it should have been apparent to yca in view of certain information developed, that the subject required a status which would have insured further investigative attention. Furthermore, during subsequent testimony regarding the case in ques-tion, you made certain statements which were entirely inappropriate. In view of the above, you are being suspended without pay from the close of business October 6, 1064, to the close of business November 5, 1964, and placed on probation. It will be necessary for you to carry out your future assignments with greater efficiency and more consideration for the Bureau's interests if you are to continue in the service. The Federal Salary Reform Act of 1962 provides that before a within-grade increase can be granted, a determination must be made that the performance of the employee is at an acceptable level of competence. Although you have com-pleted the required waiting period for such a salary increase, it is not possible to make a favorable determination regarding your competence at this time in view of the circumstances set out above. Very truly yours, J. EDGAR HoovEa, Director.    

> U.S. DEPARTMENT OF

JuSTcZ, FEDERAl, BuREAu OF INVESTIGATION, 

Washmgton, D.C., October 8, 1964.     

> Mr. JAMES P. HOST, Jr.,

Federal Bureau of Investigation, 

Dallas, Tex. 

DEAR MI. HOSTY: Your Special Agent in Charge has forwarded your letter of October 5, 1964, in which you request that your pending transfer to Kansas City be changed to a metropolitan office with a warmer climate and that the transfer be deferred until a later date because of family problems. The reason for your request is understandable and this matter has been very carefully considered. However, I must advise that favorable action cannot be taken and you should arrange to report to the Kansas City Office in compliance with your transfer orders as soon as public business permits. Sincerely yours, J. EDoAs Hoovsz Director.   

> U.8. DEPARTMENT

or JUSTICE,   

> FEDERAL BunzAu

or INVESTIGATION, 

Mr. JAUS P. IOST, Jr., Washington, D.A., October 9, 1964. Federal Bureau of Investigaton, 

DalWA, Teo. 

DrAR MR. HoenT: This will acknowledge receipt of your letter of October 6, 

1904, in which you have offered your services during your period of suspension. 141 

Your kind remarks have been noted and have been made a matter of record. I regret to inform you that It will not be posible for the Bureau to utlize your services during your supension period. flincerely yours, J. ZoAz Hoov, Director. .0.b. q . t14 wM* so tj rq 0ild U- (I001,01L - 1 9 Pr1 • 34 1,44 . , aC po.jr 

I. MAMI CdP34 LAS?-I~ .t- ,,C- - , I (Ili 4LCV L,4. , .' *4 . ,IOSTY, JA'1ES P. Jr.-(' ___. , - -23-24 3-G-1B23     

> VCTIMAN POEVIMNmC -...

7 !.... - 5-1.-*. . - 30         

> --lP opt 01401"W G'JP 0. ",8 ... ',.+ICA

COCC 5-Pr P -C'4-a ....        

> ILC€OQ[ kA I ulJpl c, I<l
> IIV-0..

Special Acont 

!#61-F-48 170 GS 13 r-.12,405 pa a. -ot P64101Qi TIO.'L I.i.,1o,,I C ,.A    

> 14 pIAMANULC(€A,Oft +i(; oQ.-%. .I

07 AMOISAIICU . oT+ '.. .. .351 

5."MARISLI" l: ' 4: c+• ++-? _- --; +- - + -. _ + ++ *... C.....oA 4~.......... ... + + , +... .. . ........ .. I..' FBI.f'. 

Suspend without pay for a period of 30 calendar d ys boeinnInw .t t!10 

close of business 0-G-G4, and ondint at tno c1o3 of business 11-5-G4. 

This action is boina tnkcn in view of his faih1.ui to perform his 

duties in a satisfactory inner. 

.. . .. . .. . . . . . ... _ " ' -- ,--+I n "~ l , " J kA. 0-. j4 ,: 4+,-

31 OF" ftA fAbo&m4 PLAN O LDERt , Co/~f I~~o %060. ~.. 

> AUJ

-frrto Tn UION Of ot xo -iC-' 

[UA Govusmeat Memoraadu, Dm 6 1M] To: SAC, Dallas (100-10461). From: SA James P. Hosty, Jr. Subject: Lee Harvey Oswald, aka I&---4 .The following are answers to questions a set forth in the memo of GAO 

Shanklin to the file, 12//S, a the request of Amistant Diretor James EL Gal 8269-2-77-10 

# I!SL!!L!L 142 (1) The Dallas Office did not recommend Oswald for the Security Index during period that he was in the Dallas Division because the subject's activities while 

In the Dallas Division did not fit the criteria for the Security Index as set forth 

it the Manual of Instructions. 

(2) The case on Marina Oswald was opened on a specific recommendation of 

this writer on 7/19/62, at which time it was noted that she fell within the 

criteria of the SOBIR program (Manual of Instructions, 105-H). By letter to the Bureau dated 7/25/62, Bureau was advised on a UACB basis that in view of the 

pending Investigation on Lee Harvey Oswald this case would be put in a pending inactive status, to be reopened at a later date for consideration or advisable action. This case was reactivated and In March of 1963 it was determined that tile (iwalds had just moved from their apartment on Elsbeth. It was determined that Iee Oswald had been drinking to excess and had been beating his wife oil numerous occasions. There had been many complaints from other tenants con-cerning this. The Oswalds were located at another location on Went Neeley 

Street and a letter was sent to the Bureau advising the status of the case. Upon 

careful review of the Manual of Instructions, Section I(W)-E, it was noted that It would be necessary to utilize a friend or sponsor of Marina Oswald for inter. 

preter and that the atmosphere of the interview would have to be conducted in much a manner as to not cause any undue emotional stress or strain oil the 

wrmu:i being interviewed. In view of the reported marital difficulties between the (Opwalds, it was decided to wait a suitable period to determine whether the domestic situation had been s flciently clarified, so as to permit a proper Inter-

view as desired in Section 105-A of the manual. Upon recontact of the subject in May, it was determined that the subject had moved, leaving no forwarding address. Later, when the subject was determined to be in New Orleans, origin 

In this case was transferred to the New Orleans Ofice. Dallas Office obtained 

the forwarding address of Marina Oswald on 10/28/68, and on 10/29/63 verified her residence at 2515 W. 5th, Irving. Texas. One of the primary purposes of the interview of Mrs. Ruth Paine on 11/1/68, was for the purple of laying the neces. 

sa ry groundwork for interview of Marina Oswald ; however, In view of the allega-tions concerning Lee Oswald's contact with the Soviet Embausy In Mexico City, It was decided not to conduct this Interview until Dallas had been made origin 

In both the case on Marina Oswald and Lee Harvey Oswald, so that the Dallas 

Office could be certain that we were in possession of all facts concerning both 

Marina Oswald and Lee Oswald. Change of origin was not received by the Dallas 

Office until 11/21/08, and not received by this writer until 11/22/63. (3) This phase of the investigation was handled solely by former BA John W. 

Fain. (4) This phase of the Investigation was handled solely by former SA John W. Fain. (5) This phase of the investigation was handled solely by former 15A John W. Fain. 

(6) In accordance with SAC Letter 62-48E, results of investigations in Espio-

nage and Nationalistic Tendency cases may be recorded in memorandums to the SAC. It should be noted following the submission of Dallas letter to the Bureau,  

> :/25/0m,

such a memorandum was placed in the file covering the Investigation 

conducted in Dallas In May of 1902, also setting forth leads to contact relatives 

and neighbors within the Dallas-Fort Worth area. It should be noted that sub-seuent investigation ban determined the subjects left the Dallas area in May of 1963. In July of 1963, the New Orleans Office determined that the subjects were residing in the New Orleans Division, and origin was changed. After It had been determined that the subjects had left Dallas, the lead to determine Lee Oswald's 

employment appeared unnecessary at the time. It should be noted that the sul.-Jects were not active in any subversive organizations at thin time and had done nothing to arouse any undue interest. The sole purpose of the Investigation at this time was to locate and Interview Marina Oswald In accordance with 105-E, 

Manital of Instructions. (7) After Marina Oswald moved to New Orleans Office. and serials furnished to that office, It wan left to the discretion of the New Orleans Office how and 

wheni Marina Oswald should be Interviewed. 

(8) On 11/1/63, following the interview of Mrs Ruth Paine, a teletype wax 

selt requesting a change of office of origin from New Orleans to Dallas. The Dallas 

Office had previously received Information that Oswald had been In contact with the Roviet Embassy in Mexico City. For this reason, the Dallas Office was awaiting 

a change of origin so that the Dallas Office would be In possession of all Informa-143 

tion before attempting an interview of the subject. It should be noted until such 

time as origin was changed the i)alas Office could not be sure that we were 

in possession of all information and It was felt until such time this was certain, 

any Interview would be decidedly premature. (0) The Information that Oswald subscribed to The Worker on 9/28/02 was 

received prior to the time this case was assigned to the writer and It was initiated 

for file when the case was closed. This case was not re-opened to the writer until 

4, 8/25/63, at which time this information was reported. (10) The information concerning the whereabouts of I". Oswald was obtained 

In the later afternoon of 11/1/68, a Friday. This writer did not return to the Dallas Office until after 5 p.m. All security Information must go Registered Mall. There is no Registered Mail sent out of the Dallas Office after four o'clock Friday and before the following Monday. This airtel was rough-drafted on 11/1/63, but 

could not e mailed until 11/4/68. (11) The Dallas Office received the WFO communication re contact with the Soviet Embassy In Washington, D. C., on 11/22/63. This communication was 

never routed to this writer. 

(12) The l)allas Office determined on 5/27/68 that the subject had moved. Sulsequent Investigation reflects that they actually moved on 5/11/68. 

(18) The information concerning Oswald's contact on 4/21/68 with the FPCC was not received by the Dallas Office until 7/1/68. The New Orleans Office was in receipt of information on 7/5/68 showing contact with 71CC in New York, Iiy letter dated 7/5/63. At the time of the receipt of the information that Oswald had been in contact with the F'PO on 4/21/63, It was known that Oswald was no longer In Dallas and the primary concern was his location so a report could be mubmitted. ,(14) The Information received by the Dallas Office on 10/18/03, concerning 

the subject's contact with the Soviet Embassy In Mexico City was quite limited. INS, I)allau, merely advld that they were in posessaion of a communication indicating CIA, Mexico City, identified an individual possibly Identical with Lee Oswald was in contact with the Soviet Embassy in Mexico City. Because of the third agency, this writer was not permitted to actually see the commt-

nication. A copy of this CIA communication was forwarded to the Dallas Office 

by airtel dated 10/24/68 and received 10/25618. By airtel dated 10/25/68, received 

10/28/63, the Dallas Office was advised of the address on Went 5th St. In Irving, Texas. In 10/29/63, it was determined that this was the residence of Ruth Paine, 

and Marina Oswald was residing there. On 10/30/13 and 10/31/68, background 

Investigation was conducted on Ruth Paine to determine whether or not It would he feasible to approach her. On 11/1/68, Ruth Paine was approached and subject 

Lee Oswald's whereabouts was determined and the New Orleans Office advisel. It was deemed advisable, until such time as the Dallas Office had all pertinent 

Information from the New Orleans Office, to await any further investigation. It 

should be noted that the subject had previously advised agents of the FBI that lie would periodically be In contact with the Soviet Embassy in Washington, D.C., 

regarding his wife's status. 

(15) This office furnished U. 8. Secret Service in Dallas, Texas, no infor-mation concerning Lee Harvey Oswald prior to his arrest on 11/22/03. The Dallas Office furnished no information to the Dallas PD concerning Lee Harvey Oswald prior to his arrest on 11/22/08. (NJ-The Dallas Ofic has maintained close liaison with the Dallas Police 

and furnishing Information concerning racial matters and Individuals belonging to hate and klan-type groups. In accordance with Bureau instructions, no Infor-mation has ever been furnished to the Dallas PD concerning Individuals with subversive backgrounds. Mr. PARKFR. Did you appeal your discipline? Mr. OsTor. I appealed it to director Kelley in October of 1973, ye.s, sir. Mr. PARKER. Did yo appeal it at any time prior to that at the time it was being imposed? Mr. Hosm°. No, sir; I felt that would be useless. Mr. PARKER. Why did you feel that would be useless Mr. Homrn. Because it was obvious that the people I would have to appeal to were the ones that were responsible for the change. Mr. PARKza. What is the appeal procedure? 144 Mr. Hory. Actually, there is no appeal other than to the FBI headquarters, and FBI headquarters disciplines you, you can only appeal their decision with one exception if the individual is a veteran, within the meaning of the Veterans Preference Act of 1964, which Iam. If disciplinary action exceeds certain limits, like they cannot sepa-rate me, reduce me in grade, or suspend me for more than 30 days without the right of appeal to the Civil Service Commission. If you will note, my disciplinary action came right up to that point and stopped. They came up to the point where I could appeal and then stopped. I therefore had no appeal rights. Mr. PARKER. Yes. Do you know of your own knowledge of other per-sons who have received discipline on account of the Lee Harvey Oswald investigation I

Mr. Hos". Yes, sir; I do. Mr. PARK R. Would you tell me who they are, pleased Mr. Howry. Mr. Kenneth Howe, supervisor, was reduced from super-visor to agent, and was transferred. He was censured twice, the same as I was, in December and then again in October. Agents Doyle Williams, William Anderton, and Vincent Drain of Dalas, were all disciplined, twice I believe, both in December of 1963 

and again in October of 1964. The agent in New Orleans, Milton Knack, was transferred. At least two supervisors in FBI Headquarters were demoted and transferred, and at least three others were given letters of censure, but not transferred. Mr. PARKER. Do you know of anyone who came in contact with the Lee Harvey Oswald case, including the FBI, who was not disciplined or censured or transferred ?Mr. Horry. Mr. Shanklin was not. Jack Quigley, who interviewed Lee Oswald in New Orleans, was not. John Fain had already retired and, of course, couldn't be, but everybody else tip through Mr. Belmont was at least censured. Mr. PARxra. Thank you. Mr. EDWARDS. Mr. Seiberling. Mr. SJIBERLINo. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Hosty, picking up that point, do you have a feeling that, perhaps, this was a matter of hindsight being better than foresight, that the FBI may have censured you because they thought that in retrospect somebody should have taken Oswald more seriously than they did I

Mr. Honrr. Well, sir, I might add that the disciplinary action taken against me had to do with my handling of the case in the March 19C3 

period, 8 months before President Kennedy was even going to come to Dllas. At no time did the disciplinary action ever question my jud -

ment on not referring the matter to the Secret Service. It had to do with administrative handling of my not interviewing Marina Oswald in November of 1963 and my placing a memorandum in the file op-posed to writing a letter to the FBI Headquarters in 1963, in May of 

19613. 

Mr. SvSMIJNo. Now, if they took that dim a view about some mat-ters which, at the time, seemed to be insignificant, what sort of a posi-

tion would they have taken if they had known about the destruction of the Oswald note and your memorandum relating to it IMr. Hows. I don't know, sir. 145 Mr. SEBRLiNG. Did you ever think that it was somewhat strange that Mr. Oswald, if he intended to assassinate the President in early November, would have come to the FBI and drawn attention to himself? Mr. HoTY. It does seem strange, yes, sir. Mr. SwminuNo. Did you ever have any conversations with any other people in the FBI or anywhere else about the oddness of that behavior? Mr. IIos"Y. Only ones I ever recall discussing the note with would be Mr. Howe and Mr. Shanklin. Mr.' SEIBELINO. Now, getting to the investigation of Oswald prior to November 22 was that just a routine check I Did you have many cases of that degree of importance I

Mr. I[osTY. wouldn't call any case routine. What we were investi-gating, as of November 1, was his reported contact with the Soviet Em-bassy in Mexico City. We were attempting to establish his where-abouts and attempting to establish as best we could without interview-ing him. I might add I could not interview him under the restrictions I was inder because of the nature of the investigation. We were try-ing to determine as best we could what he was up to, what he was in contact with them for. Mr. SRIJ iE LINO. You mean you could interview his wife, but not in-terview him I

Mr. IlosTr. That's right, sir. Mr. SErIERLING. Would you explain why that type of distinction was niade? Mr. HoSTw. Because to interview a person concerning a contact such as lie made with the Soviet Embassy, we would have to ask him and that would give away the techniques and the knowledge that we had. We would be telling him more than he would be telling us. Mr. SmarBR[ xO. But interviewing his wife, you didn t have to ask him-Mr. HosT. I was not going to interview her about that. I was going to talk to her about her background, hoping that in the process she might possibly volunteer something without my asking the ques-tion. Mr. SF.aERLANo. Now, can you tell us as precisely as possible what you recall was in the note that was left for you by Mr. Oswald ?Mr. Iowr". Yes, sir; the first part of it criticized me for contacting his wife without his knowledge. Mr. SpuWmutrao. You say he criticized you. Exactly what did he say, if you recall? NMr. HTorr. To the best of my recollection, it sid, if you want to talk to me, come talk to me, don't bother my wife. I want to know when you interview my wife. Don't interview her without my permis-sion, and he said if you don't cease talking to her, I will be forced to take action against the FBI. Mr. S.IBRI.tNo. Did he indicate what kind of action it would be tMr. Hom'r. Well, sir, I know that he was a member of the American Civil Liberties Union, and I just assumed he meant legal action. We had some-Mr. Sumfriuno. It didn't say anything about the blow-up at the officeI 146 

Mr. Hoaer. No, sir; I would have remembered that. Mr. Szn=uwao. Now, you said that you considered this was just aroutine note I

Mr. HOw"Y. Yes, sir. Mr. S8imiuu o. And, yet, you did not consider Lee Oswald to be just a routine case, the Oswald case? Mr. HosTY. No; you can't say any case is routine. You've got to consider each case on its own merit. I wouldn't say it was the most important case I had and it wasn't the least important. Mr. SFJBEBLIN(o. Although you said this was a routine nut letter, you didn't consider Oswald a routine nut? Mr. Howzr. No, sir. Mr. SXIBERANLo. Now, getting to the conversation you had with Mr. Shanklin in which he had your note, you're aware of the fact that Mr. Shanklin denies any knowledge of the note prior to July of this year? Mr. Hosfr. Yes, sir; I've seen that. Mr. SFJnyAuNo. And he has so stated under oath to this committee as iecently as yesterday. 

Mr. Hoery. Yes, air. Mr. Szmmuaxo. And you are under oath. Mr. Hor. Yes, sir; I understand that. Mr. SEJmILINo. So, is there any, do you wish to change your testi-mony in any way upon reflection? Mr. Hoarr. No, air. No, sir; absolutely not. Mr. SuazRLUwo. Just one other question. After-let's now go to the period after the assassination: At that point do you think that the fact that Mr. Oswald wrote a note to you-whatever it may have said-became very significant? 

## Mr. Hos. No, sir. As Mr. Shanklin had stated, he was dead; there could be no trial, and I thought that was the controlling factor here, there would be no trial. Mr. SEin.muiJNo. But you distinguished between that note and the other document of Mr. Oswald's that Mr. Shanklin asked you to get rid of I

Mr. Hom'r. Right. Right. Mr. Sumar.o. Well, as an FBI Agent, do you think that Mr. Shanklin would have reported that to his superior? He has so stated that he would have if he'd known about it. Mr. IIoar. I can only state that he was in frequent telephonic con-tact with FBI Headquarters during that 2-day period. I don't--I have no information from my knowledge that he did report it. 

Mr. Szmrxio. Do you think, do you have any information indi-(at ing whether he acted on his own or under orders from some higher 

tip telling you to either destroy that note or the other Oswald note? Mr. Hosmrr. I'd have no way of knowing that, sir. Mr. SmZauWM o. Thank you very much. 

Mr. Hoer. Thank you, sir. Mr. EvwmAw& Mr. Kindness. Mr. Kiwnww. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Hosty, going back to the note that was delivered to the receptionist's desk in the Dallas office, could you tell me, when you received that note was the enve-lope sealed I147 Mr. Howrr. No, sir; I don't believe it was. Mr. KINEsS. Was the--you refer to it as a business-type envelope? Mr. Homr. Yes, sir; that's my recollection of it. Mr. KINDNESS. Would you care to elucidate a little more on what you mean by that term, the size of the envelope, what was its shape? Mr. Hosrr. It would be the long envelope that you would be able to put an 8- by 10-inch letter into you'd fold it three times. It would be. I guess 8 or 9 inches long and i iess about 8 or 4 inches in height. Mr. KI DxSS. Like a No. 9 or a No. 10 envelope? Mr. Hosry. Yes, sir; I believe that's what they call them. Mr. KINDNESS. Could you tell us about the size of the paper that was inside? Mr. HOST-. I believe it was a plain bond, 8 by 10. Mr. KINDNESS. And a single page? Mr. Hos'r. A single page; yes, sir. Mr. KINDNESS You've referred to the folding of the paper a little while ago in your testimony. Could yo recall with clarity how it was folded and the way the folds turned? Mr. Howr. The normal way would be folded three ways. That was the way it was. Mr. kINDNFM. So that the content of the letter would not be observ-able? Mr. Hosry. No, sir. Mr. KiXDNESS. Until you opened it up ?Mr. HoSTr. That's correct. Mr. Kxw n ss. And that was the condition as best you can recall of the letter when you received it? Mr. Hoyrr. When it was delivered to me; right. Mr. Kr;wi u. Do you recall whether any of the writing on the letter was on the lower one-third of the folded page? Mr. HosTY. No, sir; I just recall it being written in the normal way in the middle of a page. It took up approximately two-thirds of the page, perhaps. Mr. KINDNZSS. A rather short letter, really ?Mr. Hoerr. Yes. Mr. KiNDNSrS. And was it all handwritten? Mr. Hosrr. To the best of my recollection. I do not recall a signa-ture. Mr. KINNESS. Do you recall whether there was a return address, Imenu an address? Mr. Hoary. No, sir; I don't believe there was. Mr. Ki NNEss. Or a salutation inside of, say, dear Mr. HostyI Mr. Howry. I don't recall a salutation; no, sir. Mr. KINDm S. Do you recall a signature? Mr. Hoswrr. I don't recall a signature. Mr. KINDNEa. You have referred to Mr. Oswald in your testimony on a few occasions as Le Oswald ?Mr. Hoary. That's correct. Mr. KINDNr s. Would you have anticipated or expected to see his signature as Ie Harvey Oswald on a document, or a letter, or note of thigh sort? Mr. HoArr. I believe he normally signed Le H. Oswald, from what I've been able to determine since tle assassination. Now, before that, 148 I didn't have that much information on how he used, how he signed his name. Mr. KINDNS S. In the course of your earlier investigations on the immigration and naturalization aspect of the matter, do you recall having occasion to see any documents that were signed by Oswald? Mr. Hosry. I'm sure there were some in there. There would have had to been, but I don't specifically recall any. Mr. KinNESs. In regard to the notes of your interview with Oswald at the Dallas Police Department on November 22, 1903, after dictating the memorandum of that interview, you destroyed your notes. That was your testimony? Mr. HOSTY. Yes, sir. Mr. KINDNESS. In what manner were the notes destroyedI Mr. HosTy. Put into the wastebasket. Mr. KINDNESS. They were not shredded or flushed down the toilet? Mr. IlosTy. No, sir. We burn all of our trash. It's taken out and burned, so anything you put into a wastebasket in an FBI office, we know is going to be burned. That's the only thing we do. Mr. KINDNrSS. Why did you not use the same manner of destruction for the memorandum and the note; that is, the memorandum about the note on the receptionist's desk? Mr. HOSTY. As I testified, I started to and Mr. Shanklin told me to get it out, get it out of his office, so for that reason I took more-Mr. KINDNESS. Did you infer from that, then, that he meant a more immediate means of destruction? Mr. HosT. Yes, sir; that's the way I interpreted it. Mr. KiNDNFSS. As to the physical circumstances in the Dallas FBI office at that time, do you recall where the switchboard was? Mr. Hos-ry. The switchboard would have been, now, as you get off the elevator bank and you turn to the left-Mr. KINDNESS. Excuse me, which floor are we on? Mr. HosTy. The 12th floor, sir, of the Santa Fe Building. 

Mr. KINDNESS. The 12th floor?, Mr. Howry. As you get off the elevator, you turn to the left, you would enter the switchboard door by the switchboard; if you turn to the right, you'd go into the reception room. Mr. KINDNESS. Which way was it normal for you to go to your deskI Mr. .osTY. I could go either way. By going past the receptionist, I could pick up messages and check my mail. By going past her I could go past the mail slots where they would put incoming mail, so I, quite often. would go into the front way so ? could check my mail on the way in. Mr. KINDNYFS. That would be the normal way ?Mr. HosTY. Yes. Mr. KINDNESS. Thank you. My time is up. Mr. EDWARDS. Mr. Drinan. Mr. DRINAN. Mr. Hosty, what was the content of the two- to four-page memo thit you dictated to Martha Connally? Mr. How"r. Father, that was a memo of explanation to Mr. Shank-lin, explaining to him the circumstances of my petting the note, the circumstances of my visit to Mrs. Paine and Manna Oswald, the pur-pose of my visit and what transpired there, and all matters relating to it, more or less as I explained to this committee. 149 Mr. DRINAN. When Mr. Shanklin, in a very agitated way, said, "De-stroy this," what was his motive ? Why was he so concerned abut this? When he said, furthermore, that there can be no trial now, you as-sumed that this would have been relevant at a trial? Mr. Hosrr. I don't know. I assume so; I don't know. Mr. DRiNAN. What don't you know ?Mr. Hos'T. Whether he assumed it woulA have been necessary at atrial. Mr. DRINAN. That's what you testified, that since there is not going to be a trial, you can destroy this now. Mr. Wtosxr, Yes, sir. Mr. DIN AN. And you agreed with him. What was relevant in that memo that would have been relevant at a trial? Mr. Hosry. I couldn't tell you anything. Mr. DRINAN. Why, therefore, did you take his instructions? Mr. HOSTY. Because I was ordered to, sir. Mr. DrNAN. What? Mr. Hosr. Because I was ordered to, Father. Mr. DRINAN. You were ordered on another occasion, but you didn't do it. What is the ultimate motivation of Mr. Shanklin I Why did he want to cover up ?Mr. HosnY. I don't know, sir. Mr. DRINAN. Well, you must have some assumption because on an-other occasion you refused to cover up. Mr. Hosrr. That's correct, Father. Mr. DRI NAN. Therefore he did, he was trying to cover up. Mr. HosTY. That would have to be an assumption. I don't know what his-Mr. DRINAN. Is there any other inference? Mr. Ilosry. No, sir. Mr. DRINAN. There is no other possible inference from the story that you've told, except that Mr. Shanldin desired to cover up because this would have been embarrassing to him or to you, or to both, or to the Bureau? Mr. Hosvy. I don't know, Father. Mr. DRiNAN. how would it have been embarrassing to Mr. Shanklin personally? Mr. 1os-rv. I don't know. Mr. DR AX. 'We must conclude that that was the only motive he had for covering ul), that he didn't want to be embarrassed? Mr. Hosrr. WeI, I don't know, unless there are other fats that weren't brought to my attention. Mr. DIN.AN. But from all that you know about the situation, the only possible inference is that he sought to cover up in order to avoid embarrassment to himself and not to you? Mr. HosTY. I don't know, sir. Mr. DRiNAN. When he reached down into the lower right-hand comerand took this out, I would assume that you could say that he had pondered on this u long time? Mr. HIosTy. I couldn't say for sure, Father. Mr. DRINAx. No, but you say that this had never occurred in your life there with him? Mr. Hos-rv. No. 150 

Mr. DRIN A. It's essential that we get to the bottom of this. There is a complete clash of evidence; and we have to establish motives one way or the other. Now, what did you say in the nemo--I think that is very essential because he saw the note, but is there anything in that memo that hasn't come out in the testimony about your seeing Mrs. Oswald?    

> Mr. HO8TY.

No, sir, not that I know of. Mr. DRI N A. Why would he have said this is not, we are not going to have a trial, he's dead I Why would he assume that this would have been relevant at the trial? Mr. HosTy. I don't know, Father. Mr. DRINAN. In connection with the other document that you were told to destroy and you refused, would you elaborate on the exact circumstances of how this came about? Mr. Hosry. Yes, sir. This occurred about Tuesday, or possibly Wednesday, after the assassination, when I took this letter in to Mr. Shanklin. I tried to explain to him what it was all about. Mr. DRINAN. Why did you go to him directly? Why didn't you go to Mr. Howe? It's most unusual for you to go to the top official. Mr. Hosn'. No. This case had taken on unusual proportions and Mr. Shanklin was in direct control of the case. So, it would have been a good idea to bring it up with him. He was directly controlling the case now. All right. I took this other communication to him and tried to, started to explain to him what I wanted to do and see if this was the right way to do it. Now, I think that he possibly confused this with the other letter and thought I was talking about the first one. Mr. DRINAN. That's entirely new testimony now. Why didn't you mention that before? Mr. Hoar. I'm sorry. I thought I did. Mr. DRINAx. All right. Go on with it. Mr. Hosrv. He then became highly upset, became emotionally up-set and it was obvious that he was, as I say, almost verging on a nerv-ous breakdown. This was another reason why I didn't follow his orders. He seemed to be losing control of himself and he didn't seem to really know what he was doing. Mr. DRINAN. And why was he so agit lMr. Hosry. I don't know. He probably hadn't had any sleep in sev-eral days and was under tremendous pressure. I would sy that was the reason. Mr. DwRNA.. Well, for how long during that interview was he con-fused, that he thought this was the other matter, the memo that you had dictated about the note that Oswald leftI Mr. Hosmr. I don't think it became straight in his mind until I week or 10 days later when we forwarded it to FBI headquarters and he became aware of it. Mr. DmINAX. So, during that entire interview, when he was so agi-tated, he thought that the letter that you were talking about wa the one that he wanted destroyed? Mr. Horr. Correct. Mr. DRINAN. Well, my time is running out. But the last question, then-you have to give evidence why he was so agitated. 151 Mr. HosTY. I couldn't say, sir. I think lie probably thought I hadn't coi i lied with his earlier orders. Ir. DaiNAN. My time has expired. Thank you. Mr. EDWARDS. Mr. Dodd? Mr. Dow. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. lHosty, did that memo contain any information about the book depository, which you had verified or had information from Mrs. Paine indicating that Mr. Oswald had worked at the book depository I

Was that included in that memo? Mr. Hoery. It would contain a general gist of my conversation with her November 1 and November 5. Yes, sir. Mr. Dow. Do you recall specifically whether or not it was men-t honed I

Ir. lIoe r. I'm sure-it would have, yes, sir. Mr. Doe. But it did make mention of that? Mr. Hory. Yes, sir. Mr. Dow. Are you aware whether or not the FBI maintained aItail cover on Lee IlHarvey OswaldI Mr. Hoery. No, sir. Not during the time the case was assigned to me. I would have known of it. Mr. Dowe. There wasn't any I

Mr. Ilorry. There was none during the time I had control of the 

> came.

Mr. Doe. The night Mr. Shanklin told you to get rid of that let-ter md memo, was there a meeting as such, or do you recall specifi-

cally whether or not they were coming in and out, or was there a for-ntal meeting? Mr. Hoty. Not to my knowledge. Ie was in his office alone when I entered. Mr. Doom He called you in alone? Mr. Hory. Well, as I previously testified, Mr. Howe was behind nw . lie entered the office behind me. I don't know if he remained in the office or not. But lie did go in with me. Mr. Dow. Mr. Chairman, we've got a quorum call. I'd like to sus-pend the meeting for a few moments. Mr. EDWARX. You go ahead. We'll reserve your time. Mr. Dow. All right. 

Mr. Heart. Mr. Dodd, could I clear up one thing? I think you men-tioned about the memo as to Mrs. Paine telling him he worked in the |ook depository-I had furnished that information in writing on November 4 to FBI headquarters; so, I mean, I had not destroyed the original on that. So you understand. Mr. Dow. Fine. Thank you. I wonder if 'ou could-I wonder if you could fill. me in on some information. You had never talked personally with Lee Harvey Os-

wahl I

Mr. Horr. Not prior to 8:15 p.m. on November 22, 1963. 

Mr. Doc&, When you went to se him after he was apprehended, what did he my to you when you walked in? Y1ou were sent down to interview him after he had been agreed f

Mr. IHorr. Correct. Mr. Dowe. When you walked in to see him, did he say anything to 

you I152 Mr. HosTY. Yes, sir, hio did. I identified myself by name and by po-sition, and he became highly upset and incensed and said, to the effect, you're the one that's been interviewing my wife. I've heard about you. And he became upset with me, yes, sir. Mr. DODD. And that was the extent of it? That was how-those were his initial remarks to you ?Mr. HOSTY. Yes, sir. Mr. DODD. Did you know Agent Barrett? Mr. HosT. Bob Barrett. He's a very good friend of mine. Mr. DODD. Do you have any knowledge as to why he would have been at the theater in Dallas for the apprehension of Oswald? Mr. HosTy. Yes, sir, I would. I heard him calling over the radio and advising he was en route there. lie said that a police officer had been shot, they had the person in question cornered, he thought there was a connection between it and the assassination, and he was proceed-ing immediately to the location. Mr. DODD. Wlho said he thought he had an explanation? Mr. HoSTY. Mr. Barrett. Mr. DODD. Did you ever discuss that with him at a later date?   

> Mr. HOSTYe.

Yes, sir. Mr. Donn. Did he tell you where he thought, where he got the in-formation that that woul-d lead him to believe that at that particular time there was a connection? Mr. lIoSTY. Yes, sir. Because it's highly musual for somebody just to shoot a police officer down in cold blood in the middle of the (lay out in the open like that within hours, within a short time after the assassination. He felt there was possibly a connection. 

Mr. DoDD. And that's the reason he gave? Mr. Hos y. Yes, sir. Mr. DODD. You received a lead that Oswald had moved from the New Orleans area to the Dallas area in November of 1963 Mr. HOSTY. No, sir. lie had disappem'ed from New Orleans to a lo-cation unknown, and that his wife had departed from New Orleans with a woman who spoke Russian and was driving a station wagon with Texas license plates; and I think they surinised that them could 

be a Dallas connection or a Fort Worth connection because of their previous residence there; and that's why we were notified. Mr. DODD. Your lead came from the, New Orleans FBI office? Mr. ITosTm. Yes, sir. That's correct. Mr. DODD. It came from an agent? Mr." Hosry. Well, the correspondence was from agent in charge to agent in charge; from agent in charge at New Orleans to agent in charge at Dallas. Mr. 'DODD. You don't know where that lead came from in New Orleansf Mr. Horny. It was developed by Agent Kaack. as I later determined, from his neighborhood inquiries at-the Oswalds' last residence. Mr. DomD. And that was the source of it Mr. HTosTr. Yes. sir. Mr. Dorm. Mr. Chairman, I yield at this point. Mr. EDWARDS. Mr. Hostv, the rough draft letter written by Oswald to the Russian Embassy that the SAC asked you to destroy-153-

Mr. HosTy. Yes, sir. Mr. EDWARDS [continuing]. The entire time he thought it was some-thing else? Mr. HosTY. I surmise that. I can't say that for certain. Mr. EDWARDS. Was anybody else in the room with you when it was 

ordered destroyed? 

Mr. HOSTY. Not to my knowledge, other than what I related as to what Odum-he apparently overheard him yelling at me. Odum apparently had heard it. Hes the only one I know ofithat heard him. Mr. EDWARDS. Do you think that there is a chance that Mr. Shanklin knew that the letter that he ordered you to destroy was actually a rough draft letter written by Oswald to the Russian Embassy? Mr. HOSTY. I didn't get a chance to explain it to him. No, sir. Mr. EDWARDS. So, you are certain that he thought it was the original Oswald note? Mr. HosTy. I'm not certain. I think, because I did not get an oppor-tunity to fully explain it to him. I started to explain it and lie blew up at me. ,Mr. SEIBERLING. Will the gentleman yield? Mr. EDWARDS. Yes, sir. Mr. SEIBRIDANO. Well, now, Mr. Hosty, as I understood your original testimony before Father Drinan's question, you testified that Mr. Shanklin, that you had a conversation with Mr. Shanklin about the rough draft letter and that after he told you to dispose of that he said, and what about that other thing I told you to get rid of. Mr. TIoswr. No, sir. That followed. When we finally get it straight-ened out and sent the, what is now Commission exhibit 103 to FBI headquarters, he said to me, well, I misunderstood you. Apparently jiow you did get rid of the first note.   

> ,1r. SEIBEBLINOG.

Oh, I see. That was after the conversation, this conversation? Mr. HIosTy. This would have been approximately 1 week or 10 days later. RightI Mr. IliE'BELIO. Thank you. Mr. EDWARDS. Mr. Hosty, who reported the contents of Lee Harvey Oswald's address book to the Warren Commission? Mr. IlosTy. I was the one who took it into evidence from Captain Fritz in the early morning hours of I believe it was Tuesday, which would have been the 26th of November. I took it from Captain Fritz, took it into FBI custody. I personally delivered that notebook to nsp. James Malley. I had previously told them that my name was in there, and I delivered it and pointed out my name to Inspector Mal-ley and said, here it is, and then proceeded to put it with the other evi-dence and forward it to Washington, D.C. It was taken early that moming by airplane to Washington, D.C. to our FBI laboratory. Mr. EDWAmS. Well, the next question is clear then. Why did the FBI leave out your name, license number, address of the FBI field office, when they reported this information to the Warren Commission? Mr. IlosTy. I don't know, sir. I wasn't responsible for that reporting. I would have reported it. Mr. EDWARDS. Can you surmise why they would leave your name out? 154 Mr. HosTy. I think the explanation that was given-now here, I'm stating hearsay from what Agent Gemberlingy has testified, that he took a memorandum which had been prepared by myself concerning the names, the names in English that were in the book. I prepared a menmo-randum on the 22d of November, of all of the names that I could read in the address book. You see, some of thein were in Russian, which Icould not read. I wrote down Ps best I could all of the names in English, prepared amemorandum. Of course, I prepared a separate memorandum concern-ing my name, and the memorandum I prepared was for the purpose of leads, for identifying these other people. Now, Mr. Gemberling apparently took what was meant as a lead memorandum and used it as investigative insert. This is where the error occurred. It was an error of using something for which it was not intended, and he just copied the lead sheet in as an investigative insert. That's the way he has explained it. Mr. EDWARDS. It's disturbing that you received instructions not to volunteer information, however helpful. The FBI was the official investigating arm of the Warren Commission, and there have been accusations made against the FBI that it withheld information from the Warren Commission, and we find out, right in this testimony this morning, that you were instructed not to give them full cooperation. Mr. Hosrr. I don't believe it was meant in quite that context, sir. I think what they meant was that there are many sensitive areas in this whole investigation, and if the Warren Commission wanted to bring one of these areas up, I should answer it. If they did not bring it up, I wasn't to volunteer it. Mr. EDWARDS. Did the Warren Commission ask you this question, do you have anything more that you think is significant? Mr. Hoswr. I don't believe so. Mr. EDWARDS. If they had asked you that question, what would you have said about the Oswald memo ?Mr. Howsr. I probably would have had to tell them, yes, sir. Mr. EDWARDS. How do you think this story got broken in July of this year ?Mr. Hort. Well, I believe an ex-agent who talked to Mrs. Fenner had talked to or furnished it to the Times Herald. I believe the version that first appeared in the paper was that Oswald was going to kill me, which, of course, is preposterous. Even Mrs. Fenner denies that. Mr. EDWARDa. Do you know who the ex-agent might be ?Mr. Hosrt. Well, I have some suspicion, but I can't say for sure. Iwouldn't want to accuse somebody unjustly if I don't really know. Mr. EDWARDS. Well, how many agents in the Dallas Field Office knew about it ?Mr. Hosyr. I understand about 30. Mr. EDWARDS. About 30. How many in the Washington Head-quarters? Mr. Howrr. To my knowledge, none. Mr. EDWARDS. Well, wasn't Mr. Shanklin on the telephone a lot with J. Edgar Hoover? Mr. Hovrr. He was on telephone to FBI Headquarters. I don't know specifically who he was talking to. Mr. EDwARDs. Were he and Mr. Hoover rather close 155 Mr. Hear. Well, he worked for Mr. Hoover and he reported to him. Mr. EDWAM. Well, another new element that came up today, some-thing that is most difficult to understand, and that is your personnel 

file. 

Mr. HoS". Yes, sir. Mr. EDWARDS. There is information in the personnel file that you say has been changed without your authority I

Mr. HosTy. Yes, sir. That's correct. Mr. EDWAM. Your own memorandum was changed by somebody in the FBI I

Mr. Hoary. That's correct. Mr. EDWARDS. OK. Who do you think did it I

Mr. Hosar. I couldn't say. Mr. EDWARDS. Why do you think it was done ?Mr. Hoary. I beg your pardon, sir? Mr. EDWAmm. Wiy do you think it was done ? Why were the answers being different-Mr. Ho-ry. Because the answers I gave, I denied any guilt, any wrongdoing, and in order to find me guilty, they wanted me to plead guilty to something, so they changed it so I, in effect, was entering aplea of guilty, when I, in fact, did not. That's my only explanation. Mr. EDWARDS. Well, in two days of investigation we have quite a list of things that went wrong that shouldn't have gone wrong. We have the Oswald letter that was destroyed; we have the letter to the Rus-sian-the rough draft of the letter to the Russian Embassy; and the Commission Exhibit 103 that very well could have been destroyed if you had followed out the orders of the Special Agent in charge. Mr. Howr. That's correct. Mr. EDWARm. We have the instructions to FBI agents not to volun-teer any information to the Warren Commission, however helpful; and then we have your personnel file--your personnel file with changes in it unauthorized by you. Mr. Hoary. Right Mr. EDWARDS. That's quite a number of distUrbing elements. Mr. Hor Yes. sir. It sure is. Mr. EDWARDS. Mr. SeiberlingI Mr. S=uita.no. Mr. Chairman, thank you. Mr. Hosty, why do you think anyone would have wanted to concoct a case for disciplinary action againstyou? Mr. HoSTy. I couln't say for certain. Mr. Stnrwa. No. Ilave you thought about it from time to time I

Mr. Hoswrr. Yes, sir. I would say that they probably wanted to shift the principal blame to me and to the others who were disciplined.     

> 3r. SEJI.Rr.o. In

your dealings with Mr. Shanklin, do you have the impression that he's the kind of person who would take action on a questionable matter on his own, or would he ask for orders frhom his superiorsI Mr. Iomrr. Well, that's a question that would, of course, call for a conclusion. But I would think that he normally took orders. Mr. SrfIRRLINU). In other words, he was not the kind of person who would take it on his shoulders to do something that might be contro-

versial I

Mr. Homr. I couldn't say for certain. 156 Mr. SFIBERLIO. But I'm asking you for an estimate of his charac-ter personality. Mr. HosTy. He normally followed orders like we all did. Mr. SrJim izNu. That's not only a matter of personality, but a mat-ter of FBI practice, isn't it ?Mr. Hosry. Yes, sir. Mr. SJBULINGO. Now, turning to a little different question. When you interviewed Mr. Oswald, what was his general demeanor? Mr. Hosr. At the outset he became upset with me, as I explained, over my having talked to his wife. He then calmed down, and it was a nornial interview. He was careful not to say anything that could be used against him. He seemed to be in full control of his faculties other than at the end of the interview, when I proposed a question to Cap-tain Fritz concerning his possible visit to Mexico City. He became agitated at that. That's the only two times that he became agitated. Mr. SEn IERIxo. Did he seem like a person, considering the circum-stances, that lie was normal for a man of his faculties. Or a wild man, or what? Mr. Ifowr. Yes sir. No, sir. He was in control of his faculties and knew what he was saying. Mr. SBYRmm.No. Now, Mrs. Fenner told us, when I asked her how it was, 6 weeks that she thought it was, or maybe it was only 2, but in any event several weeks after Mr. Oswald left the note to you on her desk that, she was able to recognize him when she saw him on tele-vision after the President's assassination, and she said, well, it was his wild look, his wild eyes, and his general manner of being somewhat disturb d. Do you have anything in your experience that would rive us any feeling as to whether her impression was the correct impression or not. Mr. HOaTY. No, sir. During the time that I conducted the interview of him, other than those periods where he lost his temper, he was calm and collected. Mr. SRERTJ.N-o. Now, you were following his case before Novem-ber 22? Mr. I osiy. Right. Mr. SEIRnwnhJo. Did it strike you that lie was a person who was men-tWIll disturbed in any wayI Mr. Ilosry. No, sir. Mr. SEIBERLI No. In anything that you saw? Mr. HloTy. No, sir. Mr. SE]BF.RLINo. Thank you. I have no further questions, Mr. Chair-

> 'nall.

Mr. EDWARM. Mr. Kindness? Mr. KiN DNEs. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Hosty, you testified earlier that when you testified before the Warren Commission, you had certain instructions as to the manner in which your testimony should be examined, or the boundaries thereof. Do yotu have any such instructions today ?Mr. 1n'. Yes, sir. I sought instructions from FBI Headquarters, and I was instructed to tell everything; to hold back in no manner, shape, or form. Mr.K DiNSs Would you be able to respond to this question, the, within that framework? In order for us to determine how this stor came to light through the Dalla newspaper in July of 197, should this subcommittee attempt to obtain the testimony of Mr. Hortoin Mr. Homr. Mr. Horton? le's not--Which Mr. HortonI There's two Horton's in the Mr. KNDNFSS. The one who is a retired agent. Mr. Ilowr. Oh. That would be Ural Horn. I doubt if he is the original source. I don't think of him as being the original source. Perhaps he is. I don't know. Mr. KiNDNESS. We had testimony from Mrs Fenner yesterday indicating that he had a particular interest in talking about the case, at any rate, in talking abut the note and the relationship of Mr. Shanklin's demeanor to the discussion of that note. But you would not have any further thoughts on that I

Mr. Hory. He had some interest. I don't know what interest he would have, sir, no. Mr. KINDNMSS. Just in discussing it with Mrs. Fenner in what might have been a joking way, but indicating, according to Mrs 

Fenner, that when Mr. IMorton discussed the Oswald note with Mr. Shanklin he became very agitated. Mr. Howff. Well, that's news to me. I'd never heard that until yes-terday when I heard that Mr. Horton's name came up because, you see, he was not even assigned in Dallas at the time. He was assigned to the Abilene, Tex. Resident Agency at the time of the assassination. Mr. KI"NrFS& Would the knowledge of the Oswald note be com-mon among the agents who were associated with the Dallas office 

but were resident agents in other cities I Mr. I1oer. They would be less liable to know about it than the people in Headquarters- but the people from the resident agencies periodically come into Headquarters City. All of the files are kept in Headquarters Cty, which necessitates their coming into Headquar-ters City periodically; so we do come to see them from time to time. So he would have less opportunity, but he would have an oppor-tunity. Mr. KiNDNFM. Is there anything else in connection with the inquiry in here this morning having to do with the conduct of the investing tion of the Oswald note or the alleged implication of Oswald in the assasination of President Kennedy that you could tall us that we 

have not asked you that would throw any light on t4e conduct of that investigation or the results thereof ?Mr. Hort. No, sir. I can't think of anything more. Mr. KiNDNE7S. Is there anything that you could add to your testi-mony here this morning that wold clarify and which you have not already offered about how the investigation was handled?. Mr. Hort. Yes. I would like to emphasize that my instructions were given to me prior to my testimony before the Warren Com-mission, are general instructions, I think, that any law enforcement officer is given before he appears in any trial or any hearing, that you are to stick to what you have flirtd-hand knowledge of and not to volunteer anything. And I feel that what they had in mind was that there were man sensitive areas in the Warren Commission inquiry, and if they did not want to bring it up, I was not to bring it up. Xn other words, they were to set the pace, just as today. I can only answer questions that you prqpoi* to me. I woo to do the se S-2--f--.-158 thing there, that if they didn't want to bring it up, I wasn't to bring it u .

h, yes, and another thing I should bring to mind is I was specifi-cally directed not to discuss FBI policy of why we did things certain ways. If they asked me any questions on policy, I was to defer that to Mr. Belmont, who would follow me n testimony. I remember there was one question they brought up concerning FBI policy and I told them that he would answer that, and he did following my testimony. Mr. KmxwDuS Thank you, Mr. Host. Mr. EDWARDS. We will recess for 10 minutes to attend a rollcall vote. 

[A brief recess was taken.] Mr. EDWARD& The committee will come to order. The gentleman from Massachusetts, Mr. Drinan. Mr. DI=NAN. Mr. Hosty, you indicated for the first time publicly that their was a forgery in your file, and you said that the reason for this in your judgment was that they wanted to shift the blame to you. If this forget hadn't been there, if they hadn't shifted the blame, what precisely is to blame I

Mr. Hosrr. Well, I suppose you mean the blame that the Warren Commission placed on the FBI. Is that what you mean ?Mr. D1NAZ9. I'm asking you what you mean. What blame did they want to shift to you I Why did they cover up and alter the records in your judgment and shift the culpability of the blame? What would have happened to them if they hadn't done this? Mr. Hos'rr. I don't know, unless the people would have put the blame on FBI policy, perhaps, FBI headquazters. Mr. I)RtNAN. But they felt it was going to come on them and who was "they"? Who would have falsiffleyour file? Mr. Horr. I couldn't say for certain. Mr. DRINAN. Well, I would like you to, contrary to FBI instruc-tions, to tell us the truth, the whole truth and nothmW but the truth  

> about

every facet of this matter, how you disovered t-is that un-authored--nd what you have done about it and what Mr. Kelley said in August of 1978. Mr. BxAY. Excuse me, if I might just clarify that. That is not con-trary to FBI instructions or any instuctions this witness has. Mr. DRnAN. All right. Tell us everything that is relevant about this new development. Mr. Howrr. Yes, sir. As I explained, I made those answers on or about December the 6th, 198, In a memorandum to the .aget-in. charge. On or about December the 8th, 196, former supervisor Ken-neth Howe handed my memorandum back to me. He seemed to be upset and agitated. He said, keep these, you might need these some day, so I didkeep them. It was about 5 or 6 years ago-I don't recall the precise date--it would have been in the spring, however, that my personnel file was accidentally left out on a supervisor's desk, and I had an oppor-tunity to review it. And I had never been able to quite understand what they were talking about in my letters of censure, about delayed reporting, because I felt partcularly srong on that point that I was 159 not guilty of delayed reporting, and they criticized me for not hav-in conducted an interview of Oswald's wife. ir felt that I was in good position there because the explanations I made, and I looked at the memorandum to see what possible motive they would have for the, for this letter of censure. Then I noticed that the answers in there were different from the ones I had given. Mr. DRiXAN. How many answers were different IMr. Hoerr. Just those two on those two points Mr. DRAIN. What next did you do about the very serious charge of the falsification of a Federal fie by superiors I

Mr. Hoerr. I didn't do anything until Mr. Kelley became Director. Then I brought it to his attention shortly after he became Director. Mr. DM~A€. And what happened after that Mr. Hoerr. I told him orally. He told me to reduce it to wring which I did, and send it to him personal and confidential to his per-sonal attention so that it would not go through normal channels, and I didn't hear anything for approximately 5 weeks, amnd then I received a letter from him, which I can make available, which he--

Mr. DmNAX. In essence, what did that letter say I

Mr. Homr. In essence, it said that the action was taken under Director Hoover and that he, himself, could do nothing about that previous action taken by another person.     

> Mr. DnATAN. Did he

admit the forgery I

Mr. Hoerr. Not in the letter, no, sr. Mr. DI aN. Did you have proof that it is a forgery I

Mr. Hoerr. I presented my original answers to him as an attach. ment to my letter of explanation. Mr. DsiAN. And did you have proof that the two or three par&-graphs had been substantially chan - dMr. Hoerr. I could see that from looking at it. Mr. DmwAx. No, I mean, did he aept that contention ?Mr. Hoerr. He has never come back and said otherwise. I'd never been advised to the contrary. Mr. DUmAx. Are you satlfied with that answer ?Mr. Hoerr. Well, e didn't do anything immediately about it; how-ever, I can say this, that I was given a snall promotion approximately 8 months aftir that Mr. DmwAx. Any coection .Mr. Howrr. I couldn't say that it was directly o but that was the first favorable personnel action I had received since November 1968. Mr. DmNAN. Well, my time has come up as expired, but, if I may, IIll come back to this, but one last point. Is all of this relevant to thi subject of this inquiry ? N

Mr. Hoerr. Well, I was asked to bring up thi.L I believe Mr. Ed. wards wanted to bring up the part about the disciplinmry part, and it 

wCMIld be pertinent to that, but perhaps not pertinent to the detruc. tion of the ltter but I would bring it up, as I undamtand, at Repr-sentative Edwards' personal request. Mr. DraxAi. Except that, maybe-

(r. Horr. Maybe. Mr. DftXAN. Are you amuming or asserting that the same person 160 who told you to destroy the letter also directly or indirectly falsified the fileI Mr. Hosry. It's possible. Mr. DJUNAW. Thank you. Mr. EDWARDS. Mr. Parker. Mr. PARKER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. iosty, I believe that you testified today that there was no signa-ture, to the best of your recollection I

Mr. How-. To the best of my recollection, that's right, sir. Mr. PAR.KE. And you did not have any conversation with Mrs. Fonner when you received the note the first time I

Mr. Ior. The only th'g that she said was that she gave me the note and was kind of laughing and thought it was amusin and said something to the effect that some nut came by and left this for you. Mr. PARKzR. How did you know then that the note was from Lee Harvey Oswald IMr. HoSTY. Really, I didn't know. I should have made that clear at the outset. I think I mentioned that to you earlier, that really I wasn't certain if it was from him or from another one of my subjects who had been giving me some trouble along these lines. I wasn't really 100 percent certain until I talked to Oswald at the police station that afternoon when he brought up the same point again. Mr. PARI. M So the note resided in your worWbox during that period of time and you actually did not know who-Mr. Hosrr. Not for certain, no, sir. Mr. PARKE. With respect to the personnel files in the Bureau, are they kept in any particular place? Mr. Hosrr. Yes, sir. They are kept in the SAC safe. M[r. PARKER. That would be in every office Mr. Hon-Y. E 'ry office that I know of. Mr. PARKm. 3ack in 1963 or 1964, do you recall who the Director of Personnel was for the Bureau ?Mr. Hosry. Nicholas P. Callahan, who is now Associate Director. Mr. PARKER. I see, and he would have been over all the personnel ?Mr. Homr. lie was Assistant Director of Administration. Person-nel would ome under him, and I understand Mr. James B. Adams was the personnel officer. He is the present Deputy Associate Director, who testified before you. He was the personal *lcer under the direct su-perviaiou of Mr. Nicholas Callahan. Mr. Pren . All right. You mentioned that you thought there was some kind of stop put on your file I

Mr. HoBrt. Yes, sir. Mr. PAlxm. Do you know who might have, or have any idea who night have put that stop on your file ?Mr. Howry. I've been told, sir, that it was former Associate Direc-tor Clyde Tolsom.    

> Mr. EDWARwD.

Mr. Hoety, what kind of a case had you opened on Lee Harvey Oswald and why was he under investigation I

Mr. hIosrr. Well, ir it wa orgia" llyopened, as I testified earlier, a approximately June o1962, following his return from the Soviet Union. 161 We were investigating to see if he'd been'influenced or was being di-rected or controlled by the Soviet Union in any way, and, of course, the same would apply to his wife, as I explained. We open certain cases on people coming from the Soviet Union Communist China, if they fall within certain criteria, age and educationwise. Mr. EDWARDS. You thought that they might have become spies or saboteurs Mr. Hosni. It's a possibility, yes, sir. Mr. EDwADs. What was the additional information that had ar-rived from headquarters resulting in Oswald's file from Dallas being out of its jacket ?Mr. Hosrr. All right. That was a communication from the Wash ington field office, dated I believe, November 19, 1963, setting forth information that Oswald had been quite recently in contact with the Soviet Embassy in Washington, D.C. Mr. EDWARDS. How do you account for the fact that practically everybody who worked on the Oswald matter in the FBI was cen-sured or transferred except Mr. Shanklin I

Mr. Hosrr. I can't explain that. It is unusual. 

Mr. EDWARDS. Mr. Kindness. Mr. KNDNMSS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Host y, could we go back over this change in the record in your personnel file? You say your filebecame available for your examination by chance in the spring of what year Mr. oerr. It would have been 5 or 6 years ago. I can't pinpoint the year better than that. Mr. KtNDNEss. And you were still in the Dallas office? Mr. Hoar. Kansas City, sir. 

Mr. KINDNESS. You were in Kansas City at that timeI Mr. Hoso'. Right, right. Mr. KINDNESS. And the special agent in charge there is who, or was who at that time ?Mr. Hosr. I believe at that time it would have been Mr. Karl, that's K-a-r-I Dissley. Mr. KiNrDNS. Is there any possibility that he left that available for your examination on purpose Mr. Hoary. I couldn't prove that. Mr. KI.NDESS. Do you believe that to be true I

Mr. Hosr. I couldn't say.: Mr. KxNwxrss. Were the circumstances such that it WaA unusual for your file to be out like that I                                       

> Mr. Hosn-. Normally, they are kept in the special agent in charge's safe except when there is some reason to be using them, and the reason Isay it was the spring is the end of March of every year, every agent

has an efficiency report written at which time they need the personnel file to write the efficiency report, and all of the personnel files of all of the agents were out on the various supervisors' desks in preparation of these annual efficiency reports, not only mine, but all of the files were out. °Mr. Ktn;DNSs. Had you, prior to that time, discussed with Mr. Diss-ley your personnel situation? lMr. Ho-ri. Yes, sir. 162 Mr. KPWNRss. Your Dallas service ?Mr. EDAwDs. Would you yield at that point? I'd like to ask fur-ther on that subject. Do you think that your career plans or career has changed since the Oswald matter came up I

Mr. Hosr. I never received any favorable personnel action after November 22, 1983 until after I talked to Mr. Kelley. Mr. EDwARS. Thank you. Mr. Kxr;rrss. Now, resuming, Mr. Hoasty, do you have reason to believe that Mr. Dissley was sympathetic toward your problem there? Mr. Hosrr. Very definitely. Mr. Kniwi.rss. All right, now, as to the content, the actual content of the material in the file that was changed, what was the nature of that piece of paper ? Aain would you go over that for us? Mr. Hosrr. All right. it was a memorandum from the agent-in-charge to FBI headquarters. Mr. K1XDNZ8s. Was it signed by him I

Mr. Hoary. No, it was not signed. It was what we call a memo-randum form. It was a letter in which he set forth-the following are the answers to the questions prop d by Assistant Director Gale on December 5, 1963, and then one that they were set forth-SA Howe would answer certain ones and I would answer certain ones, and then at the end there was an addendum by himself, by Mr. Shanklin. Mr. KUlrDNss. And the answers to the questions, would you char-acterize them as being reportedly Mr. Shanklin's answers, or your answers, or Mr. Howe'sI Mr. Hoerr. In the memorandum they were listed as my answers. It said, SA Hosty and then setting forth what was purported to be my answer. Mr. KiNrDwss. Your version of those answers, is that available in writing anywhere tMr. Mew. Yes, sir. My attorney has it. Mr. KxiNmss. And we would be supplied with those? Mr. Hoerr. Right It has some corrections and additions that were made by Mr. Howe. He made some changes on it in his handwriting, and they would appear on the one memorandum, and some minor changes that I made in my handwriting will appear in the other copy. Mr. Kxii . Was the responsibility for the report then Mr. Shanklin's? Mr. Hoerr. Right. Mr. KnmNas And there is no signature on either yours, or Mr. Shanklin's, or Mr. Howe's IMr. Hosrr. No, it would be direct to Director, FBI from SAC, Dallas, Mr. KINDNEs& And you're certain it was not a forgery ?Mr. Hoer!. No. sir. Mr. KINDN.SS. It would be incorrect to characterize it as a forgeryI Mr. HToy. Thlt's correct. Mr. KxNDNEL Ihit it was a report within the personnel function of the Bureau ?Mr. HosTY. Right. Mr. KNDNF.. Could you go over for us the exact nature of the dif-ferences in the language, comparing your answers to those answers that appear in the report ?163 Mr. Hosry. Yes, sir. The principal difference was in the reply, as I recall, to answers to questions 5 and 6. At the end they stated, in effect, that I agreed that I should have done it the other way, that Iad admitted doingit wrong, which I did not state. Mr. KINDNESs. ow, and you took that to mean that Mr. Shanklin was saying in the report that you had said that? Mr. Hos'T. It was set out in such a way that it was supposed to represent my answers, or Mr. Howe's answers. Mr. KINDNESS. In the same report, was there any language indicat-ing that Mr. Shanklin was expressing his views or that this was his report? Mr. Howrr. As I recall that, there was a statement by him at the end, yes sir. Mr. KINDNESS. Did that statement tend to confirm the answers that appeared above ? Is that the meaning b, Sir. Ho-T. Ye& He concurred in the above answers, or something to that effect. Mr. KINDNMss. Thank you. My time is up. Mr. EDwARDs Mr. Dodd. Mr. DODD. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Hosty, did you ever give Mrs Paine or Marina Oswald the address of the FBI Office in DallasI Mr. HosT. I gave Mrs. Paine my name and my telephone number. I don't believe I gave the address; I just gave the telephone number. to the best of my recollection. Mr. DODD. Okay. Now, you testified on a number of occasions that you had never met Lee Harvey Oswald prior to your encounter with him during the interview, afterhe was arrested? Mr. Hoery. That is correct. Mr. DoDe. There has been some problem in that the notebook entry lists your name, address and also the license plate number of your car. Mr. Hosry. That's correct. Right. Mr. DODD. Could you explain for us how it would be possible for t hat kind of an entry to be made? Mr. Hoerr. Yes. Marina Oswald has testified under oath before the Warren Commission that she jotted down my license number when I visited out there, either on November 1 or November 5, and furnished it to her husband. Mr. DODD. Would that testimony be accurate based on where your car was parked Mr. Hosry. Oh, yes, sir, yes, sir. Mr. DODD. She could have seen the license plate on your car? Mr. HosT!. No problem at all. Mr. DoDD. You were parked right in front of her house. Mr. HosTy. No. I was parked next door and then when I left, Iwould have driven in front of the house, went to the end of the block, circled around and come back in front of the house again, so I would have passed in front of the house coining and going, so she could have seen it those times. Mr. DODD. And you think that's probably how she saw it ?  

> Ml'. H[OSTY.

In the second time I went out on November 5, it's my 

recollection I parked in the driveway. 164 Mr. DODD. Oh. You talked about where there had been some note made of the fact that there was some mail received on November 22 in the FBI Office? Mr. Hosry. That's correct. Mr. DODD. Was there a photo from the, was there a photo sent from the Central Intelligence Agency, marked Lee Harvey Oswald I

Mr. HoeTy. No, sir. That letter, that photograph was delivered on the 23d of November 1963, and that was given to Bardwell Odum. Iam familiar with the picture in question. Mr. DODD. And from whom was that I

Mr. HosTY. From the CIA in Mexico City. They brought a photo-graph on the 23d, early-the morning of the 23d. Mr. DODD. Was there any memo attached to that picture? Mr. Hosry. I didn't see one. Mr. DODD. And do you know what happened to the picture? Mr. HosrY. Yes, sir. Odum trimmed off the edges of the picture to remove the background and then he took it to the hotel where Marina Oswald and Margarita Oswald, Iee Oswald's mother, were staying, andl he attempted to show the photograph that-this is hearsay, you understand, now, this is what Odum himself told me--that he then took the picture and tried to show it to Marina Oswald, and he was unable to. Then he came back and returned tho picture. I don't know what happened to the picture after that. Mr. DODD. And do you know what happened, why it was difficult for him to show the picture ? Was there some-Mr. TosTy. Margarita Oswald didn't want Marina Oswald to talk to him. Mr. DODD. Could you tell us about in detail the mail that was received on the 22d of November regarding the Oswald file? Mr. Hosry. Yes, sir. That was a letter from the Washington Field Office, dated, I believe, the 19th or maybe the 18th of November, received on the 22d of November, and it contained information con-cerning a communication that Oswald had just sent to the Soviet Embassy in Washington, D.C. Mr. DODD. And you have that ? That'sthe only piece of correspond-ence, the only piece of information, that you re aware of that arrived on November 22d regarding Lee Oswald I

Mr. I-oSTy. Well, there were numerous teletypes going back and forth after the assassination, I mean prior to the Assassination, you mean? Mr. DODD. Yes. Mr. HosTY. That afternoon we had numerous, but that was the only one that came on the 22d, prior to the assassination. Mr. DODD. Prior to the assassination, that's what I'm talking about. OK, did you meet on the morning of November 22d with an Army Intelligence agent? Mr. TlosT. I did. Mr. DoDn. Is his name James Powell? Mr. TIosTY. No. sir. Mr. DODD. Would you give me his name? Mr. HosT. Ed Coyle---o-y-l-e. 

"M r. DOrD. Do you know James PowellI Mr. HosT. Not--I don't think so, sir. 165 Mr. DODD. I wonder if you could give us--yesterday Mr. Shanklin testified that during his trip to Kansas City, you pressed him about wanting to see Director Kelley. Mir. Howry. I believe when he came to Kansas City to see Director Kelley, I believe I had already talked to Director Kelley, if my memory is correct, and I was waiting for his reply at that tune. Ile, I think Mr. Shanklin might have misunderstood me that I was in the process of trying to get the matter straightened out, and he might have drawn the inference from that that I had not already talked to him, but I believe I had already talked to Director Kelley and was waiting for his reply at that time. Mr. Dowe. Did Mr. Shanklin tell you to prvpare a memo on it, if you wanted to see him, or-Sir. JIosT. Something to that effect. He said, oh, I don't know why you want to bother with that, forget about it, just write him a memo, aId he changed the subject. Sir. Dow). Forget about what I

Mr. I oirrr. I be-g your pardon I

Mr. 1)o. Forget about what f

Mr. Howry. Forget about trying to get the situation changed. le said you don't want to get promoted anyway, what's the difference, and he tried to change the subject. Mr. DODD. Do you think it's fair to assume that the rcasou he wanted to change the subject was because he didn't want information iregard-in.. the destruction of the letter to come out I

Mir. TIosry. I don't know. Mr. Dooe. My time isup. Mr. EDWAIDS. Mr. Butler. Mr. BUTF.R. No questions. ir. EDWARDS. Mr. Kie        

> Mr. Kizz. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.

Mr. liosty, your recollection has been very detailed in many respects today. I wonder if you could tell the subcommittee, has this been your direct recollection of the events of 12 years ago, or have you in some manner refreshed your recollection of events? Mr. llowrr. It's a combination of the two. It's my best recollection, wnd in many cases I have looked at a few documents, but mostly it's  

> (Ie

to my recollection. Mr. Kiz. When did you first learn that a note had been left for you, which we subsequently learned was Oswald's note? Mir. Hosr'. I learned that the afternoon of the day it was delivered. Mr. K iJz. After lunch? Mr. I IosTv. Sometime after lunch, right. Mr. KizL. And did you learn that from a switchboard inessa ge, or    

> (( yolt just

learn when you went to pick up your messages at the desk? Mr. I ow y. My recolectMon was, I passed Mrs. Fenner's desk, and she brought it to my attention as I went past her desk. AMr. Ktzr Did you come in the front door and go up to the desk to check your messages before you went to your office, or did you colie 

fromn your office to the desk, do you recall ?Mr. Ilosry. My office was on the 11th floor, but we would always 166 enter through the front so I could go by and check my mail. You see, bygoing by Mrs. Feanner's desk, I could check my incoming mail, as wellas checking telephone messages. Mr. KjL& And you saw a blank envelope that had the note in it? Mr. Hosrr. It may have had my name on the outside of the envelope. I think he had it as "Hasty." He had my name misspelled if I recall. Mr. KzE. I see. Earlier you testified "to the best of my recollection" that Mrs. Fenner did not read the note I

Mr. HoTry. I didn't say that. I said she didn't read it in my presence. 

I have no knowledge if she did read it or didn't read it. Mr. KLE. Well, subsequently, you commented that she said the note was from some nut or something like that ?Mr. HosTY. Right. Mr. Kuw. You think this could simply be from her observation of the person rather than from having read the contents ?fr. HosTY. It would be possible from her observations of him. Mr. KLv. Did you describe the contents of the note to anybody ?Mr. Hos'r. No, sir, other thian to Mr. Shanklin and Mr. Howe. Of course, they 'had the note in front of them. Mr. Kiz. Did you ever work on a report where you either super-vised the numbering of pages by Mrs. Fenner or in which you assisted her in the numbering of pages of the report I

Mr. Hoery. What she has reference fo there was the first report that was put out, I believe, on the 30th of November or maybe it was the second one December the 2nd. I believe it was the-report of Warren de Bruyes, in which we were numbering poges..Yes, there was about six or seven agents and several clerks involved in helping assemble end number the pages. We were trying to got it out in a hurry. It was amultipage report. It ran several hundred pages. Mr. KR . We heard testimony yesterday that when Mr. Shanklin wo.s told by-excuse me, 1 minutea-by Mr. Horton that the note was in existence, that lie nearly jumped out of the window of the car, or that Mr. Horton asked him about whatever happened to the note, that he almost jumped out of the car window. Why do you think Mr. Shanklin would have a reaction like thatI This would be in December-of 1973. Mr. Hofr. That's the first time I heard about this, when it came up yesterday. I don't know anything about this event of December 

> o1973.

Mr. KL.E. Coming back to the report where you helped Mr. Fen-nor number the pages, do you recall her asking you anything about the existence of the note ?Mr. HosTy. I recall her %aing something to the effect, doyou remember when he came up to the office, or something to that effect, and I just changed the subject and walked away from her. Mr.'KE1.. Do you remember what your response to her was? Mr. HOSTY. Yes, it was negative, or I said, I don't know what you're talking about, and walked away from her. Mr. KCrE1. Why would you give her that response? Mr. Hos"r. I didn't want her talking about it. Mr. Ki~r.. Well, Mr. Chairman, I have no further questions. Mr. EDWARD Yes. 167 Mr. SmBmiraNo. Mr. Chirman, I'd like to ask one question. Mr. Howe-Mr. Hosr. Mr. Hosty, sir. Mr. SwumumLo. Excuse me, Mr. Hosty. Mr. Hosr. You have Mr. Howe next. That's quit* all right. Mr. SF.nznuNo. Sorry. Do you have any conclusions of your own as to whether there was any motive in anybody who tried to cover up anything in connection wifli the FBI's handling of this case or any-body--meen anyone in the FBII  

> SMr.

Hoerr. No, sir. Mr. SzsX LInq. But you do have before you the fact that Mr. Shanklin ordered you to destroy the memorandum and the note, and that your personnel file was falsified, and that you were downgraded, and your promotion-Mr. Hosry. I was not downgraded sir Mr. SzmzRzuo. You were disciplined and so was Mr. Howe., He was demoted. Mr. Hoary. Right. Mr. SpuImTsNo. Again, would you tell us how you rationalize these events? Why do you think these would take place ?Mr. Hoary. Why what ? The discipline action I

Mr. Szsrwxuo. Well, this whole series resulting in a falbifled mem-orandum in your personnel file. Mr. Hos'ir. As far as the administrative action, the personnel action, the only conclusion I can have is that certain people in FBI Head-quarters wanted to fix the blame on the agents in the field, rather than on the people at Headquarters. Mr. SzJ.mmB €o. Blame for what ?Mr. HosTY. For any alleged failures on our part. Mr. SFmpauNo. Did the office, did anyone in the office express any feeling that they had failed somehow? Mr. Homry. No, sir. We didn't feel we had. Mr. Sxm~m No. Did Mr. Shanklin ever express that kind of view ?Mr. Hon-r. No sir. As you know, the Warren Commission was critical of the FBi. Mr. SzmwuXo. But, these events regarding the destruction of the memorandum and note occurred before the Warren Commission ever came to any conclusion. Mr. Hoir. That's right, before it was even planned. Mr. SEyi mLim. You have no thoughts of your own as to why the disciplinary action, why the orders to cover up by destroying pp eis, and so=rt Mr. Hosry. No, sir I couldn't say. Mr. SEmIEzIINo. Thank you. Mr. EDWATDs. Mr. Hosty, do you have any knowledge of an alleged Telex that was received in all Southern field offices shortly before the assassination warning that President Kennedy might be assassinated in Dallas? Mr. HosTy. I was questioned about that the last few months, the same as many agents around the FBI were, and if any such teletype existed it would have been brought to my attention. I fee that this person is refeiring to a teletype that was sent after the assassination of President Kennedy and before the identification 168 of Lee Oswald as the assassin. There was a period of about 3 or 4 hours. A teletype quite similar to the purported teletype sent 5 days earlier, was sent during that 3-hour period. I have seen that, and I think that is where the confusion lies. Mr. EDWARDS. And did you know Jack Ruby Mr. Hosry. No, sir, not prior to the 24th of November. Mr. EDWASm. Did you meet him after that VMr. HosrY. No, sir, I never did meet him. Mr. EDWASM. I mean, did you interview him ?Mr. Hosr. No, I did not interview him. Mr. EDWARmm. Did you know anything about him? Had you heard of him before this? Mr. Howry. Not prior to the 24th of Novemiber. Mr. EDWARDS. Are there any other questions I

Father Drinan. Mr. DRINAN. Mr. Howe was censured for his failure to place Oswald on the FBI Security Index, and he alleges that the regulations at that time did not require it ?Mr. Hosr. That is correct. Mr. DRIrNANf. Do you feel that the letter that came from Oswald, if that had gone through the normal channels and had been added to Oswald's file, would that have resulted in Oswald being placed upon the FBI Security Index VMr. Hosr. No, sir, it wouldn't, and even if he had been, it wouldn't have changed the picture as far as referral to the Secret Service. Mr. DRINAN. Well, let's stay with the Security Index. Mr. RorT. All right. All right. Mr. DRr^NA. Obviously, that's a very serious charge against Mr. howe and they demoted him for it, and he says that the regulation didn't require that? Mr. HoTr. That's correct. Mr. DRINAN. Do you think that Mr. Shanklin might have felt that when he became so agitated and told you to destroy this note, do you 

think that he might have theorized that if this had gone into the fles, then it would be known that the FBI blew it because this gentleman should have been on the Security Index I

Mr. Hosrr. I don't think he would have been on the Security Index; even if lie had been, it still wouldn't have made any difference. Mr. D.IN€AN. No, but the allegation is that he wasn't there and he should have been. Now, tell us exactly why, in your judgment, you and Mr. Howe were correct is not putting Mr. Oswald on the Security Index? .r. Iowry. Because the Security Index was a criteria that was set up in accordance with the McCarran Act in 1950, which was individ-uals who would be taken into custodial detention in the event of a na-tional emergency, and the criteria, as outlined, at that time had to do with persons who belonged to major subversive organizations, and he didn't belong to a major subversive organization. Therefore, he didn't fit the criteria as it existed at that time. Mr. DRINAN. Well. does the FBI in Washington have some justifi-cation for demoting Mr. Howe, saying you failed to place Oswald on this list I They must have some criteria. 160 

SMr. lsHe. None, no, sir, none whatsoever. Not on the basit of 

Mr. I)RNAK. Well, I come back to the conclusion that Mr. Hosty and Mr. Howe are being penalized over a long period of time by some-one-and I wonder whet her you can tie this up with something that you indicated, that a gentleman very high in theFBI, Clyde Tolson, put a stop on you file tMr. Hoerr. That's correct. Mr. D AN. Tell us more about that. Mr. Hofrf. I learned that from Mr. Dissley shortly before Mr. Diss-ley retired from the FBI. He told me he had determined, he had rec-ommended me for promotion to, I guess you would say, assistant supervisor-we call relief supervisor-and he had been turned down by headquarters and told that that was the reason that there was a stop on my file from Mr. Tolson. He told me this within, oh, within a few weeks before he retired. Mr. DRINAN. What conclusion can we draw, trying to make sophe sense out of this whole thing, that here it's not in tXe Dallas office. it's at the highest levels of the FBI, andiyou are suggesting that somehow they want to prevent you from rising as you normalFy would in the FBII Mr. Hosrr. Right. That's correct. Mr. Dwwmc. What motivation do they have ?Mr. Hosw. I wouldn't be able to fathom Mr. Tolson's mind. I don't know why he did it. I couldn't say. Mr. DiaNAN. WoUld you say that the same thing applies to Mr. Howe ? That there's a constant discrimination, if you will, or a constant stop on his normal growth in his career? Mr. Hosrr. From what I know of his activities after he was trans. ferred to Seattle, he did not receive any favorable personnel action until after I talked to Mr. Kelley to my knowledge. Mr. DmxAw. Are you two people being penalized more than all of the others that were censured Mr. HosT. I would say more, yes. Mr. DMNAu . Sir, we are trying to make sense out of this, trying to assess responsibility, and it becomes more and more strange. It seems to me that you obviously have thought in your mind over the years as to the motivation, and would you have any theories of the motivation of other individuals who would be doing this to two people? Mr. Hoerr. No sir, I couldn'.. Mr. DMaXN. Well, what is the possible motivation ? Why should they have given you a small promotion 8 months after you complained? They gave you no rectification of your record I

Mr. Ho.rr. No sir. Mr. DRTNAN. All right. And that was the first. Was your salary kept low? Mr. loer. No, air I was allowed to increase in the normalin-grado steps after I was taken of probation. Mr. IMxAN. Well, the iference is drawable that someone has a lot to hide or to cover up and that is one of the continuing ways by which they do it Mr. Hosrr. Possibly. 170 Mr. D)mq. We, we're left with a m-ry in the end that I told this to the. antlemn yetrday, that's Cer four people, who wt disagree wiim fundamentally and someone has to rectify thotI 

suppo, to find out who was te n the truth and who imt. But that l'ileft ith the concept here that we just don't know what has ben going on all of them years. One final question. In your judgment should th Warren Commis-sion be reopened ?Mr. Hosrr. Based upon what I know, I think they have all the in-formation or they had all the information. Mr. DTmNaN. ;ey didn't have all the information that you told us this morning, sir. Mr. Hwir. Well, that's true, but I don't think that would be suffi-cient basis to reopen it. Mr. DRIWAr. Do you think that there is enough new evidence to justify a new commission, a new committee of some type, going back 

over the entire matter of the asasination of the President? Mr. Homr. That would have to be a judgment made by persons higher than myself. Based upon what I know, I don't think there's sufficient additional Information for them to take further action. Mr. DmWAx. Thank you. I yield back to the chairman. Mr. EnwAms. Mr. Kindness. Mr. Kimsxm. In view of the line of queioning and tedimony that we've just complete, I think it's necessary to go into one other mat-ter In our personnel situation. First: Whia is your educational back-Mr. Howr. I have a bachelors degree in business administration, accounting minor from the University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, Ind. Mr. Kxiwass. And have you worked in a supervisory capacity since you have been with the FBI I

Mr. Hs r. No, sir, I was barred from that. I mean I did not work in a supervisory capacity before November 22, 1963, and an attempt to make an assistant supervisor or relief supervisor 5 or 6 years ago was turned down. Mr. KnrNixss. And did you ever have supervisory experience in any other employment prior to being with the FBI ?Mr. Hoe". No, sir. Mr. KnM wus. Is there any reason to believe that you may not be qualified for supervisory position in relation to other things in your personnel record, not relating to this matter. Mr. Hoerr. Not that I know of. Mr. KuMwmm Are there many agents that you know of with your years of experience who are not in the sup y potio.t Mr. Hoerr. Beg your pardon, sir pMr. Knnwm Are there many agents you know of in the FBI with your same years of experience who are not in a supervisory position ?Mr. Hos~r. Only approximately 1 out of 10, qr 1 out of U[ would be a supervisor, and then there would be I or ql9 f orat sper visors for each squad, so the percentage would be that the would not be. 171 

Mr. K s. Is it conceivabl,~ then, that the fact that you are not a supervmor a entirely unrelated to the Oswald situationT Mr. Hoeff. I couldn't state that for certain-Mr. KmIDN=U. Could you state for certain that it is related then ?Mr. Hosrr. I can't y or sure. I might clarify here that Mr. Dissley never did make his recommendation in writig to FBI headquarters because he was, he had made a telephonic iury first to se i t was feasible to send the written request in, and when he was telephonically advised no, then there was no written record made. Mr. Kmxszs But not everybody has achieved it ?Mr. ony.R.ht, and I fully r~ealise it. I'm not judging that. Mr. Ho m. an" yo u, Mr. Cha i rud Mr. EDwADs. Mr. Seiberling. Mr. Smmaa o. Well tre, always room for one more. Mr. Hosty, in your experience in the FBI, have there been other cases where it looked as though Washington was trying to focus the blame for some failure away ;9m itself and onto some agent out in the field ?Mr. Hosrr. This was a normal procedure. Mr. 8mmuxo Thank you. Mr. Eowims. Are there further questons? Mr. Dow. Yes, Mr. Chairman,! have 'ust a couple. I n elected to 

ask Mr. Hoety, when you talked to Mr. hankin i ansas City, and the sguetion made that you prepare a report or file a re t did you do t tDid you prepare a memo, a report to go to Mr. Kely Mr. How". Excuse me I didn' undersnd the quetiom. Mr. Dow. Well, aocorAing to your testimony and yestedy Mr. Shanklin's testimony, that he had made a suggeson to you regarding this matter, that a memo be prepared, did-you prepare a memo or something like that? Mr. Hory. Yes, sir. I had already prepared it. The letter had al-ready been sent to Mr. Kelley. He didi' apparently realize, when Ihad talked to him that I had already talked to Mr. Kelley and that Ihad already sent a letter to him. Mr. DowD. Could we have a copy.of that memo that you prepared ?Mr. Hoarr. Yes. My attorney has it. Mr. Dow. Thank you. (The material requested follows:] ocar 54, 1978. le persosel mattr.                                            

> (perasial and confidential): In compliance with your instracons following our conversation in Kaas City on 10/19/78, Iam setting forth the base facts that we discuned Iam eor-vinced that the administrative action taken against me in Dfmber, 18, ad
> agaia In Ootober, 1964, was uJustified for the follow ing reasons:
> 1)The

letter of emmu in Deceber, I96, and the muspendem in Oetobeu, band upon anes to questlom elhcal furnished by fome, Asistant Dtreetor James Gale on 12/5/$S. I answered these questios by memo to the SAO In Dallas dated 12/$/I$ About four years ago I had an opportunity to review my field personnel le In the Kansas City Office and noted that Sertal 157 of the Dallas section of this ile contains answers dated 12/8/416 which are not the mame answers I submitted on 12/6/S& Most Particulardy I object to the answers to Questions 5 and 6 that ap-                      

> iAl IMPcIng aIof my memo to the SAC, Dal
> PI1 12//OM& Whih YOU wMl note Is diere from the one appearing in my

17 

I am aware, however, that former supervisor Kenneth Howe did make al-terations to my answers without my advice or consent, but with my knowledge. I am enclosing a copy of my memo to the SAQ, Dallas, dated 1.2/8/0, with his 

corrections, and a copy of a routdg sUp from Howe to me furnishing me with the corrections. However, the answers appearing in my personnel le are not these answers either. It appears my answers were changed a second time, probably on 12/8/6%, without my knowledge. The most obvious change Is the false answer to Questions 5 and 6, In which I am falsely quoted as saying, "Perhaps I should have notified the Bureau earlier " This constitute an admilson of guilt, which 

I did not make at any time As to the motive for the above and the persons responsible, I believe the third paragaph of [deleted) I letter dated deletedd, pretty well pinpoints the respon-sibility. I am enclosing a copy of this letter. (2) The letter of censure and suspension dated October, 1964, constitutes dou-ble jeopardy based upon the letter of censure dated December, 1968 The only thing added to the letter of October, 1964, was the statement that I made Inap-propriate remarks before a Hearing Board. Yet former Director Hoover per. tonally advised me on 5/0/64, and SAO Gordon Shanklin of the Dallas Office in June, 19 4, that my testimony before the Warren Oomalsslon was excellent The Bureau had a summary of my testimony on 5/6/04, and the full text of my test. mony one week later, five months before my letter of censure in October, 1964. and no mention was made at any time concerning my inappropriate remarks until October, 1964. Mr. Hoover also assured me on 5/8/64, that the Warren Commission would completely elear the FBI. T1s unexpected failure of the War-ren Commission to do this, I beUeve, was the principal reason for my seond let-ter of censure and suspension In October, 1964. (8) The matter covered In both letters of censure had no bearing wbaidoever 

on the outcome of the ease;, namely, the prevention of the assassination of Pr dent Kennedy. In accordance with your specific request on 10/19/73, the following should be noted regarding the failure to place Lee Harvey Oswald on the Security Index: Oswald was not on the Security Index because he did not fit the criteria In eas of 11/22/68. The criteria was later changed to include Oswald. It should be nqed, however, even if he had been on the Security Index, no specific action would have been taken regarding him or any other Security Index sub-ject at the time of Preiddent Kennedy's visit to Dallas. The FBI as of 11/22/68, had only one responsibility regarding presidential Protection, at the Insistence of the U.S. Secret Service. The responsibility was to furnish the Secret Service any Information on persons making direct threats against the President, In possible violation of Title 1& USC, Section 871. I per-sonally participated In two such referrals Immediately prior to 11/22/fS. In conclusion, (deleted) ' letter dated [deletedI, sums up my attitude In this matter that because of the action taken by the Bureau In October, 1964, the Bu-reau in effect told the world I was the Person responsible for President Kennedy's death. On 10/19/78, you asked me what I think should be done. I believe that It first must be determined If I was derelict In my duty in any manner, and wag respon-sible for President Kennedy's death. After that It should be determined what damages I suffered, and then we can discuss the third point-what action should be taken. I can state with a perfectly clear conscience that I in no way failed to do what was required of me prior to 11/22/U, and based upon information available to e, which was not all the InformaUon available to the U.S. Govenument on 11/22/68. I had absolutely no roasn to believe that Oswald was a potential 

assassin or dangerous In any way. I have so desire to blame anyone else or to seek an alternate sapegot. I am 1irmly convinced, despite the totally unjusied conclusion of the Warren Com-mission, that the IFBI was not in any way at fault. 'Information deleted for reasons of personal privacy. The material ref-red to above ha bees rwe~l as @eeftjv@ emmittes na lr" Is ateme In the commtte mat 173 In iceerdanee with your instructions, I will not discuss the contents of this letter with anyone. In the event you want further clarifleation on any point, I          

> will gladly furnish additional information to you.
> $A JAuEs P. Hoen, Jr.

Mr. Donw. Do you know whether or not there was an agent in New Orleans by the name of Dobey or do Breeze I Warren de BruyesI Mr. Homrr. Warren de Bruyes I   

> Mr. DODD. That's it.

Mr. Hosrr. Warren do Bruyes. Yes, I know him well. Mr. Dom Did he have contact with Oswald I Do you know? Mr. HoerT. From what he told me, he didn't. He came to Dallas, Ibelieve on November 24,1968, a part of the large group of agents that were sent in from adjoin_'g field offices to assist us. We got approxi-mately 80 agents sent in from other field offices that came in to help us, and he was one of them. I saw his name on the list and recognized his name as being an agent, familiar with security work and for that reason I asked for hin to work with me,-and he was with me when we picked up the evidence from the Dallas Police Department on Tuesday following the assassination, and he did work with me for about 2 weeks. Mr. Dowa. But, to the best of your knowledge, he had no contact with Oswald? Mr. Homr. lie told me he hadn't. Mr. Dow. You have no other reason to believe that he did ?Mr. Horrr. He'd have no reason to tell me otherwise. Mr. Dow. He mentioned it in the notebook entries. The omiion of your name and address and so forth, and that the reason was that you-

were really looking for lead information, since you were-Mr. IOSTm. Agent Gemberling accidently took what was meant to be a lead memo and made an investigative insert out of it, according to his testimony, and I have no reason to believe otherwise. I

I prepared the memorandum in question for the purpose of identify-ing the persons named in the notebook, and since my identity was al-reidy klown to myself and the agent in charge, I had that on a sepa. rate memo. Mr. Dom. Now, if that's the case, why would the mem also include the names of John Connally, Marina Oswald, and the Paine., who were all known as well I

And why would it omit your name, or why would your name be omitted if that were the basis of excluding it I

Mr. ioer. Well, I don't remember John Connally's name being on the list. It may have been. Mr., o r Marina Oswald, or the Paines ? They were known. Mr. Hosr. I don't believe their names were in the notebook, that Irecall. I might be incorrect in my recall, but I don't recall their names bein in his address book. Mr. Dozm But there were notations in there to that effect. Mr. Hoer. Oh, well, then I don't recall that.   

> 82-09-7 --12

174 

Mr. Dow. That doesn't seem to follow, does it? If that were the reasons given. Mr. Wfoor. Well, I dictated all of the names that were in English. I

cU1,d not pick out the Russian names. I dictated them into the memo-ri ,1lure for the purposeof identifying them. 

I; . Dove. In fact, you copied out everything? 

M. HoSr. That I could, yes. 

Mr. Dow. That you could decipher I

3ir. Hoerr. Right. Mr. Dow. All ri ht, Now, I asked you one question earlier about whether or not you had any information as to whether or not the FBI had a mail cover ?Mr. Hoerr. They did not during the period I had the cas.. Mr. Dov. All iight. Let me ask you a question, a 1s. iton now. Now, according~ to Commission exhibit 2718,byA i ,t FBI had access to the contents of letters written by Oswald, according to the confidential informant T-2, who did not know Oswald personaly.% Mr. Hoerr. Right, that's correct. Mr. Dow. The return address. on this April 21,198 letter was P.O. Box 2915, which it turns out is the same post office box where the rifle was kept. Mr. Hofr. Right. Mr. DowD. Appaetly the FBI knw about that box earlier because they had information from other informants as to subscriptions that Oswad had taken out on certain books, maz ine militr work, and so forth. So, while you might be led to believe that the FBI didn't have tces to everything coming in, it certainly would appear that they had acces even to ou mal bIsed on the fact that he was making subscriptions, or was supplied with subscriptions. Mr. Hoerr. Now that information was recdved from the point where the mail was received, not from a Dallas source. Mr. Dom. But in other words, they would have to know they would 

## be watching for Oswald, or were they just checking out those n-ga-zine@ particularly? Mr. Hoerr. No, they wouldn't be particularly watching for Oswald. They would be watching for any incoming mail. I think that the thing that you have reference to is a letter that he wrote to the Fair Play for Cuba Committee? Mr. Dom Yes Mr. Hoerr. That would have been a mail cover on the Fair Play for Cuba Committee, rather than on Oswald. Mr. Dom. But you have no information at all, none whatsoever as to the allegation that there was a mail cover, either ongoing or outgoin ,o outing? 

## Mr7. "o . by the FBI on Oswald. Mr. Dow. Well, t's assume they did. There meems to be some inform. mation that they were at least watcin mail to some degreecmig i. The fact that you had known of thefact that he was workbn, at the Book Depository, which was on the route of the Predential motorcade Mr. Hoerr. I didn't know it was the route, no, sir. 175 Mr. Doom. You didn't know the Book Depository was on the route I

Mr. Hoerr. I didn't know what the route w untu-Mr. Doon. It was published in the paper, Mr. HoTY. The day before. I didn% read the route in detail. Mr. DowD. It seems to me that that information-I just can't help but believe that the FBI was not aware of the fact tht this fellow had received a gun. Mr. Hosm. We weren't aware of it, no, sir. Mr. DoDD. A mail cover just based on the information that we're r-ceiving covering the same box. Mr.Hosr. Well, sir mail covers were very, very difficult togt ap* proved. They still are. We didn't have approval to place a ufcover. Mr. Dow. I might take issue with that. Mr. DwAR. The time of the gentleman has expired. Mr. DoD. Yes it ha& Thank you. Mr. EDWAR Mr. ButlerI Mr. BvTL One question. I understand you had a conversation with Mr. Kelley in Kansai City ?Mr. Horr. Yes, sir. Mr. Bu=& Since Director Kelley became Director, in that conver-sation, that is the one where he suggested you prepare a memorandum, did you mention the note-the Oswald note to him at that time? Mr.Hosrr. No, sir. Mr. ButmL Did you discuss it ?Mr. Hoerr. Did rdiscum what I

Mr.B Imu Did you discu this in such a form that it would appear that he was aware of the existence of the Oswald note? Mr. Hoegr. No, sir, I didn't discus the note in any context. Mr. BuTmu Thank you. Mr. Enw&z=. We are going to recess until 1:80, at which time special agent Kenneth C. Howe will be the witness Mr. Howe has requested that because of the nature of his work that there be no films or cameras and the subcommittee has agreed to his request. This does not mean that the meeting will not be public, and that the media won't be allowed to be present, but there will-be no filming or still or live photos taken. we will reem until 1 "0. Mr. Hosrr. Am I dismied, Mr. Chairman Mr. EDWAMs. Yes. [Whereupon, at 12 :20pm, the subcommittee recesd to reconvene at 1 .0 pan. the same dsy.]  

> AP O0RNOO' ,sSION

Mr. EDw=WS. The subcommittee will come to order. Our witness this afternoon is Kenneth C. Howe, special agent of the San Diego office of the FBI. Mr. Howe, will you stand and rais your rifht hand IDo you solemnly swear that the testimony you give before this committee will be the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth, so help you God ?Mr. How. Z do. Mr. E*DwADs. Mr. Parker I176 

TESTIMONY OF KENNETH 0. HOWE, SPEIAL AGENT, FEDERAL BUREAU 0P INVESTIGATION 

Mr. Pmum. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. HowE. Mr. Parker, before we start the testimony and start the questioning, may I make a remark or two? Mr. PARKER. You certainly may. Mr. How& First I want to think the committee for acceding to my request that there will be no filming during my testimony. Mr. PARKER. Just a little louder please. Mr. HowE. Is that better? For acceding to my request that there will be no filming, and to the newsmen who might possibly have been disappointed us a result of that. Second, I think perhaps it's unnece ry since the committee poAsi-

bly understands that I myself, just like the others who have testified here today, have gone back in their memories 12 years to a veritable maelstrom of events that were going on in the Dallhs office in the 2 days following the assassination. You might almost say it wa like a kaleido-scope which would turn again before you bad a clin'co to really fix in your mind the pattern that wqs at the end of the scope. SThird, when I was told I was to come over here to testify, I was aven to understand that the testimony that I would give or would expected to give would be confined more or less excusively to the 

receipt and the handling and the disposition of the Oswald note. As a consequence of that, Idid not avail myself of any opportunity to review the Oswald file, which existed prior to the assassination. It was only 1 of some 500 to 600 active pendifg investigations which I super-vied on my desk at that time in the Dallas office; and it was in acategory that was more or less. minor to my general and principal duties which were the supervision, of fugitive type cases, unlawful flight cases, parole and probation violators, selective service violators, and things of that type. As a con uence, there could possibly be some questions raised which I will be unable to answer because I didn't have the familiarity with that particular file that the case agent would have. As I said, it was only 1 of some 500 or 600 cases and 500 or 600 matters which I reviewed and supervised on my supervisory desk. Thank you very much. Mr. EDWARm. Thank you, Mr. Howe. Mr. Parker ?Mr. PARzR. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Would you please state your name and general address for the record. Mr. Ilowz. Kenneth C. Howe. My address is 666 Upas Street, San Dieg), Calif. r.P~f. You are curmntly a special agent of the Federal Bu-reau of investigation, assigned to the San Diego office ?Mr. How. Yes, sir. . .1 

Mr. PAMM. When were you first asMigned to the Dallas field office f

Mr. HowE. About August 1959. 177 Mr. PARKER. In November of 1963, what was your rank, and positiolif Mr. Howt. I was supervisor of a desk in the Dallas office, on the squad. Mr. PARKER. Pardon? Mr. Howz. On the desk or a squad. Mr. PARKER. When were you first promoted to that position? Mr. HowE. I can't specifically place that date. I hadn't been asupervisor at the time of the assassination any more than a year. .fr. PARKER. What were your duties and responsibilities as a super-visory a ent? Mr. How. As I just explained, it was my responsibility to super-vise some 500 or 600 matters on my desk, primarily those in the fugi-tive category. Mr. PARKER. How frequently and on what basis would you have contact with the special agents who were under your supervision ?I Mr. Howz. I would see them, of course, on a daily basis, when there was any problem that they had which arose and they wanted to dis-

cuss it with me, they would come into my office and discuss it. I had no set schedule for talking to them on any particular frequency. Mr. PARKER. Under what kind of circumstances would you become involved in the details of any individual case? Mr. HowE. Only if something arose which they felt they should discuss with me, prior to taking any action on it. Our investigations in a good many cases are pretty well run by rules and regulations and instructions which we have in our manual and each agent knows those. They conduct their investigations in accordance with those rules and regulations. The supervisor in the major portion of his responsi-bility, back in those days at least, was determining on the basis of the material which flowed over your desk in connection with those cases, how they were being handled, and of course, we had various rules that certain things had to be submitted at certain intervals and with respect to those we ran ticklers. And if there was anything that showed up at the time a tickler brought a file to your attention, or if there was anything that should be discussed with the agent, swell, then lie would be called in and it would be discussed with him. Mr. PARKER. Being supervisor then entailed basically a desk job in which you were reviewing other peoples' written memorandums and reports. Mr. HowE. That's right. Mr. PARKER. Under what circumstances would you bring any indi-vidual case or matter to the attention of the special agent in charge ?Mr. How .. Anything that involved major Bureau policy, anything which I thought would be of interest to him in connection with his responsibility as the administrative head of the office. Mr. PARIER. OK. You mentioned earlier that you had somewhere  

> in

the neighborhood of 500 to 600 cases. Is that right? Mr. Howx. That's right. Mr. PARIER. That was back in 1963? Mr. HowE. That's right.          

> Mr. PARKER. Is that. still true of the supervisory agents?

178 Mr. HowL There have been a lot of changes made in that respect, and I might say for the better: so far as the caseload on any super-visor's desk is concerned. Mr. PAxKImm And you now believe that each agent and each super-visor has a smaller caseload to worry about I

Mr. HowE. They have a smaller caseload at this time than at that time, that's right. Mr. PAmniR. Does that increase the quality of the work presently, in your mind ?Mr. How& It definitely ha. Mr. PAmami Prior to November 22, 1963, were you aware of Lee 

Harvey Oswald? Mr. How. Prior to November 22? Mr. PARKEM Prior to November 22,1963. Mr. Howz. Yes. I was aware of the Oswald case inasmuch as it was one of the cases on my desk. Mr. Pz uua. And you did know that agent James Hosty had a file on Lee Harvey Oswald Mr. Howz. Well, the case.was assigned to him, right. Mr. PARKER. Had you assgned that case to himI Mr. Howz. That I can't specifically say at this time. As I say, I've had no opportunity or didn't even try to get an opportunity to review the file; and whether I assigned the case to Hosty or whether it was an active pending case when I became a supervisor and had already bn n.assigned to him, I definitely don't recall. I know it was assigned initially to John W. Fain, over in the Fort Worth resident agency; and it's my recollection--or to the best of my recollection, he was han-dling the case at the time I took over. In that, event, yes, I would have reassigned it then from him to agent Hosty. Mr. PArmR. At that point in time, what was the nature of the FBI's interest in Lee Harvey Oswald ?Mr. How_. Our principal in the investigation, of course, was the likelihood that because he had returned from Russia with a Russian wife, and had attempted to defect while he was in Russia, our principal concern at the time, I am sure, was to determine whether there might be any espionage feature to his return to the United States with his Rusin bride. Mr.'PAwm .Would you then characterize Oswald, the Lee Harvey Oswald file, prior to the assassination, as a routine security file? Mr. How& Primarily, not completely I wouldn't say because most of our security files were on individuals who were native Americans and had never been abroad. That case perhaps was considered a little bit more important because of his travels in Russia. Mr. PApxR, Did agent Hosty ever bring anything unusual about the Oswald, Lee Harvey Oswald file to your attention during this period of time? Mr. How. Not that I recall. Mr. PARKYR. So you would say then that your contact with the file at this particular period of time was just in the context of routine review? Mr. Howz. That's right. 179 Mr. PAxUZ When and under what circumstances did you first learn of tkhe note that Oswald delivered to the Dallas office ?Mr. How. My first knowledge that Oswald had allegedly been in the ooe and ha left a note for agent Hosty was in hearing Nan Femer make that remark. It was either to me directly, or to someone 

elm within, ray hearing, and that's when I first learned of the fact 

that he had been in the office and had left a note for agent Hosty. Mr. PAxi.m Can youpinpoint approximately the point in time when you first learned of this Mr. Hown. No more firmly than to say it was some time after the dath of Oswald, or his having been killed by Ruby. Mr. PAinE. That was when you first learned of the note ?Mr. Hows. That' right. Mr. PwamZR. You thnk that would be then on November 24 or sub-isqnwt to that dateI Mr. Howz. It would be some time around the 24th, I presume, or the day after. I can't firmly fix that in my mind. Mr. PANmZ How did you learn-you learned of the note from Nan Fenner? Mr. Hown. From Nan Fenner's remarks. Mr. PAzuE Did you take any action regarding the note when you 

frt heard about it I

Mr. How. Yes My responsibility, of course, in connection with sounthing like that was to let my SAC know, which I did. -Mr. PAxxE. That would be Mr. Shanklin Mr. Hown. Mr. Shanklin. And I did, if for no other purpose than to find e whether he had heard about this thing and what lie knew about it. Mr. PARxKE And what was the response I

Mr. How& He hadn't heard about it. Mr. PAR m When did you first actually see the note I

Mr. Howa. It was some time subsequent to that particular event, and there even I can't say whether it was 2 or 8 days or possibly a week or 10 days later. I can't draw out of that accumulation that we were lng on then, that specific time, but it was some time following that, owas going through Hosty's workbox in an effort to find some-thin In one of the cases that was assigned to him because it wasn't in the file and in the course of going down through his workbox I came acoss this note which, of course, I Immediately-then I recall-asso-elated with the note that Nan Fenner had been talking about and which 

she alle0'd had been left there, in her opinion at least, by Mr. Oswald. Mr. Pamx& Was there anything about th.- note that brought it to your mind, or wu it purely the conversation with Miss Fenner that brought it to your mind. that it was from ]ee Harvey Oswald ?Mr. ITows. You mean after finding it? Mr. PARKR. Yes. 

Mr. Howv. My recollection of it is that it waa the fact that I asso-

ciated this thing'with the remarks made by Nan Fenner. Mr. PARKxx. Did you read the note? Mr. Howr. Yes. I read the note. Mr. PARICT. What were its contents I

Mr. Howz. That I can't say. I can no longer visualize that note. Iknow it had something in it to the effect that whoever wrote it was dis-180 turbed to some extent because Hosty had been interviewing their wife or talking to their wife or something along that line; andi also have a vague recollection that there was something threatening in the note, something perhaps to the effect that-"stop talking to my wife or else." Now what the "or else" was, I can no longer specificaly say. Mr. PARaKER If the language of the note had threatened to bomb or destroy the FBI headquarters or the Dallas Police Department, do you think you would have had a better recollection U

Mr. Howz. I believe so, but I can't say so categoi ally, no. Mr. Pmuxz What action did you take when you discovered the note in the workbox, Mr. Hosty's workbox I

Mr. Howz. Well, my first reaction was, of course, that this was some-thing that the SAC should know about. And I took the note directly to his office. Mr. PARKER. What was Mr. Shanklin's response when you brought that note to himI Mr. HowE. I walked into his office with the note and in some fashion-I can't remember my exact words- xplained to him what Ihad and where I had.found it. And his reaction was that-don't talk to me about it, I don't want to talk about it, I don't want to hear anything about it. .I 

Mr. PARKER. Mr. Howe, what do you think he meant by that re-Mr. Howz. Well, my impression at that stage was, of course, that he knew what I had, and for what reason-I don't know-he didn't want to discuss it with me. Mr. Pmumia. What did you do with the note after you then took it from Mr. Shanklin I Was it handed back to you ?Mr. Howz. PardonI Mr. PARKz. The note was then handed back to you? Mr. Howz. That's one area where, again, I can't fix the exact move-ment in my mind. I have-I have, each time this thing has come up since July, have always said--and it is all I can recall right now-I did one of three things at that juncture. Since the SAC wasn't going to discuss it with me, as I felt that he should, I either left it on his 

desk, I carried it from his office and the next time I saw Hosty, gave it to him personally, or I put it back in Hosty's workbox. I know that I subsequently advised agent Hoety what I had found, where I had 

found it, and what I had done about it, and suggested that he see the SAC concerning the matter. Mr. PAstKR. And when you brought the note to Mr. Shanklin's atten-tion, did you give it to him I Did you hand it to him ?Mr. How!. I don't have any recollection of actually haing handed the note to him. As I said, he-I can visualize his motion [indicating] don't talk to me about it. Mr. PARKzR. After taking one of the three actions that you just re-

called, did you ever again discuss the note with either Mr. Hosty or Mr. Shanklin after that period of time I

Mr. Howz. I have no recollection of having discussed the note there-after with either of them. Mr. PARKR.e Did you ever participate in any kind of discussic- or 181 meeting which gave any instructions regarding the disposition of that noteI Mr. How. No sir. Mr. PARKER. in your view, what would have been the proper proce-dures for handling a note or document such as the Oswald note, if you-Mr. Hows. Normally-you mean when it's received in the office I

Mr. PARKiR. Uh-huh. Let's assume that it was addressed to special agent Howe. What were the normal procedures you bight have fol-lowed? .Mr. HowE. Well, that would depend- upon .what exactly was in the note; and there again, I myself canrt visualize it. Mr. PARKER. Let's assume that the version of the note was the version which Mrs. Fenner says. Mr. HowE. In that event, that constituted a possible violation of Federal law, and although perhaps not a serious one under the cir-cumstances, it should have been presented probably to the United States attorney for at least a preliminary opinion as to whether or not it constituted a violation of Federal law; particularly some law per-taining to obstructing the performance of an officer of the United States Government, or obstructing an officer of the Government in the performance of his duty. Mr. PAxwK. If the note was the version in terms of its content which Mr. Hosty says it was, what would you have done with it ?Mr. How. In that event, in all likelihood, if it was as Mr. Hoaty says, something very vague arind which he couldn't relate to any specific matter at that time, then at least it should have gone into a new-a new file should have been opened, if there was no way of associating with Oswald. There should have at least been 'an unknown subject case opened ontit because it was a violation'; or if it did have sufficient in-formation in it to identify it definitely with Mr. Oswald, then it should have gone at least into his file. Mr. PARmeR. When did you first learn of the note's destruction? Mr. How& Pardon? Mr. PARxvm. When (id you first learn of the note's desruction I

Mr. Hows My first positive knowledge that the note was destroyed was when I was given that information in the course of the interroga-tions or the interviews following July of this year. Mr. PARERX. The interviews that you-refer to are what interviews? Mr. Howr. Well. with Mr. Basse". of the headquarters 6f the FBI. Mr. PARKIR. You were interviewed by the headquarters of the FBI sulsqient to JulyI Mr. Howu Yes, I was. Mr. PAIKE. How many times were vou interviewed? Mr. Hown. Once in San Diego, and once here in Washington. Mr. PARCER. Mr. Howe. were you disciplined or reprimanded in any way for your role in the Oswald investigation prior to the assassin. tion ?Mr. HowE. Yes. I was. Mr. PARKXR. Would you describe the nature of the disciplinary ac-tion and the reasons for it, please? 182 Mr. Howz. The first action taken, of course, was a letter of censure which censured me for my supervision of the case, prior to the assas. sination, and placed me on probation. Mr. Putr. When did you get that letter I

Mr. Hows I can't spedify the exact date when that letter was re-ceived. It was within weeks after the assassination. Mr. PARX. What was the specific behavior cited, or was there any-thig cited I o

r. Howz. There were two or three things mentioned in the letter. There again, Ihaven't reviewed that prior to coming here to testify. One of them was, of course, that Oswald was not as he should have been placed on the Security Index. There was an alleged 12-day delay in mv estigaton which was caused by our determining he was in Dallas, at which time New Orleans was the office of origin, he had been in New Orleans. They were the headquarters, what we call the office of origin in the case since he was there. We learned he was in Dalla& We advised New Orleans of that. The proper procedure in that case and in all other cases was to, what we call, refer it upon completion. When we determ',ied he was in Dallas, 

we referred upon completion of that phase back to New Orleans with instruction that they submit FD 128, which is the form the Bureau uses to change origin of the case from one office to another office whn the subject changes locations. There was a 12-day delay, then the case was RUC which means tech-nically it was in a closed status. We usually do that. We close the case when the other office comes back and transfers the origin to us on the basis that the subject is now in our territory and the cae is re-opened. There was a i2-day delay there until New Orleans came back and we reopened the Oswald case. Mr. Pn For substantially the same reasons is that why special agent Hosty was reprimanded I

Mr. Howi. In general, yes, so far as I recall. Mr. PAzR% Do you know who was responsible for the disciplinary action I

Mr. HowL No spe iflc individual that I can name. The disciplinary action was initiated and transmitted to the field from Washington headquarters. .Mr. PARxKR. Do you feel that action was justified I

Mr. Howi I accepted it as one of those things that you accept in the Bureau. Now that's not the only thing, of course. Subsequent to that letter, if that's what you want me to do, go on I  

> Mr. PARKXR. Yes.

Mr. How&. Subsequent to that letter, of course. I was removed from the supervisory desk and put back as a regular agent. Following that-. Mr. PARWKE. When did that take place I

Mr. ITowi. It wasn't- was on the supervisory desk until about May. I think, of 1964. So it would have ben between--shortly after the few weeks after the assassination when the first letter cane in censuring me and placing me on probation theis other events tdbk place. I was taken off the supervisory desk on instructions of Washing-ton headquarters. Subsequent to that I was removed from the status I had as an inspector's aide. That came in after-approximately the 183. 

same time as removal from the desk, and following that, follow-in 5 the-after I was off the desk and working again as an aget in as, when the Warren Commission's hearmg was completed and they made their judgments and recommendations concerning it I re-ceived another letter of censure based upon the same fac as the oin~al one. Ir. P puz. Those are all approximately the same dates that agent Hosty was also reprim.ndedI Mr. Hows. That's right. Mr. PAmm. Do you know, Mr. Howe, whether Mr. Shanklin would have reviewed or OK 'd those disciplinary actions ?Mr. Howx I don't know exactly what you mean there. Do you mean I

Mr. PARKx. Would the special agent in charge have reviewed or approved of the disciplinary actions IMr. Howr. Well, let me explain how those things are handled. First, in any case of that sort, the matter is reviewed either with the SAC or with the seat of government. In this case, of course, the mate-rial for review in order to make a decision was sent to Washinton. So the review and the evaluation was made there. That material, ofcourse, would have been sent to Washington with a letter or recmm nation from the SAO as to what he felt would be proper administrative ac-tion, if any, in connection with the explanation we had made to the alley derelictionLI M. PaRuX Were you aked to make out an affidavit or answer aseries of ques.ions for the seat of government with regard to the pre-amassination investigation Mr. How& Yes, sir. There was no affidavit. There was a series of-well, No. 1, let me give you a little picture on that No. 1, chief inspector, Gale, Who was at that time chief inspector in Washington, requested a eomplets cop of the Oswald file, up to and inclu din ovember 22, 1963.We made an exact copy of every serial in that We each serial and transmited-I am sure the opy--it qould have been either the copy or the original, and we kept the copim I don't know.. But in any event, the complete file in that reference went to Wash-in. It was reviewed there, and on the basis of that, there was a list ofquestior, a number of questiOns, I don't recall exactly how many, which were tranamitted by the inseon divimon to the San Diego office--I'm. sorry-t.he Dallas office, with the request that we be asked to answer these questions, which we did. Mr. PAnxz. Who's we ?Mr. Hown. Agent Hasty and myselL and there might have been one or two questions in that list that Mr. Shanklin himself had to answer. I don't recall. Mr. PARitm You did answer the questions ?Mr. FHowy. Yes, sir. Mr. PAnxzm. And to your knowledge, Mr. Hoasty answered the ques-tions? Mr. Howe. Yes, sir. Mr. PARwR. You heard Mr. Hosty testify here earlier today? .Mr. How,. Yes, sir 184 

Mr. PAm. He testifld that you returned to him a copy of his memorandum in response to those questions that he had drafted in response to the headquarter's request. What's your recollection of that incident? Mr. Ilows. That's something that I hadn't thought of for 12 years, until Mr. Jiosty mentioned it here today. After he mentioned it, I tried to think back and remember what took place. When we got the ques-tions from Washington, D.C., agent Hosty and myself sat down and answered those questions to the best of our ability, making up our answers in double-spaced, mo or less rough draft form. Following that, we took tha rough draft form into Mr. Shanklin's office. At that time, Jim Malle , from the Bureau was there too, and he was there in the office. We w nt over them with Mr. Malley and Mr. Shanklin. There were some ch they suggested as to how perhaps this should be worded a little bit differently, or that should be worded a little bit differently. We made those changes. There were all four of its together there at the time. I know Mr. Hosty says I subsequently gave to him the rough draft copy of the thing with the changes on it. I possibly did that. I don't specifically recall doing it. But, of course, after we'h ad gone over this, the four of us together, and made these changes, then of course this rough draft would have been taken. The thing would have been put up in completed form, and the rough draft normally would have been destroyed. Now I possibly gave back to Hosty for his own information those changes that had been made-which had been made. Ho was there when the changes were made. Mr. PARRxn. Did you individually fill out answers to questions, or was it just one set that the two of you combined on in answeringI Mr. Howz. The questions were just one set. Mr. PARKam. Just one set for the two of you ?Mr. Howu. Right. Mr. PATIKU. All right. Mr. Hosty testified earlier today something to the effect that you gave ihim back a copy and said, "Here, you are going to need this."1 Did you keep a copy of that I

Mr. Howu. No. sir. Mr. PARKXM You did not retain a copy I 

> Mr.

Howu I was satisfied with the changes that were made in what I had initially said. There was bne thing that perhaps I had in my original memo that they suggested I take out, and that was the caseload on my desk. They felt that that was not pertinent and perhaps it wasn't. And it was agreeable with me to take it out. Mr. PARKXR. Have you seen a copy of that memorandum and those answers to this since you filled that out I

Mr. Hows. Of the original questions? Mr. PARKER. Yes. Mr. How. No. sir. 

Mr. PARXER. If you saw them again would you be able to recall what your answers were? Mr. Howi. Not in great detail; no. Mr. PARKYJ1. Would you recognize the draft if you saw it again I

Mr. Hows. The rough draft ?Mr. PARKF.. Yes. 485 

Mr. How. I could perhaps recognize my own writingg if, as Mr. Hosty says, the thing he, has have notations on them by n& I recall standing in Shanklin s office. We weren't even sitting down. I hid-we had our rough draft copy on top of a bookcase and I was standing there with it, and we were reading it to Mr. Malley and Mr. Shankli discussing ouir answers and making the changes that were suggested and which were agreeable to me, and I presume, to Mr. Hosty._ Mr. PuAxR. With respect to the note, Mr. Howe, you apparently gave instructions to Mr. Hosty to go to see Mr. Shanklin about the note? Mr. Howu. That's right. Mr. PARJw. Did he do that immediately Mr. How. I don't know.y Mr. PAIMER. You did not accompany him into the room? Mr. Howr. I heard Mr. Hosty say that I did. I have no recollection of having gone in the room with him. Might have walked u pto the door but I certainly was not there when this discussion of which he speaks took place. Mr. PAJmaZ Thank you. Mr. EnwARiS. Mr. Seiberling .Mr. Sz=mLio. Thank you ,Mr. Chairman. Mr. Howe, if you had known about'the note of Mr. Oswald to Mr. Hosty at the time it was given to Mr. Hosty, what would have been your normal course of action? Mr. Howz. Well, there again, the same set of circumstances would exist, as I explained earlier, it would'depend on exactly what the note said. If it said, as Nan Fenner contends something about blowing up the Dallas Police Department and the ballas FBI office, that would constitute a violation of Federal law which I probably would have told t osty to investigate and handle With reference to Oswald, if there was sufficient information in there to associate it with Oswald; if not in all likelihood, we would have opened it. It would have been a normal procedure to open a nonsub file talk to the U.S. attorney, see if he would authorize prosecution on te basis of that note, and govern our-selves according to his opinion. Mr. Srmrmso. Now, suppose It Just said what Mr. Hosty recollects it said, that Oswald t1d him to stay away from his wife or he'd take some action? Mr. 1I6wz That would pethape be a qu ion of judgment a- to what you would do with something like t at. If. it amqounted to suf-ficient-a sufficient threat to possibly constitute a violion of obstruct-ing a G6vernment official in pursuit of his duties, a Government officer, then you would present it. If it were pretty mild, and just someone beeAng about what you were doing, then it more than likely would go into the Iles as a matter of record and-nothing done specifically about the note itself. Mr. SEBERLINO. Now, Mr. Hosty testified that he considered the in-vestigation of Mr. Oswald prior to November 22 to be an important, serious investigation, an impor4t, not just a routine invetgation. Would you have characterized it-how would you have characterized it? Si-" . Ye& ,Mr. Ikwt. The Oswald investigation prlor' to theamssesnatioi t18 

Mr. Howl As I said earlier it wasn't exactly routine because it had some elements in it that wouldn't be elements in a normal case of that type That element in his case which made it a little bit above the ornary was the fact that he had been to Russia, that he had tried to defect, that he came back with a Russian wife. There was a pos-sibility of espionage in that particular cae, where perhaps there wouldn't be Wn a case in that category which just involved someone who was a member of an organization dedicated to the overthrow of the Government something like that. Mr. Sznmmxo. Now, that being the case, when the note was received from Oswald wouldn't, that be something more than routine IMr. How . f the note was specifically from Oswald I            

> Mr. S3mmrmI. Yes Oswald to Hosty sying )my off or I'll do some-

thing, take action against the FBI. y sMr. Howz. Yes. I judge that you would consider it such because of Oswald being who he was. I

Mr. S .x o. Well, that's exactly my point. He wasn't just any-body. Even if he was a member of the American Civil Liberties Union, which might imply that he would take legal action; if he was a person who had some other propensities, why, I suppose, action could cover alot of things. Do youlhappen to know whether the file on Oswald up to that time showed that he was dangerous in any physical, violence sort of sense I I

Mr. Howr. Nothing within my recollection of the file. And I am almost certain that this is true, completely. There was nothing in'his file to show that he had any special propeniity for violence. Mr. StmmLNa, Now, you ave testified you told Mr. Shanklin about the note at the time you learned of it, which was after the assassination. Mr. How-. Yes, Sir. 'Mr. SEmmLo. And you tetified to that under oath, and you have also testified about the fact that when you saw the note you took it into Mr. Shanklin's office and gave it to him personally. Mr. Mows. No, sir. I have never mid I gave it to him personally. Itook it into his office, wanted to discuss it with him. He wouldn't discuss it with me, and I have no recollection of, as I think you are inferring thrfhian the note to him. 

I maid WhA one of three thnshpendfloig the fad that he wouldn't discuss it with me: I mtherieft it on his desk. Mr. Smwsa o. Well, that's what I mean. But you took the note into himI Mr. How& Yes, sir. Mr. Snauwiea# And you told Mr. Hosty that he should talk to Mr. Shanklin about It. Mr. Howz. That's right. Mr. Smirn You're aware that Mr. Shanklin has stated that he has no recollection of this note at any time up to July of this year IMr. Mows. Yes, sir. Mr. Snzmuwro. He doesn't recall ever having seen it or heard of it. Mr. How. Yes, sir. Mr. u au And he so testified under oath, and your under oath. Now tmere Is an obvious omonet hem. Is there any testimony of yours that ought to be corrected or altmed in any way to na sum 

## we have the record *xsraht I187 Mr. Howa. No, sir. I ceanly-there was certainly no doubt in my mind that he knew what I had when I went into his office. Mr. Sm=zmuo. T you. My time is up. Mr. EpwAms. Mr. Kindns Mr. Kxm)zsns Thank you, Mr. Chairman.. Mr. Howe, when you saw the Oswald note, could you describe its condition I Was it in an envelope ? Was it a single piece of paper Mr. Howa. No, sir; I can't. I've been asked tha-before and I cant Mr. Knwmwue Do you recall whether it wAs signed Mr. Howa. No; I have no recollection whether it was signed or whether it wasn't, as I have said befor& I lanced at the note, rec-o* what it was took it to Shanklin's ofiC I obviously probably ridthe .note but I can't visualize it at this time. I do know.I asociate it with Nan Fenner's statement that Oswald brought a note into the office and this appeared to be the note concerning which she had spoken. Mr. KzqNss When you found the note in Mr. Hosty's workbox, do you recall whether you identified it by opening it and getting some-thing out of an envelope or surely you r l whether-t was some-thing you just accidentalfy ran across, or something you would open up an envelope to find ?Mr. Howi. My -belief in that connection would be that since I was going through his box with no thought that this letter was down in there, going through his box looking or a serial, in some matter as-signed to him whieh I thought mighT be In his fle, or his box, because it wasn't in the file; if I had come to an envelope with just the name Mr. Hay on it, I probably would have gone right by it. So from that, I would say that the letter was lying there open in the box; and whether there was an envelope with it, or over it or under it, I ean't say. Mr. KnmNza. And you don' recall that there was any question about whether this note was a note delivered by Lee Harvey Oswald or not, but rather that it was accepted as being that? Mr. Howz. I was firmly of the belief that at least it was the note that Nan Fenner was referring to. Whether it came from Oswald, I don't know that there was anything in the note. These could have been and there might not have been, yhng in the note it e f which would identify it with Oswald specifically. 

Mr. Kvxrns. Then, as Lar as your collection is concerned, it's 

# possible that the note was not saned, and It's po bible that the only connection between that note and Oswald is Mrs. Fenner's identified. tion of that note as bei a note delivered by a man whom she later identified on television asI g Oswald, Mr. HowL That's And hee let me make an explanation which will clarify anythn that might come up. When Mr. Barsett first talked to me about this matter I couldn't recall anything more about the appearance or the content of the note than I now can But Iknew that in some fashion I recognized that note as something having to do with Oswald. And in my statements to him, my initial statement              

> 1. said 90othing to the effect that it must h.ave. hid somedinK in it

either mentioning the name Oswald or mentioning the name Marina, or something of tat sort. 188 Upon further thinkig back and digging bank through my memory in connection with the matter, I rembered the Fenner statement, and then it became apparent. And know I'm Preitty firmly, without any question, of the belief that what I assoced-not neooearily with Oswald, because of what the note said-but because it represents the note concerning which Nan Fenner had said Oswald left at the office. Do I make myself clear on that ?Mr. KuM xn,. I have-yes. I have no further questions. Mr. EDwzmns. Mr. Drinan I

Mr. DRmwAw. Thank you Mr. Chairman. Mr. Howe, both you and Mr. Hosty agree that Mr. Shanklin was, as you put it, oppos-ed to discussing tZie contents of the note; and, as Mr. Hosty put it, that he was determined to destroy the note. •Can you give any mQtivation why Mr. Shanklin took this attitude toward this particular note ?Mr. Howz. No, sir. Mr. DuiNA. Did he do this very often I

Mr. Howz. Mr. Shanklin normally was pretty approachable as an agent in charge. But at this particular time, he had, as has been ex-plained here earlier, he had been going without sleep for quite some time, and there was-the conditions in the Dallas office with things going right and left and piling.up on top of each other as result of the assassination, and the various facets of it, and the shooting of Ruby-he naturally was busy. 

But I think somethng of this sort at leWt to my mind was of suf. ficient importance that we should at least discuss it. Mr. DMRAN. Had he ever refused to discuss anything previously tMr. HowE. No, sir. Mr. DRTNAx. Do you think that his attitude toward this note-the way he blocked it out then, the alleged statement that he wanted to destroy it-do you think that it entered into his attitude subsequently when he at least acquiesced in censures in your record I

Mr. Uowz. I don't quite get the import of your question, sir. Mr. DwNA. Well, I'm trying to trace this particular attitude of Mr. Shanklin with the subsequent attitudes that he had toward you and toward Mr. Hosty. He acqlie d in penalties being inflicted upon both of you and I m wondering whether that "cniescence was tied up with his reaction to both of n connection with this note. Mr. Iow& I'm not sure that Mr. Shanklin did acquiesce. What his cover letter t our responses to the Bureau'ts questions were-what was in that cover etr, I on.tknow. I've never seen it. Mr. DINAN. Ordinarily, the man in charge had something to say about the conduct and performance of who's under him. Mr. How& That's right. He would make his recommendation nor-mally in the cover letter, transmitting our answers to the Bureau. Now whether that was so in this particular case, I don tknow. But in the normal disciplinary case of that sort, when there is some question of whether a disciplinary Action should be taken, that is the 

way it works. The arnts involved or the agent involved, either way, Pres his explanation of what took place and why and how; the 

SAO then covers that with a letter of hia to the Bw ad transmits 189 that to the Bureau with his recommendation as to what, in his opinion, the facts of the matter warrant-discipline 1 no discipline, or what. Mr. DRMIAN. Well, if this had been filed m the usual way, would anything different hAve happened Would Mr. Oswald have been placed upon the Secuity Index# Mr. Howz. If this hadn happened I

Mr. DErIAN. If this note thahe brought had been filed in a routine way, would that have altered anything subsequent I

Mr. Howz. You mean if it had the wording which Nan Fenner says or if it were just a routine note, such as Mx. Hosty says it wasl Mr. DRwAw. In either hypothesis. Mr. HowL If it were merely a note, such as Hosty describes it, and It didn't have any specific threat in it, probably not. If it were as Nan Fenner says, then it would be a matter of judg-

ment. In connection with placing people on the Security Index, there, were at that time certain criteria outlined in our Bureau manual as to what was necessary to place an individual on the Securit Index, or at least recommend him to the Bureau for being placed on the Security Index. There was one, as I recall, one kind of catch-all phrase at the bottom which would involve individuals who despite the fact that they had no membership in a revolutionary organization might be considered for inclusion in the Security Index. It would be a matter of judgment then on the part of the agent and the supervisor as to whet her. or not the facts taken as a whole warranted him being placed on the index because he might be dangerous to the country in the event of an emergency. Mr. DRINAN. So that if this note had been processed in the normal way, Oswald might well have been placed upon the Security Index ?Mr. Howz. He might have been. I wouldn't say that he would have been, but it would have been a matter of judgment at that time. Mr. DXwAx. And would that mean that when a President visits Dallas, such a person on the Security Index is turned over to the Secret Service? Mr. HowE. No, sir. As a matter of fact the Security Index, of course, is now a pretty well-known fact, publicly and otherwise. At that time it was not. It was more or less a program within the Bureau with the authority of the Attorney General that was pretty much a Bureau program, and the facts of it kept within the Bureau. There was no dissemination of information concerning individuals on the security index, and not even information-we were careful not to even mention Security Index outside the Bureau. We did not automatically, as we do now, practically inundate Secret Service with information concerning subversives that we make reports on. Any report that we make in those particular categories-now, acopy goes to Secret Service as a matter of course, as an automatio matter. 

Back then, no. We would perhaps be prohibited from giving that information concerning a Security Index subject as such to any other agency, including the military agencies, 

M . DMNA. My time has expiied. Thank you. 

Mr. EDWAIM Mr. Butler. 190 Mr. BTLPrn. Mr. Howe, with reference to your conversations with Mrs. Fenner, her testimony was to the effect that she immediately took the note to you while Mr. Oswald was there when she first re-ceived it and that you read it and told her that it was just a nut,. Is that your recollection ?, 

Mr. Howz. No, sir; I think you have me confused with Mr. Clark, the assistant agent in charge. Mr. BuTLm. Yes I do, yes I do, excuse me you're -right. I meant Mr. Clark, that is correct. Turning now, to the question of the Security Index, as I understand it, censure has reference to your failure to place this name on the Security Index, prior to the assassination, or something of that nature. If it had been on the Security Index prior to that time and this note had come in, would there have been some immediate correlation be-tween the two that would have initiated a course of action which did not take place ?Mr. How. No. The fact, the placing of an individual on the Security Indfx didn't in any way alter the nature of the case except to make the subject perha s a little more important an individual because that meant this individual specifically would be picked up in the initial phases of any program that would come up as a result ofan emergency such as a war, invasion, or something like that. These individuals on the security index would be the first ones to be picked up and put into custodial detention because of their propen-sity for violence, their dedication to the overthrow of the Govern-ment, the possibility that they would aid a foreign enemy. Mr. BuTY.. With reference to the information that you found in the note that you found in Hosty's workbox, I am trying to place that in time. That took place after the assassination ?Mr. HowE. Yes, sir. Mr. BuTLFJL But before Oswald was killed. Mr. Howz. Oh, no, sir, it was after Osw:ald was shot. That definitely was after Oswald was shot by Ruby. Mr. BUTLNER. So your recollections with reference to seeing the note are that it all took place after Oswald's death? Mr. Howz. That's right. What I couldn't fix there in point of time is the time between when Nan Fenner mentioned the note and the time that I actually found the note in Hosty's box. A few days, 10 days, or how long after in there I don't recall. Both of the events were after the assassination and after the death of Oswald. Mr. BETMER. Well your conversation with Nan Fenner was also after the death of Oswald ?Mr. HowE. Yes. Mr. BumxR. Now, when you had the conversation with Mr. Shank-]in, which he said he didn't wish to talk about this, did you have the impression at that time that lie had some prior knowledge of the note or not? Mr. Hown. Well, I feel certain lie did have, yes. Mr. BUrER. You had the distinct impression that he knew about the note and that was the reason lie didn t want to talk about-Mr. Howy. Because I had talked to him about the note when Nan Fenner initially mentioned it before the note was found. 191 Mr. BUTLER. Oh, you had had an earlier conversation with him yourself? Mr. HowE. Yes. Mr., BUTLER. Oh, I see. Mr. How&. Because I wanted to know whether he had heard this statement of Nan Fenner that Oswald was supposed to be in the Bureau office and left a rote there. Mr. BUTLER. And then after you finally found it he didn't want to see it, that was your impression Mr. DR AN. Will the gentleman yield? When precisely 'vas that, your first conversation? Mr. HowE. That was within a day or two following Ruby's shoot-ing Oswald, it was after both those events, the assassination and the shooting of Oswald. It was in that, right in that immediate time. Mr. DThNAN. And, if I may, what was his reaction? Mr. HowE. He hadn't heard about it. Mr. D&INAN. How did he react after that? Mr. How& Well Hosty was talked to about it at that time. And Hosty admitted he had gtten the letter. But he said it meant nothing to him. It was, he described it pretty much the way he described it here this morning. He was asked where the note was and he said he didn't know and it hadn't meant anything to him. And, at that time at least, he said there was nothing in the letter to identify with any particular individual. He perhaps has discarded it-he didn't know. He hadn't thought about it. Mr. DnuqAN. Thank you. I yield back. Mr. BUTLER. One more question, Mr. Howe. Here, with reference to the letter of censure for failing to place his name on the security index, you had no inquiries or no indications prior to the assassination and the death of Oswald. You had no inquiries which indicate that you were under consideration for censure or that there was any inquiry with regard to your handling of this file? Nothing of this took place until after the assassination? Mr. HowE. Oh, yes, that's right, because the Bureau normally wouldn't-well, I wouldn't say normally, because copies of our reports and information in the file would go to Washington in our reports. There was always the occasion when the Bureau would analyze your report, and take issue with you as to whether or not that man should be on the Security Index. Mr. BuTLEm. But you had no indication that this type of inquiry was going onI 

Mr. Howr. In this particular case no; because the Bureau had raised no particular question about having him on the index although a report had been submitted concerning his activities. Mr. Bu'rrpm. I yield back, Mr. Chni.rman. Mr. HIown. There was, there again, a difference of judgment. Wo didn't think he should be on the Security Index, and apparently the i~uaau didn't either until after the assassination when they sa1id he should have been on the index. Mr. EDWARUM. Mr. DTxld. Mr. Dowo. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Howe, yolu may have responded to this earlier, when I was absent, but with regnrld to your discovering the note in Mr. Hosty's box, it is my understanling that 

> e.

192 u were not present in the room when the conversation took place ween Mr. Shanklin and Mr. Hosty, but rather that it comes as secondhand information toyou as a conversation regarding the note. Mr. How. When Host followed through with my instruction that he should see the SAC concerning the matter, no. It is possible I walked up to the office with him or something like that but I was not in tlhe office when this conversation took plac-? Mr. DODD. How do you know that Mr. Hosty said Mr. Shanklin was unable to find the note? Mr. Howz. I don't quite get your question. Mr. DoDD. Well, it is my understanding that your statement re-garding that conversation was that apparently Mr. Hosty told Mr. Shanklin he was unable to find the note or that he may have thrown it away. Subsequently you discovered the note. Mr. How!. No, this was on the occasion of the first notice that I had concerning the thing. Mr. DoDD. Correct. Mr. Howz. And I talked to Mr. Shanklin and Hosty was then talked to and said yes he had gotten this letter to which Nan Fenner was referring. But it had nothing in it to indicate who it was from. It seemed inimportant to him and he probably had discarded it. Mr. DODD. OK. Now was it common practice for one agent to hap-

pen to be going through the box or wastebasket of another?              

> Mr. Howz. Well, Iwas asupervisor and Iwas looking for aserial,

and it was not unusual to go to the case agent's workbox to look for something that you couldn't find in the file of a case assigned to him. Mr. Dow. OK. Mr. How!. And, as a matter of fact, the clerical help in the office also would normally do that when they were searching for some particular thing Xf. DoDD. Now, in the second instance, when Mr. Shanklin appar-

ently told you that he didn't really care to hear anything after you made the connection, when you saw the note in Mr. Hosty's workbasket and then remembering the conversation that Mrs. Fenner brought up, putting the pieces together, you read the note and then you went and saw Mfr. Shakin and he apparently said, "Well, I don't want to be bothered with that, let's forget about it." And then you were trying to put together exactly what you did with the note Would you state for me exactly what you think you did with the note ?Mr. Howz. Well, [say then my recollection is not clear. T certainly did one of three things, because Shanklin wouldn't discuss it with me; 

I either left it on his desk and walked out, or I walked out and took the note with me and gave it to Hosty personally, with instructions that he should see the SAC about this, or I took it back and put it in his workbox or his mail slct and told him subsequently what r had found and what I had done, and that I had told the SAC about it, and he shodd see the SAC concerning it. Mr. DoDD. All right. Now, this, the chronology of this event o

curs, of course, after the assassination of the President and after 

Oswald was shot by Ruby I

Mr. Howi. That s right. 193 Mr. DODD. I am a, little perplexed on that point. It seems to me that if I were, if I had discovered a note written by the man charged with the assassination of the President and I brought that note to Mr. Shanklin or a person in his position, I find it hard to believe that Iwouldn't be able to tell you precisely what I did with that note. I can't figure out how, given the monumental circumstances sur-rounding a note from an assassin of a President of the United States, you wouldn't be clear as to what he did with that note. I can under-stand that looking back over 12 years and trying to remember point by point what happened, I can sympathize with that. But, I cannot understand when you consider that this was after the assassination of the President, after the assassination of the man who was accused of the assassination of the President, that you wouldn't remember precisely and exactly what you did with that note. Mr. How:. 'lere is no one niore. aggravated than myself sometimes that I can't recall these specific things, but I can't. And the only ex-planation I can give to my satisfaction is the fact that these things took place under circumstances which were very, very unusual as you will have to agree.-In addition to that, for 12 years I have been trying to forget tie thing becaiise I was (iscil)lined, )elhial)s I was just biased wlel Ifelt I di ln't warrant tile disci)lilne I got, but I wanted to stay in * ie Bureau. I liked time Bureau. I like d tile w(rk. If I was going to (1o that, I had to er'se it from my min(1 to miiy beslt ahilitv and not, eat my heart out 1eause in that (.vellt I could certainly not (10 mnV job asan agent vith the FIl. Mr. l)(,,i. I lave no further que.t ion'. Mr. Chairman. Mr. Ew.\ms. Mr. Ilowe, you overheard Mrs. Fenner make a remark about, the note a couple of days after tle assassination. Is that correct? Mr. I h)w. Tlat's right. Mr. I )WAI:T). Riillt. And vo, u went to .Ir. Shanklin's office and mnemtio ied it to hiim. What did l e say ?MIr. IIow't:. Well, he had no kiiovledl,,e of it. and naturallv lie was intrweste(l in hvarniig something about. it. too. And following tliat, H[osty was talketi to with the results that I just mnentione(. 

M r. Ew)N .tm)s. Ile said he couldn't find it f

Mr. I lowE. Ile couldn't find the note. Mr. ]I"wDWAis. How much time passed before you went through his file and found it ?Mr. hlowE. Well, that's the period that I can't fix specifically. It could have been 2 or 3 days. It could lhave beei several (lays, it could have been a week or 10 (lays, I am not sure exactly how long that it Was. [r. EDWARDS. So, Mr. Shanklin knew about the note within a couple of days a after tfhe assassination ?

Mr. [owE. lie knew of Nan Fenner's allegation that the note had been delivered to the office by Oswald. And llosty, of course, admitted that it, liad, that lie had go-,t ten fihe note. Mr. Ei)wm s. So, at that tin., he (liln't, call Iosty in and say I want it destroyedd Apparently there was a period there-Mr. tIowi:. Oh no, oh no, because as far as we knew, the note evi-dently was no longer in existence, so far as we knew at that stage. 194 As a collsequence, it, was an impasse. Nan Feiier said one thing. J[o,-tv said another thing. We had nothing on w-hich to verify the eColleCt ion of either.   

> Mr. ElDWA,,IR)S.

No; but 'Mr. Shanklin didn't say, if you come upon t hat note, destroy it. 

MIr. owE. O11, no, sir. 

Mr. EDWARDS. In other wor(ls. the inference was that the note should 

1inve I)een l)rolght in to him if it was found? 

M '. I [()w:. That is ri ght. 

MI-. IoIw)Ans. It was found and you brought it. in. 'MI. Ilmit:. As I say, because tie note was presumably no longer in ('xJite('e at that tii e, it was an iinpasse an( we couldn't establish it was from ()swald or it wa,.n't from Oswald, because of the great ifliix of other 1ap)penings at that time it was set aside as perhaps s)Tjtlliing we coll(l (1o something about. later because it accomplished 110 hilig to have these two things said about the note without being able t, (,-tab)1i!;1 w'i 1hI on was right. 

Ml. lw. its. But thI e'e was a change in MI. Shanklin's attit ide. llit-, the loilt I al ir'vingr to jiiake. W'lVin voll fir-.t toll hiim al)out 

I l,, 1ire1valviiii,, letter, le didn't say. im." (God, vlen l'(hl find it, I walt it llesti'ove(l. I(v (elidlii t ,'t excited at all: 

i'It. IIwF:. No, sit'. 

MI. El )wA IlDs. But several dl\'t, later, it might have been as late as I 1i1\s lt(r'. Nvliei tll( )i)t(, w";, bi'iiglit in to hill , that, is when lie a 'parent lIv dii't want to know anyt lng abollt it ..it'. I ,w'. Well, ie,-'aid, I oNIt wait t)talk al,out it. .It'. F:'.1:l). 'WeIl. i,,m. tihe )ioi')l thing fori imai like Mr. Shank-lii to, (d,). :ilai old jim, like lie \\v- iII th Bureau. would have been to pl~lil Wzi:iinglon an( brief them of the matter. Is that correct !

> '.

I. ,w. Well. I doi't know if thIere is a liv Sjf'l'i iw Blireau retgrila-tii that draws the line on what you have to call the Bureau about :M41 what iiU villldlit have to call ile Bi'rean about. Mi'. ii) eWhv woil lie ('hianpe his mindt liteit aboutil e note? 

WhII w\voildl lie bte rcoiiletl to having it tir ill) for- s'ei'al (ayS and](1      

> ili'!i .ii(l(l \" ('hlai4'e

lil- liiii(l t1l(l tt p(' iV 'X('\" 1'C ( iand a . I 

> aill

It t slvc d. I i() ' t\ tolil to i'I aivttlilt hio)(ilt it, w iitlitv i'r it Nv:P) '.i" [l,,v. W4.ll. le (lili't taV oi this fir -t o'('asiol if voil field this 

> OItin'.

luiii )rili7fi it0) tolie. We just aszuu1iIle( thell that the iole hiaul IbeeII (10-I1,) vei.1 altouglih obviously, it had been delivered to the office and N\' I I aii Nil l'IIF it ''', I)(-I* t('li('iIt that she Iholight it was ()swald \\.)to 

1li'wlLit I ' II hig ito I li offihi '. "liere wi~ l1. stat'iiitllliile. We toK)k Itos\t vs wNorh foi' the fact tI:it lie ,',uldn t find tle note and evidently had (ldiscarded it lecaulse he diiln't think it vas of aiiV ('),vonse4quie,. 

Ad. s a resilt. hlianiklin lidn't Say\. So far iq I i'eillliilowt' it. norl             

> ,ii!I .tliit if yonil find lii-tliinr. bri ,l,! it to 11S.

W e j iit )ire iiled ( liat it \w.s gole t Iell. 

Mr'. low 's. Btl it's. Fliner 1:i1 said t hat tlie note said that O. -\aI, \Vus ti reatelling to blow imp tle FI ofIi'e or tie )allas police, so, 

ceritainl', it imst have been an extraordinarily tough note. 

Mr. lim we:. If it was as Mrs. FIerelir says S), ves that's riglit. Bit -h, sait(I one thing, ]),tv said anothe' and wie diln'it have (lie note. 195 

And any way of establishing outside of Nan saying it was her belief without any doubt it was Oswald who brought that note in, we only had her word for that. We had no way of establishing that actually it was Oswald. 

Ml'. EDWAIDS. How nany people in the FBI field office in Dallas knew about the note ?  

> Mr. IowE.

Frankly, I don't know. There have been statements made that it was well known throughout the office. If it was, I wasn't aware of it. I don't know. I di(ln't discussit with anyone. Mr. EDWARDS. 'as it ever discussed in your plresence at coffee or at a gathering? Mr. HowN. No; and I didn't discuss it with anyone. When the note caine to my attention and all these events happened in which I was involved with respect to the note, it was kind of an after the fact sort of thing. I do know if there had been anything in that note that would have been of any benefit to tWe assassination in-vestigation, there would have been some action taken on that particular l)hase. But it provided no leads that could be followed and it gave no evidence of a conspiracy: it was of no assistance to tihe investigation that was ongoing at. that time. Oswald was dead and there was no action that could be taken from that. standpoint. The only thing that that letter established was that Oswald was a person who was capable of doing a dangerous act or of at least threatening a dangerous act, if it was the way Nan said. And who needed more l)roof of that at that time ?

It became at that stage of the game, as far as I was concerned, an admriinistrative matter, a personnel matter tlat should be handled by t Ie S'AC. 

Mr . LrWAIS. Well.Mr. S;hanklin learned about the existence of the note within a couple. of days after the assassination. And. if it was dlis-cussed, the information came to Mrs. Fenner, who said that the note had a threat to blow up the FBI field office. MI'. IowE. Well. 1 don't recall t hat. M[r. Erw~m.. Ir. Shanklin did not get exercised in any wvay at all at tlat time. Later on. soi eting imust have changed his mind. because he really got, exercise(l later ol. lie wouldn't talk to you about it. 

Mr. I [owF:. Ile woIdl(lIn t di5uss it. Mr. EDWARIDS. And, according to HI'. lost, lie insisted that. it be 

dh,:troyed, torn 1l). Iow 41o voN account for tle fact that. ie changed hi attitude? Mr. Ilowt. I have no explanafi-On-for that. MI. Emnw.xi)s. What were t1te nature of the qui&stions tlat the FBI in Washington sent you? The series of questions? ir. I[owF. Well. one of then. of course, was why wasn't Oswald on time Securit' Indhex ? Wlv was there a delay of 12 days during which tihe case was )It RU.(' tatls, wait ing for a transfer l)ack to us from New Orleans. Whv was tlat lapse of 12 days. or why wvas tIe case allowed to bw closed for that 12 days. It seenis to me some routine communica-tion to the effect that Oswald had subscribed to the Daily Worker had 

coI, in the file and we hadn't taken action on it, because a suis)ription to the Daily Worker was a dime a dozen, really. We had a lot of coin-1,unicat ionas to that effect. 196 We were asked why we hadn't taken some action in connection with that. 'l'lTere were other-I can't recall anything, anything else, any-thing other than that. Mr. E)WAiiI)s. I)il you test ify before the Warren Commission? Ir. I fwE. No. sir. Mr. EFiWARDIi. )id the FBT give you any particular instructions to-day, such as Mr. 1losty was given when lie, before he testified to the Warren Conmiiission tlat your instructions are just to answer ques-tions. dl(nt, volunteer arn tiiin,4 .? Mr. I IowE. No. sir, i was told, the only thing I was told was that the hearing was to be 10iore Or less exclusively on the rec('ipt to handling a n(i tlie (li.lposit ill of tile Oswalhi lote alnd that I should give any in-formuiatioll to tie (0m,,1mnittee tliat 1 ha(d ill lly l)ossession concerning those things. Mr. EDWARDS. Vell. if a person is an investigator for a commission doing the investigative work f0r a ('on)iiildi. it would -hardly hbe 

l)rOl)er for sonnone. to tell an investigator, just answer questions. (Ion't volunteer an-thing. J),on't v'oi thiink that thne (litv of an investigator is. as an agent to his principal, to tell him everything that the investigator has found out?     

> Mfr.IOWVE. Iissued no in

tru ,tions of that sort to Mr. Hostv. Now, you are asking me for an opinion there concerning kind of ahypot ]et ical case, is t hat-

M[. EwAm)s. NO. I am asking this because there are a number of allegations that the FBI was not vandid with the Warren Comimission, that there is a certain amiont of evidence to Sui)port that allegation. I was v'onlering whiat your instructions were from tfle FBI, insofar as 'our relations with t liv Warren (omnis.sion were c,,icerned. 

Mr. I low:. I (n't know, si r. Becate, I lost v. if lhe was briefed at all, was briefed here in Washington, not in Dallas. Mr. .)WARDs. Did MI. Slianklin call Mir. Hoover often? Did they talk on t lie telephone ?M r. I [ow:. I woulIn ' t say that lie talked to Arr. Hoover as much as he would talk to other people at the B1ureau. ()n tlie averae(e. I presume he would talk to the Bureau alout. once a (lay or twice a (lay. zn(ler normal circuImstances. It light be several t ines on 1 day, and then for 2 or 3 days not at all. But he (lid 't normally talk to 'Mr. Hoover. It was usually to some lower ,'elieloTI oli,'i. i In conne tion with some s l)ei fic communication in which that official had an interest or who was supervising the area that, was 1nder tle rslonsihilitYv of that particular official. Mfr. E[)wn r.qS. Did Mr. Shanklin speak often'to Mr. Tolson? Mr. hIowE. No more sot hian to Mr. Hoover. 

'Mr. En:DwI.ms. Mr. Ilosty testified that Clyde Tolson put a stop on his personnel file, so that lhe could not get promoted. Do you think that happened to you ?

Mr. ffowE. I don't know. I didn't know that it had bcen done to Hostv's file or that it was done to my file. I don't know. I have not seeni mv Bureau file: I have no information that anything like that had happened to my file. Ir. EWARDs. 'Well, did 'our career change after the Oswald investi-gation like "Mr. Hostv says his did ? M.r. Hfosty says things have been alot different, ever since that one investigation'was conducted which he 197 participated in. And you participated in the same investigation, you were reprimanded, you were demoted. Since that time has your career gone as you would have expected if the events relating to Oswald hadn't taken place? Mr. IhowE. No, sir. Well, yes. I wouldn't say that I was discriminated against in any way following that. Now, whether there was something on my file in Washington which was done to advance this man any further or something of that sort, I don't know. Personally, I was very happy to be a street agent, and was not con-cerned about the fact. that I wasn't given consideration for being other than that after leaving Dallas. I was in grade 13, which was an agent's top grade at that time and I am still in grade 13 at the top. I have got my regular in-grade pay raises, and Mr. Ilosty las, too.   

> Mr. E'DWAmDS.

You were in the l)allas field office several years before the assassination. )id you know Jack Ruby? Mr. I Itowt. No, sir. Mr. Eiwxmms. Ile was an informant or at least. he had reported six or seen times to an agent at the i)allas fiel(i office but probably did not furnish any information. I)id you know about that? Mr. HowE. No, sir. Ile would have been what we call a 137 case, if anything, and that is a criminal informant and concerning those, Iwould have no knowledge. I don't know whether he was or wasn't and can inake no comment on that except to say what's been said before, that, if le was an informant, I didn't know that first land, outside of just hearsay. Normally, I wouldn't know whether he was or wasn't an 

InI forniant. Even back in those days, when these contacts with him took place, I woIldn't be aware of those because that was what we call a 137 case. Those 137 cas(e are informant cases and were handled on a desk apalt from mine. I handled the 134 cases because those were cases involving individuals wio were informants in the security field. Mr. EIw.mms. Thank you. Mr. Seil)erling? Mir. S}:uii:r.NO. TL'hank you, Mr. Chairman. 

Mr. [owe, (lid you ever-did the thought ever pass through your mind that it vas rat her odd for a person who was apparently contem-p)lating assassination of the President to contact an FBI office a couple of weeks beforelhand? \It. llwiw. I hav'e never thought of tliat specific qiiestioii or iiitter for conjecture. No, we haNve no in folwati o to inlivate that Oswald contemplated shooting the lresi(lent 2 weeks lfore it hap,,ned. "I'lere was nothing in our investigation which indicated thlat in afily fashion. 

Mr. SFTlEm:umNc.. Excep talt he (did assas i-inte tile IresiIlnt'? 

Mr. ITOWE,. l'hat's right, and the only i(lication that we have that lie miglt hav(, heem contemplating soi-netliing of that sort. began no nio0re tlhan the even I% ii, fore wh1en lle went to Irving. Mr. SE:IBREmTxA. Now, Mr. Shaildin said that after the assassina-tion tlat, if lhe had known of this note or any sort of communication -frou Oswald to an agent shortly before tle assassination, that li 

would hav'e considered this a serious enough matter to report to his s uperiors. But le satid lhe didn't know of suchi communication. 198 After the assassination would you have had a similar reaction, or did you have a similar reaction when you learned of the note or saw 

thle note? Mr. HoWvE. That I should report it to my superiors? Mr. SEIBERTINo. Yes. Mr. TlowiE. I did. Mr. SEIBEBLIXG. Right. exactly. Now, would you hiave thoulghit that lie would normally have reported 

that to his superior? 

Mr. Ilow':. I won't llake any effortto comment upon the validity of Mr. Slianklin's reaction to something of that sort. I don't know. Mr. S:InEr~laix(;. Well, let lie Ipit another question. You know Mr. Shanklin pretty well. I presmme. and his habits of thought, and be-lavior. )o you t think Mrt. Shanklin wold Nave takeoff it upon himself to order the destruction of tie note, or would he have taken that type of action only on illstruct ion of his silperiors-i? Mr. lTow. T (1lo't f'el qualified to make any colment on that. Mr. Siberlin. Mr. SlJe:rnlrT. W'(.]I. let mie ask 'oil a in ore general question. Was Mr. Slianklin tie kild1 of person wfio would take action on some pos-silbly controversial matter witlolt getting the aplpoval of his stIpe-riors, or was lie the kind of person who followed orders and didn't take that sort of action ?  

> Mr. lfowE.

There again, that wonl1 he conjectilr(' on my part. Ihave no positive answer. I don't tlii nk I aiii qualified to comment on sonletlliig of that sort.    

> Mr. wyeo;l wvon

were dis'iplitned for two things. Tie ecu-

sine letters were )ased on two ti i ,s, one of wh icl] was a censure for sofl iet]li ng tl~at voN were liot reqplir 1ed by tlie- ' iles to (o. Is that truie ?'Mr. lb wi:. We]1. thoat 1)arti ci l l itc'), VOU 'c re fe efrri ng to I p,-eiii ne is the SecuritN Index thing. Mr. SEIImlIAIo. Yes. M1"r. lowrv. As I exl)laiiied earlier. wv ]Iav'e vrtiin criteria, written criteria for tlat. One iteiii in, that list of ''iteriia w.ts a kind of a catli-:ill. One of tlose state,,ii.ts that voi cou1d have uised our, own juilg-nIent : Is tlis m,,an (langerols enoijrleeve n tlo ,] he is not a member of a revoliflionarv or, a nizat iol. (lazi, rOlls (11101oy]I to the national se-

ect'it , that le shdild )e' )l:ced on tlie Seenit v Indlex ?

Anid fivy grave (crt ain t hi ugs there Slidhj as hIavinig enrga4ed inl yin-lent. activities. having ,a(le irrational conml, nits concern ing the Gov-erneit. having lhlreatpeI(.d tllim.s arailist tile (Iovernilent, anl so 

forth. If it was one of tlio,.e tliiiiurs wvere it wa left miuore or less i1 to the jwllg.ient of thje a!!eiit. if le neeVed somel ing,, to ,ise to qial-ifv someone for tlve Sen i'it v Inde(,x. in ri ose pai i(cilar cases, of cont'se. 

.vo would1 hiave to exl)lain )retty full to tHie Brea why von %vere 

(loing it under tlose ci rcuustancl., an.d tIIcy woil'l iln ji(ge, Il whet her yowe righ,,lt or whetlier von were wron.k 

fWeEIm: c. ',,ll. a-ze1 o,, evert lir g that w( know now almi,,t 

Mr. O\vald. a4 to lis act ivitics prior to Nove,,iber 22. was there qnv-tliin, tlat woul1 have iustitied Plftimg li,ii ill tlie v 'u,,'tv Index ?

Mr. rowi:. Not necessarily. "erelv being 1)i'miip to violence wr'oiddl not. really be a criteria for putting him on thie. Sectirity Index. 199   

> Mr. SEIBERLING.

But was there aity evidence that he was prone to violence prior to that? Mr. HOWE. No, there wasn't. But given what we know of him now, quite obviously he was. Mr. SEMERLIN.G. But what we know of his activities prior to Noven-ber 22? Mr. HOWE. No, because the thing at that time. as I said, our princi-l)al concern with him at that time was whetlu'r he might not possibly 

o an espionage agent. or something of that sort, have an es)ioniag'e mission in the United States. after he came back from Russia and try-ing to defect over there. Mr. SEirmIr 4 ix(. So that lie might, be, justifiably Mr1. hfowf:. That wouldn't necessarily miean that le was a danger to national security from the standpoint of taking action against the Gov-ernment. We hadn't establisled that he was a espionage agent. A, a

matter of fact, it. looked a little bit as though le couldn't possibly)' )

l)ecaluse lie didn't lim'ive the mental cal)acity which, it seems to ie, woul(l lead tie Russiaiis to t rust hin with an espionage mission. Mr. SEmiwItITNrG. Well, in vouir opinion, have we estal ished it yet ?Do we even know now that lie was an espionage agent ?Mr. I [owE:. No. sir. 

Ml'. SEIMERLIN(. SO N-ou1r julgiellt Vold le now tie same as it was theln? MI. ThowI. Yes, sir. M[r. SE~mwmLixo. Now, tie other thing :l)oiit the 1'2-(lav (delav in t ra nsferriing t he file from New (O)rlea s to 1)alas,. that striikes IIIe as leii, ii sort of tri'lili(d III)'c arie. Would that be a projwr ca('Ieter-izat ionl? 

AM r. I low. That wN5s the Blitiea is est imate of the Imatter, aid it was their judgmeiit. and I accept it. Mi'. SEMm:R.mN. Well- hM t wlhat was so had about a l2-(day deela in t transferring a roit inc file froi ,ine place to another ?

Mr. I wE. I woi ldn't Ilave coisidere,! it verV i ipo't aut Tii.lf. Tdon't thiink it had any en ringl., on the sil ser-Iuent action ill any" fasi -iou . anld 1 (lout1 knlow wvli th Bli7ireii picked thlmt ouit :a~ aI lit too. 

Mr. SE[i .IyO. Well. let fie flow jlst a'k you tlie smle (Ilesliol I

asked Mr. HIostv. 

Was it a prai'(tice at thfat tiji i in tlie FI tliat wherever there w q; 

a possibility' that tile FB13I might be vriti'izeul for sonie faillire 1r :1. -le-e(l failure. tiat fhe nide aI s('al)e,roat of sonie agrent ill tier field! in order to fret lie focus : wav from Wasingtrt ?Mm'.r. I wvoliilut Ipuit it 1u lite thlit wa. o: lvefi us thle lliureaiu1 

is all o01, oig,.i izati mu. a reflet ion bea ,'u1se (,f a dl,,reli'ti on oii al ,ur.it is a re(flect l() nra,'inst tle FlIt as : whole, and thtl(l' tie r(so dlereli'-tions of speifiv a gents werme s1I lj(,t to (ii-,i li arv aetion. Ieal-, tlat reflected on tle lIreall. Mr. S1,mili':im-io. But I ret thle imil)1e-.sioll fr'om 'Mr. h il lie's ti's;ti -

> and

. 14 'Mr. 1 lost y's that thei Wllashiliiutoui office waIs roli-11 t t 1 i~z-sulinir both coi livnilt: ions' ald ('ritiius-. vewmusmes to aeil fil te 

field., anld thle iia iri-e' of field ofll-v's, Aluid F ill hegiii t L to zet tile 

feeling that Wilngt on wanted to ])ave a re,'or(l on praeti'all, every avent so that if anything went. 'wrong tley'd always h nve soewtlhiL, that they could pin on..--pin the l)lW.ie on someone ' t in the field to 200 keep the greater father in Washington pure and free of any taint of fau t. Is that true? Mr. HowE. No; that wouldn't be my analysis of the situation at all. 

M r. SEIBTRELINO. Well, what is your analysisI Mh.. HoniE. That Mr. Hoover, as is unquestionably well-known, was astrict disciplinarian. Ie considered anything that happened to the Bureau in any of its various phases or various subsidiary offices as areflection upon the Bureau itself. It wasn't necessarily a question of picking out a scapegoat. It was disciplining because of the fact that your actions reflected on the Bureau in some fashion. INJi. SDIBEUI. N. Iid the Washington oflie--oh, excise me. Ir. ][owE. I was just. going to ask whether you understand what I'm) trying to say tlere. .NIr. SEwmjtriNo. I understand. 

Mr. ]Iowi. Tliev werelt looking for a scapegoat necessarily to say well, it wasn't the Bliureau's-fauilt or this agent's fault. Mir. Sf:Imw INo. No, but they were looking for a basis on which they could always show that they had taken corrective action. Isn't tlat correct ,

Mr. HowE. Possibly so, yes.   

> ,Al. SEIERImANG.

)id tHie Washington office ever adllit that it had done anything wrong or failed in any way l)ublicly? I'm talking a boIt,-

Ir. owv. Oh well, people here at the seat of Government, as it is known, were (disiipliinl aind gi vell letters o0' censlll'e and given the sanite action as a street agent out in tie field if Sonetliirig went wrong.   

> ,1r'. SvIERIVW'O.

Is that true (of the Director h itself ? Did he ever personally, publicly take the blame for any mistakes? MI. ,wE. I (al t sav. I donit kllow. 

B ack thirolnigh tie 'vea s--h es lvei here sive 1924, he has been hero since 192t-whetlier anywhere along tie line t here was anything like that, I don't know. I don't know of any such instance. ,1i\. S-i iw.:ILi .N;. Veill. o e fi rtr ,Ii ietiot0 .

I f it is t ruie, It11( NveO'ti' goiig, to filld olit, if it's triie-t lat Air. Ilosty's nemoraiiiiin was altered Iet veen tle ti me ,voui and he puIit it. together, its ( 'llpar(,d to one in his personnel file Would you say that looked like somicon wis trying to railroad you an1(d Mr. flosty by these disitllillary act ions, Iir. hlwl:. Vell low, tlil's " hipotlietical qiiestion. It would delend or tile circullllstalics. I have, iio kniovledge that our answers were cli led wit lolt otll klvedge. 

MNl'. SEFWlilANot. AIN' ettj.qti is : If it. turns out tlat they were falsi-fie(l, how woun V(i rell to t that hlr. Il,,wf:. It thev iver ,1t i i I lv eluli uge(l wit llut our1 knowledge 

Hiidl witiolit lis havili elly'ell given 1i 0i ¢ll loit iinity to acquiesce to those (mailig'.u, I wIould s-.y t hat, w ioever (1 litiiiget it ent w as ei'liapIs trying to 1 )I('teC( t hliills"l n olle it'siiion, or )rotect tile ollice or protect Soliiuconit by throwing a little more blaine on us. But I have no kiiowledge tlint that took liIace in connection with tills sit mit ion, vith Niv. I lost v.   

> .Mir. SEIBERluING.

W\'ell, whly would anyone want to do that., in your Ol)illioli i201 Mr. HowEp. As I say, to protect himself perhaps, if he felt something in your explanation reflected oil him and he didn't want that in there, and he changed it arbitrarily without recourse to you, or letting you know or giving you an opportunity at least to acquiesce, what else can you dedluce from that except that he's trying to )rotect himself ?Mr. SEIBERLINO. Why would 'Mr. Shanklin want the Oswald note destroyed ?

Mr. Thowf.. I don't know. "Mr. SEtBEnM NO. You cnI't guIess? 

MIr. I[owE. No. I don't have any idea. I know that so far as I was concerned Mr. EDWARDS. WVould you yield at that point? Wasn't it common knowlIedge that Mr. I loover was looking at every aspect of the assassination plersonally? iHe signed all the letters that 1 saw to the 1Warren Conimission personally. E'vell the most insignifi-callt matter that wIIs reported by tie FII to the Warren Conunission was s1-igl(ed by Mr. I [oover personally. Woiul(ln't you say--isn't it, probably tried that everything that was going oil at I)allas relating to tlie assassillat ion, (swald, et cetera, was l)ersonally supervised in Washington by M r. H oover ?

Mr. llow.. No, sir, I wouldn't say that. Every ,onununic.,tioji that goes out of the Biureall, even today, is m)'er the signiaturc of tie director ; and any coniminieation We s(blld to the Biuireaui from tle field is not. a(ldr'ssel to F I hea(liartes, or to some lower eceloi official. Everything is I)ilevtor. F1 1. '1l .at's . standard poli(y lilt([ 

has been so foir as u ug as I've bvei ili tliw Bureau. '1'w iimem fact tlat those letters carryy tlie ne of "Mr. J. Edgar 

IIoover-

Mr. li~wAmwS. 0h, ves, of co(i Il'5s, Wve cll 11lI1derstainld thlat. Blit tilie assassin nation of the Presi(dent of tile Unite1I State.S, that's sonletlhiig agitin ; and I tlinl that you understaml ho)w Mr. I loover's it.,ot ivations went. Am(1 are vott going to tell us that lie li(ll't pay close attention to wlat was goiig onI 

Mr. I)[,wE. 1 l lpstijl-jonald)y lie lil. 111t AVl.at I was getting at was tile itiere fitct ttiat his fia1ii( al))eared on the outgoing coiiiuuiuiiti-cation \voh INlt .l.e"a(ilv nlevali that lie per. ially signed tlit let-tell, or' personally l)rel)an'ed it, o1r personally approved it. If it w'erb sonietlig in'onseuent ml, of little siguiticai'e, it .o ~ll l)OSSi1)l' Ie sent out iv one of tle assistant directors. lilt associate director', or 

801(10)ne like, tlat. Aln'tli fg of imp 1ortance, l,111 si 'e vol aVe trone oVe- I [oo~j',-

desk a11 1(l N ild ]I n .si.le I it or ap' rved it )ersouallv. 

Mr. E"W.i IS. lBi~t if Mr. Iloover lhad foind out that Sluanklin lil, witI ,tl Ilis kn(,vib,ge, t' (lered tlie (lest i'tion, wouldn't lie have fired Shianklin ?

Mr. Ill,,wE. I prestime there vould have been disv'ilplinary action of s)Iie sort. I dontt know what, that would have been. 

Mi'. AWARDs. Mr. I)rinan. 

M'. I)RINAN. 'Mr. howe. vou are a very nice gentleman, and you 

don't want to injure anybody in tihe Bii-au, anl you don't wait to injilre the llirealu. Those are ('ommenabiale virtues. lit I wvouild wvant you to reson(l very candidly, if I may ask this questimio. When 3ou rea(l that Mr. Slhnllin denied all knowledge of 202 this note, and I assume that you read it in the report that Mr. Adams gave, in any event, at the moment in time you for the first time knew that fr. Shanklin denied all knowledge of the note that you discussed with him, were you amazed? Ir. HowE. Yes. Mfr. DRInAN. Did you discuss this with anyone? Mr. IIowr:. No, sir; I didn't discuss this with anyone, and haven't to this day, with the exception of Mr. Bassett and Phil MeNair. Mr'. 1)R VNAN. Did your amazement carry over yesterday when Mr. Shanklin all through the day adamantly stuck to his story that he never discussed this with you? Were you amazed at his testimony yesterday ?Mr. I owF.. I can't say whether Mr. Shanklin recalls this matter Specifically, or whether he perhaps doesn't recall it. Ir. DRINA.X'. But it's surprising to you. is it not? Mr. HowF. I would say unusual, but I wouldn't say impossible. Mr. DRINAN. Have you ever seen Mr. Shanklin g.,o against your im, ipression of reality in anything else? I [ave you ever seen anything flke this in his-Mr. Howr. No, sir. .MIr. I)x.,N. Thank yot. Do you feel that you are the scapegoat of someone? Mr. Ilowi. No; despite the fact that I feel perhaps the adminis-trative action taken was a little more severe than was justified. I don't think I was being made a scapegoat. I was being disciplined because the I)irector felt that my actions, in his judgment, or in the judgment of whoever prepared the disciplinary action downli here, were a reflec-lio)n upon tile Bureau. Mr. I)INAN. I wonder if you'd give us your idea of where the slb-coMiittee, could go iNow. Right now it's a no-end situation. The press will say Congress (lid not get to the bottom of the concealment and the ,(1striietion of Oswald's letter. Thev will also say -and I think it's a valid inference--that the FBI was allowed by Congress to continue  

> to

c,ver I) the overup. 

A d wlere (i) we go from lhere ? It's not 1I-) to us to say whether an.y-hiolv has told falsehoods here. That's 1) to the I)epartinent of J.ustice. t. 'as wvyo know. tile FII conchlide(l very solepilily that the facts discloed-the D)epartment lhas concluded this is not an appropriate  

> c.ii*

fo- crili inal l)rosecit ion at this tine. Will they do it in the future? 'What sl lld we (l now in order to save the reputation of people and  

> to

help the F13I since tlat's oiur function as the over.sight subcou-

iiittv, ?

Mr. l[owr:. Franinklv, I don't know, Mr. I)rinan. I've given you all the in format ion I ha:e to the best of iny alfility. 

N1 r. lt i x. I k now v'on Iiav(,. Mr. Illowr. I a1 not going to pass ally juldgilnelt )It what should 

(ir " ,-hld iut lw, done. 'lhe Bureau is inakiii change.. I think iuch for the better. an1in lsoe resl)e('ts sle'ifialfy givi ig supervi.,ors ino'e tiim' to Supervise theii cases as they Shol(i be sptlervised. The cRase-batl" of the agents-tlie caseloild.s'are being cut, down to tle point whVe anl ngent can devote imre tinm to hiis important .ases. \Ve're trying to separate the wheat from the chaff. I think there 

11N, a1 lft (f good things goilg onl inl thle Bureaul. 203 

Mr. DIIxxN-. One last question. Kyle Clark apparently said to Mrs. Fenner, "You can forget about the Oswald note." Would you have any reflection on that? Mr. HowE. I never knew anything about that before. I have no conlment to make. Mr. DRINAN. That came up yesterday. Mr. IIow. I know that came up yesterday. That's the first I've heard of it and I have no comment concerning it. Mr. DaiN-AN. Do you think Kyle Clark would be able to lend any wisdom to this investigation? Mr. I [OWE. I don't know. Mr. DRINAN. Thank you very much. Mr. EDWARS. 1'. )0(1(d. 

Mr. Don. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'd like to go back and try to get things together in my own mind. 

M aybe if you can just sort of give me yes or no responses. 1)o you recall having the naime of Lee Harvey Oswald come to your attention one way or another prior to the assassination of President Kennedy? Mr. HowE. Oh, yes, causee it. was a case on my desk. Mr. 1)om). So you recall that? Mr. Low. That's right. Mr. DODD. Do you rememll)er learning of the delivery of tle Oswald note after the shooting of Oswald, from Mrs. Fenner? She said sonic-

thing to you about it. 'Mr. PowE. Yes. 'T'hat was mv first knowledge of the letter. Mr. l)om). l)o you recall talking to Mr. Slianklin about Mrs. Fenner 

ilrilig that to your attention? Mr. IIow .. Yes. Mir. )on. Are you sure that you folnd tie note in Ilosty's work basket? Mr. I(),w. Of that I'm certain. Mr. DO). Absolutely certain? Mr. Howy. That's one thing I specifically and definitely know. T dis-

,',\'TI'(1 tile note iin Iosty's worklbox. Whether I[osty knew it, was 

t here. I don't know. Mr. I)oim. But you recall that sI)ecifically ? 

MI'. IhowE. YeS. M r. )om). I)o rou, rec-all when - l fm)(1 the note ]low quickly you lut sort of two an'd two together?   

> lAt

i ask you this: )id )'o, recognize tle note by the signature? .Mm'. h'ow : ][ (hont recall that there was any name. s gnatuure or naaine 

o( lherwise, in tie note. Mr. ),n)1). 1[owdid ,il know it was the note then ?

Mr. l[owE. I associated tie note when I saw and read its, contents. whii,., I did at that tille] at, least on one occasion, and I can't visualize it now and tell roi, exactly what that was. 

Mr. .Well. (lou't you, get a lot of n,1t letter's? Couldn't that. ave I een from anyone? Mr. Iow '. No, it closely enough resellbled tle letter t hat Nam 1(en-

,er Naid (swald hial brouglt into the office. 

Mr. IDo D. So it's kind of fresh in your mind that Mrs. Fenner. 204 talking about the Oswald note, was something that you were con-scious of quite severely? Mr. HowE. Oh, yes. 

Mr. DODD. So when you saw this letter addressed to Mr. Ilosty, talk-ing about going to do something, despite the fact that you can't recall whether or not that was signed by Mr. Oswald, that rang a bell with you right away Mr. 1 Low:. hait's right, because that was within, at the most, a week or 10 (lays perhaps following my first knowledge of the letter, and that was still fre-li iii ny mind. NaTturally when I ran across this thing, 1 glanced at it and saw what it was and-my God MIr. Dum. Right away it hit you-that's that Oswald letter? Mr. 1Iow. That that's that letter Nan Fenner was talking about. Mr. J)onn. Is that what you said? That's that Oswald note. Did you have that kind of a thought? 

M'. 1[(VE. Well, if you want to call it that. Let's call it the Oswald note: now. 

Mr. DODD. OK. Mfr. HowE. But that was the note to which Nan Fener was refer-ring, and to which she said someone. had brought into the office who     

> shea, I)(,win e'ed was Oswald.

Mr. )ODDi). '1'lien what was your immediate reaction ? I'd better show Mr. Shanklin this right away ?

M r. IlWE. Yes, of course. 

M r. l)kam. That was l)retty much your first response? Mr. I[owE. And that's what I did. 

Mr. ])(,. And do you recall that-

.M11r. I [oWVE. Yes. M1). lni[ (coit Bivig]. Being yomr first response? And do you recall going in ald .Iowiig Ml ,'. Sli,11zilii tite IImt(,? 

M1'. I()h . I had the note in my hand and told him what I had and 

where 1(d found it. There was no doubt in my mind that he knew what 

1 was talking about because we had-it had been (tiIssed before. 

I r. I)onD. And at that point your memory sort of ceases. You can't. recall what you (lid with the note? 

Mr. lit)wE. That particular step in there as to exactly wliat I did with t lie note-I know I did one of those three things, but which one Id(out( know. 

M\Il'. 1),)D. Can you see how I'm kind of perplexed? 

M r. I lowE. I know what you mean. 

M. 1)()1. You remember all of these things. As well as remenbelr-bng that you knew about Oswald even before the assassination. I think that's tremnendous to be able to remcmiber that, with all of the cases that y()u had. But then not. being able to remember what happened to that nlote once you gave it to Shaiklin, recogmizing by your own testi-nion" tIhe significance of that note when you found it in Ilosty's box alid 

how'it rang a h-,ll with vom, and then not being able to rem(nler what happened to t hat not( when you brought it into Mr. Shaiiklin. 

# sNr'. lb(,wr:. Well. :is I :ai l, .f,)e, no one has been more agrg:i-vate(, than I have been with myself that I can't recall specifically somie things that happened back in those hectic days. I can't specificallv rv-

call. I've tried to ever since July. I've thought periodically aboit" this    

> tling. Ihave

been (u(stioned about it and it has bothered nio that I205 haven't been able to reconstruct the thing minute by minute as to what took place. But that's not the only thing I can't recall or reconstruct back in those days. I couldn't go back and tell you exactly what happened when. Mr. DODD. What else can't you recall? Mr. HowE. Pardon? Mr. DODD. What else can't you recall? Mr. HowE. I mean so far as the investigation was concerned: when this happened, when that happened in specific chronological order. Isaid it, was a kaleidoscope really, those first few days or first week or two after the assassination. You can imagine we were goinr in 14 different directions at once, and the whole office was that way. It was a confusing time. Mr. I)ODD. Did you ever see the note again? fr. Iow:. No, sir. 

Mr. DODD. So you must have left it in Shanklin's office; at least that is one of the possibilities. Mfr. 1IowE. That's what I said, it's one of the three possibilities. Inever saw the note subsequently nor have I any knowledge of wh at 11alpened to it. When I turned the note over to--I didn't turn it over to Shanklin -but i ftei" that particular episode there, having left the office and tell-iju Hosty to see the SAG-

MD. IODD. Well, excuse me. You've mentioned one of the three possibilities that you put it back in i lost v's woik hox. M1r. hfown. Yes, that's what I say. But whatever I did   

> IfMr. DODD.

But you told me you didn't see it after you left Shanklin's office. MAr. TTowE. Well, after that series of events there, I did one of the three, things with the note, and let me say there, that's what I nean, after that I never again saw the note. M\Ir. DODD. Did Mr. Shanklin look at the note or did you just hold it out for him to readI   

> Mr. How.

I had it in my hand. I didn't hand it to him. lie (li(lI't readl it. I know that. .M[r. DODD. He didn't read it? Mr. IhowF;. But I described to him what I had and where Fl foud it. r. l)onn. Is your testimony he didn't read it? .Mfr. I lowE. lie didn't read it. at, that time, no. MNr. I)om). lie didn't pit his hands on it? You just kind of hl,+ld it out. there for him to look at? MIr. lI WE. That's right. I had it in my hand and wanted to put it on his desl. all tw'n I t hOluL.,lit we woiligi discess this thil.,, wlat (do 

we do now, here is this thing that. we thought didn't any longer exi t. 

Mr. l)oi). And you don't remember putting it back in your I)oc'wt ?

.i. Tow,. No, t don't. MNr. 1)oim. What would you most likely have done with other in-formation that you brought to Mr. Shankfin in the past ? Fin siiie v,,I saw him many, inaiy times regarding many pieces of ififornuation -normnally, when you brought something into Mr. Slianklin to see. did 82 (29- -77 - -14 206 

Iou normally take it back out with you, or did you leave it for him to look over? Mr. HowE. Well, that would depend. If it was somk thing that Iwanted to discuss with him and we sat down and discussed it at that time and we came to a conclusion, I would carry it back out with me. If it was something that I felt he should review with a little care, I-didn't want to wait until he did it, I would leave it there and then walk oilt. M\I-. DODD. HIe would normally make a request-leave this here, Iwould like to look at it further. M\I-. I [owE. Sometimes. If he were busy with something else lie would say well, OK leave it there, I'll take a look at it when I get a chance. Mr. DIoi,. And if lie didn't say that, normally you'd take it back out with you when you left?    

> MI-. IfOWE.

Welt, if we had come to some conclusion in connection witl whatever problem might be involved and what I had gone in allot, I would take it back out with me and go on from there on my 

> MO\VII.

Mr. Dou)i. Thank you.   

> I'. EDWARDS.

Mr. Seiberling? Mr. SEIEJ.rI. One more question.  

> Suppose

the note had not been destroyed and in due course had beell i 11lud ed in the file on the investigation of the assassination ? Do you 

linIve any feeling as to what would have been the reaction of the Wash.-iligtoll office of the Bureau as to the existence of the note and the fail-lift( lo take action on it prior to the assassination? Mr. ITowE. I think there would have been action taken of a very severe nature possibly in connection-liad that taken place, although I ,l,,11't know. 

\Jii'. Sqimu,~rx.z against, the head of the Dallas office? 

Mr. l[,w v:. Well. tilire agaill. tis ilig Wolil,1 he Jiandle(l in ac-cor lam,'Ie witl Ilhi ,'aii policy. Ihere wolld Ibe an explanation de-

n1an' 1t'. 'I'li t exl ia ation ,l1void be prepared. It would with tlie SA("s reconnleumla ti0i. 'fiat "s a hypotlhetical niatter. Mr. SznW~lIJN';. So that it wasn't necessarily an irrational act 1y 

Air. Shanklin. if indeed lie did orler the dest auction of the note? It. could have 1,,,ei a sel f-protect ie act. Mr. IfowE. It--I (lon't know. You could! look at it that, way I sup-1,oi'. The note could have lhad '.ist one consequence. Actuall. at that stage of the game it replresentel notling niore than something on which Jiml lost, 'o miitlt say, wouldd have 1,een very, very severely criti-cizel when the tling was e'valuated in tile hIysteria following the assas-sination on te lasis of facts which existed prior to the assassination. ad which at, tiat tine w-Muld ilot have been a great ig( deal. 51". Smln:nFi tO. So either Itosty or -*'ou or Shanklin or all three could have been in jj ired by it ?

Mr. hlOWE. I d1o1't sVe where I wotil1 have xen iii anv way culpable. Mr. SMICERILtN. Well. sinMI)ll lVcause you were Ilis sil erior. like tle captain who's in corlnanl of tlie shi l tiat sinks. Vhetlher ihe was on deck or not at the tim. or on tile Ibridg., lie is reslponsilble. Mr1. Io W. No, iot for sornethiir that was bever lro ,ght to your attention. T don't feel that I wotld have been lheld in an% way respon-sible in omnnettion ivith lhat. if soime a'tio liiad been taken ill conRec-207 

tion with that letter. I di(( wlhat I was responsible for doing in connec-tion with it, as soon as I had an opportunity to do it. Mr. SmrBeui.miN. But you (1o feel that nevertheless there coul have ben some very sharp reactions on the part of 'Washington as to the fact that the note had not been disclosed prior to the assassination? Mr. IfowE. As I see it, tie note would have only served one purpose, anti that would have been for action, disciI linarv action, as I said, directed primarily at ,Jim Hiosty because it would lhave been said lie sldould have done something with it prior to tie assassination. Of colors,, that's whiat I say. It would be severe because it would be evalt-ated in the light of what had occurred, rather than in the light of the 

circumstances which existedl prior to tile assaissitiat iol; in wllich event I don't doubt. But what if lie hadn't had an inspection tliei,, and that niote had voime to light in the course of that inspection that there would have been anythiiig more than a mild letter of censure because it would be eal led a delayed investigation. But after'tie assassination, it would not, lhve been, in my Opinion, 

rat Jonally evaluated. And that's tie only fliigtliat tit letter was good for at that time. It was an administrative mailer. a personnel latter, 

111nl after I turned it ovrr to tle SAC I was through witl it as far as 

I was coicere l. Admiinistrative action, disciplinary action, recom-itienldations concerning for or against are the responsibility of the 

.S.\(k M'. SEIEEMLNGo. Well, on that, since ap)arentlv Mr. I osty woull he tie one tlat would most likely Ix penalized, I suppose you miight 

a",-i ,n, that le 'would have tihe greatest incentive to (lestro.v t le nolte. lut if lie did that all on Iils own, why tlen certainly n'1o one eise 

wotld have been criticized for it. Mr. HoWE. Well, (Iat s probably true. 

M1'. SE111E1A (. Is tiet t tie ?

Mr. How. That's )rol)ably true, if lie did that on his own. 

MI. S nEIRLING. But 11r. Shanklin (lees not testify ilet a he di(di't order' tio destruction of the note. lie test ilied tlat lie n(ver ee lieard 

of the note. 

Nir. HoWE. I understand that. MIr. SEfIBE RIN'(;. Whicl is it rather strong coiibitiation of cir, mn-  

> S(a nes.

ir. flossy. All I can tell you is---to tile est of fiiv alility---ny recol-

lct ion of the events which are. pertinent to tlie act i'vity coI'(erniflg tlta jiot e. I I'. SETBERLrA N. Thanik \,oi. 

1'r. EDWArDS. A re-there any other questions ?

If there are no other quest ions, the committee will recess un,1til Mon-

lIv moving at 9:30 il tliis room. 

Mr. Howe, thank you very much for your test inony. [Mierupon; at 3 :'26 p.m.. the (1 iiiu ,,it ti 'e(efsc(l to-reconvene at t liv cll of the ('ha ii.. I#" APPENDIX INRODUCTION TO APPENDIX Requests made of James B. Adams, Deputy Associate Director of the Federal Jlureau of Investigation at the hearing of October 21, 1975 were further amplified ilk a htter from Chairman Edwards of October 29, 1975 to the Attorney General. That letter follows this introduction, which Is followed by the responses. Oi I ecember 15, 1975 Chairman Edwards requested the Attorney General to respond to further questions regarding issues raised in the testimony of James 1'. Jlosty, Jr. before the Subcommittee on December12, 1975. Chairman Edwards' letter of lDeeember 15, 1975 appears in this alpendix with the response following tile request. Certain of the responses by the FBI were treated by the Subcommittee as executive session material because of personal privacy considerations and not Included in this appendix. Those materials are: questions 8(a) as to names of Individuals interviewed regarding the destruction of the Oswald note and 8(c) a. to names of all individuals regarding the alleged telex to the New Orleans 'iI office. Subcommittee staff reviewed materials relating to the questions at FBI Headquarters for additional Information which would aid the Subcommittee In determining the circumnstances surrounding the destruction of the Oswald note. No Information was developed which would settle the conflicts which arose in test Inmiony before the Subcommittee. Tile Subcommittee believes that the Committee on Assassinations, created by 

th, 1l1(Ise of Representatives (luring the 94th Congress, will deal further with tlesi' subjects during their inquiry. OcTomIa 29, 1975. ion. EDWARD IT. LTvx, 

A torney General of the United States, department of Justice,    

> 1I'f.'(11 ton, ).C.
> Il,)AR

Mn. ATTORNEY GF.NFRAL: At a hearing on October 21, 1975, held by the Stibcmwmnittee on Civil and Constitutional Rights of the House Committee on the Judiciary, the witness, .ames B. Adams, I)ePuty Associate D director of the Federal Bureau f Investigation was asked to augment the record In certain instances. Mr. Adams was advised that this Sulwommlttee would sul)mit a serle of questions regarding FBI procedures and some legal Issues Involved which are attached and marked Exhibit A. The witness was directed to respond to the sub-niltted questions under a continuation of his oath, or to submit tile answers as a sworn statement. The other matters to he furnished are as follows: 1. Copy of the Report (Summary) first furnished to the Warrvn Commission which did not refer to Agent Ilosty along with the report later furnished to the ('mmisslom which included the reference data on Agent Flosty. 2. Agreement (Guidelines) by which FBI furnishes Information to the Secret Service regarding individual or group threats to the Executive. 3. The Oswald file of some 69 documents which existed at tihe tine of the deliberations of the Warren Commission with designation of which documents were reviewed by the Commission and which were not so reviewed. Mr. Ada is indicated that lie would submit a statement for the record at this tline. 4. Copy of any and all Internal rules of the FBl (whether In the formal rules and regtlattonm or not) regarding the procedures for replortlng misconduct, whether active or paissve. Identify any changes made in such rules between 1963 and 1975. 5. Report or reports regarding the discipline of any FBI or I)lgrtment of Justice personnel related to the conduct of the Inveodgation of tihe a%, ns.1ination of President Kennedy. Please provide the names, nature of the violation, dis-cipllne Imposed., 193 And 1975 rank or job description and present address (employment and home if known). (209) 210 

6. Copius of 302 (report of interview) or any other reports referring to each 

FB contact with Jack Ruby and Lee Harvey Oswald (whether personal, thru intermediaries or otherwise). 7. Chicago Police departmentt Report #55513 for an offense on or about 

1)ecelnber 9, 1939 and detxective report dated on or about Detemiber S, 1931. Reports Involve the shooting of a union official referred to in the testimony of Mr. Adams. Please advise if there is now or ever has been a "tickler" or otlier notatoi on any of the subject files asking that the FBI be notified if any itiluirics or requests were made concerning such files. 8. Tie names and a(ldres'ses including past positions (In 1903) and present ]osltlons of all people interviewed during the FBI inquiry into (a) the Oswald nrote and its d(1stru'tion (b) the Ruby coiti(ts with tie FBI and (e) the Wa11r1 

allegation of receipt of u Telex shortly before November 22, 1963 in the New Orleans Field Office. After recelving this list we shall inform you of tile Indi-viduals still In the eniploy of the FBI which th Subcommittee wishes to interview preparatory to further hearings. 9. The rep)rt and summary provided by the FBI to the I)epartment of .Jruttioe regarding the Oswald note which resulted iit the d(.Idslon Iy the )epartment (if 

Justice on the potential criminal issues Involved in the destruction of the note and the failure to reo)rt its existence, delivery or destruction. 

I would applrelate your forwarding the readily available Information Iinm,-(litely without waiting for i conlpilat ion of a resilmoise to each question. Pl:lse 

ais) provitle as s(oon as possible a sie'lifle statement as to which, if any, rejUte-r1 will hbe colplled with in executive cseslon or sholhl Ile deeiimed executive -(l-

miItt§4' material. Please provide a timetable of whien (acih item can1 Ile a(hlres'md to thils Smix(,imiiittee. Sii ie 'rel 3' )ov EDWAR)q, 

chairman , ,Subcommitte oni ('iril and   

> 'onstitutional Rigb .

,'Iclosure'. EXillBIT AQL'I'lTIONS RE;ARDING PROCEDURES FOR Il ANI.ING ('IRRFSPONI)EN(' DELIVERED '1() 

1. What w1s tli FBI lro" slire for lor4?c.ssing Information delivred to a fild o0ltiV in Nove1l'Wr. 19(3? 2. Were i's IiI tiat on titl( basls of a m.ssagr d.livereil to sch an offivi.,? 3. Would such a jiiessage be treated differently if the author was known tit 

the FIl? 

a. If so, how? 4. Are Fil lirocedures for handling messages delivered to field offices any dlif-   

> fereint today tiitan IWO

193? 5. Are field offlet4 autiorizr(l to destroy documents without liadi uarti ,r a)proval ? What. was tile lxlhy in Novembeu'r. 196.3, and what is It miV?   

> 6. Mat

arte FBI regulations regarding unauthorizei destruet ill of   

> dw'll rlenllI s1?

7. Hlas the Fill Niereneviled lally cases, other than the ()swald e(,.s(, where (mnc or more of its is'xonioiel miay li }l ldestroyed or otherwise lisiamalel it  

> (10111eit

?! If so: (a) What were the circumstances? (b) What were the disilositions? (e) 

W1lhat lswrmonnel action wits taken? 

S. lam time Fl1 (levistl anly plans or lpr(Kdlurem to furftlhor limit tile I)s-ildlitv of unauthordze(l ihestruetion of (loelmlnents in Its m)s. 8s1lon? 9. What are the procedures for advising the Attorney (eneral of an iitf'rimil investigation by tMe E'liI of its own personnel ?

10. Are all such Investigations routinely referred to the AttomIey Geioral regardless of the (isposition ?

I1. Are th, fuetN and ci rcum.sanrn. of an internal l.ive,,tigatlon of FBI[ per-soniel mairttainel In the mlxrsontlel flh, of the In dividual II v ived ?

12. Are separate investigative files Initiated at tile time of such an Ineldent? 13. Ac orlIng to FBI rles, what are the possilile personnel actions whi-ih can be taken ngalnqt an employee who violates a rule or procedure of the FBI? 14. Have any matters Involving FIll personnel ever been referred to the Attorney General for prfliecution or for review for j)silble prnwerution? (a) If so, what were the nature of the offenses and what action was taken? 211 

LEGAL ISSUE.9 REGARDING vIOLATION OF FIJI RULES 

1. Has the Attorney General researched the lossible charges which might b~e lodged against a Ix-rsion who destroys documents ilk contravention of the ruhl.-of a government agency ?

2. What are the lssible charges? 3. What additional dinrges, if any, could lie lodgt4l If. In ,vorn testimony, an Individual fails to diloe, having a dily so to do, the fact of all Impr lor destruction of doclinents? 4. lit tie case of nl tiauthorized (ldstruetlon of doltnvents, what i tihe stat-lite of limitations on such ntilf iTense if the discovery (of sutiei ai a .occurs 10 or 12 years after the fact? 5. What potential charges would bie against an Fill elldoyee who had kvowl-

edge. of a violation of Burenu rules by another employee, but failed to ropoirt such violation? 

6. Has the Attorney Gneral had cases involving destruction of document,, of non-dIslosure of agency violations inI the Imst? 7. If So, lltive lilly involved the FBI? I,*.S. JWPArMENT OF .JUSTICE, "ElJEI.AI I'iREAV 01' I NVES'IGAT ION, OFFICE OF TIlE I RECTOR.  

> Wlash

hqjt,,n, D.C.. A'orcm ber .00, 197, It( report first furnished to Warren Conmission which (id not refer to SMpe'ial Agent James 1P. liosty, Jr. and later report furnished to Warren (pun ,S1i In 

which included the information relating to Special Ageint I losty. To: Subcommittee oi Civil and Constitutlonal Rights, lI , C' mIlmitte 4111 the Juldiciary. By letter of October 29, 1975, the Honorable Don Edward-4. Cliairinnn of the n ove-calptioned Sulnohmlittee, requested to be furnlklied ('rlain Iiforualiciln to augnent the record regarding the lestintony of Fil[I l)elty Associn:te lirtictir James It. Adams ol October 21, 1975. Mr. Flwarils asked tlint readily available infirnmation le furmished to the Stilbommittee without waiting foor a completion of a respoiist, to) vach IliI-floll. 

Item Number Ono of Mr. Edwards' letter reqlested "'opy of Report ({ 1ilii-mary) first furnishled 1t) the Warren ('onmil sion witeli didl iot re-fer to Agemit losty, along with the report later furnished to the Coimmlission which ilclude(l the reference data ont Agent llosty." 

The first report npaia rently referred to lit ills requi-st is nllt lat'd l tectl .ollor 23, 11M. whih'i was submitted iy Special Agent Itobert 1'. (seinlierling of 1t I lalias Fill Office. This report was firnished to the Warrell commissiono. The 

iiformtuntion lKwrtailiiltg to le(e Harvey Oswald's address loook. which Is lPa raipetly the suilljeet matter of tis request, is contained oin pages 671-701 of that re1,irt. 

Iii the interest of ei(lomy, slice that report i. SIS lage.s Ig,. only the perfiwneat 

pages 671--701, are being furnished In this reslonse. Tlhes ierli nett I!ages fil ii\'w 

IESPONs TO QUESTION 1   

> (4) S'HJ'CT's ADI)tF-;s HOOK

On November 27, 19M. ( 'apta in Will Fritz Imade availali.. to MA\ .Ja te. |'. 

Ilosty, .r., an addro.s wook fouid lit, the residence , oif 1.4,e i Iarve'y 4iwald, IDal las, 'rqxas. Tils address book had ,vritilg Iit hoth ot English I i d Rusian langille,. The followluig laml es, adldreses and/or phone Iitnbers wvere olotailned fr'i 'n flie a aforementioned addr(,gs book 

Flylaf I

English 

T4 4'islana eloyl ent 

524174 1

Exten-4ion. 28 

Rachal Rit-vaian Translation 

Today wedding (?). 

Flylcaf 3

Russian Tranalation 

Top of page: Lee Harvey Oswald. 212 

> English

Freef 12.00. 

Elsieth, Apartment N6. 2 (Note: Oswald's DaUas residence.) Beckly (Note: Oswald's Dallas residence.) Industrial Mich Co. '214(g South Main Mr. Chin 

Rtos Page (?) 

WA 7--8441 Midland 2550 To', lemphlill (Oswald usually wrote L1 .ames of streets in this fashion.) Oswald.  

> Plge 1English

Vi. 13. Heily and Co. 

(HOII Magizazie    

> Ge'ii. Ofcs. 524-6131
> P]11ye 3

English 

Wolke or Volke 

LA 1-1115 

No. 1 1147 Monday 2, 00 Bailey Rom.on 208 Shit' Ea. Agency ElHf|, Apt. 2 

SM I' llillerest i Janialls to 1)ickens Rwvssifin 7'ranslation 1t,,tugh street plan of Moscow, Russia, with the Kremlin in the center. 

> 'nytlish

7:313 I .'n inaport St. 1 i:2 245 3124 V. 5th      

> 1111) Gj01N20 757 French St.
> llu 81 -1326
> QuinnII

Mirret   

> l1612 1lurle~y

.1 'iiji1H. ('orunnll' Fort Worth, Texas vv'. of Navy      

> MI rs. M. Oswald V\*rnamii (pretumanly

Vernon, Texas) 'eroll. Txas 2-2080      

> 8. S. -fI-5-3937
> -Usiin Translation

.\leksey (Ltenya) (after the name Quin, Murret). -    

> Pag," ';
> leusin Translation 1. .ppllcation 2cop.

2.Atitdobligra phy 2 cop. 3. l¢eference from work 

4. Reference from residence 5. (liaracteristic 

6. A copy of birth certificate 7. A copy of marriage certificate 

8. A request from the husband 

U. Photograph 8 copies 213 

Page 7Engisoh 

Mrs. M. Oswald Box 982 

1P. H. RI 2-6519 home (NWork) LI 2-2212 "Vernon Convalescent Home" Box 477 Crowell, Texas 6,44-3271 Imm. & Nat. Service 1402 Rio Grande Big. 251 No. Field SL Dallas, Texas American Pass 1733242 

11 Sept. 1959 -

Crilner () 

Blewley Bign. Con. Con. Service Russian Translation 

-- citizenship Mosgorispolkom (Executive Committee of the Moscow City Soviet of Workers' Deputies) Ismued January 4, 1960 (No. 811479) Itemidev'e lermilt for a foreigner (AA N. 5496M0) 

Page 8English 

At Embassy   

> 1. Include

June-pass. 8 fetos 2. Regis, Juna at Enibass Birth cert. 8. Travel arrange. 4. llissiwrt extention Mrs. Cunningham Texas State Employment RI 7-2071 X 320 N. Y. Huss. Em. Worker Socialist Party ie typing Impers   

> ]Mly shl(-,s (W)

SOwks (M) Pants (M) Crowell 

3161 E. Donul Bus 4 ?? 

(Presumably Crowell, Texas.) 

107 Burk lurnett Bldg. Pauline Bates 

El' 2-8991 or ED 2-8997 ED 5-M00 

Page 9

ERnglish U.S. Department of Justice bunilgratiorn amid Naturalization Service P. O. Box 2589 San Antonio, frexas V.1E A12 530 645 Clasm1. Section 101 (A) 27 (A) Date pet. filed Oct. 9, 1961 214 

Rus8ian Translation 

Russ. Am. 

Mikiul A. Metisklkov 

New York Stev. Navy Fort Worth 

F'ed Korth Waslhiigton, D. C. 

S, viet Embassy 

Wle. 1125 10th N. W.  

> S'ec'y

to Ambassador 

NA .\-s--85 Iii 

Mc. 1706 18th N. W. AD 2-3092 

1V1 S -1951 Ff. WVorth T. V. Sta. 

Page 12 

llusian Translation 

Zihiutyn (Manle) (Knowledge) (1'elleved to be Russian bookstore In San Fru liilsco.) 

lHussiln Tran8laLion 

\\iedding (ring) (rs,,d out.) Bank 36 5 rubles -p1,1. (?) 

English 

Ed. Toraz or Editor Director 

'. 0. Box 2119 U1P0 

Ne'w York, N. Y.  

> Accout

No. 38210 Ciiilaeri U 8G;lilt 

Watch Hiuig 

l1:1il tickets 

l'ge I

1isiahlfl TrajiSlaliEm 

ZalltiroViw 11-1.43(U '.,(o rko va No. 15  

> i

Translator's note: The above Is an address.) 

English 

(Itt tf work 2nd 178.50 

.Jllip 211d 171.(K) Juuue 10th l.eaves. Moscow 1045 Arr 11.30 ou-Tram n 

> JA'ft

to right Mat hene.sser (Iphonet lc) Marina's visa No. 1-1229644 iimi. visa no. 52 isSUes O1 24 May 1962 Rupian im no. K U 37700 

Front 11 January 1962 

To 11 January 1964 Entrance visa 1959, 14 Oct. No. 40339 

Page 15 English 

Exit vlsa-305002 Given 22 May, 1909 215 

Ru8ian Translation 

F4 ollowIng tfie words, "Given 22 May, 1962": Militia Administration of Minsk 

English 

1".e. Inwuil May 24, 1962, to June 21, 1962 Service No. 1152091 '.,4. Enbassy, MosCOW )allas Rooming House Mrs. M. Bledsoe IWII 2-19F." ,VWl 3-8193 

'1 2- -1llll -- 272 Acme Brick -Worker" I'. 0. Box 28 .Mail.on Square Station New York 10, N. Y. Iiini. ('ard No. A 12 5.30045 Iiniilgration and Naturalization Service 1.1112 Rio ('rande Bldg. 251 No. Field St. 

I Iallas, Texas Riverside 9-5611, Ext 2644 Texas State Board of Pharmacy Littlefield Bldg. congress s & 6th St. Aiistln, Texas 

111j. G1R. 8-81-16 

Page 19 

English 

vergee Bou e.1740 Homer TA 7- 2288 Anna Meller   

> 5d930Vj Ln Vista

rA 3 2219 

1(1 7-4011 S-ttion 521 Paul Gregory 3513 Dorothy Lane 

I'E 1-16L30 possiblyy PH 1-1639) R. Harten Ilawtorn 

"WO Barnmett 'JE t -1981 KI'TV I'E 8,-7951 Russian Translation Foill,,wing letters "KUTV" are words of a popular Russian song. 

Page 21 English 

J ggn rs-ChIleA-Stovall 

5-0 Browder RI1 -5501 News 17.S. Passport 

1) 092526 June 2, 1963 Russian TranalatIon 

Ttereshlihagin (Rup,lan translator's note: possibly a man's surname.) 

Pages ?2 and 2.. 

Russian Translation Calendar dates for March, April, October. November, December, January, 190, and February, with Russian abbreviations for days of the week. 216 

Russian Translation Consist of Russian words pertaining to grammar, Soviet Socialist Republics, and etc. 

Page 27 (Al) 

Russian Translation Rosa Agadonova Hotel "Berlin" Mak (7) 

(tSovoy) (Savoy?) Amer. Embassay Moscow Tel. 52-O-08/Chaikovsky St. 19/21 9-6-buslness (?) 

Allzlwrg, Vera V.-(Illeglble) Aksonov, Colonel Milistry of Internal Affairs of the USSR 

English 

Rum. for forein AA 549C Amer. pass. 17&3242 W/ORussian 1131147(8?) 

Page 28 (A2) 

English 

ACIJ-Box 2251 

Dallas 

A. Ex. K-42000 384 1-Z )iunner Room 384 Jelwiveic "MA ASDAM" 1Ioll-A jer. Am. Ex. 

92 Meent 320'200 Rot terdam Debovy or Debooy' 

Page 29 English 

West Berlin F. R. 0. 

Temnplhofer daunn Lee II. 

Russian Tranalation Vneshtorg Bank Bank for Foreign Trade Moscow Negllnnaya U1. 12 Kozlo a woman'ss mrname) K-403400 (telephone number) (792) possiblyy telephone extension) 

Page 81 English 

Dr. Harvey Allen TA I-19'27 Baylor Un. Coll. of Den. Alex Kleinrer "Ioma" Industripa Oo)rg Ie Mobrenscbildt W629 NIekens EN 3-1365 (Aunt Alice) A. P. Barre New Orleans '(Translator's Note: Sigulficance of above Is unknown.) 217 

Russian Translation Vis(a) and Reg(istration ?) Office Kolachny Per. 9 (9 Kolpachny Lane) Moscow (2 lines crossed out, writing illegible) Colonel (?) Petrikov  

> -Dobromyslenski

Lane 5Citizen Demushkina  

> Page 33

English 

Norman, Ok. 

13181/2 Garfield Everett Glover LA 8-3901 George's friend    

> Rusatn Tranalation
> 14 (?) Zhdanova

hotel Savoy (?) K 41980 (possibly telephone number) 

U1 (Street) Zakharova House No. 11, Apt. 72 Glovachev, Pavel (man's name) Elli German UI. Lavsko-Naberezhnaya (Embankment) No. 22. Apt. 2Gdr. (?) U]. Stanislavskogo 20 (Crossed out: also Sastan (?) Minsk Ela German ul. Lav.skaya Embankment No. 22, Apt. 22 To America 

Pagc 35 

Englii.h 

Peter Gregory continentall Life Bldg.    

> I'I) (-8449 13

Mrs. Max Clark WA 4-9377 Russian speaker Elenn 112111 

4760 Trail Lane Dr. VA WV-3741 Garry & Alex Taylor :519 Fairmont Apt. 12 IA 1-40W2 

Mother of U.S. Emlmn.sy doctor Mrs. HII, I)AVION    

> 444 FTtxedo Rod

Atlmnta, (1eorgia Natalla Alkseevni 

Russian Translation lyudnir I I(ulan ?) Dmitrlevna lHotl "Ilerlin" (Savoy) (;oma i Ieika ( ?) 20244 ( Business (phone (?) )Following "Atlanta, Georgia" Natalia Aekseevima Children's Polyclinic 'B- 9-31 W2 Petrov. Vorot .(Petrovskle Gate ?) 218 

Page 41 

Russian Translation 

Aleks. Itoinanovhih Ziger Krasiiaya U!., Minsk (?) 

House 14, Apt. 42 Vest German Embassy B. Gruminskaya 

UI. 37 

Miss Kaisenhein Kalasinaya Lane 6Diitch Embassy Van Hattun  

> Pagc 3

English 

Inter. Rescue Comm. 251 Park Avenue South New York OR 4-4200 

Russian Translation     

> Sovnarkhoz (Council of the National Economy)

of 'Minsk for a Job (orgovift (City Council) for a flat Inderedko (Inter. Rescue Committee ?) 

Page J5    

> English
> .Taggers-( 'liles-Stova !Tylxgralhy

522) Browder I 1 -5501   

> iniro (lots
> Russian Translation

7/1 Moscow, K 31 ( ?), U. Zlidanova (above is a1n a(dress4) Minsky Ul. Karla 3Marksa No. 35 Kon. Narokhsov. (?) Tel. 206311 ('omrade I)'adev Itooui 279 (illegible) 20575 Slarapov Minsk 

Ii 'me No. 4. Apt. 24  

> I'i. Kalinina

Kizmnetsova, Rosa    

> Iiiter. (Intoirist

?) lotel "Minsk" 92-163 ]lowse. 20. Apt. 8Fl. Kola Miskneva (?) Ne. Norodovskviin ( ?) 112 In (stituie) of Foreign Languages Endfish-4 hl01tlh Kla#'fer :104; ]'Iitv St. Neow Orleans 18. L4a.   

> 11. Wnrner

Kloelif4ir           

> UN -OMI)
> IN G-2741, Ex. 276
> ltu Rqlan Tranlt.0 (on
> (', onmuni,4t 'arty I'.S.A.

23 West 26th St. New York 219 

Page 47 Spani8h Translation 

'Mexico City Consulate of Cuba Zamora and F. Marquez 11-2-47 S.ylvla Duran Embaissy of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republic 1561 55 (15-60 55) Department of Consular Matters Cubano Airlines lPaseo (e Ia Reforma 56 315-75-00  

> 7.S. Embassy

Lafragua 18 469400 BIi I s 1-45--10-20 12.5 Pesos=$1.00 1 I'eso-.080. Coins 1-5 pesos. 

Page 51 Russian Translation 

Medical Institute LUCIA 31890 Ul. Kalinina 14. 

Page 52 

Rusian Tran8lation 

sniola (?) 14 stova (?) 

Page 53 JRussian Translation 

Mrrezlhkinsky (man's surname) Prospect Stalina 12, Apt. 26 veogde 1?) 7-14-53 (Aunt I'alina) Kharkov V'ezed Trinklera 

I louse 5, Apt. 7 Mikhaylovich MMID (Ministry of Foreign Affairs) Metro Smolenskaya 

I'agc 55 English 

Nt. See. Dan Burros Linucolnm toVkwell Arlington, Virginia American Nazi Party (American National Party) Ilollis see. of 

Queens, N.Y.  

> i

Newspalp(er )

lIntIernational Socialist Bulletin lutssian Translation 

Notary (Lice I'l. Zukha. 

from 1) to 18:30 Itecess 13-14 Saturday V-13 

Closed Sunday 220 

Page 57 English 

Robert Oswald Route 5, Box 140 Malven, Ark. W. S. Oswald 

136 Elmer St. Metrice R. Oswald 1009 Stara Dr. Denton, Texas 

Rus8ian Translation OVIR (?) Moscow 

Ul. Ogareva VZhA D.A. Vlgeda (?) K 45026 

1)D 10206 

DD 19106 ()staukino (residence of Russian writer Boris Pasternak) -( illegible) "B" OVIR, Moscow Kolpachny Lane 9

Pages 58 and 59 

> Englishi

Mr. lihilliwe I 2-2-2080 (Probably LI 2-2080) (P1ossibly Vernon, Texas) Rus8tan Translation Kharkov V'ezd Trinklera (Trinkler's Gate ?) Iouse 5, Apt. 7the Mikhaylovs (for Marina) Registry Office K-78545 Passport No. P311479-Jan. 4(?) 60 

Minsk 25994 Ex-39 Vidim (Vadlm ?) Petrovich 'T' eher, Moscow, IN. OR. Yak. Riga Ul. IPernovas house 39, Apt. 1IPugorelskaya, Lena (Lena Pogorelskaya Is a woman's name) TtO. 70540 l'rusokova, Maria Kalinina 30 (?) House 39, Apt. 20 

Page 60 Engli8h 

Ruth Iaine 2515 W. 5th St. Irving, Texas 

1L 3-1628 

Russian Translation Petrikov 

Ul. Lunacharskogo 8Argentine Embassy lPolsky (Polish ?) (1). A. Myskogo, (?) 30. 221 

Page 61 English 

,olnson-Moscow Miss Moshey The Ass. Pr. 726430 Unit. Pr. 726681 With Mosby Mr. Goldberg Russian Translation (Two first lines crossed out: "Comrade Roman Works (at) Karl Marx Technical Library") Radio Factory "Communar" Experimental Shop 3-29-56 

Page 63 

Russian Translation iev Setyaev-Radio Moscow Lev Setyaev Leo Setyaev V 3-65-88 (work) Nov'o-Presenanaya 23/7 Apt. 65 Skrylev, Elsa and Gri-

U1. Cherkogo, House 13 Apt. 1 (at the wedding) Nov. 6 Rimma-(Translator's Note: woman's name) 

Page 6,J 

English  

> Special Services

42 Franklin St. New York 13, N.Y. Worth 4-6363 Mr. Isaacs Washington, D.C. 1125 16th N.W.-NA 8-7550 1706 l1th N.W.-AD 2-3092  

> Page 6(9

English 

N. 0. T.V.-W.I.S.V. (New Orleans TV Station WDSV) 1. Burns Rottinan-523-5033 Bill Stuckey 529-2274 Ru.,sian Translation 

Ina 'i'akhiigteva (?) (woman's name) I Imose 4, Apt. 19, In Minsk Ninsk Lenillgradskaya Hoi ,, 1, Apt. 11 Ernst Titovets (man's name) 

Page 70 

English 

Horace Twiford 7019 Sunley IIou.tnn, 'Texas MI 9-8500 

WA 3-5492 Texas School Depository 

Mr. Truly 

III 7-3521   

> 82 -629--7 -5

222 

Page 73 

Engli8h 

Katya Ford Delean Ford AD 9-5642 14057 Brookcrest Dallas, Texas Russian Tran8lation Ministry of Finances of the USSR 

Ul. Kuybysheva, 97t2 

I'agc 74 

English 

Burton 

lxlp ,IA 8-1581 Mr. Hodson 

Plage 75 

English 

Eiena ,Hall 

-171R) Trail Dr. WA 6-3741 alasa, T exas State Robert Adams RI 7-2071 Randau at Jobco It[ 8-7604 

l'age 81 

lRII.Rill& 7ra sl(1 iOU 

RIthmn Sierakava (Shirokova) (woman's name) "I11llm-rsi" Nlos'olw Sherakov 2-0-5-75 Onan's name) Shi rikuva, Itirmnia S. 

11l. Koruva 

Main lIost ()ffive 

General deliveryy l'llilildel)hil Hun,s.-,\mer. 'it ize ship C'liilt 2730 

Sn1y(ler Av. Ituss. 1,1111. ,c(h(511 1212 Spriwe Ittissitui l )illy Paper .effer.orm Bldg. Russian ]anJ, tri. 216 S. 20 tus. llroth-iho)o 

> 4

0rgull. 1733 Spring Grdn. Typing .%llillnlt with tv 

G reg 

Crystal 'l')'ping ltchli .\dd. Em. in N.Y. 

.1 (0)c 

Plug for Itaiclo, 223 

Finger Prints Bank Acc. Mall Barber shop 

Page 83 English 

Cuban Student I)erectorate 107 Decatur St. New Orleans, la. Curlos Bringuier N. 0. City address "Cowan" lavid Crawford Reporter Chban exile stores 117 Camp 107 Decatur 

1032 Canal Nat. Progressive Youth Organization 

80 ('linton St. 

N.Y. 2, N.Y. 

Advance Youth Organ. 

Page 8English 

M os.-N.Y.-381.8O MCos.-Vla r.--149/89 

M insk- Berl In -- 4 8.38 jIm.-N.Y. 

1by tra i } 1.71 1p. to P'aris all 10 (ay's/ Embassy Newspapers With LA K-1706 

1I 7-2071 employ Box 2915 El) 2-8187 

leslie Weling ('o. FII 5-5501 '1'E )Il) ltulile (11. 34220) 

( 1, 135. )

1149.40) l.ee If. Oswald t a rdes 

RI'cr Fllih'nz/ I

> Epifglimh

NV. S. Oswald (City hall or Federal medical certificate) 

Inim. and naturaL 1)) 21)3 

MNri iue ('orlm llanuk aniiallion for discharge 

Library uiewspin ers lm)ik 1)84-( )swald '," I4' lu;lxers  

> 'rustle

for watch-l1nir cut 

TV stat imn 

Iiat -. rAl 

Overcoat -48 Shi t 40-41 Shlirts '4- 3 7224 

Russian Translation StanLslav Shushkevlch-Teachers Aleksandr Rudenchek (or Rubetichek) P. Vorosholov (?) Protillmsky (?)-Teachers KhIll Dit (?) near movie theater "Pobeda" (Possibly meaning "near the Pobeda movie theater") Rosa (woman's name) House 130, Apt. 8Karla OgInkneta (Ilebknecht ?) Street (?) Sweat shirt--48 

Elie 

Lida 32109 (woman's name and phone number) Maria 3-38-53 (woman's name and plone number), Apt. 20 House (sic) 

covow 

English 

L. H. Oswald, Stove Rd. Leonartl Calverley Personal Labdell Mrs. M. Oswald From Mrs. Hall N. White Special Howell Instr. 3829 W. Vickory RI 7-2071 Mr. Bargas 200 E. N. Vacey Louv-K-P 1316 The second report apparently referred to in this request is a letter dated January 27, 1964, sent by the FBI to the Ilonorable J. Lee Rankin, General Consel, The President's Commission. Information pertaining to Special Agent Ilosty's name, office telephone number, and automobile license number (one digit off), appearing in Oswald's address book is found on pages two and three. A copy of this letter follows : JANUARY 27, 1964. Hon. J. LF:F RANIKIN, 

General Cjounsel, The Prcsid(nt's ('omiis.vwion, 200 3farlanid Avenue, N.E., 

Washington, D.C.             

> DEAR 51R. RANKIN: We have been advised that authorities of the State of

'Texas. i icding iDistrict Attorney Hienry Wade and his 'Isistant, William Alex-mder. appeared before the ('ommission concerning the article which appeared ill "The Nation" magazine in which it Is alleged that Lee Harvey Oswald was an informant of the F111. We have previously nmide available to the ('omnission full information con-,erning our contacts with Oswald. So that there may be no doubt as to our latmls, here are the facts: Oujr first interview of Lee Harvey O)swald took plice Juna, 26, 1902, at Fort Worth, Texas, shortly after Oswald returned fromi Russia. Tils interview was contiuw(ted 11y Sipecial Agents I. Toi carter and John W. Fain mid was for thv purlmss( of ascertainzing whether Oswald had been given aiiy Soviet intelligence a..sigiiiients inl this country. ()swald was requested to advise this Bureaui iII the event, he was conta,'t id in tlis country by an individ ial under suspi.i,,us vir-cunistances suggesting that It was a So4viet intelligence aulproaci. 0swahIld agreed to (do) so. Results of this Interview are set omit iii the report of Special Agent John W. Fain dated July 10. 1162, at ID:llas. Texas, captionel "Lee Harvey Oswald, Internal Security-It," copies of which have been funilshed to the Commission. (ur next. interview of Oswald took placi on Aiugust 16, 1962. at Fort Worth, Texas. 'Ihis interview was con(iucted by SIpecial Agents Arnold J. Brown aid Jdin NV. Fain and it was for the purpose of again alerting Osvald to the possl-bility that the Soviet intelligence service might, at anly time attempt to use hin or ,iitain Information through him. Oswald stated he emihld see no reason why tihe Soviets wmlduh desire to) contact him ; however, lie promised his cooperation in repmrting to the FllI any information coming to his attentlo ill this regard. Results (of this litterview are set (,ut in the report of Special Agent John W. 225 Fain dated August 30, 1962, at Dallas, Texas, captioned "Lee Harvey Oswald, Internal Security-R," copies of which have been furnished to the Commission. 

Our next interview of Oswald took place on August 10, 1963, at the First Dis-trict Station, New Orleans Police Department, New Orleans, Louisiana, at his request. During such interview Oswald furnished details concerning his arrest by the New Orleans Pl91ice Department on August 9, 1903, on a charge of disturb. ing the peace by creating a scene. ie also furnished data concerning his back-ground and activities in regard to the Fair Phy for Cuba Committee. Results of this interview are set out in the report of Special Agent Milton R. Kaack dated October 31, 1963, at New Orleans, Louisiana, captioned "Lee Harvey Oswald, Internal Security-R-Cuba," copies of which have been furnished to the Commission. The above interviews are the extent of our contacts with Lee Harvey Oswald prior to the assassination of Presitlent John F. Kennedy. We did not interview Oswald In Dallas, Texas, or in Irving, Texas, prior to the assassination of President Kennedy. In regard to the data In "The Nation" article which alleges that Oswald had Agent liosty's home phone and office phone numbers and ,ar li(nse numbler in his possession, you are advised that Special Agent James P. Ilosty's name, office telephone number and automobile license number, one digit off, appeared in Oswald's address book. For your information, Special Agent Hosty furnished li1. name and office telephone number to Mrs. Ruth Paine when Agent Ilosty inter-viewed her concerning the whereabouts of IA'e Hlarvey Oswald on November 1and 5, 1963. Agent Hosty did not give Mrs. Paine the license number of his auto-mobile and presumably Mrs. 'aihi may have jotted such number down on her own initiative unknown to Agent Hosty. Following the arrest of lee Harvey Oswald in connection with the assassina-tion of President John F. Kennedy, Agents of this Bureau interviwed Oswald at the Dallas Police Department, Dallas, Texas. The purpose of these interviews was to obtain from Oswald any admissions he might make concerning the killing of the President or other data pertinent to the assassination, as well as to obtain any information Oswald might furnish of a security nature. Results of these interviews of Oswald were set out In the report of Special Agent Robert I'. Gem-berling dated November 30, 13, at Dallas, Texas, capitioned "Ilee Harvey Oswald, also known as L. 11. Oswald, Le Oswald, 1ee II. Oswald, Leslie Oswald, A. Ilidell, A. J. Ilidell, Alek J. Ilidell, Alek James Ilidell, 0. II. Lee; Assassina-tion of President John Fitzgerald Kennedy, 11/22/63, )allas, Texas, AFO," copies of which have been furnished to the commissionn .lee Harvey Oswald was never used by this Bureau in an informant capacity. He was never l)aidwany sums of money for furnishing information and he most certainly never was an informant of the Fill. In the event you have any further questions concerning the activities of the FBI In this case, we would appreciate being contacted directly. Sincerely yours, This information was also set out in a repoort prepared by Special Agent Gem-berling, dated Fe)ruary 11, 11K4, which was also sent toi the Warren (' oznmission. The portion of that rei)prt pertaining to Oswald's address book is contained on pages 278-283. E. SuBJIEcT's AwomEss BOOK ADDRESS BOOK OF LEE HARVEY OSWALD 

On November 27, 19M3, ('aptain WIL, FRITZ, I)allas, Texas Police Depart-nment, made available to SA JAMES Pl. IOSTrY, JR., an address l1(1)k found at the residence of LEE HARVEY OSWALI), 1O'20 North Beckley, Dallas, Texas, on November 22, 11"L3. This address ; book contains names, addresses, phone nun-hers and other writings In the English and ltuss,,an languages. The following ar(, names, addresses, notatihons and data that have not been previously reported. The pages of the address book are not numbered but for clarity and reference purposes, the pages are referred to by page number, -ame referring to their numerical sequence as they are contained in the hook, being numbered from front to back: 

Front Cover 

(Contains initials and dates of law enforcement officers, same being for iden-tification purposes.) 226 

inslde of Fymnt Cover 

(Blank) 

.Front Flyleaf 1

(Previously reported except for letters "BA".) 

Front Flylcaf 2

602 Elobeth Surmerm ww. (partially Illegible) Ilemphldll to Page N. 715 Oswald 25 29 16 16 11 105 

015 019 

43 

15 16 

53 

NI w/o 

1% 11 

.'ront Flyh'af 3

433 -51 (remaliing marked-out) 310-,-- . 41 l-( H-:-7,5 - I WO 

75.049) -- 12W- (7) 

(Other uninltelligilde figures.) 

.Froo ll Flyl'af *f: ( llank) 

I'Pac 1 :() JPuyc 2 

10 -0 

50 

J'uaj 3: (0) 

P'age V

I'lhi ]migs' contains th name "Mrs. M. )SWAL), Tel. 2-2080, Box 982, Veriiit" and1(! lImmedlittely above there appears a rough sketch of what apiean to he it Itie pcr jla ni of at three or four room structure. ,oilowiIg the "Mrs. Oswald" 

2i1fc i n'1111 addr.ss titre is at marked out note that apjiars to ic, "I,!2 "1,12 '.) 

ages 5 throullh 12: (e) 

i!'uge IJ : 

E--3 754 

( ?)i- N-4 3ss0 K-4N50 Omnit Wher illegible words ald figures. )

I'uyeCs I Ihrough 18: (0) 

'gc 19: 

SI'.\ SEE lA (which ,eants "Thank You".) 

1'iagcq 20 irri ih 2-3: (*) 

Pages 4, 25 and 6227 

Russian Translation (List of Soviet Socialist Republics, names of chess pieces, miscellaneous wirds, German alphabet, Russian-German dictionary, followed by Gothic German alphabet.) 

Pages 27 through 35: (*) Page 36: (Blank) 'age 37: (*) 

Page 38: (Blank) 

Pagee 39 through 43: (0) 

Page 44: (Blaak) 

Pages 45 through 47: (*) Page 48: (Blank) 

Pages 49 through 55: () 

Page 56: (Blank) Patio 57 and 58: (*) 

Pages 59 and 60: (Blank) 

Pages 61 and 62: () 

Pages 63 and 64: (Blank) 

Page 65: (9) 

Page 66: (Blank)   

> iageC 67: (*)

Page 68: 

('sandy or Gondy Nv. 1. low 6   

> F1i Agent (RI-II.1) -

JAMNlS P. J1O8''Y 

MU 8ti)5 

1114 ('ommerce St. 1)allas Pogvs G9 and 70: (Blank) 

Page 71: (*)    

> P'age 72: 1Blank)

l'lfes8 7 through 77 (e) 

I1agw 78:   

> It INI .M,\

180- -100 O,' 

i'nst officee (15. 

2. 1115 1 1172I 

Itcar Flylca1: 

6245 

16'25 

22182 

3(0-25 = 15    

> lRcar Flyleaf 2: (0)

lnsidc Rack ('orce-: (*) (6)-Coten(n have been previously reported In Its entlr.ty. 228 

Back Cover: 

(Contains Identifying initials and date of a law enforcement officer.) Subcommittee on Civil and Constitutional Rights, House Committee on the 

Judioiary 

By letter of February 27, 1964, to J. Lee Rankin, the FBI advised the Warren Commission of the circumstances of the omission of the information relating to Special Agent Hosty from the December 23, 1963 report. That letter explained that entries in the address book which required investigative attention were Included in the December 23, 1963 report. The entry regarding Special Agent Hosty did not require Investigation, since the FBI quite obviously knew the identity of Special Agent Hosty, knew he had been investigating Oswald, and knew he had given his name, office address, and office telephone number to an acquaintance of Oswald, Mrs. Ruth Paine. The February 27, 1964 letter to J. Lee Rankin and Its attachments, the affidavits of Special Agents Robert P. Oemberling and John T. Kesler, follow:  

> P"*VRUTAitY

27, 1964. Hon. J. ILE RANKIN. 

Gen. Counsel, The President's Commis ton, 

200 Maryland Avenue, N.E., Washington. D.C.  

> DEAR

M. RANKIN: Reference is made to your letter of February 20, 1964, wherein you requested to be advised of the circumstances surrounding the omission of Special Agent James IP. Ilosty's name and related data as appearing in Lee Harvey Oswald's address hook In our report of Special Agent Robert P. Gemberling dated December 23, 1963. at Dallas, Texas, in the Oswald case. You indicated It would assist the Commission in appraising the significance of this matter if It knew the names of the agents, Including supervisors, who prepared this portion of the report or made any decision to omit Information from the report. You indicated also that you would like a full explanation. For your Information, I have determined that Special Agent, Robert T. Gem-herling madeh the decision as to what information should be included In his report of )ecermber 23, 196M. I also determined that Special Agent John T. Kesler had resiminsibility for reviewing photographic copies of the mges of lee Hfarvey Oswald's addrew; book to determine which items needed investigative attention. Such Items were set forth as Investigative leads to be covered and it was such lead material that was Incorporated in Special Agent Gemnbrling's report of December 23, 1963. I am enclosing herewith affidavits executed by Special Agents Robert P. Gemlbrling and John T. Kesler wherein each sets forth his explanation regard-Ing his handling of Ie. Harvey Oswald's address book. I want you to know that I feel our reporting procedures In this matter are completely logical and sound. This Bureau never purported that Special Agent Gemherling's report of December 28, 1963, contained the complete listing of Lee Harvey Oswald's address book and, as you know, additional Items in Oswald's address h0ook not previously reported were furnished to the Commis-sion in the report of Spweial Agent Robert P. (emberllng dated February 11, 19614. at )allas. Texas. This Bureau from the beginnlng of this investlgation has devebiped and reported all available and relevant facts and It will continue to do so. I trust that this letter and the enclosures thereto will satisfy the require-ments of the ('ommnfi.inn. Sincerely yours, Enclosures (2). AFFIDAVIT I. ROBERT P. (WJMBERLING, beIng duly sworn, depose as'follows: In the performance of my duties as a Special Agent of the Federal Bureau of Investigation. U.S. Department of Justice. I have been acting as a coordinator In connection with the Investigation into the assassination of President JOHN 

FITZGERALD KENNE)Y on November 22, 198, at Dalla,. Texas. 229 

In connection with this assignment the following information is set forth with respect to my instructions and the subsequent handling of the contents of the address book of LEE HARVEY OSWALD. 

Ott approximately December 14, 1963, I instructed Special Agent JOHN T. KESLER of the Houston FBI Office, who was on special assignment at Dallas, to review photographs of the pages of OSWAILD's address book for leads, Ile was instructed to extract all names and telephone numbers, the identities of which were unknown, together with any other lead information, and to prepare a mem-orandum for use in setting out such leads. In connection with this review of the contents of OSWALI)'s address book, Special Agent JOHN T. KESI.ER prepared a thirty-page memorandum on Multi-lith, the first page of which was on office memorandum form. The information appearing in this address book: "Nov. 1, 1963 F1ll Agent (I11 11211) JAMES P. IJOS'ry Mi U80 

1114 Commerce St. )allas" was not included In this thirty-page memorandum inasmuch as the identity of Special Agent JIOSTY was known to both Special Agent KESLER and myself and was not lead information. In connection with the Ireparation of my report dated Ieember 23, 1963, it was my decision to have page one of Special Agent KESILER's memorandum retyped on plain Multilith in order that the retyped page one and the subsequent 294pages of his menoranduim could he used as an insert in my report. This was (]ol( solely to avoid necessity for retyping the (ontents of the entire memoran-dum for a report. It was recognized that as a result of setting out of leads based on Special Agent KESIIR's niem,,randitm that results of investigation pertain-ilg to) siich leads womld he forthcoming antl it was considered feasible to have 

the ,ontents of the addrem Ioook ton which leads were based included in a report in order that when the subsequent results of the leads were reported, such basis 

would ha;v Ien previtiisly set forth In a report. No other Agent or sulervisory p&'rs ,iiiel was involved in this declsiii. In this connclTtion it should be noted that pages 672 through 701 of my report of I i celiler 2.3. 19M3. colitiin the contents of Slpeial Agent KESLER's memo-riondiin and thnt pages (173 through 701 bear the typewritten page numbers of Sls'eill .. Agent EIEII's 4origiliil ieinwirandiin. I had no disussion with Slecial Agent KESLER concerning the Inclusion or exelislon of the data lprtaliilng to Slecial Agent IAOSTY iii OSWAI.D's address hook, but Special Agent KISIE was nirely following ny instructions to ex-trat information which was lead material. It Is pointed out that a report of Special Agent WARREN C. DE BRIUEYt at Iallas, Texas, dated Decenlber 2, 113, reflects that Speclal Agent HOSTY interviewed Mrs. IMTII PAINE al Irving. Texas. on November 1, 1963. and November 5, 19W, Also, the report of Special Agent WAREN C. DE H1RUEYS dated Iecener 8, 1963, on page .389) there ts set forth the contents of a letter from OSWALD to the Russian Einbassy in Wahington, D.C., dated Novem-ber 1), 1063, in whih letter OSWAI) nillne reference to Special Agent 110TY as ".tzent 1AMiS P. IlASTY" and his visit of November 1, 1963. The, idditlonal colitents of OSVAI)'s address hook which had not previous. ly bteen reported were included in my report oif February 11, 1964, on pages 270 

to 283. and it should hie noted that none of the information appearing on these ages was lmlli lr li ilor intti. At no time during the course of the preparation of my reports and the co-ordinating of the Investigation In this matter did I Intentionally exclude any material from any report.-As explained above, the fact that Special Agent IIOSTY had conducted Investigation at the PAINE residence on November 1 had been previously reported, his namp, office telephone number and license number of his vehicle were not lead information, newspapers and other news media bad given nich plblicity to the fact that Speelal Agent IIOSTY's name and office teleplione number were in OSWAD's address book,, and the fact that it was not included in my relrt of Dohceniler 23, 193, was solely because it was not 230 

lead material and had not ben included in the memorandum prepared by Spe-cial Agent JOHN T. KESLER for that reason. ROBERT P. GEmBEm.RNG 

Special Agent Federal Bureau of Investigation 

Sworn to and subscribed before me on this 25 day of February, 1964. MAT-FrY STEVENS 

Notary Publio Dallas County, Texas    

> AFFIDAVIT TiiE SIATE OF TEXAR,

County of Harris, 8s. 

BEFORE ME, the undersigned, a Notary I1thlic in and for said County, State of Texas, on this (lily personally alwxard .John Thonas Kesler, to me well known, and who, after [-Inig by Rue (idly sworn, ihjwises and says that: In the performanee of my duties as a $p.ial Agent oIf the Federal Bulreau of Investigation, U.S. I)epartment of Justice, I was assigned on special assignment    

> to the lD11l11s

ottir e ill collectt1411 With th iInVEStIlgathn (If t11 aSSa.sltiatiOll of  

> IPresident

John Fitzgerald Kennedy on Noveiber 22, 19M3. at Dallas. Texas. In connection with this assignment on approximately December 14. 1M63. I was instructed by Special Agent Robert P. Geinberling, who was coordinating the investigation, to review photographs of the pages of I"e Harvey Oswald's ad-dress book for leads. In connection with this review I prepared a thirty page memorandum on miultlllth, the first page of which was on officp memorandum             

> form. Itiereafter 11sed4 this nlenflrantitn]i for purlwses of rotting out leads to

identify individuals and telephone numbers which were previously unknown in the investigation. ln the preparation of this memorandum I did not inctilde data from the address book which was not lead material. I (lid not include the Infor-mation aplparing in this address book with respect to Special Agent iosty's name. office telephone nunler anid automobile liept,.w nritlier Is'ntse the Iden-tity of Special Agent ilosty wns known to tle and this was not lead mat:%rinl. I had no discussion, with Special Agent Gepinrling or anyone else with respect to the exclusion or Inclusion of Spxei ul Agent Jlosty's name in mliy enmoranlllmi. At tile time I prepar(dl the ieniorandumn I lid not kniow that same would be included in a subsequent report. Jo1n TiOrAs KESTYR. Subscribed anld sworn to before me, this 25th day of February. A.D. 1964. KATIlI.F.EN IIEJINATT. 

Notary Public in and for Harris County, Te:.          

> JIEsPONsE ro Q'ESTITON 2or S't'rwoMMr'rTE LETTERR OF O(-roBER 29, 1975

P'.S. OFPAWrMENT or JUSTICE. FpDERAL BI'RrA U OF IN'%ETFTIO0ATON.    

> OFFICE OF TIlE DVREC'1OR.

Waxhinglon. November II. 1975. Re: Agreement by which FBI furnishes threat information to the United StatN Secret Service. 

To: Siubcommittee on (ivil and Constitutional Ilights, Hiouse Committee on the Judiciary. By letter of October 29. 1975. the HIomnrable Don Edwards, Chairman of the above-ea litloned Subcommittee, requested to e furnished certain Information to augment the record regarding the testimony of FBI Deputy Associate Director Jttins B. Adams on October 21. 1975. Mr. Edwards askeil that readily available information be Immediately fur-nished to the Subcoimmittee without waiting for a t'comilation of a response to each question. Item Number 2 of Mr. Edwards' letter requested "agreement (Guidellnes) by               

> which FIT furnishes Information to the Secret Service regarding Individual or group threats to the Executive."

231 

In response to that request. there follows a copy of the "Agreement Betweenr the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the United States Secret Service (oii-cerning Protective Respnsilhillties." This agreement is reviewed periodically and updated. This latest revision was inade in July, 1973. "AOREEMENT BETWEEN TilE FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIOATION AND TIHE UNITED STATES SECRET SERVICE CONCERNING PROTECTIVE RlESPONSIBI.ITIES   

> "PURPOSE OF AGREEMENT

"The Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) originates, and receives froiu other sources, large numbers of reports o Individuals aind( organizations. ()ie purpose of this agreement is to define that portion of the information on file with, or received or originated by, the FBI which tile I'lllted States Secret Service-(IUSSS desires to receive in connection with its protective rqIponsibIIities. "The USSS has statutory authority to protect, or to engage In certain a.ti'ititc to Irotect, the President and certain other persons. (Certain other persons. ar 

used in tils agreement, refers to those lproons pirotected by tile Secret Service under Title 19, 1U. S. ('ode, Section 3050.) The authority of the ISMS to protect the President or certain other j-rsons is construed to authorize It to Investigate organizations or individuals and to Interview ilnlividuais who might constitute a threat to the President or 'ertain other persons. The FBI has statutory anthor-ity to investigate assault, killing or kidnaping and attempts or colispirucies to kill or kidnap the President and (other designated individuals. "The FBI will nake available to tie ['SSS Informaition it may refluest or Infor-mation which by Its iiaturv reveal it definite or ioossihle threat to tile safety or 

the l'resldent and certain other persons. "A second lun' se of this agreement is to insure the most eff(tttive protection! for tie i'rsldent alid ciltain other Insrs'nls by establishing it elear division or responsibilityy between tile Filll1] tind 1' S. Sul'h division will ilso avwidi 

compromaisi ng investigations or sources and needless dullication of effort.     

> "It. GENERAL RESIONSIBILITI ES "The

I'SSS is l.harged by Title 1 . I ( :sh .wet 41. ", witi the resl'min-sihility of protecting tihe ls'rsPml of the President of tile United States, tile meni-bers of his ilii(iilt' fi nilyi, I l 'resiident-eli-et. thbe Vi.e President fir other offer InI lihe order (if slw'eessi.lll I tie office of Presidenlt, an14d tile Vice l'resident-elect ; Irote('ting tie lo'rson if it forineir President and lils wife during his lifetline and ie person of a widow of it former President until her death or remarriage,    

> s(d inmior children

of a former president until t hey reach 1( years of age, miltn* suih protection is leclinel ; proteclting persons who are (leterinin( from time to, time by the Seeretary of tie Treasuiry, after consulitatlin with tile Advisory 'omlittee. as loving iajor Presidential and Vice Presidential candidates wh should receive such protection (ilnless the, ean didate inns declined !1ch lprotp'-tion ) ; protecting the person of a visiting iead of it foreign state or foreign gov-

erlnmment anl, at fle direction of tile P resident. other distingullilled foreign visi-tors to the Uniite'd States and official reprewitn tive. of ite United States iper-forming sli,(wnl Inissi nm slh road I uIiles sii(lh mulc'.his lhi'l 'inlr rot lili I.   

> "The Exx;-tli

I 'rat%.livp .a" vice. tinder lie (~it ril Ptf lie I irec.tor. SM5, is clilirged by Tile 3. IS. o'asd,. Sis tiomi 26rJ. vith lirtietl ion 'if the Nxecttiv, Mansion and grounds In thie listIfri.t of 'ol mnuai a any Ipuilling ii whilh l'resi-dentliil o cem are inloted foreign dilphain(i i in ifl71 Ii P(nt i I flie mletro-polltan area of the Listriet of (olimlibia : and foreign diplomnatle missionto located In sulch oilier areas In the United Statem, its territories anid pessionl,. as the residentn. ol a ni.e-nyby -case baf . many direct. "The Fill! is cluirgel umidpr Title 1.4. '.S. C'a0h. Setiolln 1751. with ilvestigaitivi jnrl. aletlio, over the awsatilt, killing o(r kidnalping. 11 liittenilos for 'ornspirictlex to assault. kill fir kidnap t lie l'reside'nt of ili I'nited Sta te's amd other desigriatasi inflivillus I, "The Fli hn resTinslilitv for Foeral I Ivetigntlonm of all violations f

Title 15, V..44. C'lse, Sections 112. 97M. 116- 1117 and 1201. relhtlhlg to te 'A tfor the i'rot ,act lion of Va 'reignifl OflimIs almd Oflhil guestss In tle 11'nit ad Sin tes.' 

"The FRT has lnvettIgative Jiirisdictlon over vloInaltins of a wide range of thlif criminal statltes of the United States Incllding primary jurisdiction over matters affec.ting tle internal security (if the United States. 232 

"Ilf. EXCHANGE OF INFORMATION AND COORDINATION OF RESPONSIBILITIES "The USSS undertakes to identify individuals or groups who because of their propensities or characteristics, may be dangerous to the President of the United States and certain other persons. To assist the USSS in identifying such individ-uals and groups tile FBI agrees to furnish to the USSS, information (other than public source Information or information originating with other U.S. agencies) from its files or which may come to its attention which by its nature reveals adanger or possible danger to the President or certain other. persons, or which can be construed as falling within the categories of information desired by the USSS as set forth in Section IV of this agreement. "The FBI will inform the USSS of the identity of individuals or organizations who come to the attention of the FBI as knowingly and willfully advocating, abetting, advising, or teaching the duty, necessity, or propriety of overthrowing or destroying the Government of the United States, or the Government of aiiy state, territory, or possession, or political subdivislhm therein, by force or violence, or by the assassination of any officer of any such government. The FBI will furnish the USSS with reports on such Individuals or organizations as requested. I raring investigation by the FBI of such individuals or organizations, the FBI will bo alert and promptly notify the USSS of any information indicat-ing a possible plot against the person of the President and certain other persons. "The USSS agrees that it will conduct no investigation of Individuals or groups identified or suspected of being threats to the internal security of the United States without notifying the FBI. However, when time for consultation Is not available, andt an indication of immediate danger exists, the USSS may take such action as is necessary with respect to carrying out its protective responsibilities. Any information obtained by the USSS during such action will be furnished to the FBI as expeditiously as possible. "The FBI will not conduct investigation of iIlividluls or groups solely for the purpose of establishing whether they constitute a threat to the safety of the President and certain other persons unless there i an indication of a violation of Title 18. U.S. (xde, Smction 1751, or other statute over which the FBI has 

jursdlction. "It will Is the responsibility of the FBI to a(lvie,, the ',S when investigation is heiiig initintd iimier Title 1.4, IU.S. ("ode, Section 1751 tind thereafter to fur-nish tho USS8 with copies of thei FBI Investigative reports as they are prepared. It will he ti riesp:nslihility of the 1788-1 to furnish the Fill any information in           

> Its possession or whih may cone to Its attention whih reasonably tulleates

thilt a vilolntioll (of Tifle 18, U.S. Code, Si action 1751, has been or I I izng coinjil ptted. 4"l'he USSS also agrees to furnish the FBI tiny information in its p' .iesslon or which niny come to it, attention indicating a violation of any other ,tatnte over which the FBI has Investigative Jurisdiction. "The 111I, iimer its responsibility for investigation of violations of Title 18. 

1.5. Code, SHetions 112. 970. 111G-1117. 1201 and 1751 will take cognizance of the prot4tive responsitbilitlem of te Tri smury Department under Title 3. U.S. C(le, Section 202 and Title 1. I'.S. C(ode, Section .3056 ind tius does not limit or inter-fere with tim authority of the Secretary of tlp Tr'aury in the (1lieharre of his statutory polveliv'e rtsl,,,niilliitles. This is not to hoe eonstruted as vesting eon-current Investigative Jurisdiction with the Treasury Department with respect to) invostlirntions of individuals or organizations (,ngtrgetl In aetivitles iffecting         

> the national swilrity inclidIng terrorism. treason. sabotage. evpsionage. cointer-

esplonnnge. roliellion or insurrection. sedition, sesditions cons4piraey. neutrality matters. Foreign Agents Registration Act, or Any other Statute or Executive Order relating to national seiurlty. Any Invetigatitons of such groups or Individ-uals for any reasons other thnn in connection with protective responsibilities Tmust he elo.ely eoordinated with and have the eonenrrence of the FIT in order to rinimize Interference with national security responsihilites of the FBI. "IV. INFORMATION TO F VFPRNTRTEM TO THE UNITED STATES SECRET SERVICE By TI EFFIIERAI. al'RY.%1' OF INV%*FTIO%.TTO. 

"A. When an Individmial or group Is referred by the FBIT to the T7915, the following information will ti furnished to the extent nvailahle:         

> "Itdiridu.I,--lentifieation data including name or names, addresses, photn

233 

graph (or statement as to availability of such), physical description, date and place of birth, employment, and marital status. "Organization.-Name or names, addre .4 or addresses, officers, size, purpose or goals of organization, source of financial support, Lackground data and such other relevant information as may lie available. "Rea.von for referral.-Statement of the class or claises--of-Information described in Section IV B under which the individual or organization belongs. "Information in FBI files.-A sunimary, as appropriate, of pertinent portions of any FBI file on an Individual or organization referred. 

"FBI identification record.-The USSS will make specific requests In each instance where a check of the FBI identilication records is desired. "B. rlypes of Information to be referred :

"1. Information concerning attempts, threats, or conspiracies to injure, kill, or kidnap persons protected by the USSS or other U.S. o}r foreign officials in the I'.. 

or ltloroid. "2. Information concerning attempts or threats to redress a grievance against any puibl official by other than legal menans, or attempts personally to contactt such officials for that purpose. "3. Information concern tg threatening, Irrational, or abusive written or oral s ittemnents about I.S. government t or foreign ot~fil'iuls. "4. Information concerning (lvil listurbauies., nti--13.. (lemonstrations or incidents or demonstrations against foreign (iI)lllofnitih establishments. nJnforinition ,oncerning illegal bolnihi Ing.-t or 1)1-inki-ngu vineg Icelilent of 

cables of firearms, explosives, or other iIplenents of war; or other terrorist act Ivi ty. 

"0. Information concerning persons who defect or indicate a desire to defect from the n'ilted States and who (lenon,trate one or more of the following eharacteristis (a) Irrational or sluici(lIu! behavior or other emotional ins'tability ;

Sb) Strong or violent anti-U1.S. sentiment ; and (c) A propensity toward violence. "7. Information concerning persons who may he considered potentially danger-ous to IndlvIdals protected by tile ITSSN becIause, of their hnekground or activi-tiv.4. Inciuldi ig evidence of emotional instability or participation In groupsi mqngiging in ativithes lininu.al to the United States.               

> "V. PROVISION OF FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESI1ATION PFR9ONNEL TO PROTECT TlE PRESllDENT AND OTIIFR PROTECTED PERSONS

"The USSS may, in accordance with Title 18, U.S. Code, Section 3056 request Fi3I Agents be detailed to the USSS in order to augment the capacity of the USSS to perform Its inrotective duties. Such requests slhuld he addressed to th directorr (of the FBI. 

"FIll Agents detailed to the T'.SSS tire under tihe direction and exclusive oiieratioial control of tle Iir('t4tir of tim, ['55S for t1, period! of their assign-niemt. The Fill Agents so detailed mnay perform an armed or other protective function. "VT. IMPLEMENTATION OF AOREE'(ENT 

"In order to effect the best possible security of the President and certain other 1wr.,,n.4 and laces vhose prote(lion is the responsibility of the l'SSS, the FBI and the ITSSS will construe the terms of this agreement Illerally and will take such steps as are necessary to insure the proper exchange anti coordination of "Trhe fivreeinent shall Ie reviewed annually by representative of the FBI and the I '555. or at sii.h other times as the FBI or t he T555 may request, to I usurp that the ngreement IA both prncticnl and protuetiv,. Revisions may be made on th,, authority of tihe Director of tMe Flil and the Dirotor of the P55,5,. This ngreenvt suloersodes nil prior agrmnients Letween tile Fill and time July 16, 1973. (S) (r.ARENCF. M. Kr.LLEY, 

Director, Federal Bureaut of Investigation. 

July 30, 1973. (8) JAMIKS J. ROWLE", 

Director, T'nited States Seeret Serviec". Subcommittee on Civil and Constitutional Rights. House Committee on the 

.hudeliary 

There follows a copy of Fill Form FD-376, whlih Is used to forward threat  

> ilifi

'rmmuition to tie United1 States Secret .',rvi.e (USS.). It summarizes the terms of the agre,+nent. 234 

Dim oa%, 

U.. Secret Scrvice, Department of the Trea8ury, Wasihington, D).C. 

)EAR Sn: The information furnished herewith concerns all individual or or-gunization believed to be covered by the agreement between the FBI and Secret Service concerning protective responsibilities, and to fall within the category 

, or categories checked. 1. L, Threats or action against persons protected by Secret Service. 2. LJ At tempts or threats to redress grievances. 

.3. D Threatening or abusive statement about U.S. or foreign official. 4. [] Participation in (iviil disturlbancesa niti-i . demonstrations or hostile incidents against foreign diplomatic establishments. 5. El Illegal bombing, Ibomib-making or other terrorist activity. 

6l. ] lDefeetor from U.S. or inlicates desire to defect. 

7. k 'otentially dangerous because, of background, emotional instability or activity in groups elgtiged in activities inimical to U.S. Photograph L i has beent furnished [ enclosed I] is not available. Very truly youri, CLAUENCE M. KELL.EY, Director. 

k ubvommittce on Cititl and Con8tititional Rights, Hlolme Committee on the 

-Iudiciarll 

AL tile tie of til assassination of Presi4ent Kennedy, FBI instructions re-gardIiing diss,'miiiiitiiii of tlreat information to the i'SSS were not as specific or i. s fitl reaching. rhe tlien existing Instrucdtions, as they were contained in til tFI- I I iandi",,k for Sp 'ecial Agents." are -set fortl on page 432 of the -Re-Irt of tie l'residthlit's commissionn on the Assassittat on of President Kennedy,"    

> i't)y of

wlich follows: Il loo, wliich is in thit possession of every lBureau special agent, pro-vided :'i'lirents against the l'rvsident of ti U.S., nmnlers of his Immediate fam-ily, hlie P'esident-el.vt, mid the Vi e-President. livestigat ion or threats avihlist tie 'resident of tle I'nit cl States. renr-Iter4f 11 sh nl tdilt ifamily, the h'residotnt-Elect, and tilie Vice-Preshhli t is witiill tile xclisiv'e jiri, di1ti( of the U;.S. Secret S'rvice. Aniy in forimition i ml iclting ie tN sxbil ily of all attempt a gailist tihe licrslin or safely oif file l'ireshblnt . IiieL.1bers of. tile iitmeuliate family ,it the President, the Pircsldent-Elcit or the Vice-l'residenit must he referred huitiediately 11y' the most cx-lit-dit io es a of a 'll of lillil lionl to the ai :iresl ,flico of tihe I .S. -e'ret Service. Advise I, le llurpan at the samelI lime b.y teletype (of thi(- information so furished to lie Secret Service a114t lthe f'n-t that it ilts been so dissem-ni-zi:i ed. Tile above act ion should be taken and noi evaluation of the information 

sloilhl bIf altt 'llpled. Wlien the threat Is Iii the f. rill (if a written cOmilltilli-calion. give aI colly to local Secret Swwivt Ill fr Iward the original iii tile Iii t' \lenii whert it will bo made availIale to 1 Secret S,,'vice lieadqiarters in wislmiligton. reit'o referritl of Ote c4i.y to hcal Secret Service shiou 1(1 not 41elay the imildiaile referral uif the Information by tie fastest available ni-aits o'"trcioiltIion to Secret Servie locally. 

'i'lle State Iep it iieit Ilvisel t lie secret Service of all crank and threat lettr mail 1' (or crank \'isil,,rs and furni.hied relrts -oncerniig a:in, it:;assinatio or at-tenai,1td issnIssiliatio of it ruler or t .r majoi ollicil alyvhere ini the world. 

The severa military intelligence ngencii-s reported cratk mail mid siiiilItr threats IlImvillii tin1'zelut Avem-duimtg to) special Agenit ill 4 'ba1rge illek. I lie Sec-ret 

Service liad Ili siaidard proc.,lure fi)r tlie systemantic re\'iew of its requests for IIiii reer'ilf orf iitfiriatimi frti oilier i'tderal ag 'i'ijs. 

'I'lii '()oii1iiis-iol,iiIi''i4ev4-'4 int tei' fi 'ilitie, "iiih land roevd(iii4s ' of tie l'rotective 

11es,:11'-'l Set-lii of tilt Sovrvt ServIce pri'it to Novellift-r 2. 19413, vvri inde- 

> ilmilot.

Its (,lMirts ill lpt r tto have i 'eil 1(lo largely dlirecid at tilt, "croili" fi 'ar. 

All ii ,gh tilt, Service re,'ognim, ed Itl hiIts -a dvaCe prevvttive mea.isre-4 nmust en-

c("Iilijss moret Illltliese moSt obvious da llgers. It made little effort to idmetwiry filto'is ill tht-, fi'tivilie,.,; 11' 111 indiviluual fir e'll u ',gnllizil grfmlpl. otlir llhan s c.ill lirtlls. vhilh s1g&'isted a soir.i' f hiitweir ngisimt which itimely preciu-tiii is ,',,bi Ibe tr ken. Exce(l t fior il. spiwin) "trip indh,x" fle of 4(m) an lies. n.'ie of 

tile cases In tiie i'HS en.r:il files iva s availabht for' systematic re'vliev on ii geogr;phlic hasis \\lmin the l'resident p1)hn1 d a particullar trip. 235 .Subcommittce on Civil and Con8titutional Right8, House Committee on the 

Judiciary Briefly, any information Indicating the possibility of an attempt against the person or safety of the President, members of tile immediate family of the President, the President-Elect, or the Vice-President, was to be referred im-mediately to tile nearest office of the U! 5. On -i)eember 26, 19i13, the FBI on its own initiative issued new iistruet'ions t4 its Agents regarding diissemiLnatioln of threat information to the V SSS. These b~ro(lled list rtet Itpis, which are set forth mi pages 4(61 and .162 (if the i"leport of 

til i'resldent's Conmission (n I he Assassination of President Kennedy," formed the Ibasis for each of tile future agreements between tile FBI and I'SSS. Thy req uired FBI Agents to report iminediately information( concerning suilversives, ultrarightist., racists, and fascists: 

(a ) W'ho Iissess enmtio al instaility or Irr'ational behav'ior, 

( I)) \Who hai' ii1:t0v threats (of l(dily liarm agitnist (licials or employees (f 

Federal, state, or locIal governments, or officials of a foreign government, 

(e) Who express or have expressed strong or violent anti-iltlted Staies senti-iivniits il 1 whi hlu'v bIeell involved lit ioim ilng or bomb-mking or whose laSt (,olulitit hiuui'lt.es Irtldelichs towadni vi oltice, and 

I) \V'lo se lprior acts or statements depict prolensity for violence and hatred iigaliist organi Z('( government. IIEI'ONSE TO QUESTION 1 O, SUOFC')oM MITTEI; L'"'m L IFR OF Oc','Oiilut 291, 1975 1T.9. 1)EPARTMENT OF JUSTICE,   

> FEDERAL ]11BRF1BUE oF INVESTIGATION,

OrFFci. (IF I' I )ilwCro, 

IWashington, ).C., Norember 26, 1975. Jlouze Sutbcommittcc on ('iril and Constiutional Vi1ht, Cornflitlc (M the 

Judiciary. 

lteferenc'e I made to lie ()(-tolier 29, 1975, reqmvst by the Subcomnittee for ('v rtitil (lor'iln ents. - (ji'stio tree retit'st'I tlt ()swid ilt' of (11) d i1uments wlllch existed at the lime of deliliera tlos of tile Warren Cominisslon, including a designation of those docunt, ns reviewed Iby the C mission. 

Etilosed lt'iewitiI iS a ((liy tif a letter from the then director of tile Federal ]liuremi otf Iivestigitlon (FIll), .1. Elgair Iloovir, to Mr. J. IAP Iiinkiln, generall counsell , The 1'rfsident's commissionn, dated May .1, 19-t4, wilch identities tile e9 flo'u,,itlits InI lile Fill I lt'uithiiirtt s' tile ('mcei-uriing lke Harvey Oswald prior to tie asa ssi gallon of tit, llte Prtsideint Johin F. Kennedhy. It Is noted this letter ik set forth as (C'onii.ion Exhiit S31. 1iH,-,S13. Volume 

X V! 1, li tlie "llaritigs Iltfore '|'lin, 'resit't's Commissilon (n The Assassi nation of i'rewbileit Kenniedy." E'nclosure. 

MAY 4, 1%M. 11011. .1. IEn. RAN',KIN, 

(u4,111fl ('oillowI, Vich I'1rein 's (Comi0,m, in 

200 l-rll m/1 A. rc l ac, NV. 1",. a.111 ilgton, 1).C'. 

I W , t I a. II AN KIN l'tv'eruiee is Muiaie to tlit, 'lsiuslo biet bfweein staff meynibrs or ie icm'oimii siou uid It r. A. If. Blelmont oif tis x I f-ure, Mi ny .1, INA~'. lI, aI'ordaui(.1ce with tlis dlis ,'sioi, tMere ntre listtd below it' t 'itnts of tie Fill Iheadquthai rter. tile omivernijig Lee Hnrvey Oswald up to tile time of tile ;issas-sitiatimi of ti lt' ite 1'resldent Jolni F. Kennedy 4n November 22, 1 !X: 

1. A uiewxv a,l'r friomrng fr ,,i tilt- "(i rl'u, 'iristi ' ." dided ( i('tl(ohor 23, 

1959 .f, inftic'atiig a i lien Aiieriemi c t'ltin iud di'fsected to the Sovitet I'mi(o. 

2. A I 'nil t ' ,1 P 'ess lIewz, listedd ( )'t lier 31, 111(9, at .I1 w',ow, im v'ishi g tlit IA!' 

liiivey (iswnhl t1hind IZt1e to l(uisiin 111(l hand ld alldio I to reitilinit'e his AmericanI ('it'iisllil anid becolmle Siviet citizen fotr "lpurely ilitiv'il repasmi.." 3..\ emri,(li dailt, ()teIr 31. 190, from E. B. Ieddy to A. I. lBimnont repo(lrting that a chec-k of this Ittireatu's fi es (Ils'losetd no iniiormatii i Identiiled 

'with Low Hlarvey 0sm\naid. It wax noted a military service fingerlprint card was it.catefd ii, tie files of ilie idlltlien ti on Iv)vision w hich aljipedired to relate to I. A State l)elir nent Telegram (lissLithld "('ontflential" dated October 31, 

1959. from, Mo'owv to the Secretary of State reporting that Oswalt appeared at 

Ilie Anwmr'ican mhunl.ssy ii Moscow, to ronoliwie hiA macricati cit liei?. 236 

5. A copy of an Office of Naval Intelligence memorandum dated November 2, 1959, containing the results of a check of the U.S. Marine Corps file regarding Oswald. 6. A Navy Department communication classified "Confidential" from Moscow to the Chief of Naval Operations dated November 3, 1959, advising of Oswald's request for Soviet citizenship. 7. A Navy Department communication classified "Confidential" from the Chief of Naval Opoerations to the Naval Attache In Moscow dated November 4, 1959, furnishing background information regarding Oswald. 8. A memoranduzm from W. A. Bratjigaii to A. 1i. Belmont dated November 4, 1959 summarizing agency checks regarding Oswald and recommending that no further action was warranted by this Bureau concerning Oswald at that time. It N as also recommended that a stop be placed against the fingerprints of Oswald in the files of the Identification Division should Oswald re-enter the U.S. under any other name. 9. A copy of a State Department Despatch from the American Embassy, Mos-cow, to the Department of State, Washington, D.C., dated November 2, 1959, classified "Confidential," which set forth results of Oswald's contacts with the American Enibassy in Moscow. 10. A copy of a telegram classified "Confidential" from the American Embassy, Moscow, to the Secretary of State dated November 9, 1959, advising of efforts to relay a lrsonial message from John Pie, half brother of Lee Harvey Oswald, to Oswald. 11. A copy of a telegram classified "Confidential" front the American Enibassy, Tokyo, .ialwin, to the Secretary of State dated November 9, 1959, setting forth results of an interview with John E. Pic regarding Lee Harvey Oswald. 12. A copy of the I(lentiflcation Record Numler 327 9251) regarding Lee Harvey Oswald. This record disclosed Oswald was fingerprinted by the U.S. Marine Corps on October 24, 1956. 13. A copy of an airtel from the New York office to this Bureau dated May 23, 1960, cotptoned "Funds Transmitted to Residents of Russia, Internal Security-

I," which sets forth results of an interview with Marguerite C. Oswald regarding Oswald's plans to attend the Albert Schweitzer College in Switzerland. 14. A letter from this Bureau to the Department of State dated June 3, 1960, furnishing the State Department data in the lS)SMession of the FBI concerning Lee Harvey Oswald and requesting the State I)epartnment to furnish this Bureau any information it may have concerning ()swalal. 15. A letter to this Bureau from the Legal Attache in Paris dated July 27, 19060, setting. forth results of his inquiries through his sources to locate Iee Harvey Oswald. 

16. A letter to this Bureau from the Legal Attache in Paris dated September 27., 1960. setting forth results of lis efforts to determine if Oswald was enrolled in the Allert Schweitzer College In Switzerland. 17. A letter to this Bureau from the Legal Attache in Paris dated OCitober 12, 

196), advising that information from his sources indi(cate(l Oswald was not in attendance at tiM, Allert Schweltzer College in C(hurwalden, Switzerland. 

1,. A letter to this Bureau from the Legal Attache in Paris (iated November 3, 

1J60, which st forth additional data developed from officials of the Albert Schweltzer College regarding Lee Iarvey-Oswald. 19. A letter to this Bureau from the Office of Naval Intelligenee dated Novein-ber 15, 1NW, advising that Lee Harvey Oswald was given an undesirable dis-charge from the U.S. Marine Corps Reserve on August 17, 1960. 20. A letter from this Bureau to the State Department dated February 27, 1961, advising the State Departnient that Oswald had not shown up at the Albert Schweltzer ("ollege In Switzerland and also advising that Oswald had been given an undesirable (lischlinlrge frmn the U.S. Marine C)rps Reserve. 21. A letter frmn lie Washingtm Fl.iel fi t(.eo lixu lureau dated .My 23. 1961, sclting foirti results nf a review af thlv i af thu. l'assort Oflhe. 1)euprt-li(i'lit tof S tite. cu(lnet ern i ig (0-w al(l. -

'22. A letter framn the DepIartinent af State to this Iaarea u dated May 25. 1961. aid rising that the Stnt l leniirtonent Ii)s.- s(,;l i i if' 'rmn tlton whli .h Inda ilt !Ilitt Oswald lnd rennijuv',d is iti'mally (,f tr e I".S. aud that if ha' huiail nt exlnptrimted idimseif it any ;ty. flw' American Emmassy was prilpnred to fiirnish Oswald ia alum'rt fior travel ft, lhe I'.S. 2. T', reptort (if S'414-ial .- mt 1 SA ) .T,,ln11 W. Fain dated .July 3. 196I,         

> Dallas Texam. whhlh set forth results of Investigation (if

Oswall. 237 

24. A routing slip from the Legal Attache, Paris, to this Bureau dated July 28, 1961, advising that the Leal Attache had informed one of his sources as to the present status of lee hlarvey Oswald. 25. A letter from the Washington Field Office to this Bureau dated Septem-ber 1, 1961, which set forth results of a review of the records of the Passport Office regarding Oswald. 

.1U. A copy of a State Department. name check regarding Oswald's wife, Marina Nilchoilaevna Oswald, dated Septemer 12, 1961. This Bureau responded to such name check "no investigation conducted by FBI pertinent to your inquiry." We also referred State D~epartment to date previously disseminated to the State 1)elmrtmnnt on July 13, 1961, regarding Lee Harvey Oswald. (Report of SA John W. Fain dated J lily 3, 1961, at Dallas.) 2r. A letter fromi the DIallas oj ih'e to tlhis Bure-iu (tated Scpteniber 29, 1961, setting forth results of inquiries in Dallas made in an effort to oltain data regarding the status of Lee Harvey Oswald in Russia. 2?;. A letter from tie 1Dallas offce to tils Burean dited Novenber 20. 1961, setting forth reslts of an interview with Marguerite C. Oswald, subject's mother, regarding pily is of Oswald to return to the U.S. 

29. A copy of hdktntiflcationi Division Record Number 327 925D regarding Oswald. 

30. A letter from the Washington Field OffIve, to) this Bureau (latedl Felbruary 19, 962, which set forth results of a review of the records of the Passport Office regarding Oswald. 31. A coplJy oif a communication classified "Confidential" from the Director of Naval Intelligence to the Naval Attachle iii Mo(.scow dated MarelI 3, 1IM;2, which set forth information in Office of Naval Intelligence Iles regarding Oswald. 32. A 'opi y of a 'cjini tnication friiii Ilie 0)1iice (of Naval Intelligence ti tire i)vlartinent of State (ated March 3, 1962, which enclosed results of aru Inter-view o)f Jolin Edward Ple by the Dehliartmeuit of tihe Air Force on February 12 andIL W, 1V62. 33. A letter from the Office of Naval Intelligence to the Bureau dated April 26, 1962, enclosing a copy of a letter Oswald sent to Brigadier General It. McC. Toinp-kins, U.S. Marine Corps, date( March 22, 1962. In this letter, Oswald indicated that General Tompkins should consider his letter a request by Oswald for a full review of lila case. 3-. A letter t'romi the Vaslhin gton Field () iep to tilIs Btureau dl:iate( May 11, 1102, which set forth results of a check of State Department files regartling 

> Oswald.

35. A letter from this Buieau to the I)allas office dated May 31, 1962, advising that Oswald landedd ito return to the U.S. and Instructing the )allas office to lie alert for hli arrival In this country and thereafter to interview iim to (letirnuine whether Oswald was rcruiled Iby Soviet Intelligence or made a'y 

deals hIli the Soviets in order to obtain permission to return to the U.S. :36i. A letter to this Bureau from tl e State apartmentt clarified "('onlidential" dated May 17, 1962, entitled "American )Defeetors: Status of In the USSR." Icl'lded iii tine list of defectors named was Lee Oswald. 37. .n il rtel to this Bureau froml the Washingtm Field Office slated .Jue 6, 1962, which set forth results oif a check of State IDeartiient records regarding                                                                                                                                                                         

> OswIa ld. 3,8. An airtel from the New York office to this Bureau datedl June 12, 196W2, which set forth results of a(.heck of the records of tihe nImigration artd Natural-Ization Service INS), regarding (swald and which enclosed two nue\. paper clippings regarding Oswald. 39. An airtel to the New York office from this Bureau dated June 14, 19412. ad'isi ng the New Yo rk office as wvel as tMe Wa.sliltgtoil Field, Dallas and Newark Efl(es to Ibe alert for (Oswald's arrival an(d destination in tihe U. S. 40. Aletter froim tile New York offlc to this Bureau (hated ,Juuw 2;. 1uII2, wlInth set fiirth results facieck with INS concerning Iswvald arid achleck of the r(ords or the llund .Ain,,rica Line regardling Oswald and his ftaiilly. 41. Areport of SA Joln W. Fain dated July 10, 1962, at Dallas, whicll set forth results of investigating regariling ()swuald and his-wife. Marinia. ''hiis r','ort nil, -vet firn ti, ri" wts (or itie interview (if )swald tort Jie -. 6, 1962, by SAs .John W. Fain amnd II. 'Toim carterr .

-12. A letter fromn the lallas office to this Bureau (luted July 2.)5. 19)2, entitled "Marina Nlkolaeviia Oswald," which jlacted the FBI investigation of Marina    

> 82-629--77--.. 1,i

238 

Oswald in a pending Inactive status. It was pointed out that it was felt her activities could be sufficiently followed at that time in connection with the case oni her husband, IAee Harvey Oswald. 43. A relrt of SA John W. Fain dated August 30, 1962, at Dallas, Texas, stt forth results of additional Investigationi of Oswald. This report also set forth the results #)f the Interview of Oswald on August 16, 1962, by SAs JohnI W. F11a1 

aid Artiold .1. Brown. 44. A letter from the )allas office to this Bureau dated March 25, 1963, advis-ig that Informatihi had ie, i received from a cotlflential source on Seplen-bIer 2., 1962, that Os).wald's iiait,' wis contained on a list of naiies ail addresses of s il (crilit'rs 111iniiililllI ly .'ThIi Worker," Jill east (Oalst 'oiinmiiist iitWSIlol-s r. 

45.- A Copy qf tlhe Ildeil ihatlii I)ivsiuin Record Number 327 925D regarding Oswald which set forth the fact lie had been arrested in New Orleans, f,,usiau, ion Aigutd 10. 11)93. 

•16. A newspaper cill)ling of tile "'J'lhil4 I'hltyuie," (of New Orleais, JAmlislhilia, 

1iltel Aligust :i, I 00i, wliichi reported tiat Oswald haI been arrested ili New 

Orlea s fir ptsiiig oit Fair Iliy for 'ulba (olilnittee ( FPl('('literature. 47. A letter froni this ireii to) t the New Orleans office actedd Aigist 21. 19 .

iist -rlltiig the New Orhleinm and Dallas offices, to conduct additional iivestigatioi  

> (tf

!ee lilarvey ()swah I ls ia result of li.; (list rlit imn (if literattLire ili New O)rhaiion Auigiist 9. 1liW. 4.4. All ititri,, froii t lit )lili. otlce to thi. It iiireai diited Auigust 23, 1903, 

w11lhi set foltli reiill s of Its iJiwvstigilttin t I) estniush Mhi' rest, idiice and mit-

ljikt'lnliit or o switld lit New O rleais. -4.. A let ter fr in lie 1)nll .la odib(, Iii t his Miren datiA Septeiiilier 10. 196.3. whih (.liii Jtl till eHh 'h(1 E1f origin of ir invetigaitioli .ticerittig Li, IHarvey   

> 4i.mil

ld friom Di i to New Il)riiis. 5(). A letter fro li lie villas Olive to tlii.s iurean iidated Se'ptembier 10, 19(13, wlih .cli(a gdt lie4 lIfi.. of origin In tutir Investigit1i)i i iI'lld "'Marliiu Niko)-   

> lili lilii I.%11

hl' fl'r iii I)illi.s to New Oi 'leallis. 

51. A (lpy of liet ileh lde tiiation Reord Nwiiier 327 !2-1) regirdiig le, 

1 Iiirvey I t)swid. 52. 'h'll, repotI (r f SA ,Jii eil I. 1 isty(,V til .Septt'iller 10. 19,03. lit )ii hi.S      

> wihli et tflIit rv,

illls (if hitest igii iin (of I0tswilll. Tlils re ort itidivatei that 

)swiild wi lien rt' siding mlill working ill New )rltilis, Ltuisliiii. 531. A letter f'il t lliIs fl1tretimii to Ilin' ,illlais office dtiied tSepteitber 25, 19M3, 

fiurpilsbiilig Apipindlix ilgle regilllig 1Il1, Ei'('42. 5tI. An iil'lti l fr pi I lit' New' Ola'nsiis dii',, to tIis Mliri'li I ii(l t Selptemilier 12, 106i, rejiltistiig thliat lit' New Yirk (offi f*v rnilsi alm alllr rilprinte cliriuteriziitiE ii of (;orlis. Llimmiitt. It was noted hat Oswald. i l l it ion to di41liinatllig liate-

riil from the FP(CC in New Orli-as, also pIsstd out booklets int it lhl "Thie 'rliit' Against ('libi" by ('orllss I1iinit. 

.i5f. , ii iiirtl fromlli the Nw (S rh'liis lli,'et, I tlis llirca iiltetl Sel)cijtember 21, 1 MI3. whivih enclosed e'jiles of it iieilii rai(iiln daled! Septemeilb'r 24, 1 2. coii-

(,'imlng Oswalhi wih.I t f rli Jltlitn rr, itimiiig I.swilil's i rrest tit N'vw 4 ) rhlIets  

> oIn

Aligllst I, It9W3. 8uch hit0 i w'i tiilttiltit'fl froiti Ihe Ne'w Orleaniis lIhce I)'jlart-

.M. A colly fif the Id,ltitilhltion I)ivi.sion lltec(rd Nulb'r 127 9251) (onicernig Oswa I. 57. All alIlmll fri iii Cllhl s ti ill,; lillremi flll i'dt I )ct 'her 22. 119;3. report ii!;g tiot 

INS lii )ai.is liad ricel vi'd ia coinlini i heatiol classiled "ocret" fro n Mexi-o Vity, wlilch i iiliteil! tlinta ill iidiviiil, Iossl ldy Idn t'lI with lis' 1Harvey       

> (I.swiilul. wiis in 4',40liiit willi t

lie S vii i-hliill.y iII Mexico 'ity.    

> 55. i(lim' ,(lited

' ()ctiil,'r 10. 16 3, wh.i('ll .-iis sent Ii l te Fill, lh' ti i lt 

of st ,iiid l'p lrtiiieuit of Ili, Navy ltti.itll ""'S,reti" wticli replrtel thil Jill 

A.ln,ri,1li li 1ll', wIll Illenlit lh,, i it' l C s L41. OswillId lind .ol lcta teI 1ii4, S,ivjet iitha.s.y. Met'xlo ('ity., mi Octlibl'r 1. 191413. 'l'hi llht'iiS, lnlind ittdI )0swalil 1l1lY lIse 

hillntivit tol Ile nIllry I)'0wal. imii 00olber IS, I 939. ill New Orleaits. I msi lla  

> -59.

Ait Aiirit! from l lie, ',w I-)hlrlens ofce ii tillrs flurai (lt(I Octslier 21. 19(l1, alviisi i! tlilil It (swIlln h4lft a forwiriig address In New C)rlnini ,EIt Sep luu.ilcr 241, 

1903. liwlng it, IltiW altllre.- to) he 2515 West Fifili Avliie. Irving. Texti. 60. .it iOtl from till1 New Orllis office to Ibi Is irval li uiie Octoilw'r 24, 19M3. 

reqilt lag tlw Dallas oiffive to Iuwctt sllijolt and his wife. (61. A c'ilegriln to I lils lhireail frtim rour IA'gnl AtlInie lin Mlexi.o tlatel Octo-lier 18. I9N1', wi'h fiirnilshed information from third agency clInssifldl ".Scret--Nit To Iel Further Dlssenitiated," reporting that Lee Oswald find conltactel 239 

Soviet Vice Consul Valerly V. Kostikov of the Soviet Emlbassy, Mexico City, Mexico, oil SeptewlINr 28, 1963. Our IA'gal Attache indicated lie was foiowiig this matter with CIA and was attempting to establish Oswald's entry Into Me xico and hi current wlipreabouts. 

612. A cablegram to thP I, gal Attache, Mexico, front this Bureau dated Octo-ber 22, 193, furnishing a brief summinary of data In the files of this Bureau con-cerning Oswald. 63. 'l'he report of SA Milton It. Kaack dated Octoler 31, 196I, at New Orleans, Louisiaa, which set forth results of additional investigation regoirding Oswald. 4. An airtel from the Dallas otfle to this Bureau duted October 30, 1908. wherein SA .James P. Most, Jr., reiwrted a pretext interview in flit vicinity of 2515 West Fifth Street, Irving, Texas. Such interview revealed Mrrlna Oswald was resiling with Mrs. Michliael I. Paine and (litt IAe Harvey Oswald visitedi Marina at this address but was not living there. 615. Au airtel from the Little IRo.k usfli, to this Bureau dated Novemler 5, 163. wliti'h furnished a hlinge of address regardbig Robert Oswald, brother of Lee la rvey Oswald. 

W;. A letter from the New Orloutis office to this Bureau datetd November 15, 

19113. entitled "Marinm Nikolaevuia Oswald" which changed the office of origin froIi New Orleans to) Dallas. 

67. An jirtel frin tie i)allas offlee to this Btirvaii dted November 4, 1963. re).Prting re-sults of the ct)utati wvithI Mrs. Michael It. 'aine oi Novemeler 1, 1968. IG. A letter fromt tlie New Orleans (4111e to this Bur.ati dated Novenhier 11), 

11163cl. .111111ging Ihe offlece of origii of the ilee larvcy Oswald investigation front New Orlein s to 1 )ilias. 69. ,\n airtvl fro the Washington Field Office to this Bureau da ted Novem-tier 1), 1H. rel Nrtig. that an iInforrmunt advised on November 18, 1H93, that 

i. I larvey Oswald had been in contact with tie Soviet EmIassy, Mexico City, 

Mexico. 

Sincerely yours, J. EI).GAR lh(o0VEIt. 

I)EI'ARTMENT OF% .JUATIC(V, lWaShifgtofl, 1).. S'pt ember 27, 1976. 

ll),. IDox EIVmm,    

> ('htirmnnil. Rhuleomtinter o

1o 'ivil anI ('ti,.ttitutionyul 1?iqhtv, ('om inttetcc on 

tfhe ,ludiviary/. House of Ii'prept.ntatlir. lIUashinton. D.C. 

1 wkam MR. (IHAIRMAN: In response to the request (i ('iuigre sutmn I)odd I11ttadh a uneunoranvdum prepared Iy the Federal ]uirelaii of lIive:tigtl iuim ('Oil- 

> eerIiti

the Lee I larvey ()s4wald ile. This i(iemoraniduam I it stip lll| en] nt to tile FIll' 1r'-41)1s1 s - if N. VIlIier 2(6, 11175 ti tlhe S mi Ilit Pi,'% request of4 t)i-

ier 2 . 1975.      

> S-luicrely, T,.%,,vnYN-cPE .%. CA IL.A.iox
> $'pc'iild

.1.4'04'1fi n tol the    

> .1 .t.,4rI* Int .

I u' I rly' ( 1.1t it.     

> 'A. DI)PItPIITMI.E.T OP .JSTl('E.
> FmI)I;Ium,

hul: o" I NVITI( AoTrS. OffI( EIOF TIIF TDlRECTOIR, ho' tth lton, I)'.C., Sjpitm her 17. 197w. 

1 .,(glbolsunujilf r ,il C ivil angd (os tl ill i HiiilhtiI jIsfx. ( ltimgitIt'e (l the   

> .I ssl ir'juips'l.

l fere ,em Is ninll e to th t I lobvi r 211. 1175,. reti -st ilv ti 1,Stilosimitt, 11,4 It wli'timed t o t l) ,'' lhr Let.I rvey ()w l I11 oi ffor I! c islslt wihl 4'Xit0 I lit lesp lii' if' t lie liliberall i'iis if t he Wri on C'uiiiluziksivi isii miA tp witi'h of t ose iitiuuuit'tq were re \viwed Iv ie ('-lliiiksjm .i s d which wi'rtisif t roview4el. Fitrther r f-rt'u e . lliuds' kto I he resli.se of' flilt- Fetderi, r t] st'iisi ofr iv . tivllioll 

VItIi . d1iftedl N'iveoi i I r 20. 19575. wIIhIcl 'iielsi', ,l f copq y.41 1lt let) Iafr:1 4 1lv 41, 

1:w;pi, friin lie Ilsei li-4.i or fit' tli Fi .. 1 . , ig:sr Tll\ vr. 1Io M r. .1. ii' nalik il. (;.sIs'r ] ('ouuiumseI. tilt' l'r-l,.iieu ts (cirtnliis.jimu. ile'rtifylsg tht, m1 I uii]ie1 t' eiltl, u-       

> sill ii ithe ()swi hi tle

pri ir to (lip a. .s ia:u thi it I'reidi-WI .31,lim iV. Kowiicd v. 

.kAz a stiliilelllt to0 11m4.tive- rsfererucsi eolwtnst fif fle Fll, d:ited Novell)-

her 241. 11175. tist, fts tswiilg isfor uit I sniol is heins flrnisilie :

lIt .oris off ti' FlBT d isif' , lint tlio' if retientit s leltl J t(' lt )to M r. 11( lk in was ilreiA r following it (1 isc'mslon hletweeli former aisista mit to5 thieI lireevtir 240 

Alan H. Belmont and staff members of the Warren Commission regarding the con-tents of the Oswald file up to the date of President Kennedy's assassination. When advised by Mr. Belmont that all pertinent Information had previously been furnished to the Commission, It was agreed that a letter from the FBI should be directed to Mr. Rankin descrihing the 69 documents contained In Oswald's file, following widlch a Commislon staff member would review the file for an item by Item coiulirlson with the d(wninputs listed In the letter. On May 4, 1901, Mr. Sanmel Stern of thiv Cmnission made such a review and on the same date Mr. Belmont Introduced Mr. Iloover's letter to Mr. Rankin before the Commission. Mr. Belmont offered to make Oswald's file available for review bty the fill Commission; however, that option was not exercised. Records of the FBI further disclose hint the pertinent Information concerning Oswald as furnished to the Commission consisted of the following reports which Inieorporated the results of the FBI Investigation of Oswald up to the date of President Kennedy's assassination: Report of Special Agent (SA) John W. Fain, dated -July 3. 19161, at Dallas, To-xas. Report of SA John W. Fain, dated July 10, 1962, at Dallas, Texas. Report of SA John W. Fain, dated August 30, 1962, at Dallas, Texas. Report of SA James P. Hosty, dated September 10, 1963. at Dallas, Texas. Relmrt of SA Milton R. Knack, dated October 31, 19W3, at New Orleans, 'ilsln iia. RvsPoNsir To QutrsrioN 4 or SUIaCOMMIi"TEE lcF r OF OcrosER 29, 1975 (4) Internal rules of the FIll relating to the proeedur,s for reporting mlon-duct of personnel are located In t(, Bur(,ai's M aniil of lhiles and Regulations, lart I, S ection 9, ('aptioned "I)isciiplinary Mattiers." Basleally. the rules require that any Inf,,rmation pertaining to allegations of misconduct or Improper lpr-formatce of duty coming to the attention of any Bureau employee be promptly 

and fully relxrted to the Bureau. The method of communication to be, utilized In advising the Bureapt will delend upon the vircumstaiice. of each ea.,t but there must l no delay in notification. The rules flirther reqitire that any Investigation necessary to develop complete essential facts regarding any allegation agnlnst Bureau employes must lie )romptly and thoroughly handled. Division heads luist advise the Bureau of the facts pertaining to the rniseonduct or improper pirformance, obtain written explanations from the employee Involved and submit this Information to 11IIIQ along with his recommendation for administrative action. There has been no sulbstantive change in this ihly between 196k3 and 1975. It is also noted that the Handbook for FI1 .Mployevs (non-invetigative person-;n,,I ag,' 32 a so (4ntains lie statement that any nlsovduier, neglet of duty or allegations of such nature must be promptly relorte ! to the, liureau by any emliloyees learnilng of It. Above mentioned regulatiois are available for review if desired.    

> RrswPONs TO QUESTION

5 OF SUrCOMMITTrE LETMR OF ()ronER 29, 1975 

5) In conlnltitni with the Kennedy asstssination 17 Bureau employee (5 Field Investigative Agents. 1 Field Supwrvisor, 3 Special Agents in Charge, 4FhIIlIQ Sulervisors, 2 FIIlIIQ Section Chiefs, 1 Inspector and 1 Assistant Direc-toirl were d9i'1111h in iDucemler, 10M63, for slhortconlngs Iil connection with the Investrgation of Oswald prior to the assassination. The disciplinary action t/|a Ill Wi14 11.14 follow.s •             

> (1) kSle'lal Ag. nt In Il)allas who had invetigative resl)onsilility for the 4)siili

cast wIts ( 'li.s4irel a 1(1 plale on probation for Ina(eeilate Investigation, filhlr,, to in enth-w I iswald's wife until after the asaR.sination, delayed report. Iniz. falure to place )swiald on the Security Index, and for holding Investiga. tion, In athe *viltnie, after heing in r(eelpt (of information that O,,wald had been In        

> t'nli.ct with the, 8oviot Eunlem .sy

in Me t, City. (2) The Ftiehd Sunimrvis,,r in Iliallits with supervisory re.sponmilillity for tlils uimailloer wa- evi'e.rol and placed on prolition fer failing to insure that the case wali more, filly iiev e tigal141 aid rt'iorted, for not liacing Oswald on the Security  

> 111th'; ii1

nil fr r niii-urrintg with delusion to hold Investigation In aheyanace.            

> (3 1 A S1eo-.il .:# it in l)alis was eens.ired for

failing to hnve tlie Oswald 241 

case reopened after being Informed that Oswald subscribed to "The Worker," an East Coast Communist newspaper, 9/28/02. (4) A Special Agent In New York was censured for failing to promptly dis-seininate Fair Play for Cuba Information to Dallas concerning Oswald. 

(5) Another Special Agent in New York was censured for failing to Insure that Fair Play for Cuba information concerning Oswald was more promptly dissenii-nated to Dallas. 

(6) A Special Agent iii New Orleans was censured for delayed reporting and failing to have Oswald placed on the Security Index. (7 and 8) Two Special Agents in Charge who were assigned to )allas (luring perlids cmovering the Oswald investigation were censured for their overall respon-sibility In this matter. (9) The SAC in New Orleans at that time was censurel for failing to insure that there was no delay in reporting this matter and for failing to put Oswald on the Security Inhrx. I 10) An FBIIIQ Supervisor was censured and placed on probation for failing to instruct the field to conduct tlackgroundljnvestigation concerning Oswald upon his return from Russia, failing to have Oswald's wife interviewed, failing to put Oswald on Security Index and for not reopening Bureau file to follow on this matter. (11) Another FBIIIQ Supervisor was ceisured1 and placed on probation for filling to take action on a telelype, advising that Oswald had been in contact with the S(oviet l0liassy in .lexic) City, failing to completely review file until after the fasllissinat on, tailing to instrntet hheld to romss nore vigorously after oilittiining kitowlslge of (.mita.t. with Soviet Enibassy, Mexico, and for failure to 

har v Oswald pla.eil oin Security Index. (1") Another F11il14) Supervisor was (e'vnsureol for failure to place Oswald oil the Security Indx Ill i lJi te of cns(iltralie Fair I'lay for Ciba continitt ee activity and previous Soviet defection background. S13 An PIlIQ Supervisor was censured for delay in handling a cablegram front Mexico City andI for not putting Oswald on th( Security Index. 

(I. 15. 16 an( 17) 'r'w Section ('hiefs, ain InsjKeetor, nnt Asmstiiit )lre(.tor, all lat ,III IIQ, were e.0listired f ir overall responsibility in this matter. Iit St-ptniber, h1K1, as a re-sullt of th Warren ('oiimmnission report, additional a111iillistrav Ivt t lion witi inip)seffd oni 8 of tile iv we mnent ionel eiployeest who wel' jtreviotisly il i.Aiplinted ill IIM~t. That i1,sclpliInary nation wis as follows: 

( I) Tiele case Ag(lit in )alias wits censiri4li, plaeeil iol)arolot ion and sluslnled 

for 3i( days for ilahqla te invest 1gliion, failure top interview Osvai's wife until artor the atssaiiti lull, delayed( relp rating, failure top place Oswild oil the Se-e'trity Intlex, anfli fior todiing Inlvestigation i lieya ace after bei ng in receipt of infrinlionm that (.swaiui liati Ieeli In contlat with tihe Soviet Einlassy ill Mexico 

Cily. It is noteld tils SlX'ihl Agent was also ordered transferred from a)llas to a

Iiunollreft-ri'ne(, office 1/2t/(Mt. 

(2 Thel Suixrvi.tir o t lil iiat tr i I ) iallats was (ensui'ed, placed on probation awll tra nsferr14l for fill ig to Insuire th, ii Wilt Iire fully invest ignited in(1 reported. for not plat.iig (Owald on th, Security Index, and for concurring in decision to hold i Investigiition in albeyance. lie witI ilso renovtl fromt supervisory (lutlep ii April, 144, its it resllt of his derelile tltons lit the Oswald ease. 

(3) A Sli,li , Agent ill DlIlas wiis ensuret awl plheed on lrorolttion for fail-

file to Iav thle 04)iVi1l4 clw r4ilxinl after kintwiilp, i lithe slius erilasi to "The Worker." iii East Ciast ('uimiiiist newspaper. 0/t29/6'2. 

iI1 An 11111) Supe ir rir was eiillire(4, iilaiveI on l rolJit61il anId transferi-ed to the held for falling to lnstruct th lie flehl to ticii(lt fikgroulnd invest lgation illpon t walil',s ret urn from Itiusi it, fitilingip live ( kall's wifet interviewed. 

fnllilng to put Oxiwall oil the Security Index, aid for not reolning Bureall file to follow on this Inlit Itor. 

(5) Another FIIIIIQ Supervisor wii censured, placed on probation, removed from slirvis4)ry duty, deoteiiidf4! fromi (05-14 to GS-13, anti transferreol to the flld for failing to take a(,titli on a teltyleOi ntlvising af Oswahl's contact with the Soviet Fnlasiy in Mexico ('ity, failing to completely revit.w flip, falling to in-stru(,t fie-ld to p)re.ss more vigorously after Oswald's clitiet with Soviet Hinllatasy, Mexieo, and failure ti have (Oswald plaed4l on Security Index. 

it11 An FBIIIQ Supervisor was censreiifed anid lilaieel on probation for falling to lte (Oswald on Si-vitrity Iiilex in spite of cousiferalble Fair 'lay for ('uba activIty anid jir,-lils tihfi, ,l1)11 hslik-v mniili. 242 (7) An FBIHQ Supervisir was censured and placed on probation for delay in handling a cablegram trom Mexico City and for not putting Oswald on the 8eclurity Iudex. 

(8) 'li' 8AC it New Orleans wa (,ensured and placed on protiton for fail-Ing to insmir, that there was i delay In reporting this matter and for falling to place .suiject on So.urity Index. It addition to the ihove, S, 3 other empl(oyeC" who had not been disciplined as a result o? the O'.ald case in 11)(13 were disciplined as follows: 

( 1 ) A Specil Agetl ili 1)allas wis censurel amid placed oil probation for falling 

to proper ly hunmlle aid supervise this nuitter lit relationship) to the subnissiotn of evidence to the litrelimi. 

f2) Aut Iiisiwlm'tor at FI II Q was censtured for not exercising s-titficlent Inigli-tion ntii for'reslght to ii itiate action tu have Security Index intiterial ds,'uini fatre.i ro Setervt Servive. 3 A .A.,si stlait to (Iih I ) rector itt Fi I IIQ wits (elsure(i for his overall I rlc. ll-;dieliiy iii this entire matter. 

RESPONSE TO QUESTION 6 OF icUrwommirmrr LYfI,'rrR or OCTOrR 2'9, 1975 

U.S. I)PARTMENT OF JUS'Iit:E,     

> FEVERAl. JtU;RFi..K OF INVE1411.4,ION,

(OFI(CK OF THE'Ti )IRvcrOR, -      

> 11'a-vt hitrtop, D.C'., Notwtinlbocrej ,197..
> 1R4

4 '4iies of :Ir2 I irt of ltiti erview I r it ny of her relorts referri ng to oiI,,h FI '11, lt('t With JAY lhirvy ()swaid. 

To : Suuiomnimiltt. on (' ivii and ('olislitltionlal ]lights, Ihou.*'e Cnninlittfe oilt III. 

By leteUr diltei 4 tetehder 21.. 1975. flic lonorabcle )on Edward.,i, ('halriin of th e upjlrn Stilwoniittev, rc(iest#-.'d Prtal In hiforination to a uglnt the record        

> ii-gardiii lh(, It.Iimono10 of Filt )eplty A.ssovi'te

director .Jaices It. Adamui.s (t ( t lier 21. 1175.  

> Mr.

Illw, rcls requo-sted that readily available iformittiln le furnished to the             

> Still, lliiili'it tev wiffllllt milling for actimlintion oif ar'islcoccss' to

each q .Ii4st 1) 11.  

> lit resismp,

i t itotti nimil,'r six (if Mr. E.dwarils' stiprn letter, a review ,if fice e' ,ntriil aind I .ail:li. Tviix. Fill flies reve~als only eight 3(92s (Interviews) wil IA'e 

I:irvey 4I.wail were cuoielicl,. (it the dait es shown below. These interviews 

w,,ri, firnish,'el tf, lowe, Virrn (C'lii sslon ind til vert mItu wn si exhibits. Thl folleilig Is a list ff these 30's utiul where they lire ftiit in the ('omilkssionli r(iprt. I)htrm aind W1'arren ('ommisi " references 

June. 26, 1Vi2: \'olimne XVI, page 728, exhibit W23. \'pijinp X X V I, page 241, ex hitdt 2669.ll Augiit 14, 1912 :

Volume XVl ge 7361l, exillhit 824. VolumeII XNVi, longe 1413, exhibit 27:58. 

August 10. 1191 ;Volimue XVII. jIage 758, exhibit 826. Novermilr 22. 1964: 

oiliiunie XVII. i;nge 758, exhibit K32. ]{elprt. 1ilg'-q 612-613. Novermlber 23. 191W: Volume XXIV. pnge4 20-22, exhllilt 1949-11)91. Rl-port. pagim (114-018. Neeveielar 22. 193: Re-port. pages (I1I9 620. Novel nler 23. 1963: Vlume XXIV. pages 14-20, exhibit 19m8. Novertder 23, 11)3 :

Reitort, lmge 6,25. 

lufeermi ll Ion on fli, nlleged note Oswald delivered to the I )allas, Texan, FBI 

omc'p prior to President Kennfdy's as.,ssiltintion. is being handled separately as referred to in Itemi nine of sulira letter. 243 

U.. DEPARTMENT OF JUWrTICE, FEDERAL BUREAU OF TNVE8TIUATION, 

OFFICE OF THE I)itECTOR, Wash ngt on, ).U., Novcm ber 4, 1975. Re Copies oif 302 (Report of Interview) or tiny other reports referring to each 

Fill contact with Jittck Ruby. 

To: Subcommittee on Civil lind Consitutional Rights, Ilouse Committee on the Judiciary. 

1By letter dated October 29, 1975, the l1onorable Don Edwards, Chairman of the supra Subcommittee, reljuested certain Information to augment the record regarding fhe testiniiony of Fill Jeputy Associate Director Jane,, 11. Adanis oln (Ictolier 21, 1175. Mr. Edwirds requested that rea(ily available information lie furnished to the Suboinmi ttee without. wiliting for a (om1ilatlon of a response to each que.t 14ti. In reNlKonii, to Itei iulnber six Of Mr. E41wards' SUlra letter, a review of the celitr l IIli(1 Iallits, Texas, FiI lihles revealed onlly tlree' 3 s interviews ) with Jack Ruby were condictld, o1 flit- dIntes sliowiI below. 'h'lies' iuterviews were furnished to flh Warren Conmission Indl were Showu as exhibits. The follow-

1lig IS It list of thl'eSP 31r2sN 11( where tley are found in tht- niiniissoii report. 

Dates and Warren Commission References 

November 24. 1963: Volume XX, llges 37-40, exhileit-Ilall 1. Noveileer 25, 19M13 : Volilile XX, pages 41-46, exhilt-lall 2. Ieepinher 21, 11V3 : Volume XX. pge's -17-462, (,xhiliit-llhill "3. III Illhliliol1, l ttilly was 11.4io conltne ted by a ii Agen rof flit I)tlg s i)eh'e on March 11, 1951), in (i'w of his knowledge of the ermnilnnll elebmlehitliii lt lalhis. lie wits alvisel of flie liireati's jiiirlsditim in ri iilnnl liters, and lie expret4se4 a will ngness I. fu1rildsh Inforimt ion long lhese llnes. II1e wis sllh.seqenltly Col-

tn'ted lo ,Ight other 4weisiumis, Aprl .i, 28 ii, Juie 5 and I8, '1)59. July 2 all 21, 11, A ugust i1 and 31. 1959. a ind h'iol ier 2. 19., but lie fiiriisliel no Infor-iantion except for (leserilitivl' Inforinaltlon o)n li inself atid ftirtlher eOntacts with hint were dlis(ontlimed. loiy was never pll any money, and he was never tit any tlint' on informnant if the FBI. 

REMPONS-E -1O QI'tRTnICN 7 o' SuancitM .rm"E l,yrrrER O ioIEit 29, 1975 T',,, I)PAuITMENT OF Ji'K'rl4 F. "EIRF:A. UIiREAI" IF NVFRTJOATION,  

> 0(v)i'F4P

OF uTi ; I ) I R1Fcr0. W lCt ion, D.',, .Vo rcfi her 2.3, 1975. 

re (hiileng) Police l)eliIrtinieiit. report minloer j.1'-513. 

T 4o: ,il)eolllinlit tee (l Civil and ('ost lItmit iomiil Rtights, llou.se committeeee oi lhe 

.1 iu4lh'lary. fly letter of Octoler 2M. 1175, fi t llonoralblo l)n FAwnrdts, ('linirnin. Sub-(41lilllii e fi411 ('ivl Iil ll 4'e u.It lit iIlinh Rightsx. i louse C( oI'4) mi tee on tie ,Juidiiiary. reflieste'd certa in iiiterl l anl Iif trniittfoii to 1llltnlln tie record )of the testi-moiy before the 1lulbcomnitte on October 21. 19175, of ,Ilieg Ii. Adoims, Deputy Associate I)ireotor of the FBI. Mr. Elwnrils reiliI' teil lhnt readily nvuilluhle Information lip forwarded immditely without writing for a compilation of are',. Ii1sf' 14o en il ilU4, t loll. Item Numler 7 of Mr. EtImlwrds' refiluest IS a1 follow's: "C'ile:iiL,. l'nllee 111p. 

purtnient Report #55513 for an offense oni or about I)eeember 0, 1939 and de-

tectlive r(l'lrt (liltId 4i) or alout l1,f'-lin 'r S. 1131. Ilxp rts itivelw; ,e he shoothlilc of a iinion official referred to in ihe test ino1y of Mr. Adnm-. I'lease advimo If 

there is tiIw or ever lins l'en n 'ftikle'r' or other iiotation o n y of tile suuhjeet files asking that tile FIll he notified If any Inquiries or requests were made con-eorning such files." It is noted flint flie reiluest i,. folr a 'h4'ck of ('hihaogo ilet' lepartnent Reirt NXmbpr 55513. The Chlncgo Pollce J)epartmemt advises that It wmuld b Impos-sible to attentlit to retrieve a file based on its number, as riort flilremrll are rec,,urrent annually and are not used for indexinr purpogeg. Their Report 'Number 55113 was located, however, on Octoler 22, 1975. In a packet assembled in response to a November 25, 10 3, letter from the Dallas, Texas, Police Depart-244 meant. This Report Number 56113 applies to the substance of the inquiry. The detective report is also included in this packet. No "tickler" or other notation was found on any of the files of the Chicago Police Department in this matter asking that the FBI be notified if any inquiries or requests were made concerning the files. Additionally, James McGuire, Director of Records, Chicago Police Depart-ment, has advised that he is unaware of any such stop or notation. No information pertaining to any such "tickler" or notation ever being placed on tit' C h icago Police Department files pertaining to this matter is known to FBI Headquarters or the Chicago Field Office. Il)irector McGuire was advised that the FBI had caused Chicago Police De-partlent recor1H to be checked on November 27, 1963, regarding John Martin, Jack Iltuby (and Rubenstein), and the murder of Leon (ooke; and no record had been found Identifiable with any of them. lie stated the reason a record check regarding Martin was negative on November 27, 1963, was that Martin was not airresteti anti therefore would not have been indexed. Ruby (Rubenstein) and (Cooke would not have been indexed since nantes of witnesses and victims were not Idtlexetd lit 1039. RaEfPONSES TO QUESTIONS IN EXJIJIIIT A or SUBCOMMITTEE LEI1"R OF Oc,'ronER 29, 1975 

Quttion No. 1. What are the FBI procedures for processing information de-llverei to) a field office in November, 1963? Answer. Tile following is the procedure for handling imall received lit an FBI ofi ce. which lInclzdes the liprocedure for establishing it file: Mall received Ioy a field office is ope-ned in the Chief Clerk's Office where It is 

searelied through the field iflice Imice's to determine If it should be placed In an existlitg file. If there Is an existing file that pertairis to the subject niatter of the mail, Ilie file number Is written ()i tlie mil and It Is forwitrded to a supervisor fior review and aiplrtipriate routing to the employee responsible for taking the required action. If there i not an existing file on the subject matter being sarched, relevant Index references will e listed on the nmill which Is then for-warded to a sulervisor whou will designate the classification for the mail, indicate action to be taken as well as nmie of the employee whom he wants to handle the matter. The mail is then forwarded to the Chief Clerk's Office where a file will be opened as nesesary. It is given the next sequential case number within the ap-pjropriate chus'ii(atim. 'ie original copy is sent to the employee designated to handle tile matter am the other copy is maintained in the office file. 'Fie (Clilef Clerk's Office also prepares appropriate Index cards and ease assignment cards.  

> Quw.mlitiat

Vo. 2. .%re files Initialed on the basis of a message delivered to such Answer. Files are not hittlated on the basis of a message delivered to a field office. Mall directed to the personal attention of an FBI employee by name is con. siderei I t4 be personal lit natmt ,ild Is not iiult on1a1 Ically opened In the Chief Clerk's Office. Mall hilnd carried Iby any Individual to an FBi field office which is accinuiptifled hy a request that It Ie delivered to a united employee would not be Ipriwessead by the (ThIhf Clerk's Oile,, but wouh' le delivered to the employee In aIt-4,rda nve wllh t lie request. It o'm 1. I liluilI dthItld on the, Jliudgnau'ilt of time recipient as to whether tlie Ines- 

> sage

sliould: 1. he ihidield t4 all existing file. 2. 1h, designated as the first document in it new file. r 3. r, eiire ( tlier mr nao ticlal action at all.    

> Quction %',. 3.

W\\1,tld slIch a mes.sagt, hl, t realiii differently if 1lie author was kmanwi Io the Fill? Ith sH. hIuw' ?Answer. '['lie Iit'sa,.ge dellvereil to a field office for an Fill employee would le gi ve'le h)3 that e(ilplo c,. 'l'let author o)f the messelt. whether knolii (jr wot would 

be lilnmitaterial. 

Question No. 1. Are Fill lurwc',<hires for handling messages delivered to field any diffireritt iailay thiih I 1903 ?Ans wer. No. Mail received Iby a lii'ld office today is proce.ssed li the amne fash-Ion it was In 1,4IN3. 'lie prwedures art' basically exilainel in the answer to the first (luest lomi. Quc'ntion No. 5. Are field offices authorized to destroy documents without head-qua rters approval? Answer. Field offices umay not destroy record material without headquarters 245 

approval. The policy on this is no different today than it was In 1963. The disposal of all FBI records is controlled by regulations of the National Archives and' Records Service (NARS), General Services Administration. The regulations re-lating to this Is In Title 44, Chapter 33 of the U.S. Code and additional guidelines for the maintenance and destruction of records are included in the Code of Fed-eral Regulations, Title 41, Chapter 101 entitled "Federal Property Management Regulations." The destruction of all record matters has been In accordance with theme regulations. However, until a document is designated for retention by filing, it is not con-sidered it record. Thuis, a personal note never designated by the re~dplent for filing is not considered ever to have become part of FBI record holdings. 

Question No. 6. What are FBI regulations regarding unauthorized destruction of documents? Answer. FD-291 (copy attached) Is the employment agreement signed by all employees as they enter on duty in the FBI. This relates to the misuse or un-authorized disclosure of FBI documents. Misuse would imply destruction. Title 44, Chapter 33 of the U.S. Code sets forth regulations regarding the destruction of documents and the destruction (of all Fi1 records have always been in accord-ance with this statute. Chapter 31 of Title 44 relates to the unlawful removal and destruction of records. EMPLOYMENT AGREEMENT 

As consideration for employment In the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), United States Department of Justice, and as a condition for continued employ-ment, I hereby declare that I intend to be governed by and will comply with the following provisions: (1) That I am hereby advised and I understand that Federal law such as Title 18, Un'ted States Code, Sections 793, 794, and 798; Order of the President of the United States (Executive Order 11652) ; and regulations issued by the Attorney General of the United States (28 Code of Federal Regulations, Se-tions 16.21 through 16.26) prohibit loss, misuse, or unauthorized disclosure or production of national security information, other classified infornmtion and other nonclassifled information in the files of the FBI; (2) I understand that unauthorized disclosure of information In the files of the FBI or information I may acquire as an employee of the FBI could result in impairment of national security, place human life in Jeopardy, or result in the denial of due process to a person or persons who are subjects of an FBI investi-gation, or prevent the FBI from effectively discharging its responsibilities. Iunderstand the need for this secrecy agreement; therefore, as consideration for employment I agree that I will never divulge, publish, or reveal either, by word or conduct, or by other means disclose to any unauthorized recipient without official written authorization by the Director of the FBI or his delegate, any information from the investigatory files of the FBI or any information relating to material contained In the files, or disclose any information or produce any material acquired as a part of the performance of my official duties or because of my official status. The burden is on me to determine, prior to disclosure, whether information may be disclosed and in this regard I agree to request ap-proval of the Director of the FBI in each such instance by presenting the full text of my proposed disclosure In writing to the Director of the FBI at least thirty (30) days prior to disclosure. I understand that this agreement is not In-tended to apply to Information which has been placed in the public domain or to prevent me from writing or speaking about the FBI but it Is intended to pre-vent disclosure of information where disclosure would be-contrary to law, regu-lation or public policy. I agree the Director of the FBI Is in a better position than I to make that determination; 

(3) I agree that all information acquired by me In connection with my official duties with the FBI and all official material to which I have access remains the property of the United States of America, and I will surrender upon demand by the Director of the FBI or his delegate, or upon separation from the FBI, any material relating to such information or property in my possession ;

(4) That I understand unauthorized disclosure may be a violation of Federal law and prosecuted as a criminal offense and In addition to this agreement may be enforced by means of an injunction or other civil remedy. I accept the above provisions as conditions for my employment and continued 246 

employment in the FBI. I agree to comply with these provisions both during my deployment izo the FBI and following termination of such employment. (Signature) (Type or print name) Witnessed and accepted In behalf of tie Director, FBI, on ------------------------ 19 -------------------------------------

(Signature) 

Question No. 7. Has the FIl experienced any cases, other than the Oswald case, where one or more of its personnel ulay have destroyed or otherwise mis-handled a (doctiment ?If so: (a) What were circumstances? (b) What were the dislmstIons? (c) What personnel action was takent? Answer. Although we have no system of retrieval that would insure infallibility against. missing a certain Instance, it Is the recollection of those exlrienced in this field that there Is no other instance in Bureau history where a case involving the destruction of a document such as in the Oswald case has occurred. We point out, of course, that it Is a matter of public record In connection with the Water-gate hearings that then Acting Director L. Patrick Gray destroyed pertinent documents relating to that matter. In addition, we have several instances of clerical personnel who have mishandled d(wouments and/or dislmSed of certain material in order to alleviate their work load. In all recollected Instances these employees were given the opportunity to and did resign as a result of their dereliction. 

Question No. 8. las the FBI devised any plans or procedures to further limit the possibility of unauthorized destruction of documents in its poiwession? Answer. The FBI regulations regarding the destruction of documents are quite clear and are in accordance with Archival regulations as set forth in Chapter 3, Title 44, U.S. Code and the Code of Federal Regulations, Title 41, Chapter 101. There are no known instances regarding the unauthorized destruction of FBI documents which were part of Fill files and the existing safeguards regarding the Imssibility of suich unauthorized destruction are believed to be adequate. 

Question No. 9. What are the procedures for advising the Attorney General of an Internal investigation by the F11I of Its own personnel? Aumwer. Normally, the Attorney General is not apprised of internal investiga-tions by the FBi of its own persniuel In mattrs involving mison(Juct and/or violiatlons of Bureau rules and regulations. Administrative inquiries are con-due(ed. approprilate investigation carried otit. statements obtained and a deter-nuination reached within the Fill. Serious malters may be referred to our Insle-tion I)ivision for additional Inquiry and in any In.tance where investigation dlevelops information which could involve criminal activity the matter is then referred to the Attorney General. 

Question No. 10. Art- all suh investigations routinely referred to the Attorney Gemral regi rdless tf the (liSINIsitilI ?' Answer. As lsdnted out alove. till mRuh investigations are not routinely referred to tih Attorney General. however, when there is any Indicatim thot our emnloyet. has violatedl a law within the Jurisdiction of the FBI or the Jh-liart-nment of Jimstice, this Is promptly rjiorted to the aplropriate agency and/or the Attorney General. When inatters Involving criminal vihlations within our juris-diction, 11s set forth hereInafter, are brought to our attention they are promptly referred to the appropriate Iilt ed Statem Attorney for pro.,ecutive oplnilon. 

Question No. II. Are the facts and circumstances (of an internal Investigation of FBI liersonnel maintained in the i*,rsomnel tile of the individual involved? Answer. In all Instances where administrative action is taken against an employee as a result of an internal Inve-stigation. information relatilng to that matter is tiaintained in the personmel file of the Individual Involved. There are i rellurstmnces, however. where allegations could 1e mnde against An employee in tin jrerf'rninnce of his or her duth In connectIon with substantive investiga-tion and that material tilld only in the substantive case file. This could occr - 247  

> when

au allegation of misconduct is made by a subject of an investigation con-cernirrg the Agent's handling of the substantive case, hhu conduct during the investigation, the possibility that he denied the subject certain rights, etc. In all such instance, affidavits are obtained from the Agent involved and the complete miate-rial is fili in the substantive case file, und a copy is furnished to the appro-prliti, U.S. Attorney vhich is available to the courts. 

Question No. 12. Are separate investigative files initiated at the time of such an [neident? (Tli refers to question No. 11 which is: Are the facts and circum-Liilice of tn internal investigation of F13I peronel aiutaitil lit the person-nel file of the Individual Involved?) Answer. Reports of Inquiries conducted regarding personnel are miintained in the irmolitrel .1ie. If it involves a violation of a statute for which the FBI has investigative Yresponsibility, a separate case file would be established with a copy 1lhtced iln the personiel file. 

Que.vlion ? o. 13. According to Fill rules, what are the lposslble personnel actions whici vail be takei against an employee who vi(Aatts a rule or I)roc(oure    

> .Of tlie Fil

?

Answer. Except In certain technical work, i.e. fingerprint examinations, the Fill (ioes not have or apply a ireLbe table of peualtiesi for violations of Its rules       

> .1111d regllatlons. The cireulistaflces of each case

Involving misconduct or viola-lion of rules tare judged ol their individlil merits and discillinary measulrts taken range front oral reprimand upl) to 11lid including disillissal. ,1pelitically, We 

liii t it order of ascendling severity oral repriianid, letter of censure, letter of censure and probatloiin, lttr of centsunr, pirolation and suipenision, alld dlisillissi .Quction No. 14. Have any iititers involving Pill l-rsonnel ever been referred to the Attorney generall for prrosecution or for review for possible prosecution ?tn if so. what were flit- nature of the offenses inil what action was taken? Answer. Although wo bave no rtrieval tsyvtem which would Insure lucludlig till iitters involving Fill persoiitl whicli have been re-ferred to the Attorney ,heiiral for prosecution or for review for ljsslblet lrosect tion, following tire monie r'colle ,ted illstalli*es where .such aitlii hls been taken. ( 1 ) A S lial Agent was ticcist,tl of falsifying lls exlnse vouchers for his owi personal gain. This imat-tr wia presented to the local United Statem Attorl-y who lecliled plrosecition itl li of adnilisltrati ve action. The Age-nt was permitted to retire. (2) A Special Age'nit wats accused of not ima g fMll payment to an Informrnant lind recording that he (had made much payment. lile resigned during adininistrative inquiry. This matiter wits referred to the local l'nited! States Attorney whio delined prosecu-tion ill view of Iiitfiietlt t-videncie. (43) All allegation was received that aSlovciiil Agent 1ili(l accepted i briloe. An administrative liniqury deternineit thit           

> tire ilegition wits without substinlce anid the entire inlIt ,r vas

subsequently iefrrl to the ID)etartnriit for rtview, 14) In another instance a Swlil Agent wIl. uul,, of violations of bureau rules relating to hris asvwiatlor with cer-trai nienihbers of organlizel crime, ad this inttter was referred to tie Depart-iient of Justlie, 'trikv, Force Attorneys hnliing organlzed crime In that area. 

(5) A clerical enployte was ltcised of theft of f1overinient property, iAe. tak-lIg U'.. (Governeilit supplies for his ivii use. ThIs matter was piented to the lical Uilted Stia tes Attoriit'y who d(,lined prosecution. The emoly le resigned.                                                   

> M) ljl it rent (,lse we had an idmlixsimoi from a Sphcil Agent that he iltered Ilho serial niilier on ci athandgun, 'Tli nia ttr was referred to thlie local unitedd Stnaiites Attorney who (hliued prontlitloll. (7) Also, reent ly lit 1Ilcinronid We liad thr Specil Agents, an Aistl nt IlS .linl Ageiit In A

chargee 1iid a Sii'ii I 

> ,wt-iit

i ('li i rge, li(cttsed (if the mishandlinig of a nutter Involving a wirelap by heelii ipollie. The, matter Im currently befort, i gralid jury aid Is being h i l tml by 111 I'.S. 1)Pepolrtni lit of .3iilice. Ther are also two recalled Instances where the Arliiriy general was advised ly letter of violitilon.s of Federal liw rtgardlilng f rmer FI l'.srsiiiel. Iloth iuivol ved these- former ni,nnployees having made ii-nt ithlrlzetl di slo.umr of certa iii Itens and infornarion front Buren nillt-s. Iloth 1iittrm ire pending. In addition, In tile recent IiSt we have Iiivreigiitted allega-itslls of lil tilllit Hilid 1ai.'jt.iig great cities conIicernling oni, of olir SI.-ial Agents Ill 'harge. Ti allegations were (h tirinlined to be withioit foild(1t ion, and we fiirTii.ll l tho Attorney flenennil with the results of our inquiry. The, Attoricy Uj'tIl'rail was also made aware of information pertaining to a charge, of violating thil Il .1illi, to x laws, I.e. Inflilling imedili aind dental IeXplet'iSm-4, ,oncerniig one of ir A sistit Slecial Agents 4- ('barge,. This employee retired and was sub-... 44tlltitly c llvicted of hils violation lid finild, 248    

> RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS

1 TIIRoUOH 7 OF LEGAL ISSUES SET FORTH IN EXHIBIT AOF SUBCOMMITTEE LETTER OF OCTOBER 29, 1975 OFFICE OF THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY GENERAL, 

Washington, D.C., December 4, 1975. Hon. DoN EDWARDS, 

Chairman, Subcommittee oi Civil and Constitutional Rights, Committee on 

the Judiciary, U.S. House of Representatives, Washington, D.C.             

> DEAR CHAIRMAN EDWARDS: This is in further response to your letter to the

Attorney General dated October 29, 1975, In which you asked various questions In order to supplement the testimony given by FBI Deputy Associate Director James B. Adams before the Subcommittee on October 21, 1975. Attached Is a memorandum which is responsive to the first five questions which were under the caption Legal Issues Regarding Violations of FBI 1?ulcs. With regard to questions six and seven, your staff has Informed me that the Subcom-mittee is not concerned with Watergate-related cases which may have involved destruction of tapes or documents. With that in mind the Criminal Division of the Department has Informed me that it Is unaware of any cases involving de-struction of docunents where the circumstances are similar to those surrounding the destruction of the Oswald note.  

> -Sincerely,

STEVEN" TILACKHIURST, 

Assistant Special Counsel for Intelligence Coordination.                       

> U.S. GOVERNMENT MEMORANDUM DEcF,MBER 3, 1975. Subject: Request of Subcommittee on Civil and Constitutional Rfights. This Is in response to the list of questions entitled Legal Issues Regarding

Violations of FBI Rules which were stibmitted to the Attorney General by the House Subcommittee on Civil and Constitutional Rights. I & II. 18 U.S.C. 2071, in pertinent part, prohibits the unlawful concealment, removal, mutilation, obliteration or destruction of any record, paper, document or other thing iled or depomited In any public office or with any public officer of the Unitel States. Melnerney v. U.S., 143 F. 729 (D. Mass. 1900) ( onduct violative of 18 U.S.C. 2071 may also constitute a violation of 18 U.S.C. 1W- (obstruction of justice) if the destruction, or other prescribed treatment of the subject record or paper, is for the purpose of Influencing, obstructing or impeding the (1due and proper administration of the law under which a proceed-ing Is being had before a department or agency of the United States, or the due and proper exercise of the power of Inquiry under which an inquiry or Investiga-tion is being had by either House, or any committee of the Congres. U.S. v. 

Fruchtrnan, 421 F. 2d 1019 (6th Cir. 1970), cert. denied 400 U.S. 849. III. Any individual who, having taken an oath, knowingly submits a false statement or testifies falsely concerning some material fact, may be charged, depending on the forum, with a violatlon of 18 U.S.O. JP 1621 (perjury) or 1623 (false statement). Holy v. U.R. 278 F. 2d 521 (7th Cir. 1921) : (Gebhard v. U.S. 

422 F. 2d 281, 287-288 (9th Cir. 1970) ; U.S. v. Nikoletti, 310 F. 2d 359 (7th Cir. 1962) Perjured testimony or false statements which ob.truct, or attempt to obstruct proceedings before departments, agencies and committees may constitute a viola-tion of 18 U.S.C. 1505 (obstruction of Justice) even If the gravamen of the ob-struction is that the Individual perjured himself. U.S. v. Al, 439 F.2d 751 (2nd Cir. 1971), cert. denied 404 U.S. 85M. An individual, under oath, his the duty to testify truthfully concerning any matter regardless of whether or not that matter for conduct] is punishable by the federal criminal law.-U.S. v. Worchester, 190 F. Supp. 548, 509 (D. Mass. 1960). 

IN'. 18 U.S.C. 1 3282 provi(les that for non-capital offenses "no person shall be prosecuted, tried or punished for any offense . . . unless time indictment is found or the information Is instituted within five years next after such offense shall 249 

have been committed. The statute of limitations begins to run when the crime is complete; i.e. from the date of the last overt act. U.S. v. Aputreas, 374 F. Supp. 402 (D. Minn. 1974). The statute Is not tolled by the jnon-discovery of the offense during the statutory five-year period. V. To constitute a violation of 18 U.S.C. § 4 (misprison of felony) it Is neces-sary that an individual take "some affirmative act of concealment . . . or other positive act designed to conceal from the authorities that a crime has been com-mitted. Bratton v. U.S., 73 F.2d 975 (10th Cir. 1934) ; U.S. v. King, 402 F.2d 694, (97 (9th Cir. 1968) ; Neal v. U.S., 14Y2 F.2d 643 (8th Cir. 1839). Under existing Judicial constructions it is not sutficient for the purposes of an 18 U.S.C. § 4violation that an individual has knowledge of a crime committed by another and remains silent.  

> DEcEMBER

15, 1975.   

> li. EDWARD

I. Li~vx, 

Attorney Wrneral of the United States, 

Department of Justice, Washington, D.C. 

DEA MR. ATTOHNEY GENERAL: At our recent hefaings with respect to FBI over-sight, James P. Hosty, Jr., Special Agent, Federal Bureau of Investigation, as-.signed to the Kansas City Field Office, testified under oath regarding, among other matters, his role in the Lee Harvey Oswald investigation. During his testimony, he stated that certain information in his personnel file was erroneous. The sub-stance of the issue itivolved his responding to questions prolxn(led to him re-garding the pre-assassilnation handling of the IAee Harvey Oswald investigation. Mr. Hlosty reHponded in, writing to the questions, lie stated that a memorandum drawn in the IDallas Field Office, where he was then assigned, representcl the substance of at least two of his answers in a manner not consistent with his written resixnise. The implication Is that Mr. Hlosty's answers were intentionally misrepresented for pl)IPmPes of allowing appropriate censure. We would like to be able to review the al~ lrol)rlate portions of Mr. Hosty's file for the purpose of determining If such a umitdtement occurred. I would appreciate your advising me as to how. and under what circumstances, the determination of these facts may be accomplished. In this sane vein, much of the testimony at our most recent hearings involved tie policy and procedures employed by the FBI in personnel nmattrs. It appeared, for In.taiwe, that the fact that an FBI enIplryee bad military ,ervict, gave that person different rights with respwet to administrative punishment. We therefore would appreciate the opl)4ortunity to review the personnel procedure of the Bureau. It would be helpful If the Bureau could supply for our use a copy of theme ,roeedt!req. Think you for your continuing assistance to the work of the Subcommittee. Sincerely, Doiy EDWARDS,  

> Chairman, ,Pubcopittre

on ivil 

and ConRtitutional Riqhtx.       

> T)EPARTMENT OF JUSTICE, AgsSISTkNT ATTORNEY GENER.-At, LFnsr.AT.F,:E AFFAIR.,

W'ihlnqton, D.('., Pcbruary 5, 1976.  

> Mion.

DoN EDmWARtDS, 

('hoirmnan. idweormntte on Chiil anid Con titutlornal Iirht., Complittre ()n 

thre Judirfaryl. J1otue of Reprccwntatirr.s, Waxhington, D.C.               

> I)AR '.MP. CHAIRMAN :In rosponsv to your Deevnmbr 15. 1975 letter to thi'

At-torney General, I anm enclosing a memorandum prepared by the Fe(teral Bu-remi of Inveticgtlon. 

If I can to of additional assistance, I hope you will call upon me. Sincerely, 'MIC[AFT. 'M. ImmrL.MAN. 

.t .ixtant A ttorncy rcrncral.  

> Enelosmm re.

250 

U.S. DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICe, FI)ERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION, Omrc' Or THE I)xrEcTO, 

Washington, D.C., January 15, 1976. 

SPECIAL AGENT JAMES P. HOSTY, JR., INFORMATION CONCFRNING FBI POLICY ANt) PROCEDURES RELATING TO I.ESONNEL MATTERS 'In response to a request from the U.S. Mouse of Representatives ('onimittee oil the Judiciary Decenber 15, 1975, relating to information contained in the per-son-nel file of SA James 1. flosty, Jr., it is noted that song the documents in question are two copies of a nieworanduni from '81clat Agent Htosty to SIeial Agent ini Charge, I)allas, lated I(eember ti, 193. Eatch copy contains liiud-written notations, corrections or additions thereon. Thmse couples were previously 

inade available to the conaniittee hy SA Ilo'sty. Thlhe only other (l(ltetit involved waes an unlated letterlead mepniorandtnn lpreplired by the Special Agent in charge In )allas and transnittei to the BuriaU 

on Iceiulher 8, 190", and contained tile nancies of lee Harvey Oswald and Marina Nikollievnel ().wald in the captilo. This document containedd explanltlonis fr nindividuals Involved In the investigation of Lee Harvey Oswald and is available for your review with appropriate excisions to protect the privacy of Individuals other than SA Hlosty mentioned therein, Iii etnnection with tie committee's rlnext for information pertaining to policy and pirocelures employed Iy the FBI in perwmeiel matters the followeig Is rioted. By statute, all positions In the FBI are excepted front tile ('omititivo-service ainI, therefore, our administrative action relating to disciplinary ilar-ters are not governed by the requlrenlents of the 'lvil Service ('onniissiom for tit coniiletive. service. We io, however, adhere closely to guidelim. set forth h% 

tho Collilllo nill and l(ave it two-stp symtezi wherclil employees who ire ioli-veterans andl are tlee subjects of adverse action, which action is taken by the As-

sislant D)irector in Oharge of the Adtmninistrative Iivision, httve the right to appeal this actioni to tite D)ire(-or. It shoulld hp rioted that all a(lverse it iu .;,t,4 is one ivolving more than thirty days' suslension, reduction in rank or com-peInsation, or distnmsal. It should be notel that the two-step appeal Aystem within the Fi, relatig to bhotll veterans ind nionveterails wats foirmtlized in 1II74 am i result (if (Civii ,Se'rvi(e C(omnmissiJnl revisions relating to adverse actions In September, 117 .which St rested that tile final action on an a(verse act ion case should Ice aken 

iy a higher ofifciti thai the one that took the initial actioi. Prior to that I imn natll niliiieist rative etettion oif this nature .,is hatidied y the ii rector cilil 

litlli,-bahlitle only to the directorr except for the veleran who had tile riglt of 

n(Ii(ll1111 i lK-s1tl to tilit (' ii Si'rvie (Cm iissilm .In the case of veterans (if the military service, however, ill such enpcl i"vvey are a ffiori(ed all rights availlde to thlein in accordance with the Vetermns 115 ri'fr-  

> enti, Act

(of 1144. A veteran iust lip given thirty d.alys' iidvatite writ i-ii nnutli,. or 

tipe Ipropwal of any of the aicove-nentloned ai(lv'erse actions (Title 5. Section 7512. U1.S. (We) li li may also appeal an adverse declsi-n to tlie (ivil Service ('o, a-eeis-4cfn (TitIP 5, Section 7701, U.S. ('Ode). The veteran is entitleded to is% rights 

ui rlder the provislois of 5 ('oCle of Federal Regulalons (,( H). lart 752.2011 ci tNwI (Adtverse Actions i1y Agec'ie's ) and tn(er Federal l'ersoieieel MN11l1at11, Secticil 

752.2Q2 (revised Septenlier 9, 1974). Infitortivit in iiin.erning vet'rlins' rights ilt sit'h matters apipwars In (lip Flt 's Mn"tital cit ofMles anel Itegiflati ins, Part 1, Sectidh 1i]--7. aind Part I. Sect ii in l0-1) 1. it llrllgh tie veterinl has tile adlie'd prct(''tiiin of tie niI(viIIlce written jicitlh.' a lid a riglht of al peal to tie ('livil ,Service 'omnni- oin. uill eml liloye ' are t r':eted4l 

Irn thm staitie ill mneritr in rhniti n to other nsIli4ets of dIlwp'illia ry islx..o. Eah 

ccitt uicyve is ftedly tIvi'eJl d t thlie flp tiefle iiiure of till V alloafg:liin portasil1K1 ti) tliit m'iilica mcle. 1s affiordl, all Interview. hlies the right to reply to spe('ifl' ciiiire's. 

a n(d is ivhpti every ohisi(rt lit y to fllireiish expl intionis anad refate ollegiet 1ifll. 

Icittle'rs Intvolvintg possi le 41 isc linary action are handlitimil a there lgh inl lfnr'r. in'lt:idl' extetilve iit\'stigation where wa rranted nl n onae cti(in ik ta kec n Il 

ai fa,'ts hvn'e h eeci firmly eqt bhlishAd All vtii)liyees, of course. leave file 1i 1:et trp (cmitest adlverse ac't ion In Federal court.  

> cc'

M Iwit kr, E, Jrt tTI. 

S'pvriai ('foun 'nc1 for fih Ifilirr fe 'ooreli,.a ion. FBI OVERSIGHT Attorney General's Guidelines for FBI Activities and 

## Additional Legislative Proposals WEDNESDAY, FEBRUARY 11, 1976 

HOUSE OF- REPI.IESENTATi VEm', SUBoM3M'3rIITEON CIVIf, AND CoNsTI'Iu'1ONAI IIII'i (JF T'I' le ('uOi M ITiEE ONX'1'!1F.JUI'ICIAlty 

II'a.xh bg/on. P.C. 

'I'lie silbeoI)Clhlittee ))let, pursiiant to notice, at 9:35 a.m.. in roomn 

'22.37, Rayburn IHouse Oflive Building, lion. Ioin Edwards [chairman of tile sulconmilittee] presiding. IPres-nt: Representativ es Edwards, I)rinan, Badilio, I)Xld, and Butler. Also present : Alan A. Parker. co slil : Tlloras I). Bren, asistant counsel ; and Kenlnetil N. Klee. associate 'otiisel. 

Nil. ]bDWs. '11 Sil)CoJ1ilI t te will coe to order. The gjrent lenmi n f'om New York. Mr. lA) IjA). Mr. airmana. I move that tl. Sl c,,emilnnittee onl Civil 

and Constitutional Right s of the I , se ('onnittee o tle Judiciarv permit ,overage of this hearing iii wlole or in part by television broad-cast, photography, or any olher method li rsn'ant to tlt- rdes. 

Mr. EA.ms. Without objecion tle resolution ordered by the gen-t leunan from New York is adopted. A little over a year ago tle Attorney (htneral and Mr. Kelley were here (lisussimlg with tle louse J.,lldiinry committee e tile subject of domestic intellige n-e. This area of Work done--y-the FIl is a very large Iaft of the FI 's activities. I x lieve that oute estimate is tiat it rel)resets is percent of the work. perhal)s $70 or .. 80 million a year in Fillillbdgetary ,,xJendit ures. 'he (hnral Accounting Office es-timaxtetI that ii 1'074 i It) field! oflives there wNere perhalpS 17,000 to 

1,0O either Ol)eni cas-s or files. or something along that order. in do-mnestic Intelligence in te 1) field othces that the (eiiral Accounting Office xauRiiined. This subject anid this resinsilbilitv also is tle stickiest thing the Fill ust. contend withl. It is ftaug ht with (iangvr. not only to tire FIll. 1,ut to the public. ()ne of the prol)lel .s is that there iu no ex-

1licit law that delineates its rvsponsibilitivs and desivnmtes the FBI as tle official organization that slimll tv in charge of domestic intelli-gence within thel nited States. And perhaps because of the lnek of con-gressional guidelines. ,mogressional law. the domestic intelligence iro-(251) 252 ram over tile years has done great damage to the FBI and the pub-lics opinion of it. 'he COIN'ELPRO, of course, was a part of the domestic intelligence activities of the FBI, and some other unfor-tunate things that happened such as the persecution of Dr. Martin Luther King was a part of the domestic intelligence activity of the FBI. So the preparation of the guidelines that we are going to talk about today is a welcome step. Because it is terribly important that we some-how define and limit the domestic intelligence activities which are very important, very essential in this country. Both Congress and the De-partment of Justice have been most negligent over the years in their responsibilities to be interested in the problem. Now, it is the intention of this subcommittee of the House Judiciary Committee to write law on this subject. And undoubtedly the guide-lines will be of great help. Indeed, important questions about the gui(lelines might well be included in the laws. We are looking forward to the statements of Mr. Kelley and the Attorney General today. Again, we appreciate the attitude and spirit of cooIeration that has been shown all the time by both the Attorney General and the L)ireAtor of theFBlI. 

,Nir. lluth, r. Mr. BUTLER. T'hank you, Mr. Chai rm an. This is, of course, but another he ring in a series by otir subcominit-tee on FBI oversight desigined to exauliine the apl)ropriate legislative options with reference to lhe Federal llurt'au of Investigation. It (oecirs to n that (irilg the course of these hearings we will develop a jurisdictional basis for the F111, awi( once having defined the jllrisdiction, it will be necessary for this subcommittee to demon-strate the scope and the mode of the oversight to insure that the FBI oe)rates within its jurisdictional nlail(late. Of course, of fundamental importance is the decision concerning the FBI oversight that should 

be spelled out in a statitte as opl)posed to that which will be left to executive order or gui(lelines. And with regard to the chairman's commnents in this area, of course.. 

exactly where. we will draw the line between those two remain's to be 

decided. But I hope that the members of the subcommittee, Mr. ('hair-man, will bear -in mind that flexibility is necessary also to effective law enforcement. The statutory limitations serve to limit the activities of the Fil. bit it also serves as a p)otential source of future litigation. So I am confident that we will do our iutmost to strike a proper balance. I welcome the gentlemen today ani al)preiate their cooperation in 1)ein1tr with uis. .Nfr. Ei)wmmsq. M.r. 13adillo. .r. l. mr,.o. Thank you. Mr. Chairman. 

I want to thank you for having called these hearings. Yoi remember, when the guidelines were issued. T requested hear-ins.g and T said then that I was aoing to introduce a resolution to dis. app)prove the guidelines. I am reintroducing the resolution now based upon the new draft of the guidelines that is being proposed. T diseiised the resolution with soe, of the members of the subcwom-rnitte. But basically the reason I believe this committee and this conPnresS should disapprove these sidelines iq because they are q-, broad as to give license to exactly the same kind of activity that the 253 FBI has carried on up until now without the benefit of guidelines. For example, during the past few months we have been shocked by the revelations surrounding the COINTEL operations against Martin Luther King. But if the new guidelines are ever propagated, exactly the same kind of activities could be given the sanction of respectability, and that sanction could include the sanctio-n of this committee. That is because the guidelines suggest that investigations can be initiated to secure information on the activities of individuals and groups of individuals acting in concert which would involve the use of force and violence in violation of the Federal law. We know that the activities of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference did indeed lead to violence because of the reaction of the communities in the South and so, if those activities were to be carried out, the same actions against I)r. Martin Luther King could be taken in these sidelines. I would like to have the Attornev General and Mr. Kelley address themselves to the guidelines especially, because so many of the activi-ties that are permitted under the guidelines are the normal activities which have to do with the protest against action of the Government. For example, on the question of B(3), the opening up of files, when an organization is doing something that would impair, for the pur-po.ws of influencing the 1U.S. Government policies or decisions, the ftunctioning of the government'of a State. Well, in New York State 

w'o now have ,eople woi are tlhinking of sitting in in the offices of the Emergency Financial Control Board because they are protesting the cuts that are being made in the City University and in hospitals. But thatt sitting in would impair the activity of the State government, and under thoso broad guidelines you could open up a file on them, too. On the question of the mail coverage. the same situation that led toBella Ahzug's mail beingstirveilled could take place if this was some communication with an organization that was carrying on activities thnt would lend to disruption of the State or Federal Government. So T believe,. Mr. Chairman. that these guidelines should be rejected by this Congress. and I believe that. if we are going to have effective oversight of the FBT. we need to write legislation in this subcommittee and hove, that legislation approved by the House and by the Senate. 

Mr. ErwARrW. Mr. Dodd. Mr. Domn. Thank you. Mr. C hirman. T have no opening statement. Mr. EWARJM. Mr. Levi, I believe you lave with you Deputy Assist-ant Attorney renernl Mary Toawton. We welcome fs. T~awton. And we will now hear from the Attorney General of the United States,. the Honorable Edward 1I. Levi. Mr. Attorney General, you may proceed. TESTIMONY OF HON. EDWARD H. LEVI, ATTORNEY GENERAL OF THE UNITED STATES ACCOMPANIED BY DEPUTY ASSISTANT AT-TORNEY GENERAL MARY LAWTON, OFFICE OF LEGAL COUNSEL Attorney General Txv.' Mr. (Oiirman, T welcome the opportunity to talk again with this ubeommittee. During the months since I laIt testified here there has been much discussion about various incidents   

> A2-129 77-17

254 which I described to you last February 27 involving the Federal Bureau of Investigation. The FBI's domestic security investigations have received the most attention. And much of it has centered on COINTELPRO, which was revealed to this subcommittee before I arrived at the Department of Justice and about which I provided further details by letter on May 17, 1975, when they came to my attention. From the beginning, this subcommittee has been interested in the FBI's domestic security investigations. But it has also been concerned with the whole range of FBI practices. I)uring my last appearance before this subcommittee I promised to start work" preparing guide-lines to govern FBI practices in the future. The preparation of those guidelines has been slow and difficult,--much slower and more difficult than I had realized. The problems are complex and important, as im-portant as any now facing th Department of Justice. I had hoped when I first. appeared before this subcommittee that I would be able to present to you at my next appearance a complete set of guidelines. T is has proven impossible. But programs has been made in-drafting giridlelines in several areas. You have been provided with the most recent, drafts of proposed guidelines covering the Whqiite Hou.se in-quirie., investigations for congressional staff, and judicial staff ap-pointments, the handling of unsolicited mail. and domestic security investigations. These draft, guidelines cover many of the areas that have been of greatest concern to this stilw'ommittee. Because the statutory base for the operation of the FBI is not satisfactory, I know the members of this subcommittee have been con-sidering what changes it should enact. The guidelines may be helpful in these (lelilberations. Before discussing briefly each of the draft giiidelines you have seen, I would like to make a'few points about the quest ion of statutory changes. The lmsic Statltory provision concerning the FBI is 28 UT.S.C. 5.13 

wlhi,.h provides tl,,at tle Attornty Geiieal may appoint officials:                                               

> (1) To dlete't mnd pro'eiilp erh rigniie n~aInOt the I.nited Statmi: (2) to a.444
> In the protetion of the Proidmt :rind (3) to conditt swh Investigations re-
> mrdiln( oruiatni matters iindrr the entrol of the' levirtnment of .Tii4tiee and
> the Ilmepartment of state as may Ie direetedI by the Attorney General.

Ill addition. 21 IU.S.(. .")1 dh,.la:irtS tlilt tllic ,edei( il Bii 1rali of Tin-vest i,,atim is in ilie I )emiim tent of .Tistive. Therl are other statute., s,1(bas the Conr.,essional Ass.Issination. Kidnapping and Ass:ault Act. which vest tle lBurea certain special responsibilities to investigate partiviiar criliuinal violations. There aM also Executive Orders and Pirsi hential .' ritenents an1d (irectives placing investigatory responsi-bilitv upon tile lBureau. 

Ill soe areas--- sul as (lomestlc cerity-the simple statutory base I have iist desribe(l is overlaid with a series of exe,-itive orders--for 

,'xIIIItI)Ol(. ExeC.tij,4 ()rile' 10130 CoMuInerninr the Federal loyalty pro-,,ra in---- a i( irective s ,ot jn1r ack decade,. The simplicity of the stat-11t, v:n;I'i CS when pla.,l in t!is sef in. loreove, .the nthorized work. 

of tl hr Blrn".i ill terl, of erii( detetion inwit lme seen in the context   

> oif statiltvs

paflS-:vd by Cyw-P. r q~ ~iet q, filhe Sliith Acvt. tile Seditio115. ( 'ouslpir:ac'v Iw. ant ti lihlellion and Insurrection Statute. I would like. to I ,-in Ol w disi ssimi today by sti.mtsting a few considerations 255 that should be taken into account in deciding what statutory changes 

s1o(il1b iLw made to define, more clearly the areas of the Bureau's juris-(( ltion aml the Ieasalls and meth1odls which the Bli'olau is permitted to use in carrying out its assigned tasks. Fi'Sit, thire is a tel) )tation to resort, to having tie coiits make 

l11iV (lifli('ult day-to- lly (he('isioIs ltX)mit investigations. When afourth allienlidment x-arclior seizure is involved, of colors, repcoiime to a 'ouirt for iL jilid'ial warratiiti iill Ilost, vir(ulinstali(es rqui red. But the telljtat iot is to extenidI ti( uws of warraltts inito li$as where war-rants are not cost it utioniallv requ ird. For ( exampl)Ie, its x'oni know. it llts been sliggestedt that tile FBI ought, to obtain it wiurrant. befol uising till illforl'itll l'Ax((-Il(iillg lt- i,\'trll lit rt, tlliillenit ill this way 

would 1w it major s14-1) toward all alteration ill tile Ibsic unature of tile (r111i ill i l ,I j w4 ice s.vst li, in k \leri,'i. It w til(i ]I) a 1it !) town rd the in-

(jllisitorildI ill which juligt's, and1l ntt iia'ludx'lr of tile executive. 1tt'1t1ly controll tim ili vest guti ioul of crimes. h'liis is tie system us -d 

iii still I'lr()t )J )4',iiii turits adi els whee. but l)lt s1 " s~stemi of justice kJ' 1)p'- Ik, ill'e.t ig.tt louIt ll )r'4).-s4'wii(ll of 'imue selatae froim the 

11dul ilti,' li (f cr'im~lin~al ch.ll-4':..,,.. 'I'1,e separation is important to the 

lll raliytv of the iildici, a ii.eiti'lit" which 01l1 S..st( 'Ii takes pains  

> Io Iplot('d't.

Then.,rt i-s alml letr re lated c'f.w-idlvratioll. Tro retiltire judtges to de.i01e Nw~lthe ~ r llr ilitm-111ltvls IllaY I" !. w-f'.4 ill lartiv'illar' ca;, e -wou.ldl Irin,ir lift( Jiilicii' v ifilo tIie ltlst ilitl)i'iit and111 least 14filtt.I)l pfart 

of dw limeii4st 1irative prw-ii (*, 34'cr~lIili ;r thi' wble of tlejja ?

> i '

i vvS1 i (r ii i' I ], a In t) .f ( i'k th1 t J w id beipiI, la,, ll )( ll ,4llr.s, we 

# lidst ask 0.ir.Stives woi, I ti'l-e i'. Ow iist)xf lllill i nlv'es of ilf rid i-

a I I't loui ovelnli) ii s('Vt' l'V ~in iI .li ii lt it Iv askv.ds colt nvi 'k.. It woulde lla it e I,lt. eso il i lit s i iti c1' i,.ats wli vitlsr 

wAvlll Ihe Ihaildh-dl Iprflilor ,vily 'vr. if l.-indile'd with vare. would lace it Ireilowi( . Imnrlenl of work on 1l"edlen'd .idIge's.  

> lit

lflfing~ . ltliltl-rY ch]ange-. il 11.4 best i).4, v'nbller'ed tha~t rigid (di-retili., g.ov'entvin ~ eve ry sit~)ill h il \'eslizli\'e, Iproees.s Could .sftc-

ritiv'e lira Ilei!,iilitv tIlel. iS lVV~t...SS-'v\ if a11 iv \'e, 'fi/aaive a/..enly is to .tllit, to lt iiVt' Iv ' t('t1,1 sital situtions it. ii inst, fa'e. U igid statuto'y 

l)rowV'i,3101s w)iiltl inlvite' litiLzati(4 at every st('p inl the investigative 

> )IN)i't'sS.

Slio'l litit..lion i-i',)11 ven.v w ,lle l s(d Iv level . in( d(lial..; Io fi'uist rnit leg..il ititat law efie't'elaielit t'fof'ts without achli'evingr tho llVI'11111 of ('4)ontrol for" whichi4'l flie st atttilt's were enacted. As Lord 1)ev-

lil lilts said :

A- ,wo)iitui . nvi hiig ha I4-1 (40l1101I. tW,, IS i lawyervr-I ike -- ut somti ime.m I;,.'ortlmlua ' -tevndvIiE'liiy I trelt 'h wrillen !(prl dis if It wtre the lst word oil                             

> tli11 11jmt All1 il III wit h\viih t'li'1l I'lc cam Itls'eE illg Ito wiHlhelh rIt fMllIN (i lne' shdh' or
> tt ol tier twliat imwy It' iitIiuly 4rawn bIundilry.

stlrl1miolltald'. 'l'hea I )e,)lurt iiietut tf .1tt, ii' e ,.i',i to work \%,ill, ('on-grsi',lss 13 i sing intlls llawll wi! '4 t'v t Oll t. sli t iIie avof w )(h(t raii is'l 

11l11)'Il 11l4. r('sl'imsiibilitie'sul tIbe F B I~. ''rll ljt-) (' glltl ills i're l -Il' f)f w l-O' -(, 1"4I)'))(, l'w ale wvithi C on-

gr'ess ill llwtlilg its Itegi.hlke i 11 1tspow;x:Ililitv. Somlle of what )IRS be(ell 256 'proposed in the guidelines may be useful in drafting statutes. Other parts of the guidelines may beit he left to regulations or Executive orders. As I said ini my earlier testintony before this sulx'oimittee, consultation with you and with other conaressional committees is an important part of the process by which trese guidelines can be per--fected. There will not be complete agreement about what has been pro-J)os4l-in(leed, within the D)epartment of Justice there is some dis-agreement about some provisions-but this is inevitable and is a neces-sary part of the road we must travel. We welcome dis utssion, which is also essentiall . Let me then briefly describe the four proposed guidelines that have been substantially completed and have been provided to you. Others-which will cover criminal invest igat ions, use of informants, counterintelligence invest igat ions and ot her areas-are currently ](ing (rafted by a committee within the I)epartment chaired l)y Mary Law-ton, I)eplity Assistant Attorney General in the Office of Legal Counsel, who is here with ime, and Comipost( of representatives of the Civil Rights and Crimiinal Divisions. tie Office of Policy and Planning. the Federal Mireau of Investigation, an(l tie Attorney General's Office. As new guidelines are drafted in these areas they, too, will be made available to you. When I testified before this suleonmittee last Februiary I (leseribed 

a numler of inci(Ients which occurred in a )io(l datingg back more than a decade in which the FBI was misu.sei for political purposes. Inoted that in most cases we discovered where the White House was involved tie initiation of an iml)roper requIest was nade by a White 

I louise staff nember-acting in the President s atiane--to a counterl)art in the FBI. These requests were often made orally. White House staff members in a number of (lifferentl positions were Involved. As you know, tie FBI conducrts lbackgrolln(l investigations of per-sons Ieing considered fo" appointment by the P1residlent either to posi-tions in (Government departments or agencies or to the White lotse staff. The FBI also cheeks its files and sometimes vonducts further investigations of persons who will he in coitact with the President or who will be given access to classified information. The gu1ideline con-cerning White House inquiries sets iu) a rc eedlre.-which is already substantially being followed-which requreos that requests for all such investigations be made in writing b the IPresident or the Counsel or Associate Counsel to the Presi(lent. inder the proposeAd guiidelines the reqpst for an investigation would have to certify that tle person to be investigated has consente(i to the investigation with th e knowledge that information gathered in tie investigation would he retaine(l by the FBI. The consent provision is important as a mechanism for pre-venting investigations in fact sought for political or other investiga-lions. It is also important as a protection of tle privacy interests of l)(e1.sons to b)e investigated. There are provisions requiring that access to information provided to the White house be strictly limited to those directly involved in the matter for which the investigation wns ini-tiated. Custodians of tile files in the White I louse would x- required to keep a list of all persons who were. given acce. . The Proposed g1uide-lines concerning congressional staff and julicial staff at)pointments take the same basic approach as t le guidelines concerning White House inquiries. In addition the White house has been following the practice, which 257 

perhaps should be embodied in the guidelines, of directing through tile Attorney General's Office all requests for investigation or for material from Bureau files except routine background cheeks. This was not the policy in the past. It reflects the Attorne general'ss role, which Idescribed to you last year, as a lightning rod to deflvct improl)er r'equtests. 'he propose(l guidelines on the White Ilouse inlluiries and on other matters, accept tie propositioni that FIBI files should be dest rove(l after a reasonable length of time. The deadlines for dest rictiol of files have not yet been specified, however, becallst for a(lininistrative reasons these deadlines must be coordiinated thrigolliot tie FB1I file system. The last time 1 appeared before ti,.. subcoimitte miany Ilelil)elrs were colcernel about the handling of 1ii.oliited derogatory inifornila-lion received bv the F11I. Unsolic tedl in formation .anl I) very vaiN-able in law enforcement, as 'oii know, itt tile concern hias beel that allegations ae)elt tle private Ii, s and llaits of ind ividuals h)ave found tlir way into FBI files wh ere theY may rv ieiaih for great length of time its a silent but troublesome inivasioi (,f illividlual privacy. In my testimony of last Februarv '27, 1 stuggested tlat o l balance it would he     

> desirable to (levise some

proce(Iilre under wlich somie information ill Bureau tiles wvothlll be (lest royed. The gii(lelinles coiicerniiig misoli'ited in formation set ii1) a proce-dure for tlie early (lest ruet ion of such information when it does not relate to JIitters, witblin the jurisdiction of tile liederal Government or does not niake an allegation of a serious crime within the jurisdic-tion of State or local police agencies. 'T'le uelraft giidelines )rovile for destirictLion of sulh i solicited in formatint within 90 lays. The 

periodl after which other files welId be! required| to be destroy(l Ilay 

vary. Infornmation collected in bakgromnd investigations 14ight be retained long enough to avoid tile need to re)eit ilnvestigative steps as an ildiviihual moves from jol) to jot I iill government or out of government and late-I back in. 0n tie other hand, (lest rmict ion of files developed in prelim ilnary domestic Wecrity investigations may 

be required quite quickly if information indicating crinlinal con(uct is not developed. Finally 1 come to tile )roosed guidelines concerning tie con-troversial area of domestic security investigations. I have already testified about these guti(leliiies before the Senate Select Coiimittee on Intelligence. Since that testimony, several changes have been 

inhale in the draft. You have been provided with the latest (Iraft to these guidelines. There are several important features I would like to describee. First, tie prolsed domestic security guidelines proceed from the proposion flint. Governn.t monitoring of individuals or groups beCauseP t ler hold injol)lar or controversial political views is intoler-

able in our society. This is the mieaning of the warning issued by 

former Attorney General Harlan Fisk Stone, as I read it. Stone said, "There is always the possibility that a secret, police may become amnitce to free'government ano] free institutions, because, it. carries with it the possibility of abuses of power which are not always quickly apprehended or umderstoo(i * * *. It is imprtant that its activities be    

> strictly limited to

tie lerfornance of those functions for which it was created and that its agents tlhemiselves be not above the law or 258 beyond its reach * * * The Bureau of Investigation is not concerned wfth political or other opinions of individuals. It is concerned only with their conduct and then only with such conduct as is forbidden b~y 

the laws of the United States. When a police system passes beyond these limits, it is dangerous to the proper administration of justice and to human liberty, which it should be our first concern to chei'ish." 

Tile proposed glidefles tie dolliestiv seeiityv investigations closely to the violation of Federal law. I realize there is an argument as to whether the (iidelines tie domestic security investigations clo.lV enough or too closely to the detection of criminal misconduct. But the main thing in my opinion is that the purpose of the investigation must. he the detection of unilawfil conIduet and not merely the moni-toring of disfavored or Iroildiesome activities and surely not of unipop~ular views. Illis is acconllished in tl e ilidelines byv requiring some showing that I he aletivities under investing tion involve or will involve the  

> 11se,

of fore or violence and O1. violation of Federal law. I must. aIl llit ti1eIri, is 1 Iroblvi, -- in part a iraftin po lo)l('n Iht j se'Ia Imore tian tihat- of ]low to descril)e or' st. fourth a stmiidar'l wh iclt fii r'ther' Specifies what is viea ut 1'y "sonie shSowing." fltcatise investigate ions-into erimninnl condict in tle domestic se(ivlritv area uiifiv raise sicriifivait first amienleiClt issues, tihe Vp'o-

posed gilidefl lne provide for conlipend iols reporting onl sulch investi-gat ions to tile I)epartlnewt, of .Jlvqf ic'. In general tle g1ileli .P lspro-vide for a much greater involvement Iby tt, rest of tile )epirtviieiit of Just ive and ti ie At-torney (0,neral in reviewing FIll (bluestic 

secliurity invest igations. The emnhplhasis uponl del)rartrIwiait al and coi-

gre'ssioaill review is irup~ortant, ut it itiuist be recognized tlint the Bureau iuujust. have prim rvy r'esponsilbilitv for votroll inr itself. "!'le gid lines attemiipt to strike an alpprop~ruriate lrnlinv. Periodic reports 

IW flue B131reau of pu-eliniuary investigations would lhe required. All full invest igat ions wo lld have to be reported to tle Attorney (eworal o.I his lesig.nee wit Ii 1 week of their opening. The Attornevy (Ge-ea! or his designee could close any investigation. FBI Ileadqluarter.-woUl! Ihe requi red to review t lie results of fill investigations perioli-

cally and to close. any when it appears that tei standard for opening a full investigation 'is nonsatisfied and all logical leads have m,en exIhusted or are not likely to be lrol uct ive.      

> J.lh opeln vase wolui(i)e reviewed

annimliv in t lie departmentt of 

.fist ice alld w,,uld e closed if no longer jist ified undvir the standards. el o lp)('ISo" il Al))roval of the Attol,,u cy generall would be i'eliired    

> vlr siu&.! sensitive

tech iiiquies as title I I elect ron c srili've i 1lance orl 

prev 'litiye action r, to he iisevil, andv1l lihe Attorney General would be   

> reqi Ii

neil to) i'l-p)Ot to ( 'ouuress period 1 a lIN on t tuei I-4t:1 nces, if :11y. ill wli,.l 'I Vn' vent iw ye e.i iii was t alw i. l'n-liiuimar'v invst iations- wlliil- woull not involve the infiiltra-tion of in fo1,a fits irt) o'pga izati ls oil r*(o)s or .uuelu techiiqlues as el,,ctronic Sii'rvei Ibmrce or limil covers- .wol id be a itlrirized onllv on ilie blsis of in flivta(ion or' allege actions l1at ai individual, or inidividivals      

> actn, ill VoMc.t't, may N.

ewuga~rdlud ill activities which involvee or will iivolve tlie uise of forcV Or Violence and tihe violation of Federal law for one of five designwttef l pirlposes. Those criminal purposes are: 259 

(1) Overthrowing the government of a State; (2) Interfering, in the United States, with the activities of aforeign government t or its authorized representatives; (3) Impairing for tile purpose of influencing U.S. Government policies or decisions (a) the functioning of the Government of the United States; (b) the functioning of the government of a State; or (c) interstate commerce; 

(4) l)epriving persons of their civil rights under the Constitu-tion. laws, or treaties of the United States; or (5) Engaging ill domestic violence or riot ini when such violence or rioting is likely to requ ire the use of the Fe(Teral militia or other armed forces. 

May I inter'li)t to say that this meant, engaging in these activities, ]iot indllcing them. P~reliimiinary investigations woull be limited to inquiries of pliblic rt,'0rd a(d oiher Imilic soliCes ; Fll files anl inldices; Federal, State. 

'll local records ; 1111(1 existing iiiformant s mnd so1evs. Interviews mid phllysical slirveillaine 1ii(lertldaken for tle limited pirlpose of identify-

ill, tihe slbject of tie investigation woi l(1 ie allowed, but interviews or surveillancee for aillv othel purpose would! require the written authori-zatiion of tire special agent, in clia'ge of ti apl)ro)rilte Bllreal field (,tflice. 

The (Iraft. guidilines provide that suich ii-trsive investigative tcli-n iijies as imuiltrat iolu of in formiants into organizations and use of elee-ronlic suirveillance alnd mail covers may only be nitiited as a part of fulll inv'estigt ionjs. 'I'lw glidelines set ont. tile following standard for tile opeiling of i fill investigation: Full invest igat ions must be ,i iltliorized by t lie 14 I Ilediquiarters. They may only be authorized on tii basis of sj )ifith llil art icula)le filets giving rasons to believe that ault iim(li\'ilulil or iidividiials acting in 'olcert ale or ilay be engaged 

ili activilics which involve or will involv'e tile use of form. or violence 

1iid the( violation of Fe(eral law for one or more of the live pUi )oses I lilviltiolie(I earlier. A provision is also ineliudl to allow the FiBI to investigate for lin-ited peliodls of t ine ill situiions ini which ilonest ic violenee or rioigi liot violatibig Federal liiw is likely to resillt in a request by a Governior or legislatil re of a State inder i0 U.S.C. 331 for the me of Federal t 1l0)S. You will recoglize. I lisstlil. that tie staii(lar for opeiiig a full ilivestigatiol lroosed in tile gililelilles is til equi ivalelt of tihe stli(d-

irll for it street stop iili14 frisk ein'itcl I by t lie Supreie court t in 

7( / V. h;o. 'l'lere tie Supremle ('oirt wrote ithat ill jiistifying aSt 'let seller a ic flier " ''ilil- l"inst bp able to point to specific an1( articui-hbIdl' ftilts wI ivi, wien lltaken together wit iih rationl| iliferelnces from lhfse facts, reasoilil warrilTli tlie ilitrlisioln." In Iiis .lilm lilt ion of the holding of tie ("' oit.i ('hief Justice ill'i'en wl'ote: Vi- 0 * hold todwv that where the police offleer olbsrvrv(.4-uni.quzil endliet                     

> which hads hiin reaisoiably to (o'eiuide In IIlit of hi. experience tlhat criminal :o'livity in1Y IN, 11foot 111141 thaiit'l'.s()m with wm~i

h I k iWilluig mniay Iie flrhinel t1l1d ll'I'.I't'l luhiigeroul.. iuerep it tn l e ilrse of Iiivesl ilatinlg t ils; Ihlm vir ie ld iiti-                                                       

> fils hiliiself m, ip. iimand IIi l"lI ll 14 ike. reaioliuitil iuiries, and1 wh ere iithliing in
> 1i11, ilitill uii llge.s of thle rOle linrter serves tio (dslxl 'Am reoisuuialull feivr for him own Or olhers' safetyy, ie is entitled for tIhe porotectlion of hlinl it and ot hers In the area
> to miOliluc lit e'refully liitei

search of the outerelothiimg of silel iKr.oin ii nil           

> itlllnlit ito discover weaoliont which miilght I* used to 11asult him.

260 This standard was adopted causee it requires a strong showing of criminal conduct before a full investigation is authorized. I should point out that a change was made in this part of the guidelines since my testimony lwfore t.he Senate select committee. Originally the stand-art had required a showing of specific ani articulable facts giving reason to believe that the suibjects of the investigation are engaged in activities tlat involve or will involve force and violence and the vio-lation of Federal law. Tie change to the Ilirase "are or may be" brings the formulation of the standard more closely in line with the TerrI/ standard. The previous language of the guidelines proved to be too close to the arrest stantlard-lthat is, too restrictive as a standard for the opening of an investigation. 'Fli, (lose correspondence of the re-vised draft's standard with the Terry language gives the gidelines' formulation a foundation in ti Supreme Court's analysis of an anal-ogous constitutional prol)lem which, while it involves a different area of law enforcement, does l)rovide a definition for the standard which is to control Bureall activities. Tle proposed guidelines go on to requiire an additional consideration before a full investigation is opened. The guidelines state: The following factors must 1be considered in determining whether afull investigation should be Iindertaken: (1 ) Ti nmagnitude of lie threatened hlarm ;(2) The likelihood it will oi.cur: (3) The imme(liacy of the threat: and (4) Ti danger to privacy and free expression posed by a full 

in vest i nation. This listing of factors, w0ich ]as been added in the latest draft, gives the standard a dimension and explicitness it did not have in earlier drafts. For example, the balancing of the factors would re-quire olticials of the FBI and thme D)epartment of Justice to close any full investigation even if there is clear threat of a violation of IFed-eral law if the threatened harm is d1e minimis or unlikely or remote in time. Finally, the draft guidelines provide a procedure to be followed in emergency situations when action by the FBI to intervene to pre-vent the use of illegal force and violence may be required. This see-

tion of the l)rOpo'sel guidelines, I am glad to say, has )roven to be 

controversial, in part for fear tlat it seeks to allm the FBI to engage in activities of ti sort that were involved in COINTEIPRO. As Ihave said many times before, the activities that went under the name COINTEI 4 'W) as far as I am converne(d were either foolish or out-rageots, anti the preventive action section of the guidelines was not intended to legitimize such activities, nor in my view, wouh it do so. It was included in tle (raft, guilelinvs in the recognition that enmergency situations may arise in which hiunan life or the essential fenctioning of Government may be threatened. In such situations law enforcement officials would be expected to act to save life or protect, the functioning of Government. Indeed, law enforcement officials would be condeninIed if they did not act. Tio preventive action sec-tion of the guidelines was "designed to provide a procedure for the Attorney General to authorize and report to Congess such activities. It was (lesignetd to set ill) an orderly ani careful procedure to be fol-261 lowed in the case of emergency. It could be supplemented by further rules developed by the Attorney General. Under the proposed guide-lines the Attorney General could authorize a preventive action only when there is probable cause to believe that illegal force or violence will be used and that it threatens the life or the essential functioning of Government. Under the proposed guidelines the Attorney General could authorize preventive action only when it is necessary to minimize the danger, that is, when other techniques will not work. In the latest (iraft of the guidelines several specific prohibitions were included to make clear that new COINTELPRO are not to be sanctioned. Pro-hibited are the commission or instigation by the FBI of criminal acts; the dissemination of information for the purpose of holding an indi-vi(lual or group up to scorn, ridicule, or disgrace; the dissennation of information anonymously or under false identity; and the incitement of violence. It may be that Con ress will choose to prohibit any FBI efforts to intervene to prevent force or violence. But to do so carries with it arisk and a responsibility. The proposed guidelines are still in the process of revision. They are tentative. As the guidelines have been developed they have been shown to the chairman of this subcommittee. We must enunciate the differences among us about-the best, words to use and then seek to re-solve those differences. But. the miiain thrust of the gmi(lelines is surely the most important thing, their recognition of the ned for a program for destructionn of files in the interest of privacy, their requirenment of consent from the subject of background investigations, their reuire-nient of progressively higher standards and higher levels of review for more intrusive investigative techniques, their requirement that domestic security investigations be tied closely with the detection of crime, and their safeguards aptinst investigations of activities that are merely troublesome or unpopular. U:pon these main themes I hope we all agree. The IDepartment of .Just ice has undertaken other steps to meet some of the issues of concern to this subcomniittee. We have created an Office of Professional Responsibility to investigate allegations of iim-proper conduct. by I)epartment personnel and to review the investiga-tions (lone by inte'nal inspection units of agencies within the Depart-ment. We have been trying to work out a legislative proposal to bring national security wiretap)ping and microplhone surveillance under ajudicial warrant procedure. ()n June 2-1, 1975, 1 provided the Chair-man of the louse .Judiciarv Committee with statistics concerning the use of national seculrit v elec-tronic surveillance instituted without prior judicial approval. Before the Church committee I recounted the his-tory of national s,' rt v electronic surveillance since 1940. revealing avear Iv year count of the niimN'r of telephone and microplhone surveil-lances: 'he latest figures in this area show that. in 1975 a total of 122 telephone wiretaps and 24 microphone, devices were used to overhear conversations. We have tried to be cooperative with this and other committees of Congress about other aspects of the past history of the FBI and other agencies within the Department. We have tried to reveal as much as possible about the past of a sense of comity and a feeling that th past problems must be discussed in the process of creating new policy. But 262 we have tried also to recognize that the past is not always the best guide to the future. As we review recent history we may be so over-whelmed by it-and by our failure of memory about the social and political forces that shaped recent history-that we will read its les-sons more broadly than we ought to. If there was a lack of humility in the past about the perfection of our vision of what was proper, Ihope we cannot fail to recognize that the flaws in our vision about the past and the future today, may be of concern. It is a challenging and interesting time, and I hope together we can prepare ourselves wisely for the future. We cannot escape from the responsibility of looking at the problems we face today and are likely to face in the future. Whien I testified almost a year ago I stated to this committee-and I want to em phasize most strongly again today-that I have both a, personal and official concern for the issues which face us in this area. Those issues are close to the basic dutiess of the Attorney General to protect the society--its values, and the safety of its members. I am sure that I)irector lKelley will agree with me that we must clarify for tme present and for the future the kind of coum',e to be followed, meticulously and candidly. I l)e'lieve we have already madle consider-able progress in this regard. Together with Congress legislation can 

1) worked out and wise policyy achieved. 'I'hank+ you. Mr. 1'Amv.\Ws. ''lhank yo'l. very inuch. lMr. Attorney Gelleral. Before wve have qu(estiO(is we Nvill hear 'rolcn the Ilonorable Clarence 

I%(]ley, I)i rector of the FlI. Mr. ell ey. 

TESTIMONY OF HON. CLARENCE M. KELLEY, DIRECTOR, FEDERAL 

BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION, ACCOMPANIED BY JAMES B.ADAMS  

> '%[r.

1(r.u.Ey. 'lhlank Youl. I wish to thank the -onunittee for thme opplrtinity to contribute mN 

views for vour consideration oII legisltitive 1)01 ic S and guide lim(s 

fir tle FBI. 

M li(lrstanling is t hat viO 1prininary concern at this t ine is tie F11I's investigative responsi)ilities in thel domestic security anrea. 

We must consider first that these investigations (,eal with activities posing a threat to or(derly and legally ('onstit ted1 government-inter--(sts which tlme (ov'eriment has a special obligation to protect. As the Sulpren ('ort has observed: "* * * unless (,v, lernment safegmiards its own ca)aity to finlct iol and to l)reserve tile security v of its peol)e. society itself ,'01111 l),econw s) (isordered that all riglts 

a d liblerties \voinIl he endangered."? 

As a I)ractial m atter, the line )et wee (oniI'stic se itv work and investigations of ord ilary crilmime is oftel ,1flic lt to (les,:ribe. What I)egins as an imt,,lligemice illVesti tloll iiay well enld in arrest nd l 'r isecm it ion o)ft l]e subject. 

I want to e ni hasize that tthese investigations are not undertaken for tie )urpose of collecting informati on oi those who hol n11ll)Opular 

or coitrove-ial political views. 'lleir fous is onl vollluct, nnt i(eas--con(dict that involves or is likely to in volve a violation of Federal law. 263 But the important distinguishing characteristic of a successful domestic security case is prevention-they are undertaken primarily to thwart illegal activities, not to prosecute. As a consequence, intel-ligence work involves the gatheringy of information, not necessarily evidence. The purpose is to insure that the Government has enough information at its disposal to either frustrate or minimize the conse-quences of the intended harm. As the Supreme Court put it, "the emphasis of domestic intelligence gathering is on the prevention of unlawful activity or the enhancement of the Government's prepared-ness for sone possible future crisis or emergencyy" If we are to accomplish these objectives, the FBI must initiate the  

> iilv(sti(ration

in advance of the crine. The ability of Government to 

l! erelCit crinmiial acts tllreatelilg (bloestic security is dependent on  

> 0111'.ant

icil)ation of their occurrence. Ant icipat ion, in turn, is dependent 

ORn" advance il format ion--t'hat is intelligence. Moreover, the interests involve(l are too imnportaint for the Government to wait until the crillit' is imminent or an atteml)t is mnadle before it begins its inve.tiga-tive activity.    

> IAt sconsider,

for t lie nuomelt, tile problem of terrorism. Terrorist ac.ts are ilIrcl'asing globally: but more, to the p oint, ter-roris1t activity is growing ill tihe I united 'tates. 

'l'lre were 89 Ionllbings attrilutable to terrorist activity in 19715-

an auverag( of seven a nt li. That, was almost doll)le the number in 1971- (15) m(lll more t han three t imes tle numnbLr in 1973 (24). Eleven people were killed in terrorist acts in 1975-six of them in l)ombings. Seventy-six persons were injured in these, bombings. lrol)-

ertv (lannage i (iiiie(l to mre thii $2.7 million. Wio is respl)onsil)le for tlee lrmutal a1(1 (lest r&itive acts? 

ihe \ Nw World Liberation Front, a revolutionary groVuI) operating primarily in Califorilia, boasted of ('olliluittilig 19 bolilbings. A public ut ility coli)panl was its riiiary victinl. 'i A mled l'orce.s of ]iuert,) lican Liberation, or FATN. claimed 

18 lK)onl)illgs -Inl OIle JiSi,'jvCessfil attemiipt. Tle groulp'S favorite tar-gets were Government al(l o'p)lorate faucilit ies--especially banks-- in New York Cit-, Chicago, and Vashington, I).C. The FAILN took credit. for the bloodiest terrorist bon)iing last year, thet explosion that killed four people and injured 53 others on Janu-ary 2., 1975, lt Iralijuces Tavern in New York ('it y. Eraunces Tavern was wwre George Vasliu.gto said farewell to his troops in 1783. and it. is tile former homeu of the New York Stock Exchange. Tile FALN's (lest riictive (il)al)ilities were am)ly delnonstratedl on ()vtober 27, 1975, )y its claimed rlesonsilility for its coor(inated, si ultaneous attacks on Government mnid business buildings in NeV 

York, Chicago, and Washington, D.C. The Ixplosions marked the ob-:ervante,, of the first anmi'versary of the FALN's existence. 

( )t her (lest rmet ive. bollibilligs were ('liin!ed by the ('ontinental Wevo-lutionary Army, Red Guerilla Family, George Jackson Brigade, 

Emmliai o Zapat a Uinit and tie ( 1ican() 'ilwration Front. 

Tlhe Weatler I"litlergroulid clatiied three )onmbilgs and one attempt in 1975. One of the blasts was at the State I)epartment in Washington ;

an attempt fizzled at a departmentt of I)efenis facility in Oakland, Calif. 1'orim recently pul)lished issues of the Weather Underground's news-letter, "(Osawatomn ie," contained this threat regarding our Nation's 264 bicentenniall, July 4, 1976: "The rulers have set the time for the party; let us bring the fireworks." It, should be obvious from this appalling list of violence that we are not as successful as we would hope to be in dealing with such matters. 13ut there have been numerous cases where information gathered in domestic security investigations made it possible to thwart or mini-mize violence or to make prompt arrests, preventing further incidents of violence. Let me Eive you a graphic example. In August of 194, a bomb was (iscovere(l at. the United Nations. Two days after the occurrence, the Louisville FBI Office iceived in-formation that an attempt had been made to recruit a resident of Ken-tucky to participate in a crime to be committed at the I Tnited Nations. Information gathered during a prior domesticc security investigation made possible the identification of the individual making the at-tempted recruitment. As a result of continued investigation, this same individual was convicted and sentenced to serve 25 y ears. In addition to terrorist groups, we are also faced with individuals or organizations who are de(li(cated to the eventual violent overthrow of this Government. I know-there are those who feel that the Govern-ment ought not to concern itself or expend its investigative resources on the prevention of what might be a remote or highly unlikely occur-rence. Reasonable people can (liffer on the proper governmental re-sponse to these situations. Suppose an organization openly eSl)ouses revolutionary doctrine, that is to say, the use of force and" violence to overthrow the Govern-inent. But it is clear that they will not take immediate action, or if they (lid, that they would not he successful. In the meantime, they actively recruit new members, and attempt to strengthen their financial re-sources-and wait. for the proper moment. I recognize that advocacy alone is not a violation of Federal law, nor am I suggesting that we make it one. I am aware also of the special cost itutional problems that are presented by these cases. As Justice Powell put it, the investiga-tive duty of the"Executive may be stronger in such matters, but "so also is there greater jeopardy to constitutionally protected speech." It has always been m y philosophy as a lawNv enforcement officer that tle Governnent should strive at all times to meet its obligations for the naintenanve of security with the least possible intrusion on the affairs of its citizens. 

But. what would youi have us do about the presence of revolutionary organizations in our society? Should they be totally ignored on the premise that somehow Government will receive an a(lequate warning that violence is imnminent and will be able to take the nwessary meas-iires to prevent tile crime or at least. to minimize its consequences? 'Where is lite varningz to coip from. if not even the most preliminary and1 mininnal kind of inliry is permitted ?As tle head of tle principal Fe(leal law enforcement agency in the country. I feel that. I would be remiss in ny tiess if I were to ignore any group that advocates violence to accomlplish its objectives. Indeed, tle Congress hlas passed a nmnber of Federal statutes over which the 11ureau has investigative responsibilities, all of which are designed to secure the internal security of this Nation. It may well be that the Government's investigative response in such matters should be carefully measured and need not be as exhaustive or 265 intrusive as our investigations into completed crimes, particularly those of terrorist groups. Bait I submit it would be unrealistic to pre-vent the Government from obtaining information needed by the Execu-tive for sound judgments about the nature and extent of the threat posel at. any given time l)y such organizations. However secure we may feel today about the strength and dura-bility of this Nation-and we have every reason to feel that way-no one among us cain claim any special knowledge about what tomor-row-will bring. Legislation adopted in today's climate which severely limits the ability of Government to re-spond'effectively to such matters may well prove too restrictive to meet the needs of the future. I recognize that congressional concern in the area of domestic secu-ritv investigations has been prompted )y past mi. es or errors in judgment.. My own view is that there is no institutional mechanism that can guarantee integrity in Government. In the final analysis, we must place our trust in individuals. But I realize that more must be done-it is not enough to rely on self-restraint. We have in ide a commitment to review past FBT procedures and 

practices. Investigations in time. domestic security area have been re-duced significantly since July 1973.  

> -

As you are aware, the-FB1I is participating with other representa-tives of the department of Justice in the drafting of guidelines to govern various areas of FIll operations including domestic security investigations. These gui(lelines represent a positive resl)onse to tie need for a delineation of tihe Fl Is propelt role and will l)rovidoh foc control and review of the FBls ie riaim. 

h'Iose, portions of tie gilidelines dealingg with tie jurisdictional basis of doniestic security investigations are an al))rol)riate sul)ject for legislation. ()tier sections night lbe put into effect b~v regulation            

> or Execltive order. Views lay diter on the precise fortm) or content

of t ile guidlel iines. V~lalee t ie omt comle, tme repr'esent a coliscient iolls effort to deal with one of tile most (liflicllt'anl oml)lex areas of our in vest igat i ye responsibilities. Tim resolution of these natters will llemalnd extensive and tlioliglt-

fuil deliliral ion b%' the Conlgre&ss. In t iat ngard I pledge tile Comlleto Cooperation of tle; liu1re. and assure vo tliat we %Vill carry olit both tle letter and tle spirit of stich legislation as thle (Congre! s Imay enact. .Mlr. l,.)AmU)5. rl'nk yot very niuch, Mr. Kel ley. 

Mr. Kelley, (o you al)pirovP of he guidelines i 

> Mr.

1(EJA.EY. I would say that they are generally acceptal)le.. Tlro are still tingrs thlat we ied to work out. And we ire working elos, ly wit ti tho!e developingg t hem. I thiink we are goinuig to l , able to come 

u1p with somtl i ing tliat is miuit allv acceptalble. 

Mr. EInv m's. Mr. AttorneY 6ineral, d!o youi detect a difference in the views of the lIc I and tle I )epart iienlt of Justiwe oi onllestiC intel-ligence? 'r.. Kelle v states on page 2 tlat-                              

> Te im important dikingiimhlng ehnrnaterke of a.me,s.fi dome.tle seirit.r -eme I. prevention -they are nidertaken primarily to llwart illegal activity, not to pIroecute them. Isn't that ade.*'ription of l)reven1t iye action

I

Attorney (;eneral LENvr. 'l'ieu is a1 snse iii wlich all criminal law enforcement is intele(ld to be preventive. I i ink wh~at )irector Kelley 266 had in mind, althougli le must speak for himself, is that when one is concerned about groups which are engaged in terrorist activity, tile important, thing is to prevent the execution of the terrorist activity. groupss are attempting to take serious violent steps toward the over-throw of tie Governneunt. The problem is not to arrest. them after they have (lone that, but to try to prevent the action from taking pla'e. M1r. Emv.%ims. So the actual investigative techniques are (lesigeled to do lamlge to the organization so that they wont operate efle('tively? Attorney Geleral f&%-1. As I say, D)irector Kelley has to answer for 

llinsvlf. What hie has salid, is I al sure tl' chairman knows, is tlhat the explanation that is always given for tie difference between that kind of c'ri minal in vestigatiou wli ic]; is 11fiii'(l us (doiiestiC see,' itV invest igat ions alid tlose wliell are efied t', r5gil ize(l crime or or1t-

nar'y erinijual investigation. And it is always sai(I th tl there are two di, re, ,les. ()we is tie reventvive 2 let of seci ig to it that one know-; enough1 about. it. so that t hromiglm tlie detection of beginning criminal acts, I Would say, one may prevent. tile c'om)letion of many of tital. 

So I atn sure tait tlere is thiis (lifl'ren('e l)etwven us. Aid I am mt sure that it is prevejitive action in ite sen.-' t hat von say. lut it is alwavy.v 

Said that j revelitioll is impor)iil t it ll i dollestic s.ecrity iv . And also tle time element is mnlch long,.er. Now. 1)iretolr Kell\v" knows a rireat 1';1l i iore a1o1lit soe of these iiiatters I hian I dof. I thinki I lhat liiiliv of I lie riszanized crime, ivest ifa-

timis take a lo . lonr time. So that I aill 110t .inre that this is a rule that v(al jusit automatlhic allv ei, :"1 pliei. Anfl as filr as tlle pre e.ti ye act loll ks iomiipried. I thiink it .rfitlioi S,1illfnr. ;I courts hSail]. that t" f111 comp et ion or t l i m 4,i1 11Cll i of (v'i'( 'tih" ir wthe 

(OV 'll ilit orI te'r(,listl f ivit;es is soiilihiil ur whfei' therv is a shif'4.ii   

> lliefi tIrv

to previ'iit it. Bit to prf'vfmlit pIte.vvI!it onl nIviv takilla mui    

> fouui1S. il(Iiciiiiigthu'lp lii)i~riof

the things hy (ieti"till-r ciiil flit4. iolhlS IM I hI(' tec if'rt irov'eds. 

1ht I )i retor K:iif hs to spe.-iii for ri.flf 

Mr. Elwmm m)i. I think olu're ridht. 'Mr. AttoIi'ov ( ''l'i1. ill ';r statement that the provision i,' tlle ulmieiivns for priv,,il i ye a.111t , is-vr" nrn-i a\ ,eh.iij. ,i ii l I l:iI 1(!l o'f' oITlfr to have to exllin            

> (o tile voililmit tee ill it kind of ni211

~it 0u~ Ion w li t' Wnlirfiy(I hI'll -I aTmd this i; al-z,) aIllo ir wV fid I li i t I i,'kS will he :h'.i', 

to thwart nt9 1 iviV thaiittI lie ,FBI dos, not think shol( li: Iwuln, :wI wet orilaril v1nder AieriiU 12i Vw w.oi wold arrest t 1e 1)e,'.S. 

Mr. ErE.Mav~ I respomi( to that ?'Mr. E~wu).q. 'Yes. 'Mr. KEr.I EY. As I see law enfol'rfelent gener l1\. its ii:irv lim 1-

dat e is preventioll. If we ill fiaw en forve iiemt were to oilleern O11 or-

sel'es, solelv with an after-the-faft st illinti0, wp xN'vol(1 indleed ! e il a

Pr,'(1 I1 oils po':ition. W have. for ex:ii l'de. at tle- local levl ti ,litrorllii• Ol ! , streets wl-iiui is preveitioln 1v virtue of th1e le--ellOP of tile officer all(1 bY vi-t ile of thet imiilnut (hlliI'er to tilie rr 11,1:11 

i f lie ci mini its a ermne t hat lie Iii v lhe nprel'-ended. The' m is \\it i." 

Ih at provefi a& reit dea 1of le'enlt ioll. 

I havv ikened those who liveop po ] eil im's anid , l'tinols to over-

tihrow the Goverimeiit bY force andl violence its criminals. The Ut[-267 rorist is a criminal. We investigate these matters, and perhaps may end up1) with a cOnsJ ir'acy violation, in which case we will prosecute. We 

(ti not I)y any means let it he brought, if at all )ossible, to the climax, where the action is actually taken. It is nothing more than to try to l)rotect, as you would in a "bank robbery, wlen you learn through in-formation given you that a crime is going to beh perpetrated. Rather thaitn 1t it. go through, you stop it before it hiappens-a-prevention of what might be carnage within the bank-and results in a solu-tion of tile matter without that danger and that harm. M r. Fmvwms. Mr. Kelley, I only have a few more secon(ls here. her that definitionn what happened in August of 1970 would be al)I)rol)riate. Mr. Brennan, former Assistant Director at the FBI, testifie(l before Senator Church that in August 1970 the Bureau ordered     

> invest ifationi of 6,

( members of tihe SDS and 4,000 members of black si inhlent litions. Now. this rhetoric woulld make one uneasy. And vet under the for-inirila that Vel are su,.gesting. opening all of these fAles and following           

> Iliso pOl)l aroiil ar dand investigating them would be entirely appro-

priate, because they might some lay to an act of violence, tley light il reate l tie (overom ent. Mr. Km:.r:'. It think that we, .something of this t 'pe to arise today, anl if it. were felt that they le.%,nte(l, -as set out. iii tile guidelines, a

VVirV definite threat to the (overinent. to overthrow it by force and vilec. 1that, tlie ('Iillhasis woilol be 1)laced oi tie leadler. You lhve riany followers. An] it, is incoleivable that there would be every one iitlle gr n p whopk as c trl N%-11y i'v c mit te,1 to tIiis type. of thing as         

> -11e t l le(vlrs. We w%l1(1 in sc.l an ievvn

I. ave (lefiliitclv under the    

> Pi il( linvs

consuiltedl witl, ti le I larnt. of ,! justice anio arrived at soiulo, sort, of a wrwkable solil io)u to tI his type of an investigation. Mr. Thzwanmns. 'ilmank v-m. MIr. l h i'.xi :. 'Fhan--k wou, .[Mr. (hainn. 

Mr. Atto ilev (ener ll. I coingrat ilat(, veou oil vonr assuml)tion of 4'utt rol by tie I ) parl Incut owv t li Fl' il anlil the llnmn, er in which yOul 

are going Idlunt it. Anl I also appreciate the cooperation that you i av, given, this con un ittee, and your candor about the prior But, I think tie thlirg Iliat converms fin as I1 li-let to lie presentationn here tlodav is tl at the 1)u)1l wiit v whicl has littOn(l' revelat ions of prior inliseretioncs in the wholt intehligi'we, field has caused what appears to be mnybe an overreact ion. I liklie the philo5o oliv of criilolines. Ilhit I an real apprlehensive in 

Mn" o(\\n Mind as lo wletler we are not tiglitening this thing up too ItIllt'}l. ou otf curse, r e-rcunt, the ])epalment view. But isn't there ai st rng, view sollimevhir( within youir )e)artment that the guidelines your l)rcsOnt. are too t ight ?Attolnev Genral Lixi. I really (lon't think the matter has been :ut)r'wh!ed tiat wnay. There are some serious questions and we all n,,.,4,nize thien, and we are trying to work them out. And then there ai' lanii gra.,e q e tions. And s4)lieti ,ies tile languinge is put down one d;i' and lmks a certain way and then when one looks at it a few (ays later, and thinks of the coii'.,quen.es of the language. t here will be' adifference of view. And that is why this is ani area where it is difficult 268 to frame a statute, it is difficult to frame a guideline. I think the most important point that I would keep pressing is that tile domestic secu-rity investigations have to have a nexus with the detection of crime, except for those special assignments by which the Bureau has been tasked in connection with such matt-rs, for example, as the employ-inent, suitability investigations, and things of that kind where it is really doing things for other intelligence agencies. Now, once one accepts that, if one does, then the question of how close the relationship to the detection of crime has to be, and how to state it anti not make it too strict and not too loose, is a -very serious problem. And as my testimony reported, since the prior draft in one respect we have loosened them and1 in one respect we have tightened it. And this process really has to go on. And it is a matter of considerable discus-sion. And I lhave to say, it is not a (sion of I)irector Kelley and me disagreeing o1 people within the I)eparltent disagreeing-'it might 

be a question of my disagreeing with myself from one day to the next. It. is a very difficult and very serious problem. And I think we hav'e to first try to agree on the spirit and direction of %v iat we are trying to 

dll. 1nl tleu find the words. Mr. BUITLER. I appreciate that. And I woilld like, along those lines--of course, v-(oi are apprehensive about locking these things. in concrete ill leg-islation. I amt conve rued, for my own understanding, as to exact lv what. wotld you view as the legal effect of guidelines in ternis of-do you ti nk it has any problem for admissibility if there is aviolation of the guidelines? 

)o wo have any problems of civil liability in connection with tle 

giiidelines? I low mulvch flexibilitv is a vailal t to change tle guidelines from t iilie to t .tne? Whatl woilll le tlie procedure to (4) olt ?

Attorney (eneral l%:vi. It. (lehlJIlS oil low the guidelines 1nltimlately get, put into pl]ae. I f tley are ill into Ipla'e partly by statute-

Mr. Ilurl:i. i al) referring to not iv statute. Attorney Gelneral I. Sonle will b;e b~v executive order and some will be by departniental guidelines. -And iere I should think tint it would airect the eaIalli ei leIWs$ of thu, action, tl, Ib.lief that the action was testified. And, therefore, it 1mmdollbtedlly would have solme rela-tionKhip. But one would have to see it in the particular contextt of a ca.m-on liability. Mr. ltrI.r. How almut the amnisilbility problem? Attorney general l L:vi. I think in that case they would bx. Mr. l"i'.Fic. Mr. Attorney General. let mc be sur I understand what wold happen if we had a hypothetical. I am interested in this publication which says: The rulers have set the time for the party; let us bring the fireworks. Suppose we had no history of prior Iisconllet of a roup of people 

who got together and advanced that philosophy, an ( that is all we heard. It night he a gri p of flower girls or something. And vet that was called to the attention of the J)eprtnient. Would on investigation be opened. or could it be opened under your guidelines, on the basis of that. in advance ?

Attorney General ,:vi. I should think that a preliminary investiga-tion whicl would involve seeing to what extent the Burvau knows who 269 these people are, or the newspapers know who these people are, and what generally is known about them, would be all appropriate step. I think one has to move from that kind of consideration of what you know about them to a judgment as to how serious tlis is. And the guidelines this time have tried to set forth the kind of considerations one would have in mind. We all know that inflammatory language Is sometimes used where the only threat really is the hauigiage, and otilier times where it is really something niiore. And I really (lout see how one can ailswer stich a question automatically without lookiiig to see who signed it and who knows about it. Mr. BUTLER. Mr. Kelley, do you feel inhibited under thosA cir-cumstances by the guidelines? If this came to your attention do you think the guidelines as proposed would inhibit the Fill iin an appro-priate matter? Mr. K.LLY. I think we couhl properly under the guidelines pre4 It 

this to the )epartment and have a resolution of it. I aml con1fidenlt that it, as Mr. Levi has said, would he necessary-I would say that it would be mandatory-to get a little more, L)erhal)s, tlhan just a state-ment before we engage in any preliminary. But. ini die ab.elce of an'-thing more than ulst this, witliout knowing who tiey are, I woildi dolibt very much that we would (10 anythiilg at all. This is perhaps rhetoric, anti riwioric is use( frequlntly bw soille of these groups. But if tilere is anything further, we c-an together, I ani sure, arrive at a conclusion about whether a lrel iminary iiglht well be needed. 

Mr. BUTLER. I guess my question basically is. you (lo't. feel like your ability to act in trcir(uinstaiwes similar or slightly mo01 aggravate, lthan this is inlibit!ld by thle I)i)PS(ti gllitlelilies? Mr. Krti.i.m I an comfortable Ider this. Mr. IIUTLR. My time has exl)irCd. Mr. EDwAmm. Mr. Badillo. Mr. BADt, ,. 'rhanik voi, Mr. ( 'luinan. Mr. Attorney General, you sly tlt the glihlines are still in tlp prx'ess of l)reparation. W hat is your present inutentioll is to wiumle 

these guidelines that Ioi have gi'en us totdav would Ib. plt nto e|}er' '. 

Attorney General L.:\'. Wel, I don't know whien tie giii(leliiies will 

be finished. The.' are, I think, in influence somewhat il effect nov, that is to say, tile very fact of the discm.ssion) and tie attenI)t to woimk them out is sha ripenedl the direction of the I )epattiiuiit andi of t le 

Bureau. ]lilt I (lont thiink tiey should be plt. into effect as a fornlaiu matter until the' are further conp)letedl, beCalsle. th er'e are ilntr-relationshi!ps between areas wliere gindelines are still being worked on and haven t come to this point of coiplt' ion, wii,.li isn't, a final completion. Now, 1 ant s.orry that I (an't give a definite -late. I have learned Iy 

experience tiat tie dates I give Ot t til t1rn out to Io' incorrect. Mr. WoIulA . Vouild you agree to give ti le membes'r of tlhis sutlK'oill-inittee at least 2 weeks io ice Ix'fore vonl lave tile intent to put the final guitleliutes ill effect so t hat we 11v review what t1, fill:l guideline' art 

going to be prior to the tinue thai they will lw'ouae ( .4.tive (

Attorney (General S.:vr. Mo far as I amit concerned. I woilld he glad to give the nIiilers of this coiiuliitte(e tit liuc0.h t imne to review ttllmi. Mr. lhun)m.o. 'l'lanik you very Inuclh.      

> N26129 77-... -1,1

270 I have to iask you about tile gilidelines that lave to (10 with investiga-tions by tile White I louse. 

As I understand it, they limit tile investigations to be initiated by the White house on1y to those circunstances where the White [ouse is sivekitig to consider someone for a Presidential a pointmeint or for 

access to ,hissifd(i iiiforillt ion ill ti ,service of the Wllite ] louse or the 

U.S. Seret Service. Ili other worls, having to ilo with eljoylnelnt or :14''ess tO 1n fornation. Is that correct .

Attorney (;eneral T ha:vi. 'l'lmt is what. that particular guideline is 

III tOtt.    

> M.rir llii,. "'llis gilid~el ine.

Now, if tlhit is i' eas.5e, then wliv I uvoll litide tiilat ili o ,der to 

iiiiilate thile investigation , talit Vili xlimi'l get, lie 'Oli.ecn lt of t(lit ili-liviiiial to IwolllOilitedl rllil r tliaii iierely ile stateiiient by ille 

Wliite I hltist (will pIove that they initendt to ajsjomilit Smiief ite ? Bevlihe 

it lit as listplplil il iihe alst t :06t it(lie Attm'ili'. ( eerui| iaid I Ie FB Il (itd 

niit inieild to viollit. tlie law, blit thinl soliilll'h'ly ill Ite Wilile I oi.e 

walilts to iliVe.tigit(. l l',ito'lll'. it teli le, thi.ion fellow, alli hev  

> s..

I hat t it'!' wulillt If) i CIm i litll li li.tleull, .V1IIl t lilt( I li'v liltve lilt ililt iil >il ()f ai li IgIil ll li fill(t 1 110l1il11lI. (lil\ iit,'VVI ( !il!,               

> .\fill tlieni Illii fi ll ili\'-A igillli ()f Ili. llli iii 11 ri-iill vwillilil

his cmileliit. '%fill hiill \%.)Ii gottnl ill tollci hili hiilllie wmoiilul hav 14)1d \'oll thinlt lii( 111ill )i iilli lli ()f accept~lting filli ipillililllilll w ith Owll 

Whlie I llmile. WV itv v'ili'l .\'()ii l-m'-\illli i le Illati.(, c iln flf tlit( inii ilillil l 4 lli( ill-

v'iv . iga l4 i iiill e '4'flire'l ?Att .11y.( v 'iii I t:vi. 'l'liat is tlie silent il o)f t ie g1l ibleile. 

NI!i. lI.~ili~. hutIlii it lw;i't ,av that. ir. it .il., it hll ilev l ll-

u ivitiiul l lilli 't ii.- 4'fl li, I t15(111 Juige toil " fl e p iillilit. itf'iii I. I lhiilil 'w ill fill f4'tl 11111411 t'ti her atiolit it if p ii did illiit. 

Ali4rliiev (ellt'ril lvv:vi. 1114' intelinti4l is to) have liO' cli-t'il (of ilthe 

iiiilivilliil. 'l'iw Iliv i'' v Avt reqliile. t1111 ill i ni yi'i evullt --

Mr. 1.ici;.j. lilt tlhat is mllY" if Ill, I()li'Sni kllw. f lit' f,'llw il-ii-ii 

lalw thiat 1w is itt'ilig ili.vestigiitefi. Aidi w' hlVI' I l '\l. iiitltl' iof tile 1,'l'h-v i,f lr I ll l~ '

Altiil,\" (v iil : vi If till iileiiies tietit ('er it 51peiiilly 

%'(ll tl', iakiing it 'lod ointil:. h iilse llie llrfese of IOlie gitilelinles 

Mr. lk.\iii.t. yhinii V4). I \%(tiliil l1'r'cil te it if that w4iiili be liiudv 

> SJ)'(ifit'.

Nmv, witli l'e,'lqx-0 tt vwi"iiri*o i" 'ii4Iflii(1,. ti li 111(, (ii lli.' lanllilg      

> dil! $lielfiliit olli of1-f

l it' it ,fl ilifr;wi uim). I ccrtailnlv weleoi ll te 

Pilidhfiiles that i r(vifde lint iiforillit ifl)i slilill ,h i':'i rv('fi witlill 90) ivs af e Iwili, 'el'y 'civ'l if it is ilisli 'it(el I ilifotiltu t illi04l it 4l,)1,s 

licli allege 'wr'olii!).liii. iit \'ililt stir's lilt' is lit t l i iil i it I illl  

> 11

, silll-v that, it i all ii't pi is ies very iliii ,h 1 vl t'lli. it  ,ay, W1I4-11 lihil44tVl41 iiriimrlion alleging wrongdning or inlmoral vi'one ,It not                

> I iiilig to avih'atimli 4f liiw biy IlfNtfed (or alilmoi nto4i fihilli or vIlli tin-
> )loy4'es is rfwflvfd'ti

' lbiyh FBIT, the FBI shnll destroy it withinl 90 diy.s. 

'I'll lIrlrbdt'lh is liat lmlost iiiiioral elmidluct ten is to 1 iillegll. tof). Avnid that fl'lo i practical point of view. if yiou say not aimiounting to a271 violation of law, it really means that you are not going to destroy it. To use this siml.e example, let's say that Congressmana x

smokes pot. And that is illegal just about every place. So that under this guideline you would not ie required to destroyy it. And yet it would be, unsolicited information withI reference to everything else. Attorney General LItvr. Again, T don't know whether there should Ib a specification of the kind that is on page 3 is to4 tl(s matters. which are not regarded as sufficiently serious. And I think this is on,(1 hi ig we ougit to consile r. 

Mr. l lm. ,. I think there sloili I w a slevifi,'ation. because wil ci we get c'ilargi's against polple ia llta- to do withI minor matters. of tlet type I mentioned, or lhavin" to (10 With 11xt ran1irital affair's 01 something like thlat, for whlilii in favt, altlotiglh it is illegal in most jiuirisdict ions, there Iaven't heeu prosecutions in decades, if you go by' 

tle wording of tle guideline, the FIl would not e-I think there sliould Iw, sotile category---pelrllps viiliationl of I li, lIIItw whic.hi would 

INi t feloiiy, (," s4114 inili,'atioii of tlh serioiisiess of the crinte. attorney y ( ;('lier':il IIxVi. Tflint uiany well Ie. Mr. 1ItL:)Jo. With respect. to domestic sevitrity investigate iotl. Ibsel (11 1lie lisis of th( in vest igat im. I erwiinlv u1hl.'rstanli t(h se0tio1 I lilIt lilt.s I0 (1o viIi ovdort wrowhing tie, (j oVeelnllelt of tl 

I "nlitedl States. 

lNt then ilienl y(u get into tile question of inlmiring for tli Iur-

Isws of influencinig I .S. Goveruinint jol i'ies or detcisimits tie funi' tioin,,., of the ( oviiili lt n"th, fini: iollillr of t1e State. tliet IOle  

> tlli'st

Ion 4o'oiii&s 11l) of wilat is t he i ,nt. 

l,'1,01 ,VNIlIIl)I. jiist 2 weeks .. o Ile , ,:,1, :I g 'cro-i (if d u',, alolii'. fl4 liii i trli't, wi114 inx.' :ui i t(i fivel 01 ulwe lier il Mi rv Indm been u- e

I h y wer, n t r'Vil!_ to inlsii'et lint I lie I,'ol,,n'l ( i it1 ' en it -,vow ild (',I[-

# Iili{, fl. (tn'1 i ,.. 1 hI : i vi't ion pl p r rv Ill. Now. I t - S-41 ill thet. olli'e. .\ nd| 

tl {,,,' (1hlntitelv I~li -'C(I tihe fllwtitttioing of tflint ageitey. k\1l(l   

> !' w,

le i. 4,,i til. (lf t ,ey wre t *iig to do was to t t lie Nl\ %. ,td,',' I,, ,i,,lillim-v . Iiy o\ dl, Iie -. II Ij,,'t to invest igiit iol. 

I .-I t \,4 t'I iwI IIv IIt. si r?  

> .\lonu'v

( eniril IdA!. It is not my intent. .\till I think th iOw 

I1,'11 is tha:t tihi.; illf ,,.,urvx, ,'vil.... as I linher-t1av ,i it, frmll bisi,. statltvs lp:ls.,,,, IY the. (Coir ,'ess Iliandnatinlr tl. ,' I ,lI 11' Il)epartmnit to we  

> .tet,

i niniakiig st'ht aet ivities cnies. I t think tile language act ally Mr. !1hn).io. I)vo wl think that the (',,v .,gs intelld(C lit 'voil 

At t(wii'ie (v'v Il 1I ,v1. I dolI't k n4w-- of colr se, tI is doesI't Sla k

.MIr. 1l.mwti,.o. I iin saying, the words "the functioning of the Gov- 

> 1,, 1t11111cl

t i fitli i,,0 11iw of til e 'I-IIl enll jt of ai State," aiItd hiter-

ferinlr wit Iht liz,o ,lvj'iIh' that i,; into'f-l-rilivt. all! impmiring. Whlivnve on y011 had a deinonst ration- in otl4'r words, the basic pro,-

lvI is w bet Iie' i'li wo 'hvv vrii11:11 i IvIi 't 14) m-1'i't h ow ft(i ( ;ovel'I iieit. 

or" whevt ie' tI he" ji ist \w-:111t to ej uIo, til, llij'ies of tle (m entent. 

anid fit,,y witlit to call uttentim)1 ti) it. The television lople will go 272 down and dramatize it for us. It is the technique of sitting in, it is not for the purpose of overthrowing the Government, but merely to call attention so that you can get sonie publicity so that perhaps the bureau-crat will take action under the program. Attorney General Lixi. May I say as an ex-university president that I am somewhat familiar with'the te-chnique. But this describes the uls 

of information or violence and the violation of Fehirnd law. Mr. BA-DILiO. That can happen, too, sir. Becau.:, in the process of sitting-in they have refused to budge, and it may cause violence, if it policeman says get up1 and they won t get up, there may be a fight. Aind this happens all tile time. Attorney Genieral Li:vt. I will walk down the path a way with you, bit not all the way. 

.I'. BADILIA). I low far will you go? Attorney General Lv'I. I (1o not think that the gool intentions of those who engage in force or violeiice is always stiflicie'nt to say that it really wasn't force or violence, and1l that the actions (lid not constitilto 

a eolisiderable jeollfldy. 

,MIt. AIK~mIJiA. I didn't say that it was always force and violence. all I said tlt, it was not a que, stion of threatening the domstic security of the ('utnitniv. Under this threat of force anl violence, nolxOlv ehlf-

lel~ges tlhat, it is a violatiol of haw. All I atil saying is t hat that is lnot 

a threat to tlie donmest ii ,-,ilu'nt y of oilr Nation. .Attorney (len'ral Wi. 1Vell. it (-ali he. And ag in I lon't know how 

Olilv woiil(i liaft a guideline which talks aiout iniii sit-iis and mai11jor sit-ils ahi(l so on.     

> Mr. HA, ltltA'). Iam

afraid iny ithu is till. But I want to get hack to ile question, tile word "impairint." and ill(- quiestioni blliiid thie illiilillii,     

> Mr. EDAiMw .Ms.Ar.

lh-Mdl. N r. IDiw). Tlnhnk iou, M!r. ('haiinan. I wonder if, kttorneyN (eia IAVi. youl could tell n1P Iasically willt 

vOui hlave siidi alg e oof yollr testmiliony that you re oiize. imd I

ilniiik it is iirmll to do, I lilt tihe Attorney (ielueIral is i ,slOjisii iflr      

> tlip activity of the FIlt. Mir.

Kelley, (to oII lhilv(' iliv pi'obliin with ltlat lit all ?I)o .otl iwogllize tllit your Sui vl'isol, your illiiledinte Sily l''isor 

fili! . isl)lie .A tolmlie\" ( etueilal of tle 1I niied States? 

,ir. KEiLEY.. ! (.til1 (erilil' SJ(V syllt I recognize that. Anlld I Cll 

also s, iinetiiniv itv tln I hi lve lind a very plealit rdlatioisliil withI 

Mr. Levi. Anud I liaive not at any tilnle coie to tlie j)Oilit of being iie-linis or arguiuieintive, hopefully to tn iintoleratle ilillOUiit. We fret 

along verT well. Mr. li)oll. I ought to give lie Attorney General eqial time. 

## Is til tl fiiir assesslinenit of thue Ilatiohshilp, .Mr. it.torney (lelri' I ?

.. Attorney (' veli'iil LEVi. I tliink it hns hwei a very goxlx rcilati isiilp. But 1 (10 w'it to say flint I think it is a very (langerois idea-it is like t1in gili(leliils-- to siayv that tine Attorney (senera is rinli ing the F' II. 

lihe Fil1 ha4 to live Conside'iable alitonoity. Aliil tile l)iretor's resinomisiilitv i" a ver' great olle. 

So, tlhat the Attorie" (Geliral hiniq tlie responsibility. It is all over-

sight respoisibnilitv of i general natllre. And, of ,ouilrse, what tle gilidel ilies atteiiplt to d1o is to speify those things which llaritiillarly 273 .have to be brought to his attention, or particularly have to have his approval. But if the Attorney General were to say that he was run-ning the FBI and everything that was going on in it, I don't know what -else that Attorney General would be able to do. Mr. DoDD. I didn't mean to state that I thought. the Attorney General was running the Fill. But certainly in the final analysis the Attorney General would have to accept the responsiilitv--correct me if I am wrong-the responsibility ora violation of law or a problem that arose 

Is a result of the violations of some of the proeedlires of the guidelines 

that lad been set otut by the Attorney General. Is that a correct, interpretation? Attorney General IL:vr The Attorney General accepts the respon-sillilitv for the delegation or for the jurisdiction of tin, director , and has to exercise his own responsibility and concern about what goes on. lut there is a distance between the responsibility of the )irector audl tle responsibility of tlie Attoi'ney General. 

Mr. )oim. But in the final analysis you are responsible, is that .cor It or not correct? Attorney General Lr.vi. T am responsible for sone things, hut T am not resl xnsible for others. There are going to he misdeed(is in any large -organization. There are going to be violations of rules in any large organization. And there are going to be matters of julgment. And I

think it. would be quite wrong, if not for myself at least for my succes-sors, to say that. the Attorney General can *he responsible for all those acts. l ut I woild insist that I am not responsible either. M1r. T)oin. Wlhat I am tryingto get at is that I detect a clar disagree-meucnt in your two statements tolay over the kind of activity wherein the Fill wOid bvgin to conduct an'investigation. I van appreciate where Mr. Kelley is coming from on this. I refer to page 7, for instance, of your statement. Mr. Kelley, getting down to the lu1st sentence of the last paragraph where you say: "Where is the warning to come from;, if not even the most, pre-liminarv and minimal kind of inquiry. is permitted"? 

And then I see on page II of your statement. 'Mr. attorneyy General: "'Wle purpose of investigation must. be the detection of unlawful conduct and not. merely the monitoring of disfavored or troublesome act ivities, and surely not upon popular views." 

T detect there a clear distinction between your views as to the role 

-of the FBI. Mr. Edwards, the chairman. brought this out, in his initial question-ing. And I wasn't really convinced blv your response that there is a complete un'lerstanding between the Attorney General and the T)irec-tor of the. FBi as to when in fact an investigation should be initiated. I frankly have a tendency to agree with you. Mr. Attorney General, lmsed on your statement. but I am concened, baRed on your last state-mnent wlhen you say. that. there is a larger distance than I thought ex-isted! between the Attornev general'ss office an(i the Director of the FBI 

is to exactly what. role tle FBl should take into the investigation of activities of people who may be considered subvemsive. Attorney General Lvi. There are several answers. ()n -nswer is that in dealinrr with the fill investigations, the guide-lines are ('onstru.etd go tiat the Akttornev General has to know about them, and the Attorney General can order that they be discontinued. 274 So, that their is that kind of control. I don't want the Attorney Gen-eral put in a position where he is covered by so much information and detail that he will be ineffective. And I keep making that point. Second, I prefer my language, and the Director no doubt prefers his. Tim fact of tho itatter is that when a specific question is raised us to whether a preliminary investigation could be opened, I said that Ithought there could be some kind of a preliminary investigation, and lte Director, if I understood him correctly, said ho didn't think ('nogt 111ad he~n shown to have one. So, that if 'ou, take those answers, the D)irector is being more care-

fill Itt this t;Ilttent titan I am. And I think these are natters that would show how difficult it is, when one has a hy)otletical case, and 

wl('ll one has to find ouit. more about it. and on, to decide what the S,,eis (ht (flit ion is going to he. 

But tlhat is a .ase where tlhe director , its I uttde stood him, is being Illon'e call iJolts (hltl I aill. 

Mr. I)on). Mr. Kelley, ldid volt uave a land at all in (Irafting these (Ira ft. gtlil ite s (ttlrilu the di'afting process, were Aot involved, vere Yw~I invited ill top)i)a't i'il.te lt(l d Iialke revoli tli'ti(hlt io s. .I-. K-.u.y. Wo lhi'e a representative who is working with the ,'(itttliittee dIrawing tllose tle). And frol tinle to t ujie I get reports anld kow what the thrmst of the guidelines is, yes, 

M r. )m). )o y)oi feel thatt lie guidelines are too restrictive. based 

mt t h(. Att olie ie4 IIerI I s last slate('ient, or ill fact, thev are too loose ?

Mrr. l(,:i.ixv. I (o't think vou can categyorize t hem that broadly. 

l'here is still sotm ,'osite(rat jott of these various guidelines. But I,lo,'t t think itt this point tlat we can say t hat they are too restrictive. We tti eci okthint kt 

Mr. I)ouu. I t link ilyt iune is up. 'l'lTank vou. NI r. ( 11a inn. .I I. F')hv.AICiP. A sCget ~tbnC'k to the )reventtive action which I think \ i uJ (.111 5' it )r i5.ttssiol thta almost aiy ot ler irt of tle gui lines. Mr. Kelley, Vo miuted out tlat preveltive action is taken by a

i icetllia (III tItt n. In I wolli agree tliat a )oliceltlan oi patrol 

has Iltch to (to witl l Iv and, order itt lit, cotmullnitv. I ,h1l't kitow of av local or State law that w lth(l flieuise or aiithor-ize a 1)l1ietlila i0 atr l to look at a sutsliviotus elmracter c(lning ,lowmi the sl'rect alnd tel tlhe mll to g) in his llouse iettli, lie thinks that tliis itim looks like llemiiighit he It (riiilal. Tha1 t is l('relltiVO alt lin t it d1iCititta woudlili't I, ailt lOrizl to (ho. 

NM r. h :Li,.i;r. I iliti't k n1w of all N 'rt-s tricti is iisofitr as lhis calm-lilit N to iitk,, it ltl ,t Soie prelt itiitli'v, i ,,lntiries if outl' to follow 

lhimi for it wilei. mr () (leterilitle. .Is It testtIlt of his su5ii~cimit Ibout the 

situation. t4))l ,ili ul, action. 'I'lere ar' 1,111 tlhings whill zak,, a       

> 101'~s01 fr ti IItI) tilmi SI 51h1iito NI

h11 otliver. Andt~ it-, it utmi1ter of  

> fact.

lit, w\ milil Ibe s i, iw it rv'ji., if le, (li iilt r'si),htil to o-,tie extent, ill (it her lI, lz withIt lhiwt we itll title in Oitt gtilhlii,,s a pr'limi-naty'. I I,, is tit goingo to) stop I l1v i1a11. lprobmlii. Iut l, is goitgZ to :at. 

Icvi-st itnket a few l) ltinYary inlttiries. NIMr. Ew.%iis. Ycs, t hat is aII taken cart, of in tie ordi .r criuninal 

lItw kind 1 ! re ,('clent in t lie 'om n on law .Yo mi ie iot. actttally writing it. out like you are doing in these guidelines. 275 For instance, let's take a specific example. W,10e have an unpopular war, and 100,000 young Iople anti middle-aged people announce that they arc coming to Washington to demonstrate. It is very clear that there will he some violence, because if you get 100,000 l)eople there is always something that IIiIpllns, unfort unat ely. And the demonstration threatens the essential function of the (6overnmiient, because people night not Iw alble to get to work. 

'Fell me what kind of )reventive action the F BI wold lx' licensed to indertlake inder the guideline vid1 tH),0 ) people coming to Wash-

ilgton to dellionst'rate very entilllltsitically aIgaiinst f1i111il)Ol)llar war.  

> Mjr.

K:mIEi. Under te prevailing lissieiliillatio ll viles. stich infor- 

> Iilition

w01l141 ill fill problflilit l to adlvise tie local [iut lorit its that there is it report that has been 'bI'ought to us, and1! tei col trol of what act ion is to I' taken vested enti'l-v ill thelli, tIl 1o 1ctit)0 oil 0111' )ut, 

it, being just a I)re°tpoleral(c of" Ip(olph which in itself iiigl't iw a

llroblev,. lht, we dlo notify t ll local pl'Olle when inforntiat ion of tlint t? 'l comei(s to 11s. Bit we ( 'lot. t'oilidli't any iiivest igat ion. 

Mr. ,1,1MVI1,S. I)idaI't solmeotie from tie !,'!I test ify t.lit, if tie 

Pirl),lp 1 lint. I referred to niglht Iw 1ari el ifg il tit direction of ti White I loust, .oiuwonec inl ,le Fil miglht. change tile sign 01' Oslietiing 

) 1t It hey wolihi go in fittot Ier (irect ion is t lint co-rect"? 

Mr. K :u.i~:Y. Such a tling was bile at. one tiniv, I ti liik, yes. 

.N I. 1aIM-M)MS. So thlit woIll he 2I typical IJ)IeeI It ive Ia('l iOl. 

Mir. KELEY. T'I'lit could be, a irevtentivv. And I think t lit. is wvilIat it wits at t lat t iimt,. 

Mr. ll"EW.mlus. Mr. At toliey (e.ner al1. ('111 'ol give Its sonle idea of w I! ut kinl i f it 'i(tiviies tliis l-It'it i'e act 11)1 l l l e1 (hIs iwn l to cmI-     

> jul1 o)1 what it would

thwarllt ?

Attmwiey (I'aiclen r la I'. For exa11v de, wh il )' ai i a'e a girol of   

> aiiaiu'rl 4)1t,

sidh, of an Iuip() ulair war eXir'lisilg th(ir c4)1stitti- 

> uiInal

rigiiis, wit nessintg their viws. ji aid you lii\e avo lit'm greoitu also  

> an:

r'liigIz. id 1lhey, N r on t he otlir side (;f 11his, and Il hey ilnr illso, wit- 

> i's-ili

m1111(i eX4I'iSiug their rights, anl tlhey have plaInned their line   

> of iai'lii

so thlat tlNev are likely to clwslh ald thier( is likely) to Ie it 

grent, deal of violenlct. lld bhoodslit'd. it "eenIs to) 111c thlat it might he  

> app,roiri:ate

to se' to it tillit. one goes down )net' street atlliI te otlhe tr g,' i)t ' l tW Ii 1114 Ol i'r1 st i('('t. 'lilit \voult I , )lx'014 exaii il)1'. 

Mr,'. Nivn\u ti. 11t iiit is it 1)0liveialis jobi, is it lot, andt not tie FBi s jiob ?

At laiivv (Genvucrai Il N . 'l'h ic'eis ai1s() tlt- l-fi '(l, l of tile 1vd(l, ral ilri-lirtinln. Anl tlhi, us'11,4's tlizt there is Federal jilrisdiction. 

AIitl er cxi2l11), w( ai I1 we Are it is k a\ 'vn. for s mile str'llmiie 'el-s4 I. l vIt ii (l iglt'S ll i 01' Ii , 'nator is II tillget of lil a-sls. ilat ioll 

hIl)t. aId it is 114,t known pr'cisely wh'!o is involved inl it. Steps n1.ilit 

it i,, tkle to 1pr)tect aii iiivkc ii ,re llien It reaiclmi i ,g1, tit ( 'ongrsinanl      

> m' S('illit mI'. )r

I suipi)4st' f ht i re Olle knows t hat there, are problemm 

lIim i'r'o iri,. act ivities wvl'] i i iglit involve the locution of lolnlis 

inl irtiiilar l)Ia(4,s. oiv ama iglit try til hougl ole men ns 01- 1nothr to 

M'. lI i s. 4o) ake flint iopte.ative? 

Atit ml'V ( ;,elae'i 1. 1Avl. To ia ke the bollis inoperative if one ki,ows wIh' re t hiey' au' .276 Mr. EDWARDS. We are talking about criminal activity. I am won-dering where you have to have the guidelines, because what you and Mr. Kelley have described don't need any guidelines. Attorney General LEVT. The section on preventive action, much argued alout, was put ill for the reason that with the background of the COINTELPRO, the committee wanted to make it clear that that kind of activity was not to be engaged in in the future. But you can't just write a provision that says no preventive acion will ever be taken. I think that is quite unworkable from any human organization. There are incipient and actual duties on the part of all of us to engage in preventive action at various times. So, the decision was made-and maybe it was the wrong one--to try to specify that narow area. And it is very narrow. And it requires not only the'approval of the Attorney General, but it requires a report to Congress. And to call it dirty tricks is really unfair when one has all the statements about the things that can't be done. Now, it may be that the best remedy is just to remove it. And if it is removed from the guidelines--and we have thought about that-then one has to think about what are the implications of that and what is it. saying about the prior COINTELPRO activities which we want to say should not be resumed. 'his is the problem of the drafting. really. And as I say, there are alternatives. One can just take it out, knowing that reasonable people will agree that at times preventive action is necessary. That, of course, would take out also the reporting to Congress and the approval of the Attorney General. 86, that is not an easy problem. And I assure you it is one which the committee has worried about enormously, and I have worried about enormously. fr. EDW.%nDS. If you are going to keep that provision in there you are going to have to come up with a lot, better example of when it mi.lut be used. because the examples that have been thrown around in this testinmony and in previous testimony, such as the marchers, have been adequately taken care of by local and State and Federal law. Mr. Butler? Mr. B'rT,F. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. T am interested in tie way in which the drafts have developed. Have you got a d,'velopment- loes your record indicate the manner in which proposals have been circularized, and your comments that You have received internally, and what has come out of-are we in draft No. 1. or where are we? Would your file reveal that? Attorney General L~vi. By your leave, I will ask the chairwoman to reply. I

Ms. T,.woM. Mr. Butler. in domestic security it. happens to be draft 24 at the moment. The others have various numbers T don't have with me. But what has been done is. the committee itself will fi st seek a briefing on what is existing policy, and all documentation on what is existing policy, and then discuss among itself what changes in existiH, policy oucht to be made, what. new areas ought to be ad-dressed that have never been addressed by existing policy statements. 

1w existing docnmnents. and then begin drafting, circularize the draft to tlose b)othj within the division of the department, or within the 277 Bureau who have the specific operating experience, get comments back, and work out new drafts, float new drafts, and when we think we have something, send it to the Attorney General, and then start over again when we hear back from the Attorney General again, circularizing drafts, discussions. We have consultants that have been asked for their views. Earlier drafts have been given to the Congress. Indeed, in this one area made public there are bar association committees that are looking at them that have promised to get their views to them. They haven't been received. yet. But it is a constantly evolving process. So that this is basically the method of operation. Mr. BUTLER. Are you proceeding this way with each one of your guidelines? Ms. LAWTON. Yes, sir. Attorney General LIwv. I should say that we rewrote one of the guidelines, namely, the one we are talking about, because we thought it was too loose. The committee then rewrote it. Mr. I IuTLEn. At what stage do you share it with this subcommittee, with our chairman-when (1o you feel is the appropriate time to send one to the Ilill for our review?   

> M8. LAWTON.

It has benen going on-tlie first time that the chairman saw the domestic security guidelines was actually incidental to a dis-clis.sion of an entirely separate piece of legislation, to illustrate one of the p~ro)lenms in that legislation. We showed him the kind of dichot-Omy we made between preliminary and full investigations here. But (,.scnt tally, when its committees are beginning to focus on specific prob-lemns, in advance of the Attorney General's testimony he has sent uLR copies of the guidelines, if those are the matters under discussion in a )aiticular hearing. There has been no systematic method of decision, if the ('ongress is holding hearings on a subject that one of the guide-lines .overs. Attorney General LEvI. The problem is, I think we are all anxious to have tleni, I know I am, made public as soon as l)ossible for the purposee of discussion. It is also true that that can have two effects. One, it can appear to bind the Department or a part of the Depart-ment to a position to which it objects. And I don't really want to be in that situation. And second, it can be subject to great misunderstanding as the guide-lines have been already. So that I think we haven't made them public as 4on as the first or second draft has appeal red. So that as it seriously develops the problem and exposes them, we have tried to make them available. Mr. BIU-MYR. I guess my problem is, I am having trouble focusing it on just exactly what particular provisions have created tie greatest discussion within your internal organization. Attorney General Lv.i I suppose the provisions that have caused the most difficulty as far as I know-and I am not on the committee-are when you can open a preliminary investigation, when you can openi a fill investigation, the techniques that miay be used and the ler-mission necessary, and what kind of special permission, and finally, the preventive action. But there are other guidelines which we have not made public. 278 Mr. BUTLER. Would it be possible from time to time to bootleg alittle information up here to the Republicans to tell us what is going on ?

NMr. EDWARDS. Since a partisan note has been put into this, I learned about the guidelines through the Senate. They were first presented to the Senate committee. Is that correct, Mr. Attorney General? Attorney General LEvi. Well, I think that in a most bipartisan way I first talked about the guidelines before the American Bar Asso-ciation last summer. Mr. BUTLER. I am mad at them, too. Attorney General LEVi. I had no idea then that it would take so long,. 

Mr. EDW.vuDs. Mr. Badillo? Mir. BKnIImrx). (loing back to the opening of an investigation, do you have any further thoughts on the question of impairing U.S. dov-erinent policies, and low far you can go, so that we'are not opening files on people wlho are protesting. Attorney General LEvI. Well, I lhad thought that that was taken account of by the kinds of statements tflat are made on pages 3 and 4. lBut since those relate specifically to fll investigations, probably some kind of a statenient of that sort. ouglt to be written more generally. M[r. B1nITITo. I6ine. I wolild appreciate seeing what you come up with. Now, on tile question of preventive action, Mr. Itelley, let's take ahyl)othetical example of a. group of people in New York City who want to) protest at the democraticc National Convention. Let's say it is a,roup of P]erto Ricans who would like the )emocratic Party to i ,iude in its platform a provision that Puerto Ricans shall have the igh~t to vote for independence, they are not talking about violent over-throw, tley are. tryini to get independence through the ballot. And        

> leiy plan to disrupt tile convent ion

until tile )arty agrees to have such im item onl the platforn, and they plan to try to i)lock tle entrances         

> so that, tle convention cannot proeeed, so

th1at that might lead to violence'. And let's say you get authority to take preventive action. Would that in your ln(lerstanding include the right to get FBI men to try to infiltrate that group and to try and be elected to be members of that group and try to alter the plans in that fashion? 

M r. KvrLEY. As the Attorney General has said, we agree that any expression of political dissent should not be attacked, and would he 

intoleral)le under the democratic form of government. You speak of a situation which probably, by virtue of the activities   

> (oi t('111dated,

lIv11 t 11 l al prol)lenlm. one to be controlled 1)v tile police department. And preliminarily I cannot give you a complete answer at this point. But I would say preliminarily it would not au-tlmoriz , us to t rv to develop inforInalts within tle groitp or infiltrate it. Irr. BIADHJO.. In the past did not, the FBI get involved in somie of ti conventions, such as the 1972 convention, and some of the activities taking Plaeo there? Mr. Kti.ruE. In sonie eases they may have had some informants work-

ingr in groups whieh had clearly " established themselves as revolution-ary in nature. 279 Mr. BADILLO. But you do not foresee that in the future, unless the group is revolutionary in nature, that the FBI would be involved 'Mr. KELLEY. If it is a possibility, based on some investigation and reports given us that this may 'be a revolutionary group, yes, we may feel the neel for some investigation or the development of informants, yes. This is one of the areas where I would certainly feel free to discuss this with the Department, and not proceed precipitously, but to go carefully. Because this ig a gray area. Mr. JAADILLO. I understand yoiud position with respect to revolu-tionary groups. But I amn trying to get your position with respect to the question of fore or violence. Because, you see, you have two stand-ards. One is the revolutionary groups of overthrowing the Govern-niient, and the other one is just the mere fact that the activities may lead to force and violence, and under those circumstances, as I under-sta.1 the guidelines, no slowing of kin attempt to overthrow the Gov-eminent is required, merely tim fact that it might lead to force or violence. Also you are saying that you would only consider the force or violence situation where there would be a showing of revolutionary activities. -Attorney General LvI. It has to be both. M1r. BAI)DrA. It has to be both? Attorney General LEVI. Yes, sir.   

> Mr. BADILIA).

If you could clarify the guidelines-as I understand it, I see. item No. 1, overthrowing the Government is a totally separate item from items Nos. 2, 3, 4, and 5. If you mean item No. 1, overthrowing the Government of the United States, and impairing, then it is a different thing. Attorney General LvIx. I didn't mean that. It has to be force and violence, a violation of -Federal law, and then one of tie other itens. It, always has to be force and violence, plus the other items.        

> Mr. l.11.O. You mean if it was

just force and viohvlCe.--. Attorney General, LvIr. That wvo1ihl be insufficient. 'Mr. Bm'r.x). Interfering of the convention, then there is no viola-tion of Federal law. But don't you say tiat they are interfering with tie functioning of the government of a State? Attorney General LF:vt. I think if it makes a convention impossible, you have t serious question of depriving persons of their civil rights. .Mr. BIADmuf. That is right. So, that is why I thought you are not just, talking about, the. overthrow of the Government. Attorney General LFv. That is correct.  

> Mr.

IIA)LA-. Tell me, how far did you go along in terms of other people who might be involved when -ou have an investigation 6f tie particular group? And let's say that that group is involved in ademonstration along with other groups. Do v,-uu plan that. the investigation woill include the other groupss 

mIs well ? Let's say tlere is 11 march inl Washiing.'ton, and tlere are .0 grol)s iuvolve(done of whieh 'ou are investigating, Wut the one goes 

Hlong with thle ,olier 19: is it intended that tle ilvestifrntion woild 

then 'he open to include the other groups as well who are participating in this group? 280 Mr. KmIrJ 4 EY. I don't visualize that it would go to the other 19, I just can't visualize that at all. Mr. BADILLO. M time is lip. 

Mr. EDRwDRw. Mr. Dodd ?

Mr. J)ODD. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

Mr. Levi, I wonder if we could spend a couple of minutes talking about the standards that are used for a full investigation. You point out in your statement that you use the guidelines or the tests as was used in Temrr v. Ohio, the stop-and-frisk case. Attorney General LEvf. Yes. Mr. DODD. I am a little intrigued by it. I would be led to believe that a s1o0)-and-frisk, which is intruding, as Terry v. Ohio declared, would certainly have to be considered-and you may disagree with me if you wish-would have to be considered imuch less of an intrusion than adecision to con(luct a full investigation of someone? On )a,,e 16 of your statement. you say "TI stan(lar(i was a(loptedbecause it requires a strong .:showing of criminal conduct before a full investigation is authorized." And yet it would seemn to me that actually the standards--or tie. stan(lard in 'e rr v. Ohio-ought, to be more aptly used, possibly as the basis for conducting a preliminary investigation. And the stand-ards you use in conducting a preliminary investigation are used to conduct tle full investigation. I wonder if you iltight comment on that. Attorney General IAmv[. I must, say I think time sentence on page 16 which says: "hIt requires a strong showing of criminal conduct before a full in-vestigation. is authorized" is ill itself too stron a statement. A11(1 I

nimeant as I said it to OIlfllCIlt on tilt point. AndI am glad you raised it. Because what I t think it, ]has to be taken to mean is something in tie neighborhood of a reasoll to thiink there is, or some sich thing. Because if you really know there is, tlien you don't need the full investigation, andl you w)n)ce(1 with tie Course. And on the other end of it, I don't know how one is going to get to this place where there is reason to believe, or as you once said. likeli-hood. and so on, unless there has been som J)reli.inary investigation to find out. We can't use tie same standard which is involved in bring-ing a case, because this is before one brings a case. This is tie investigation which makes the case possible which de-

elops time case. So that the standard has to he less than that. And Ithink it. also has to x less than the arrest standard. Now. what kind of words define it I am not sur. "Likelihood" vas regarded as not a good word. But I don't think that "probable cause to believe" is tle right phrase. And this is really a problem. It is aprollem of trying to set one siandarl for beginning the investigate ion. that is, preliminary, where you can't do very much. One concern that. I have about these guidelines is that perhaps one can (1o so little that p,,rhaps tIe, preliminary wotldn't be extremely helpful. -But I have len reassured on that. And then a higher standard for the full, where you can use different investigatory techniques. But that is still less than the standard where you get. an indictment. 

Mr. l)om,. It. just sort, of seemed to me, looking at 1(b) of tue guidie-

lines, that those are the basic outlines, or steps, or whatever one would 281 look to in order to make a determination as to conducting a prelimi-nary investigation. They are pretty stringent. It seems to ine that you have got to pretty mulch make a decision that the conduct, as you say here, would involve, the use of force or violence and would be a violation of Federal law. It is pretty strict, I would say, in order to make that determination. Attorney General LnVI. It says, in order to ascertain information. So it is an attempt to find out. And I think as long as one accepts the importance of an investigating agency- and recognizes that for all kinds of criminal eases one needs an investigating agency, and not just for therone case, but for a continuity, one has this problem. And we are trying to tighten it, and to state the steps. But it is a new area. And we went to the Terry case because we thought it was as analogous as we could find. But this is the area where there have been changes since the prior draft, and maybe we can work out something better in the next one. Mr. DoDD. I believe that almost every member of the committee has raised this point this morning. And I believe both of you recognize it as well. And that is the setting up of some sort of procedure for this (ommittec- and other committees of Congress that have jurisdiction over the investigatory agencies, specifically, the FBI, for setting some sort, of a system where you have a better line of communication. You testified before the Senate last month. And it seemed to me that, reading that testimony-and you correct me if I am wrong-that you said that you (lidn'tbelieve that ongoing oversight needbe ns expensive or as comprehensive as was conducted by the Senate Select Intelligence Committee. I am wondering, the WVatergate atmosphere sort of created that, and now that that is over with, you don't need to have that kind of inten-sive' investigation. One of the great problems, I feel-and I would like your feeling on it as well-is that we shouldn't have to get to another kind of 'Water-gate situation to have the kind of good communications between the Bureau and the FBI and sitting committees of Congress charged with the responsibility of conducting oversight and working out prob-lems stch as setting up a set of guidelines. I)o you really feel that we shouldn't have a kind of extensive and comlrehensive oversight that the select or ad hoc committee should have? Attorney General Lm. I don't remember commenting actually 

on whether the kind of investigations that, were conducted by the select eommittees were the kind of things that should always be expected or continued or whatever. Those are very different kinds of investigations. It is an incredible problem if one approaches a department and(l decides to look at documents which flow over a 20-year period which couldn't possibly really be read or analyzed by either the people giving the documents, 6r to a considerable extent by the people receiving them. That is a very, very different kind of operation which can highlight )roblems. Andl I am not being critical, allI would say is that that is not what I would call a typical oversight function. Of course, there should be oversight. And there should be continu-ing oversight. As a matter of fact, I think what I said to the Senate 282 

committee-and not the Church committee, but the Government Oper-ations Committee-was that my concern was that-and I don't know how to handle it-that if the Congress were to create a special com. mittee for the oversight of the intelligence function, just intelligence, that might split the Bureau. So, that. it is intelligence functions before one committee, and it is other functions before a different committee. And this bothers me. Idon't think. for various reasons. that the Bureau's functions should be 

looked at, b~v one committee. And I rather thought it was the same committee that was looking at the Department of Justice. So, in any event, I certainly accept the notion of a continuing oversight. I don't think continuing oversight should le regarded as continu-ing management. I do not think that continuing management is-the function of the Congress, or (1o I think that that would be an efficient way of doing things, or an effective way. So. that one has to work together the kind of recording an(l informa-tion systems which will keep the committees informed. And I (lon't Ix.(lieve there is any argument about, that fromn our stanll)oint. Mr. )om). I know iny titme is up, but [ wo((r., Ir. Kelly. if you would coniment as well. This is from your testimony before the Senate: We muct ask whether the same degree of lntitude sild be allowed a4 is essential to an ongoing oversight committee. The Select Committee came into Ieing in a Watergate atrmsphere. I ues were raised that needed to Ie resolved. Most of them have been resolved. I wonder if you could give us your comment as well on that same basic loint. Mr. Kiarj.:v. We have to date, since April of 1975, devoted 4.500 agent days to tih developtuent of the informal ion that has been desired 

bV tle coininittees and 2.2-21 clerical (lays. This, of course, is quite anumniber of days in time, and so forth. And it is expensive. We, how-ever, (io not construe this as lost.. We construe it as very necessary, in tint. there should! be, over.sight. And I have never said that we sloiltl not have oversight. In otler words, the system is not one we feel ,1 10d dIject,(1 to, bult the t'el.ts of tiat are (lite. on occasion, (lalaging to us. We are running into situations where the very heart of our ealal)ilities, informants and sources-and I (lon1t mean in-

formanmts exclmsivel., lit sources-are reluctant to talk with us be-

eauA! of tle wide (liselosures tit have been made. Attain, I am not coiml)aininpr about tile system of oversight. I am talking about the efTects-of it-can we balance this with what is ll('.essarv in order for us to (1o tle jo1) as it shoulde I o(one. We seek glnidouce. Wv a'-willing to work within tie framework of a set of guidelines and legislation. 

W', (ldot q(iarrel aboit that. Wlat we are saving is that we must keepl inltact as much as pjossilde tile cal)abilities that we need to (1o tie job tlle way it Shiould b~e (1loe. cal)ahilities which are still legal. but, nontliele."s t hey ayre very essential. And we nust preserve them as best We caln. 

We lave benci working 111ider oversigilt. Tie Senate .lliciary Commllittee I's heard me and tle former Attorney General. And c((rtaijily knlowinmg Mr. Ievi as I do, we (10 not together have any 283 complaint about this oversiglht. We would hope that it would be done ini an atmosplhere where it would be constructive, beneficial, and would not to any extent destroy those capabilities. Mr. )ODD. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Enw,ums. Mr. Parker.   

> Mr. 1PARIKEI.

Mr. Attorney General, the guidelines are entitled "Do-niestic Security Investigations." Is that terminology meant to include all of tle similar or same type of cases that we formerly called domestic intelligence cases? Attorney Greneral Lvi. I think so. Mr. l)ARK:R. I didn't mean to be overly suspicious, I was just Wondering whetler the Bureau was carving out a new terminology which would exclude certain areas of domestic intelligence which would not be cove red l)y the guidelines. Attorney General Limvi. No. I am probably responsible for the use of the word "security," because I thought that so far as the public was concerned, the. public was much more familiar, and probably much more concerned about internal security investigations. and I thought tie word "sectirity" was probably a more candid use of words than in-tellience. But I didn't feel strongly al)out it. Then there was some discussion as to why the words were changed, and wletler there was a suggestion tlat this was a change in the direction of tile Bureau. I don't think it is a change in the direction of the Bureau. But as I have already stated, in my own view of the direction of the Bureau has to be to keel) these investigations very closely related to the (etection of crime. Mf[r. PAKEai. Tlank you very much. Would you say thlat the )epartment of Justice and the Federal Bureau ot Investigation are presently operating within the limnita-tions of the guidelines as presented ?

Attorney General Lvi. Well, in general I think so. I cannot be certain, because the only way you can be certain is to put them into effect and see where it runs. Mr. PAJIKEJ. Is it your understanding or your intention that they would presently operate under the limitations, or at least the outlines of tile guidelines? Attorney General LEVI. I think it is my intention that they flag problems for all of us, and where there is some deviation, which con-(eivably there might be, because just as we are not sure of the guide-lines, tiet liat, is a matter that will be disclissed. And we have fre-(luent discussions. Mr. PARKERI. Director Kelley, you indicated that the number of domestic security eaes has been reduced significantly since July 1973. Is that re(lction the result of fewer people who meet the criteria that would )egin an in%-estigation under tlat term, or is it the result of l)oliev changes within the Bureau? Mr. IKELLF:r. It is quite a lengthy response that T will have to make. But generally speaking, it is Ihat certain people (o not meet tle ('riteria. 'Mr. I'.\mKEli. There are fewer' peolle ill the country involved in wlat 'ou call domestic Secllitv cases ?

lr. KErLEY. As we h111e now deinede it. 'Cs. 284 Mr. PARKER. Mr. Attorney General, one of your significant accom-plishments, among many, has been the realinement of the relation-ship between the Department of Justice and the Bureau. Someday the 

cast will change. Do you have any suggestions as to how that will be perpetuated in the future? Do you think it ought to be institu-tionalized, and if so, how can it be institutionalized? Attorney General LEvi. I hope it is institutionalized. And I think 

I speak for the Director as wel1 as myself. How it should be institu-tionalized I am not sure, because partly it is statutory, and partly it is a matter of writing down such things as these guidelines. And it is partly going to be a matter of oversight. Mr. PARKER. 1 was going to ask if you saw congressional oversight as a part of this equation. Mr. EDWARD,. Mr. Klee. Mr. Kr, ,. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Attorney General, on page 19 of your statement you specify some main themes on which you express the desire that there should be general agreement. One of the themes is a requirement that domestic security investigations be tied closely with the detection of crime. Do you mean to exclude domestic security investigations that, are tied closely with the prevention of possible future criminal activity but which are in no way related to the detection of a crime which has al ready occurred ?

Attorney General Lmvx. No; because I thiik-I don't like to get into the. kind of consideration which inevitably leads to a suggestion of the law of conspiracy, which doesn't happen to be an area in which I find favor. But the fact is that what I am talkincy about is that. it is tied sufficiently closely so that it is the detection of a crime that either has been committed or an awareness that it is likely to be committed, or there is a reasonable probability that they said h'ose words. and one is looking for and being violent about a violation of law which is either coming or has come. Now, if it is coming. and the statutes of the Congress are apt to talk this way. you can talk about it as a con-sp)iracy. But I find that a very full net which may not disclose what is involved. So I would rather lut it this way. Mr. KEEF,. Is the standard that you propose to set different from the standard set by the Supreme Co'urt which Director Kelley referred to on page .3 of his statement, where the Supreme Court said: "The emphasis of domestic intelligence gathering is on the prevention of unlawful activity or the nhaneement of the Government's prepared-niess for some Posture crisis or emergency.11 Attorney General LVI. I don't think the standard is different. One lias to be a little careful about these sentences from cases. One would like to know what the prior sentence is and what the following sen-teMre is aind what the Court actually held. Mr. K( fE. My final question relates to the fifth criteria in section 

1 (b) of your outline under bases9 of investigation. Youi emphasize when  

> you

read your statement that the word engaging in domestic violence was different from the words "inducing domestic violence," and indeed an old draft that I have seen talked about creating domestic violence. Why the limitation to engaging in domestic violence and not inducing domestic violence? 285 Attorney GENERAL LEVI. For the very reason that the question was put earlier in the session, that it may be that a group, exercising their given constitutional rights, might be met with violence on the other side. But I don't think that that is the reason for investigating those who are engaging in their constitutional rights. Mr. Klx. Director Kelley, do you feel that a group that is inciting to riot but does not itself intend to engage in domestic violence should be the subject of a preliminary investigation? Mr. KELLlY. Yes; if they are inciting others to do that which they  

> (1o

not want to (1o themselves, I think certainly that we should at least mnke some preliminary inquiries. Now, as to whether or not this is inducing, I am not here to engage in any debate about what is meant 

b) inducing or engaging. But this can well be constri.ed as engaging. I or examlpe, when you hire a killer, it is both who are then engaging andi not just then in(lucing. Attorney General Ltvt. I would regard that as engaging. Mr. KFr.v. There you are. We are together now. MIr. KLE. Thank you very much. Mr. Chairman, I have no further questions. Mr. EDwaI)s. Mr. Badillo. Mr. BI DIMm . Mr. Ivi, is it your intention that the criteria of the guidelines for White House investigations be applied to investigating at the request of any executive agency or any Cabinet member? Attorney General L'Lv. Mary Lawton has just slid, for Presidential appointments, yes. But I think there would be other restrictions on-al there are other restrictions-on requests by Cabinet officers. Mr. BADTJ,IA). Do you intend to have separate gilelideines for those? Attorney General LEVi. I (lon't know how tile guideline committee is going to handle that. Butit it has to be included. And we do have separate I)rocedi res. Mr. B.ADILL. Would you let us know? Just so we 1n(lerstal( each other, in the White Iouse guidelines 

vyou will .haneo it so it. is clear that it is the intent that the consent of ilie indivi(lal 1)e secure(l. Two, in the destruiction of information you have some criteria by 

which unsolicited information which is a violation of the law may le destroyed if it is something that really has to (do with victimless crimes, as we wild call them, or generally some violation of law. Attorney General Ivvr. That is' my position. You must understand tlat there is a committee Mr. B.Tnirto. I understand. Aknd three, that, vei will fight for the basis for opening up a basis to (listingiiish a criminal group trying to overthrow the Government and a group) that is merely trying to persuade the Government to revise its decisions? Attorney General L.vr. I would make that distinction. But if the persuasion is by force and violence, I am not likely to. Mr. B.DHALO. You are going to look into how far you go down the road. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. EDwARm. Mr. Dodd. Mr. Dow). Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  

> 82 -120--77-19

286 'Just a couple, of questions addressed to you, Mr. Attorney General. Is it correct that a preliminary investigation can be conducted ih the field office without the authorization, of headquarters, the Attorney General's office, or headquarters of the FBI ill Washington? Attorney General LFvi. That is what the guidelines say. Mr. D6ODD. On page 5 of these draft guidelines, section 3, "Termi-nating invetigat ions," paragraph (a) says-Preliminary and full Investigations may be terminated at any time by t, 

Attorney General or his designee or FBI headquarters. If the headquarters is not even aware that a preliminary investigation is going on, low are they going to terminate it? Attorney General L&,vi. That is an excellent question for the Director. Mr. DODD. Mfr. Director? Mr. KF.rLty. By notification that a case has been opened. Mr. DODD. If You didn't know it was opened? Mr. KrJLEY. Well, we are supposed to. Mr. DODD. Well, you don't have to, according to tWis, prelhininary investigations can be opened. Mr. KF.LF.Y. We don't have to know of the opening of a preliminary in the field in our headquarters. Mr. Adams. Mr. ADAMS. They do have to notify us, but we don't have to authorize it. Mr. KELLYY. We are notified of it. Mr. DODD. You are notified of it, but. you don't have to authorize it? Mr. ADAMS. That is right. Mr. DoDD. What does that mean in terms of procedure? A file slip goes in that we are going to conduct an investigation? Mr. AD^AMS. No; a special agent in charge of the office authorizes the initiation of a preliminary inquiry. Ile hs to furnish to head-quarters the basis upon which lie authorizes it. The headquarters is in a position then to take issue with his decision. But he doesn't hmve to await initiating it, he makes the basic authorization. And therefore headquarters is in a position to take issue. Mr. DODD. But in effect they are involved in the authorization proxess even? Mr. AD.Ms. Yes; on a post basis. -Mr. DODD. On page 9 of the guidelines lnder section (c) "Retention." I don't know if it, is just my copy or not, but in paragraph 1 you have-The FBI shall, In accordance with a record retention plan approved by the National Archives and Records Service, within blank years, and so forth. That explanation, you just haven't made uip your mind as to how long a period of time that should be, or the Archives hasn't made up its mindI Attorney General Lir, . I think the committee hasn't made up its mind. And really this requires more consultation with the Bureau. The period of time is not yet settled. Mr. 1)otnn. At the bottom of that page your second note says--It mny also he poslble to establish a scaling procedure to reserve investigative records for an Indefinite period of time prior to destruction. -297 

I have a difficulty-and we have been over this, r guess belre-but after a preliminary investigation has been conducted, and it is con)-

cluded by the fieldoffice, and there is no reason to proceed, there ip. 

no merit-let's go to the most extreme cases-there is absolutely no-merit for continuing any further investigation as to the initial reasons. or reports that we reeive from informants or sources that will be. un-reliable, that the information was specious, it was unfounded, it is. absolutely without merit, and you have got yourself a hunch of infor-mation that is absolutely wort hless, it is lies, why is there aiy hesitation at that particular point in completely destroying that file? Mr. Km,LFY. I think one of the problemss is thit you have difficulty in this lield in saying absolutt ly no basis. And it might be that subse-uent reports made by informants or sources might give fortification or the original allegation. I would say that the harm is not so mitch in the retention-and Idon't think forever, for a reasonable period of time-the harm is not retention but the abuse of this information. And we would like to have it considered as a viable system that we have at least a reasonable period of time for retention so that if anything does come up we may use it. Now, this may not be construed by the committee or Congress as a sensible, reasonable system. And we would not quarrel about that. Because we would revive the investigation if subsequent informa-tion comes up. It is just one of the devices that will assist us and prevent a de novo type of investigation. If it is not the construction of the Congre s and the committee, we are not going to argue about it. It is jlst one of the devices that might be hlpfll. 

Mr. )ow). On the other side of that question it came to me, going over this last evening, that while there may be an effort or desire on the pait of sonic to see, those records destroyed once, you could have asituation where, for historical purposes, in the investigation a person they cease to maintain certain information that might otherwise bo 

(lestroved. Will any consideration be given to that in discusSions with flier National Archives to maintain historical documents that may have absolutely no merit in being retained from all investigatory standpoint but may have nerit in terms of being l)reserved from a historical stand-point, is that lei iig considered ?

Mr. Kmr.trv. I don't know. lnt. I know that on occasion sone of those investigated might even reqluest that it he retained. And I know ;f 

one such instance--in other word., that if anything ever came up, he wolild be able to say, this has ben investigated and this file is in aCerain place preserved at iny request. so that I might show my in-nlocence. T don't know whether the historical matter has been pursued. Attorney" (Ge neral Ih:vr. Thle National Archives would have control over it. Mr. Jo om. Of ninintaininy historical (ata ?Atf oler %. (lWlelal Lm:vr. Yes. 

"Mr. )onm. Would thev have control over--wNold tlhev make the deterni at ion thnt it is historicnl and that it should not b)e destroyed, 

even though you had1 determined tlint it should be? Attorney Orenerah LTvi. Yes: as I iinder talnd it. 

1 r. DODD. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. EDWARDS. Thank you, gentlemen. and Ms. Lawton, very much for excellent testimony. "And I personally think you are doing very 288 well in those guidelines. I have reservations about the preventive ac tion provision, but we will discuss that at a later time. And I think you should not have that provision in the guidelines. But it is also subject to further discussion. I would suggest that you testify before the Rules Committee of the House, they are getting ready to report some kind of a bill that I think would do great damage to the legislative oversight responsi-bilities of the House of Representatives. And unless there is opposi-

tion expressed at the appropriate time, you are liable to find yourselves in an entirely different situation, and one that might not work very well. We intend to have further hearings on the matter of guidelines- as they are developed with other witnesses, too. They should be helpful to you and to us. And I am sure that private organizations and private attorneys and knowledgeable people in this area will have their say on this imlortant matter. ''lie next hearing on the subject of the FBI would be the General Accounting Office's full report, which is a huge document, on ebruary 24. Again, we thank the witnesses for appearing. [Whereupon, at 12:20 p.m., the subcommittee adjourned, subject to the call of the Chair.] FBI OVERSIGHT Attorney General's Guidelines for FBI Activities and Additional Legislative Proposals THURSDAY, MAY 13, 1976 SI[ )'SE ofp REPRSENTA'rTIVES,      

> Su I('()M MPI-V'EE ON

CI V11 1 A NI) C..ONSTIFrUvTi(NA, Iti! ITS, OF TIMlE COM3IPI'rl.E ON TIE JUDICIARY, 

Wa8hington, D.C. 

The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, Thursday, May 13, 1976, in room 2237, Rayburn House Office Building, at 9:35 a.m., lion. Don Edwards [chairman of the subcommittee] presiding. Present: Representatives Edwards, Drinan, I)odd, and Butler. Also present: Alan A. Parker, counsel ; ho]mas P. Breen ani Cath-erine LeRoy, assistant counsel; and Roscoe B. Starek III, associate counsel. Mr. EDwAnns. The subcommittee will come to order. TodaY the Subcommittee on Civil and Constitutional Rights of the Louts .tuJliciary Committee intensifies its focus on determining what legislation should be drafted regarding the domestic intelligence activities of the Federal Bureau of Investigation. The work of the various House and Senate committees in disclosing past abuses is just a part of our responsibilities. The revelations of the last more than demonstrate. the. need for proper legislation. In addi-tion, we have the clear agreement of the Department of Justice that legislation is imp)erative. Given such a setting, the mandate of this sub-committee iclear. It is our intention to expose ourselves to a wide range of informed views during our hearings in the next. month. My fellow members and 

I will not fail to consider all of the issues in a most serious manner, for we know our )olicy decisions will have both immediate and long-'an1e effects on the functions of the Department. of Justice and on the public at large. Each has legitimate interests to be )rotected, and our policy should indicate that the varying interests are compatible. 

'lie Constitution provides no special status to any citizen because of that person's title, )osition, or agency afflliation.'Whilo it is true flint. lawbreakers must )e quickly and fairly dealt. with--a (luty given 

byi the people to the Government-those who are rude, impolite. dif ferent, oljectionalble, offensive, or whose morals or mores do not I)lese. us are entitled, in the absence of illegal activity, to be left, alone 

,y our Government. It. should also 1)e made clear that at the smam time we focus our attention on this specific area, this subcommittee will be continuing its 

(259) 290 oversight responsibility with respect to other facets of the FBI so that other functions of the Bureau will also be dealt with in turn by the legislative process, if we determine that such action is necessary. MIr. Butler, do you have a statement? Mr. BUTLER. Yes, sir, Mr. Chairman. Today we reconvene for several ;additional days of hearings pur-suant to our oversight jurisdiction of the FBI. I look forward to these hearings because it is with serious concern that I -read the por-l ions of the Senate select committee's report concerning the activities of the. FBI during its long, and in many respects, meritorious service to this country and to the preservation of the freedoms enjoyed throughout this Nation. Ve have been provided recently with the committee reports filed in the Senate. I look forward to reviewing the additional volumes, which are scheduled to be released next week. portions of the material are awesome and ominous, but I am con-vinced that we have seen the last of these actions which were carried out by an overzealous Bureau that occasionally placed its dedication to (ltity above the law. No organization, particularly a law enforce-ruent agency of this country, will ever again be permitted to conduct itself in this manner. J'his brings me to a point, Mr. Chairman, which I hope we will give serious study and careful consideration. During this past month, the Department of Justice has released guidelines which clarify the FBI's (1ol0(luct for three specific types of investigations: WhiteIlouse per-sonnel security and background investigations, domestic security in-vestigations, and reporting on civil disorders and demonstrations in-volviig a Federal interest. By June 1, we expect the long-awaited counterintelligence guide- 

> Ii

nes. It is my understanding that long hours of thoughtful delibera-tion by dedicated Department of Justice attorneys was accorded these gl sidelines. If legislation is nc,essar, Mr. Chairman, then let us act swifty and responsibly. Yet in light of this serious effort for reform, I am not convinced at this point that restrictive legisimtion is the answer. Ihope we will hear again from Attorney General Levi and Director Kellev on this very issue. In any event, the long history of excellence within the FBI was reconfirmed to many this past weekend when Director Kelley apolo-gized to the American peol e for the Burean's mistakes. With people of the caliber of Director Kelley, who are willing to admit to error, 1 have strong feelings that the Bureau will once again ,be held to the same high esteem that it enjoyed for decades. I look forward to the testimony from the several distinguished witnesses who are scheduled to appear before us over the next few weeks. Mr. Ev)w.%M)s. Thank )'oi, Mr. Butler. The gentleman froin Massachusetts? Mr. 'I)R . I have no comment. I want to thank the witnesses for coming. I have read their statements and I am most interested. Thank you. 

Mr. EDWAnrxq. Today we have twe witnesses who have been deeply involved in the study and the analysis of the lawful role of Federal investigative agencies in the life of our country. 291 

Our first witness is Mr. Jerry J. Berman; who is the director of the domestic security projoctof the Center for National Security Studies. Mr. Berman is an attorney and a member of the bars of the District of Cohimbia and my home State of California. He has been involved in public interest laws since 19681 

Mr. Berman is coauthor of the book "The Administration of Justice Under Emergency Conditions" and of articles for a number of news-papers and journals. We welcome you here, Mr. Berman. I will introduce Mr. Halperin in a minute. Mr. Berman, you may proceed. TESTIMONY OF JERRY 3. BERMAN, DIRECTOR, DOMESTIC SECU-RITY PROJECT OF THE CETfER FOR NATIONAL SECURITY STUDIES Mr. nrRMAX. Yes ;-Mr. Chairman. I believe that I have a very long statement, as you can see before you, and I would like to have the whole statement inserted into the record. And, then, I would like to read a condensed version here today. Mr. EDwArDS. Very well, without objection, both statements, in full, will be made a part of the record. You may proceed. Mr. BERMAN. Yes; my second point is that Mr. Halperin and I have a joint presentation and I think that they flow together and I think that we ought to present our views, as a whole and then open it up for questions. And I think, that then we can proceed more expeditiously that way. Mr. EDWARDS. Very well. Then I will introduce Mr. Halperin after you make your statement. Mr. BEFRMAN. Mr. Chairman, members of this subcommittee, Con-gress must enact a comprehensive legislative charter to govern the FBI. No more important business is before the Congress. At issue is the rule of law and the future of constitutional democracy. I there-fore welcome this opportunity to state my own views on key issues that must be deliberated and resolved. I believe the need for a comprehensive FBI Charter is beyond debate. Before the FBI can be made to obey the law, it must have a law to obey. The present statutes governing the investigative responsibili-ties of the FBI are silent on intelligence investigations aimed at American citizens. Congress has allowed the executive branch to conduct intelligence operations as a matter of executive discretion and the executive branch has authorized mid expanded the FBI's intelligence mission at will. This is not law but license. Allowing the executive branch to claim as an "inherent power" to direct FB intelligence has led to widespread abuse. Rule by Executive order, subject to modification at any moment, has placed our liberties on anything but a firm foundation.-Only a legislative charter can put to rest the doctrine of inherent power and place all of the investiga-tive activities of the FBI within a framework of positive law. After 40 years of executive disorder, only public covenants can begin to restore 292 public trust in our investigatory agencies. The new domestic security guidelines which Attorney General Levi promulgated in April of this year are a case in point. They may be more restrictive than previous executive directives, but they have been established under questionable authority and can be changed tomorrow or by the next Attorney General. They were put into effect in April but they are tentative. I do not think that Congress should any longer defer to the Execu-tive. A legislated charter should set forth precisely under what cir-cumstances and to what extent the Bureau may investigate the political activities of American citizens. This poses a basid issue that must be resolved during these deliberations: Should Congress authorize, limit, or prohibit domestic intelligence investigations? While I sense growing support for a charter to define and clarify the investigative jurisdiction of the FBI, I do not believe the proponents of legislation agree on how Congress should resolve this vital issue. The FBI and the Justice Department want the Congress to authorize domestic security investigations. The Senate Select Committee on Intelligence has made a series of recommendations that if adopted would limit but not prohibit intelli-gence investigations. The House Intelligence Committee has called for prohibition by recommending the abolition of the Internal Security Branch of the FBI. My own opinion, and one that has been endorsed by a number of public interest organizations, such as Common Cause, ACLU, and TJAW, is that the FBI should be prohibited from conducting domestic intelligence investigations targeted at American citizens. There is no reason why investigations limited to criminal illegal acts will not take care of our security interests. Today, I would like to explain why I have reached this conclusion. It. is the duty of Congress to devise a legal structure for the FBI that will curtail FBI intelligence activities in order to avoid a repetition of the past. I also believe it is incumbent that. Congress "make no law abridging the freedom of speech, or of the press; or of the right of the people peaceably to assemble, and to petition the government for a re-dress of g rievances." Congress can only accomplish both by enacting a charter that pro-hibits all domestic intelligence investigations by the FBI, and specifi-cally limits the FBI to initiating invelstigiation.s only to "detect * * *and prosecute crimes against the United States." By definition intelligence investigations are initiated without rea-sonable cause to believe a crime has been committed, to gather informa-tion on the plans, activities, beliefs, associations and memberships of indivi(luals and groups. Investigations intrude on speech and associational privacy protected by the first, fourth, and the fifth. and ninth amendments to the Con-stitution. They chill speech by subjecting citizens to the fear of inves-tigation, exposure, and reprisal if they engage in unpopular political actiity. Acting under Executive orders to investigate subversive activities. and prevent violence, the FBI has not only intruded upon the privacy of innumerable individuals and groups, but has engaged in sy-tematic illegal activities. 293 As the committee is well aware, the FBI has not confined its investi-gations to individuals or groups engaged in illegal conduct. It has investigated members of Congress, peace groups, civil rights organiza-tions, the women's liberation movement, and delegates to political conventions. It has routinely initiated and conducted investigations and main-tained files on nearly one million associates and members of organiza-tions that espouse revolutionary doctrine but whose activities have )osed no clear and present danger to the security of the country. That kind of spilling over is inherent when not limiteal by legislative action. And it has engaged in FBI "smear campaigns" against civil rights leaders, including Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., involving illegal wire-tapping, dissemination of derogatory information and an anonymous letter urging King to commit suicide; FBI programs of warrantless wiretapping dating l)ack to 1940; directed at citizens and groups in the Ujnited States; FBI political intelligence programs conducted at the request of the Executive to keep Presidents informed about their enemies and op)onents---usually persons who have done no more than dissent from Administration 1A icy. I believe, this public recor(l of abuse places a heavv burden of proof ul)on the Executive to show both the legitimacy anAl the propriety of allowing the FBI to continue to direct intelli gence investigations at American citizens. This burden of proof relates directly to the debate over the future role of FBI intelligence. Today, the Justice Department and the FBI seek autliorization to conduct intelligencee investigations in order to anticipate and prevent violence. The department and the Bureau cite statistics which show that acts of violence and terrorism are on the rise in the United States to justify the continuing need for FBI intelligence investigations, despite the fact that the Senate Select Committee has concluded that the FBI should be authorized to conduct limited intelligence investigations for this rl)UOSO.-Two assumptions underly these recommendations: (1) that intel-ligence investigations play a useful role in anticipating and preventing violence; and (2) that carefully drawn guidelines together with ex-ecut ive and congressional oversight can prevent serious abuse. 'These assumptions are simply not supported by the evidence on the public record. 'rhe facts strongly indicate the contrary and lead to the conclusion that this grant of authority is both i'nwarranted and dangerous. I want to make it clear that I think violence and terrorism pose adanger to our society and I believe we must step up our efforts to find ways to reduce the instances of violence in our society. 

f [owever, I (to not believe intelligence investigations provide a mean-i'igful solution to this problem and in fact may exacerbate it. I think the evidence makes this clear. First, the public record demonstrates the FBI intelligence has been nil but uselesas in anticipating or preventing acts of violence or illegal conduct. According to the Senate Select Committee, between 1960 and 1974 the- FBI conducted over 500,000 separate investigations of persons aid groups under the "subversive" category, predicated on the pos-294 sibility that they might be likely to overthrow the Government of the United States. Yet, not a single individual or group has been prose-cuted since 1957 under the laws which prohibit planning or advocating action to overthrow the Government and which are the main alleged statutory bases for such FBI investigations. According to the GAO audit of FBI intelligence investigations, the Bureau has not been able to anticipate violence through its vast intel-ligence operations. Investigations of sabotage, certain bombings, and riot violations, and protection of foreign officials, although handled as part of the FBI's domestic intelligence operations, usually involved criminal acts committed before the investigations were initiated. In fact, the FBI rarely anticipates significant activity of any kind, including violent acts. According to the GAO audit o'f 19,700 cases, involving a random sample of 898 cases in 10 FBI field offices, the FBI anticipated activity in only 17 cases. Only six cases involved potential violence. In the 1960's one of the main reasons advanced for expanded col-lection of information about urban unrest and antiwar protest was to help responsible officials cope with possible violence. However, as the Senate Committee reports, a former White Iouse official with major duties in this area under the Johnson administra-tion has concluded, in retrospect that in none of these situations would advance . . . intelligence about dissident groups [have] been of much hell, and that what was needed was physical intelligence about geog-raph y of major cities, and that the attempt to predict violence was not asuccessful undertaking. Moreover, much FBI information is useless to other agencies con-cerned about violent political acts. The GAO report notes that while the FBI disseminates over 89 percent of its intelligence case reports to the Secret Service, responsible for protecting the lives of high govern-ment officials, the agency retains only 6 percent of the information received. The Secret Service said it received "too much not always useful information." A specific )efense Department directive I)OD Directive 5200.27 requires the destruction of a great deal of informa-tion it receives from the FBI about civilians considered "threatening" to t" military. The civil disorders of the 1960's, the Capitol bombing, the political assassinations, and the attempts, the activities of the SLA, and other instances, were not anticipated and obviously not prevented by FBI intelligence gathering. I believe this record not only undercuts the FBI's case for con-ducting intelligence investigations in order to anticipate and prevent violence, but suggests why intelligence investigations are all but useless for this purpose. First, tho FBI collects facts, but the reca.rd shows that we do not know that this collection of facts is relevant in predict-ing violence. Second, intelligence agencies depend on prior notice, yet, most political violence is spontaneous. As three Presidential commissions have concluded, "the larger outbreaks of violence in the ghettos and on the campuses were most often spontaneous reactions to events in a climate of social tension and upheaval." Third, the FBI assumes there is a causal connection between speech 295 and action, but as random bombings demonstrate, terrorists do not follow rational patterns. And, finally, the FBI relies on a network of established informants for information, but true terrorists know this and operate under-ground. Under these circumstances, massive intelligence coverage is relative-ly useless ana will continue to be unless we adopt the unacceptable al-ternative of putting everyone under surveillance. I think that the prob-lem must be addressed differently. My second major point is that the Justice Department guidelines and the Senate committee recommendations, designed to limit the FBI, actually authorize continuing coverage of lawful political activity. T hey pose a grave risk to our civil liberties. I do not want to get entangled in the guidelines today, but, as my longer statement indicates, I have analyzed these guidelines and recoi-mendations, and have come to the following conclusion: That to anticipate violence under these standards, the VBI would be author-ized to investigate the same individuals and groups that it has always investigated. The Comptroller General has stated "the language in the draft guidelines would not cause any substantial change in the number of and the type of domestic intelligence investigations initiated." In 1974, there were over 30,000 on-going investigations. In the Senate Select Committee's final report it is pointed out FBI officials inside the Department, interpret the guidelines is permitting continuing investigations of "subversives." In effect, the Senate Committee adopted the Justice Department guidelines, but attempted to make the rules more strict, to prevent the-Bureau from investigating lawful political activities. I think that the Committee failed and it expressed its own frustration at trying to. draft language that maintains the fine line between surveillance of lawful activity and violent conduct. I believe that frustration is war-ranted, because that fine line cannot be drawn. There is no way around the fact that intelligence investigations are based on a predicate short of criminal conduct and unavoidably lead to investigation of law-ful activity. I think that to focus on standards *Ignores the two central lessons of the recent investigations. One, that they were useless in preventing violence. The second is that narrow programs tend to grow. As the Senate committee itself observed, "We have seen a consistent pattern in which programs initiated with limited goals, such as preventing criminal vi-olence or identifying foreign spies, were expanded to what witness characterized as 'vacuum cleaners,' sweeping in information about law-ful activities of American citizens." It is the nature of intelligence ac-tivities and investigations to grow and to expand, especially in tines of crisis and tumoil, so why authorize itI As I remarked earlier, the problem of political violence must be adllressed differently. The FBI should be allowed and required-to at-tack the problem of violence by conducting criminal investigations leading to prosecution and conviction of- those engaged in violent crimes. 296 Mr. DRINAN. I wonder if I could interrupt at this point and say that the very term "intelligence investigation" has never really been -defined. Would you assume that preventive would have to be included, that every intelligence investigation is also preventive in the minds of the FBI and in the minds of some in the Senate Select Committee? Mr. BERMAN. Yes; I think that they have read in the term "pre-ventive" and that this is the predicate for intelligence gathering under the present guidelines. Both the Guidelines and the Senate committee recommendations are based on the idea that intelligence is needed to prevent and antici-pate violence, sir. However, I believe that instead of employing 1,000 agents and 1,000 informners and the apparently fruitless exercise of identifying ahead of time the lone assassin, the person who is likely to engage in political violence, the FBI should concentrate its efforts on deterrence. This can only be accomplished by detecting and prosecuting those who have committed violent crimes and not only the politically vio-lent. Out of over 1900 bombings in 1975, only 89 were attributed to political terrorists. This is further evidence that this is a police prob-lem and not an intelligence problem. Trlhis approach, I think, would lead the FBI to focus on conduct rather than advocacy. It would limit the FBI to the collection of evidence, instead of all information about the plans and the activities and beliefs of political groups. By making successful prosecution the goal, the FBI would refrain from employing illegal means, such as warrantless wiretapping, that could taint important evidence. I believe that this is the only way to solve the problem of violence without risking our civil liberties and democratic values. Certainly before we authorize the Government to conduct intelligence investi-gations to anticipate violence, we need to know more about the causes of violence and whether intelligence serves a useful purpose in pre-venting violence or anticipating it. I would recommend that although the record before Congress argues for prohibition, a further study of this issue is in order and that perhaps a commission should be.---

Mr. EDWARIS. May I interrupt you Mr. BY.RMAN. Yes. AMr. EDWARID. Is that not the problem that you mentioned earlier? And that is that in most of these cases, the thousands of cases that they had under investigation in 1974, 19,000 cases, there were no crimes involved I

Mr. BERlMAN. That. is correct. Mr. EDWARDs. That is right. Otherwise, if there was any probable cause for a crime, they would take it to the U.S. attorney and try to get a convict ion, but, they had practically no luck. Mr. B, R-HAN. Correct.. Mr. EDWARDS. As a matter of fact, none. Of the three or four crimes that, were charged and prosecuted those were processed in the State courts for non-Federal offenses. 297 Mr. BERMAN. That is right. With all of this massive -intelligence gathering, which was not predicated on crime and not specifically focused on violence, they had a far reaching and vast network-and still could not successfully prosecute. Mr. EDWAiDS. To a certain extent, that shoots down what you said, that they should concentrate on crimes, because if they had found any criminal activity in 1974 in the 19,000 cases they would have gone to court. I am not taking a contrary position, but I do point out that that was what the evidence showed. Mr. BERMAN. I am trying to make them concentrate on crimes to prevent this broad scale coverage of political groups without any predicate based on crimes. Mr. DRINAN. Very relevant to that, Mr. Chairman, have you ever discovered any regulations or guidelines to these spooky informants out there? You say on page 13 out there there are 1,000 informants and 1,000 agents. But in the GAO studies, I recall 85 percent of all of the information that they got was (lone by informants. Is there an, guidelines or are there regulations given to those informants? Mr. BEn MAtNi. No, there are not. l3oth the GAO study and the Senate Select Committee point out that while the FBI relies primarily on informants to gather information, the Manual of Instruction has no gIidelines for the use of informants. They have been able to use them at will. The Senate Select Com-mittee has reconended tighter ] procedures. Mr. ialperin will speak to that, but there have been ino 1-1 vs for informants. The informants are simply operated by the Bureau and told to "obey the law." That has lead to agent l)rovocateirs. and their interpretation of what the law involves. ''lat has been dangerous and has led to violence on the part of the Government. Mr. DIN. Would you say that that is possibly illegal, to employ informants, these people who'disguise themselves as a member o the group. Is there some illegality in the very concept of using this for intelligence? Mr. BERMAN. Yes,I believe that informants are a form of general search and I think it already has been analogized as a walking micro-phone, yet with the added and dangerous capacity to alter events within an organization and also intrude on first amendment rights. 'Ihey are the vactium cleaners within the organizations. 

... r. Em%,\m 1 )s. Will the gentleman yield? The GAO report reported over and over again that the informants and the infiltration and the activity of donlestic intelligence served in itself to do damage to the people and the organizations un(ler investi-gation, t hereby achieving a restilt that the B1ureau desired. Mr. BiEllMAN'. In my testimony I recommend the creation of a com-niission, one task of which would be to look at the relationship be-twe ,n intelligence' gathering and anticipation of violence, and als to considerer whether an intelligence agency by its tendency to itself en-

gage in political activities does not exacerbate and start violence of its ow!i. Ti reports of the Senate Select Committee on the informants, on 

('(OINTEILPR() operations, on the Black P)anther Party, indicate that 298 

informants became involved in violence, often at the instruction of the Bureau that they prevent violence. I don't know if this problem can be handled by regulations; it may be rooted in how intelligence agencies view the world. Mr. D.INAN. Mr. Berman, I wonder if you have thought of the possibility of bringing an action in the Feederal court for injunctive relief against the very use of informants. What could a judge do ? He 'would have to say, it seems to me, that this is illegal, receiving money for unaccountable actions. Mr. HIALPERIN. There has been such a case that was set aside by the court of appeals, by one of the justices on the Supreme Court on the grounds that it was premature. But there has been a suit, and if it is successful, it will be followed, I assure you, by a number of other re-quests for a similar injunction. Mr. BRMAN. My point in recommending the commission is that we do not yet know enough about this and other such problems to reach definite conclusions. I was surprised that the Senate Select Committee made the same statements that I have made, and then, at the end, turned its recommen-(lations around and said that the Attorney General had convinced it that the FBI is useful in anticipating and preventing violence. There-fore. it adopted the Justice department guidelines. Yet, the Senate's committeee offers no real documentation or support for that adoption. Its whole report goes the other way. I would very much like to know what the Attorney General said to this committee to turn it around. Iknow, for instance, that the FBI withheld information from the GAO and this committee knows that problem well. Those omissions from the FBI could have established what their role was in preventing vio-

lence. 

The examples of the FBI's preventing violence that the Senate Se-lect Committee found, I think there were eight mentioned in a foot-note. were from submissions that came out that were requested after the GLO study. But those eight investigations, as Senator Philip Hart points out in his following remarks in the Senate report, would not have been coveted under the sidelines that the Senate has prOl)osed. They were picked 1p-out of these 1 million investigations that the FBI conducted. Thus, I believe that the record indicates that Congress should make it clear that it wants the FBI to operate only as a criminal investiga-tory agency. 1y charter, it should establish that in the future the FBI may only initiate an invest igation of a person when it makes a showing of specific and articiilalble facts giving it reason to believe that an individual or individuals acting in conceit are engaged in or imminently likely to engage in a specific criminal act in violation of Federal law. To insure that the FIl will investigate only specific punishable acts. I also recommend, as does the Senate Select (Committee, the re peal of ti speech crime statutes. such as the Smith Act. which the F1I comi-t inles to 1iw as a )redicate for intelligence investigations, even though they have been ruled unc onstitutional as written and the courts will nmot enforce them. 

I believe that a criminal standard should also apply to all forms of po *ille espionage engaged in by knerican citizens. 299 

Today, I have focused on violenee and termrihm, bNt I am also' eon-cerned by the Senate Select Committee's recommendation that would authorize the FBI to cond.et preliminary and full preventive intelli-gence investigations against Americans who may soon engage in hos-tile forms of intelligence activities. Again, an allegation by someone is sufficievtlbo trigger an intelli. gence investigation, even if the espionage is not pliushable by law, be-cause the Senate includes in its recQjnmendaions something which is called "clandestine intelligence activities" which lare not criminal violations. Congress should establish a criminal investigative standard because the intelligence investigations in this area have also led to massive sllrveillance of the lawfiil activities of citizens. For example Opera-tion Chaos, the FBI-CIA mail opening program and NSkIs com-

miunication intercept programs were operated to determine whether antiwar activists were supported by hostile foreign powers, based only On the allegation that this was the case. A reasonal)le sis)icion standard would prevent suich investigations. And by making the forms of espionage that am now defined as "clandestine intelligence activitZ " specific violations of law, Congress would make it clear that the 1i BI only investigates crimes. Finally, I urge rejection of proposals to allow the F13 to engage in so-called preventive action. New authority can only serve to legalize 

conduct which is currently bevonl the law, including techniques em-

ployed by-the FBI in its COINTELPRO operations. 

I realize that the Attorney General has struck these from the gulide-

lines but the press I-elease accompanying the guidelines said that it was because of the controversy that those rules had provoked. The Attorney General also said in "extreme circumstances" that he anticipates thait agents would be able to continue such preventive actions. We inust know what this means and what extreme circum-stances would warrant this. I think that it is up to the Congress to make clear that the COIN-TEL 4 PRO operations--many of which were labeled preventive act ion--cannot be, continued or engaged in again. I say here that I am calling for a- fundaniental change in the FBT. But I really am asking for the retturn of the FiBI to agency investigat-ing criminal activity. That is what. it was inl 1924 and until 1939 w~lin President Roosevelt issIme( the Executive orders. And I (do not think that the Attorney General's guidelines or the Seuiate committee's recommendations accomplifili this return to the original intent. I (o not elievthe guidelines and recommendations will ('heck ti, Bureaut's excesses. It is a bureaucracy that will not be 

clecked by intelligelee guidel ines. 

I think that if we. look at the record, when MxRsevelt issued his guidelines, he said, it was not (lear that the Bureau should investigate sillwversive activities. vet the Bureau investigates subversive activities. Under the manuaml'of instrctions, in 1973, when it became ques-tionable as to what. atholritv enabled the Bureau to engage in iltelti-

gence investigations, it simlply switched to the speech crime statutes, even : houh t he con ris woIM l( not enforce t hen 1. 

he gunideliies aaw dlistinct ions bet ween prelinina ry and fldl-seale inv(,tigatiols. vet the (;AO stidy shows lhat Fill agents (to not make s mic distinctions and apply'the .alan techlIqi(lueS ill bX)th. 300 

Files are considered closed by the FBI but information is still in-serted in its dead files. And while the Justice Department and Congress try to write intelligence guidelines to restrict the FBI to investigations to antici-pate violence, the current Director resists such restrictions. He states in a memoradum to the GAO that: Limiting domestic investigations to preventing force and violence could restrict the gathering of Intelligence information useful for anticipating threats to national security of a more subtle nature. And I don't know what that means. As the Senate committee reports point out, the agents inside the Bureau interpret the guidelines to allow them to investigate subversives. If intelligence guidelines have not- worked to date, why will they work now? Those who argue that they can be enforced rely on oversight. But can Congress or the Justice )epartment or both oversee the thousands of investigations undertaken eacl year? I understand that the Attor-ney General has three monitors appointed to oversee all intelligence investigations in the field but how can the Department or Congress hold the Bureau accountable if the standards for investigation are as vague and flexible as those proposed in the guidelines ?Is Congress with its capacity to create a house 1n-American Activi-ties Committee, as well as an Intelligence Oversight Committee, abetter guarantee of Bureau propriety? Will the Justice Department or the FBI act as a restraining in-fluence on agents, when the facts indicate that they are often the ones urging the agents to intensify their intelligence activities to meet the crisis of the moment? I think not. Although oversight in certain circumstanie.s can be an effective and a necessary means to control the FBI and other investi-gative agencies, oversight can never be relied l u)on in the absence of a charter that explicitly states the limits of FBI activity. I think it is tine to draw the line and call the halt to intelligence investigations. And it, is time to enact a charter that defines the FlBl's inission as an investigator, upon reasonable cause, ofthe coininissioni of a crime against tie lUnited states. 

The purj)oseof a charter is to define, the proper role of the FBI in the free society. That role was best articulated by Harlan Fiske Stone in 1924 when he said that the "FBI investigates conduct in violation of the laws of the U7nited States and is not concerned with the political or other opinions of individuals." I believe my recommendations incorporate this concept and should be adopted in legislation. Enactnent of a legislative charter for the FBI is essential in a society based on the nile of law and conmittel to eliminating official lawlessness. I make two additional points in conclusion: One, Harlan Fiske Stone announced that standar(l after t he Pal ner raids, when Congress had before it a charter an was considering enacting a p~rohlib~ition against intelligence investigations. But. because tle bx elie\'ed in tile Attorney General, as we may believe in Attorney Gbnenl Levi, Coi -gress didl not. It took only 10 years to turn the whole thing arl'oundll-secret orders were isstued and the Bureau was on its way. 301 Finally, what I think we are really calling for is a statute for the whole Government, not just for the FBI, to serve as a reminder for Congress, the Executive, and the people that the democratic ideals we are committed to must be a standard that we look at in the next time of crisis and that we have to ponder why we set it down before, we make any efforts to change it and start us on this lawless track again. Tlank you ver much. Mr. EDWARI)s.Thank you very much, Mr. Berman. [The prepared statement of Mr. Berman follows:] STATEMENT OF JERRY J. BERMAN* Mr. Chairman, Congress must enact a comprehensive legislative charter to govern the FBI. No niore important business is before the Congress. At issue is the rule of law and the future of constitutional democracy. I therefore welcome this opportunity to state my own views on key issues that must be deliberated and resolved. I believe the need for a comprehensive FBI Charter is beyond debate. Before the FBI can be made to obey the law, it must have a rule of law to obey. The present statutes governing the investigative responsibilities of the FBI are silent on intelligence investigations aimed at American citizens.' Congress has allowed the Executive Branch to conduct intelligence operations as a matter of executive discretion and the Ixecutive Branch has authorized and expanded the FBI's intelligence mission at will. This is not law but license. Allowing the Executive Branch to claim au "inherent power" to direct FBI intelligence has led to widespread abuse.' Rule by executive order, subject to modification at any moment, has Ilaced our liberties on anything but a firm foundation. Only a legis-lative charter can put to rest the doctrine of inherent power and place all of the investigative activities of the FBI within a framework of positive law. After forty years of executive disorder, only public convenants can begin to restore public trust in our Investigatory agencies. The new Domestic Security Guidelines which Attorney General Levi promulgated in April of this year are a case In point." They may be more restrictive than previous executive directives, but they have been established under questionable authority ' and can be changed to-morrow or by the next Attorney General. Congress must no longer defer to the Executive. It must enact a Charter that sets forth precisely under what cir('unstances and to what extent the Bureau may investigated the political activities of American citizens. This poses a msic Issue that nimut be resolved during these deliberations: Should Congress author-izP, limit, or prohibit donm,,th iintelligence investigator bs? While I sense growing ,-upilrt for a hurterr to define and clarify the hvestiga-tive' Jurisdiction of the Fi1, I do not believe the proluinentsof legislation agree on how Vongress should rvolve this vital is. u. The FBI and the Justice )epart-ment watit the Congress to authorize domestic security Investigati)ns.' The *Mr. lerman is an attorney and directs the Domestic Security Project of the Center for National Security Studies of thP Fund for Peace. The views presente.i are his own. I See priuarlly 29 U.S.C. 533, thb base Investigatory authority of the FBI.- 

> 2

For the most broad Interpretation of the President's inherent power, see TPstimonv of Former Assistant Attorney General William Rebnquist In "Federal Data Banks and Con-

,ltutllonal Rights", a study prepared by the staff of the Subcommittee on c(ontltuti rll  

> lthtchts

of the Senate Committee on the Judiciary, 98rd Congress, 2d Session (Committee 'rint : 1974), pp. 598-601. 4.lut1ce Department Guldellnes on Domestic Security Investigations and Reporting on ('ivIl liordern and Demonstrationi Involving a Federal Interest, as released to the pre"s on March 10. 1976. (Hereinafter The Justice Department Guidelines) 6,,lhe Attorney General claims authority to Issue Intelligence guidelines under a suh-section of 24 IT.c. 533. which provides that the FBI may conduct "such other Invertilgn-lions regarding official matters under the control of the Department of Justlcr mid the lDsijirtmPnt of State as may be directed by the Attorney General." See Attorney General Edward 11. Levi, Address to the American )ar Association, August 13. 1975. The que'tlion. however. Ismrn reality whether Intelligence investigations are "ofeial mattirn" under the control of ite Attorney General. No other statute provides such explicit authority, tinI,1e the section of this same statute which authorizes the Fll to "detect" crimes Is rad to 

cover Intelilgence matters. Such a reading would mean that the FBI and the Justice I)eartment can put all Americans under surveillance "to detect" crimes. &The Attorney General and the Director of the FBI have articulated this oitlon In Iinimerahle statements. The latest will sufflee: See Tetimony of Attorney (eneirnl Edwtrd II. Levi before the Subcommittee on Civil and Constitutional Rights of the lHouse Comn-82 A;29 77---20 302 Senate Select Committee on Intelligence has made a series of recommendations that, if adopted, would limit but not curtail intelligence investigations." The House Intelligence Committee has called for prohibition by recommending the abolition of the Internal Security Branch of the FBI. My own opinion, and one that has been endorsed by a number of public interest organizations,' is that the FBI should be prohibited from conducting domestic intelligence investigations targeted at American citizens. Today, I would like to explain why I have reached this conclusion. 'The duty of the Congress is to devise a legal structure for the FBI that will -eurtai FJBI intelligence activities in order to avoid a repetition of the past. I also believe It is Incumbant on Congress to make no law "abridging the freedom of .eK.eeh, or of the pre.vs; or of the right of the people peaceably to assemble, and to petition the Government for a redress of grievances." Congress can only accom-lollsh both by enacting a Charter that prohibits all domestic Intelligence investl-gations by the FBI, and sleclflcally limits the FBI to initiating investigations oirly to "detect * * * and prosecute crimes against the United States."" -

'The record of ,FBI intelligence activities -over the last 40 years leads to the Inescapable conclusion that our country does not need and can no longer afford to permlt the FBI to engage In ongoing intelligence Investigations targeted at those who are not actually suspected of having committed crimes. Moreover, there Is no reason why FBI criminal Investigations of illegal acts will not take care of our real security Interests; I can think of no other limitation on the FBI that can guarantee our constitutional liberties and democratic values. By definition Intelligence investigations are initiated, without reasonable cause to believe a crime has been committed, to gather information on the plans, jnctlvitioe, beliefs, associations and membership of individuals and groups. In-vestigations Intrude on speech and associational privacy protected by the First, Fourth, Fifth, and Ninth Amendments to the Constitution. They "chill speech" by subjecting citizens to the fear of investigation, exposure, and reprisal if they uiigage in unpopular political activity.-i Acting tinder Executive Orders to Investigate "subversive activities", and "prevent violence",' the FBI has not only Intruded upon the privacy of Innumer-alhle indIviduals and groups, but has engaged in systematic illegal activities. As the Committee Is well aware, the FBI has not confined Its investigations to in-dividuals or groups engaged in Illegal conduct. It has Investigated members of Congress, peace groups, civil rights organizations, the women's liberation move-min , and delegates to political conventions. It has routinely Initiated and con-dltetedl Investigations and maintained files on nearly one million associates and i] embers of organizations that espouse revolutionary doctrine but whose activ-itle- have 1psed no clear and present danger to the security of the country.." And it has engaged in extensive illegal activity."b FBI "black bag jobs" or illegal burglaries carried out against hundreds of citizens and groups; lilttce on the J.udiclary, February 11, 1978' and the Statement of Clarence 31. Kelley, Director of the FBI. before the same Subcommittee on February 11. 1978.                                                                                              

> 1See Recommendation 44 In "Intellience Activities and the Rights of Americans",
> 1,ik 11 6f the "Final Report of the Select Committee to Study (overninent Oporatlous with Repect to Intelligence Activities", United States Renate, 94th Congress. 2d Session. Ii, port No. 94-755 (Government Printing Office: April 26. 1978). (Hereinafter SenAte Final Report)
> 7R,,commendations of the House Committee on Intelligence, February 11, 1976., Iouse Heiort 94-888. hse Letter To Arnate Intolligence Committee on FSI Charter RecommendattoMx from the American Civil l.bertlel Irnion. Americans for Democratic Actlon. Center for Natlnnal Scrity Studios, Committee for Public Justice, Common Cause, and United Automobile
> Workers. March 11, 1976.

S1 t I.S.C. 538.     

> Is Aline of

cat develops these roositions, e.g., NAACP v. Alabama, 337 V.S. 449 

(105s) : Rates v. lAttle Rock, 381 T.. 56 ; 19801. 

i1 See Executive Directives first issued by President Roosevelt orally in 1916 and fly                                                                         

> way of apress release in 1939: reimmued In 1945 hthe .J1istice tepartrnent: In 1950 by the Jlustice Department: and in 1952 by President Truman. See also. discussion in Senate
> Final Rpport. note 5supra, pp. 25-29.
> sIrefer particularly to the order IsNued by Attorney General Ramsiy (lark In 1087 to
> gather Intelligence relative to civil disorders :Memorandum from Attorney Ooneral Ramsey
> i'lark to J. Edgar Hoover. Director wBX, September 14. 1967. ee also discussIon in Senate

Final Report, note a supra, pp. 82-84.                                    

> is& Renate Final Report, note supra. p.,
> lso See generally Senate Final Rieport. nuote 11 suprn. see alson. lorry .1. Brmaitn nnd Morton if. Hialperin. eds.. "The Abuses of the intelligence Agencies" (Center for National Secuj-rity Studies: 1075), pp. 14-51).

03 FBI mail opening programs conducted In contravention of statutes and postal regulations and mail opening programs, also illegal, conducted in cooperation with the CIA, eventually resulting in the opening of 13,00O letters annually; FBI COINTELPRO operations conducted to "disrupt or otherwise neutralize" political groups, 2,411 actions that included harassment, dissemination of deroga-tory information from Investigative files, dissemination of false and anonymous materials to breed dissension among groups, agents provaceteur and interference in the political and judicial process; FBI "smear campaigns" against civil rights leaders, including Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., involving illegal wiretapping, dissemination of derogatory information and an anonymous letter urging King to commit suicide; FBI programs of warrantless wiretapping dating back to 1940, directed at citizens and groups In the United States; FBI political Intelligence programs conducted at the request of the Executive to keep Presidents informed about their "enemies" and opponents (usually per-

nsmiS who have done no more titan dissent from Administration policy). 

I believe this public record of abuse places a heavy burden of proof upon the Executive to show both the legitimacy and the propriety of allowing the FBI to continue to direct intelligence investigations at American citizens. Certainly the intrusions into Individual and associational privacy that are inherent in intel-ligence gathering make this burden of proof substantial. This burden of proof relates directly to the debate over the future role of FBI intelligence. Today, the Justice Department and the FBI seek authoriza-tion to conduct intelligence investigations in order to anticipate and prevent violence. The Department and the Bureau cite statistics Which show that acts of violence and terrorism are on the rise In the United States to justify the continuing need for FBI intelligence investigations.", In its Final Report, the Senate Select Committee also recommends that the FBI should he authorized to conduct limited Intelligence investigations to prevent violence and terror.'O Vwo assumptions underly these recommendations: (1) that intelligence investiga-tion4 play a useful role in anticipating and preventing violence; and (2) that carefullyy drawn guidelines together with executive and congressional oversight can prevent serious abuse.' These assumptions are simply not supported by the evidence on the public record. The facts strongly indicate the contrary and 

lead to the conclusion that this grant of authority is both unwarranted and dangero1s. I want to make it clear that I think violence and terrorism pose a danger to our society and I believe we must step up our efforts to find ways to reduce the Instances of violence in our society. However, I do not believe intelligence Investigations provide a meaningful solution to this problem and In fact may i-xacerbate it. I think the evidence makes this clear. First, the public record demonstrates that FBI Intelligence has been all but useless in anticipating or preventing acts of violence. AVcording to the Senate Select Committee, between 1060 and 1974, the FBI 'oI1(lucted over 500,000 separate investigations of persons and group under the "subversive" categorT, predicated on the possibility that they might lb likely to overthrow the government of the Vnited Staten. Yet not a single Individual or group has been prosecuted since 1957 under the laws which prohibit planning or advocating action to overthrow the government and which are the main alleged statutory basis for such FBI Investigations." According to the GAO audit of FBI Intelligence investigations, the Blreau has lnt been able to anticipate violence through its vast Intelligence operation. "In-vestigations of sabotage, certain bombings, and riot violations, and protection of foreign offlclals, although handled as pert of the I'RI's domestic intelligence operations, usually involved crimlinai acts committed before the investigations -3vere Initiated." 

11 Sp Statement of Clarence Kelley, Director FBI, before the Civil Rights and Con. 'tit tional Rights 8ubcommittee of the House Judiciary Committee. February 11, 197(1. Recommendation 44, and discussion in Senate Final Report, note 6 supra, pp. 318- 

> 1'

Senate Final Report note 6 supra.  

> "

Senate Final Report, note 6 supra, p. 19.     

> ('omptroller General of the

United States, "Report to the House Committee on the .tiltctary. FBI Domestic Intelligence Operations . . . Their Purpose and Scope: Issues That Need tO be Re'olrod" tGeneral Accounting OMee: February 24, 170), ipp. ;-4. tiere. in:after cited as GAO Report) 304 

In fact, the FBI rarely anticipates significant activity of any kind, including violent acts. According to the GAO audit of 19,700 cases,, Involving a random sample of 898 cases In 10 FBI field offices, the FBI anticipated activity in only 17 cases. Only 6 cases involved potential violence. 1 9One of the main reasons advanced for expanded collection of information about urban unrest and anti-war protest was to help responsible officials cope with possible violence. However, as the Senate Committee reports, a "former White House official with major duties in this area under the Johnson adminis-tration has concluded, ip retrospect that 'In none of these situations . . . would advance Intelligence about dissident groups (have) been of much help,' and that what was needed was 'plysial intelligence' about geography of major cities, and that the attempt to 'predict violence' was not a 'suceosful undertaking.' "= Moreover, much FBI information is useless to other agencies concerned about violent political acts. The GAO report notes that, while the FBI disseminates over 89% of its intelligenceL case reports to the Secret Service, responsible for protteting the lives of high government officials, the agency retains only 6% of the information received. The Secret Service said It received "too much not always useful information."' A specific Defense Department Directive, )OD 

Directive 5200.27, requires the destruction of a great deal of Information it receives from the Il! about civilians conmllered "threatening" to the military, including reports on civilian mlbversion." While citing acts of violence and terrorism as a justification for intelligence activities, it is common knowledge that the FBI did not anticipate any of them. T1he civil disorders of the 1960s, the Caitol bombing, the political assassinations and attempts, the activities of the SLA, andi other instances, were not antici-pated and obviously not prevented by FBI Intelligence gathering.' I believe this record not only undercuts the FBI's case for conducting Intelli-gence investigations in order to anticipate and prevent violence, but documents why intelligence Investigations are all but useless for this purpose. First, the FBI collects "facts", but the record shows that we do not knov what facts tire relevant in predicting violence. Second, Intelligence agencies depend on prior notice, yet most political violence Is spontaneous. As three presidential commissions have concluded, "the larger outbreaks of violence in the ghettos id (on the canmpm".es were most often slxntaneous reactions to events In acliniate of social tension and upheaval." ' Third, the FBI assumes there Is acausal connection between "speech" and "action", but as random bombings demonstrate, terrorists do not follow rational patterns. And finally, the Fill relies on a network of established Informants for Information, but true terrorists know this and operate underground. Under these circumstances, massive intelligence coverage is relatively umeless and will continue to be unless we adopt the una-eeltable alternative of putting everyone under surveillance. The problem must 

he addressed differently. My second major point is that the Justice Department Guideilnes and the Senate Committee recommendations, designed to limit the "BI, actually authorize continuing coverage of lawful political activity. They pose a grave risk to our civil liberties. To allow the FBI to anticipate violence, the Justice Department Guidelines authorize the FBI to Initiate an Investigation against an individual or individuals acting in concert on the basis of a mere allegation that they are engaging or will                                                                         

> 1(;AO Report. pp. 140-144. In reviewing 101 organization ies. the GAO oinrl only
> 119 instances where activities were anticipated by the FBI. Only 12% of thep netivltio. e.uilI conceivably involve violence. There Ix no record of whether the Fill prevented aiiy of thla potential violence. The FBI contends that these statistics mar he unfairr hoeai ,. thev concpntrate on Investigations of Individuals rather than groups ((AO Report. Appe,-
> dl V). In response, GAO states that its "samp

le of organizations and control flle xwere ,f11e'lvit to determine that generally the F I did not report arlnnee knowledge of planned violence." In most of the 14 Instances where such advance knowledge was ottainiil, It related to "miwh activitles as speehes, demonstration or meetings-all essentially non. violPit." (GAO Rtpoort, p. 144).                                    

> 0Senate Final Revort. n-te 01 supra. p. 10. Tegtnulny of Joseph Califano.
> *1 GAO Report. note is supra. pp. 12.-120. t'Qnate tFinal Report. tote asupra. p. 254.
> 2-'8,e fbi, exaniples cited by Director K~elley In his_

statement of February 11. 1976. rite'l      

> InI note I I snpra anti

In is Me~morandlum to the Comptroller, GAO Report, note IS an1pra,      

> 212-217.
> Soyinate Final Report, note 6

supra. p. (8. See "Report of the National ComisS.lon on              

> ('lvii Dmisorders" (1968). chapter 2portot of the National Commission on the Causes and

l'r,'ve n tol of Violence" (1969) "Report of the President's Commisalon on Campus  

> Iiir.,st" (1970).

305 

engage in violence at some time to achieve political ends. Within ninety days, if the FBI finds "specific and articulable facts" to indicate that such persons "may be" engaging in activities that will involve violence at some time In the future, a full scale investigation may be conducted until "all leads are exhausted." *At no point do the Justice Department Guidelines specify what kinds of facts justify Investigation. Earlier drafts mentioned advocacy, membership, and sup-port of groups that engage or may engage in "violer " political activities. Later drafts state that the FBI must look to facts that indicate a "likelihood" that an Individual or group will resort to violence, but do not specify what this nieans.' Past practice is instructive, and the FBI has always interpreted such authoriza-tions to mean that it should conduct anticipatory, ongoing, and perhaps never ending Investigations of the members of organizations who espouse "revolu-tionary" doctrine; those who associate with such organizations, even though they may only attend meetings or receive literature; those who offer support to mu'h groups, even if it is only suport of their right to association; ald those non-revolutionary organizations who might be infiltrated or co-opted. It is clear from past FBI conduct that the effect of such guidelines would be to permit the Bureau to inhibit individuals from dissenting publicly on matters of program  

> 1111d policy.

To anticipate violence, the FBI would be authorized to investigate the same individuals and groups it has always investigated. As the Comptroller General has stated, "the language in the draft guidelines would not cause any substantial -change in the number and type of domestic Intelligence investigations irilti-attl." I" (In 1974, according tW Senate documents, there were over 30,000 ongoing intelligence investigat Ions.") As the Senate Select Committee Final Report points (Jut, intelligence officials inside the FBI interpret the Guidelines to authorize continuing Investigations of "subversives".0 

If these Guidelines had been in effect in the 1960s, the Bureau could have justilied most if not all of the Investigations that have since become the subject of public concern: all antiwar groups, including the American Friends Service committee e and Women Strike for Peace, becau.,e anti-war demonstrators might resort to violence; all memlbrs and associates of the Communist Party because it advocates the violent overthrow of the government; employees of the Institute for Policy Studies Ixcause of the suspicion that they were in contact with the violent Weatherpeople: and all civil rights organizations., Including the Southern Christian Leadership Conference, because civil rights protesters interfered withi interstate commerce to influence public policy. The newest guidelines require that there be "substantial" interference, but can FBI agents draw the line be-tween substantial and trivial interference? The Senate Select Committee also provided standards for the conduct of pre-ventive intelligence investigations. The Committee adopts the framework of tile .Iustice Department Guidelines but attempts to make the rules more strict to prevent the Bureau from investigating lawful political activities. I do not think the Committee su.ceeled and it expressed its own frustration at trying to draft language that maintains the "fine line" between surveillance of lawful activity and violent conduct.," I believe that frustration is warranted, because that line cannot be drawn. There is no way around the fact that intelligence investiga-tions are based on a predicate short of criminal conduct and unavoidably lead to Investigation of lawful activity. Under thn Senate standards, the FBI may conduct a preliminary preventive Intelligence investigation for as long as ninety (90) days "when It has specific MThe latest guidelines were Issued on March 10, 1976. Although the giidelines state the purpose of investiga tIons as ascertaining "information on the activities of individuals, or individuals acting In concert which Involve or will involve the use of force or viole'nve and the violation of federal law." the "Involve or will Involve" standard Is diluted by fol. lowing sections which authorize the FBI to initiate preliminary investigations on the bnsis of mere "allewationi" and fNl Investigations If permonm or ground "may he" enated In activities that involve or will involve violence. The Attorney General admitted that amore "fleiIble" standard was required to explain the choice of "may be" over "are Involved."                                                           

> See Testimony cited-in note 5supra.
> 3 1 refer to earlier drafts of the guidelines issued in November and December of 1975.
> 27 GAO Report. note 18. supra, p. 150.
> 2A Hearings before the Seleet Committee to Study Governmental Operation 4With Respect to Intelligence Activities of the United States Senate. 94th Congress, lit Session, V411'Iml' ii. F'd,,ral Bureau of Investigation (Government Printing OMce: 1976), pp. 34-350 (EXhihits 3and 4).

I Senate Final Report, note 6 supra, p. atR. 80 Senate Final Report. note 6 supra, p. 321. 306 allegation or substantiated information that an American will soon engage In, 

terrorist activity." "s In reading this standard, I see no difference between it and the standard pro-posed by the Justice Department. What is the difference between an allegation and a specific allegation? Or between likelihood and soon? Or between violence and terrorists activity? As SenatorPhlip Hart (D-Mich) points out In his additional comments at the end of the Final Report, "The Recommendation would preclude mere advocacy or association as a predicate for investigating Americans. In practice, however, that would simply require specific allegations that an unpopular dissident group was planning terrorist activity."" Senator Hart points out the problem with examples: "Of course, if the FBI receives a tip that John Jones may resort to bombing to protest American involvement in Vietnam, the Bureau should not be forced to sit on its hand until the blast. But our proposals would permit more than re-view of federal and local records on John Jones and interviews of his associates, even in a preliminary investigation. On the basis of an anonymous letter, with no supporting information-let alone any indication of the source's reliability-the FBI could conduct secret physical surveillance and ask existing informants about him for up to three months, with the Attorney General's approval. "The Coninittee was concerned about authorizing such extensive investiga-tions before there is even a 'reasonable basis of suspicion' the subject will en-gage in terrorism. The Report offers examples of how this recommendation would work, and indicates our desire to insulate lawful political activity from investigation of violent terrorism. But these very examples illustrate how in-extricable the two may be at the outset of an inquiry into an allegation or ambiguous information. The task of finding out whether a dissident is contem-plating violence or is only involved In vigorous protest inevitably requires in-vestigation of his protest activities. In the process, the FBI could follow the organizers of a Washington peace rally for three months on the basis of an allegation they might also engage in violence." The Senate opens the Intelligence door further by proposing that the F)31 be allowed to conduct a full preventive intelligence investigation if there is "rea-sonable suspicion" that an American "will soon engage in terrorist activity." 3' 

In effect, any factual basis beyond allegation (such as a meeting at which violent acts are discussed) can trigger an investigation that can continue for a year or longer if the Attorney General finds "compelling circumstances." "

There Is no definition of "compelling ciTcumstances" and the standard of "soon will engage in" begins to have that indefiniteness that would allow the Bureau to investigate any possibility of future violence. I think this standard invites arepetition of long-term surveillance of lawful political activity, and a resort to familiar covert techniques such as informer plants and inspection of bunk recor(ls. tax returns, trash covers, and the like. All may be employed in a full investigation under the Senate's recommendations." What the Senate effort demonstrates is that the issue cannot be resolved by standards but only by prohibition. lEven narrower standards will not suffice. To focus on standards ignores the central leson of the recent investigations. As the Senate Committee itself observed, "We have seen a consistent pattern In which programs initiated with limited goals, such as preventing criminal violence, or Identifying foreign spies, were expanded to what witnesses char-acterized as 'vacuum cleaners', sweeping in information about lawful activities of American citizens." a It is the nature of Intelligence investigations to grow and expand, especially in times of turmoil and crisis. As I remarked earlier, the problem of political violence must be addressed differently. While the-Justice Department and the FBI continue to engage Con-gress In a dialogue over how to control FBI intelligence activities, they have failed to justify these activities; or to argue convincingly that legitimate secu-rity Interests cannot be protected by conducting criminal Investigations of Indfi-

viduals and groups limited to the gathering of evidence rather than "informa-tion", and aimed at prosecution rather than "prevention of violence".  

> S

Senate Final Report, note 8 supra, p. g (Recommendation 44). Senate rina Report, note 6 supra, p. 161. 

Senate Flnal Report, sote a supra. p. 86"61. 

Senate Final Report, notes supra p. 820 Recommendation 44). Senate Final Report, note 6 supra, p. 820 (Reoopmendation 44). Senate Final Report, note 6 supra, pp. 821-429 (Recommendat ion$ 55-59). Senate Final Report, note 6 supra, pp. 8-4. 307 

I believe the FBI should be required to attack the problem of violence by conducting criminal investigations leading to prosecution and conviction of those engaged in violent crimes. Instead of employing 1000 agents and 1000 in-formersal in the apparently fruitless exercise of identifying ahead of time the lone assassin or persons "likely" to engage in political violence, the FBI should concentrate its efforts on deterrence. This can only be accomplished by detecting and prosecuting those who have committed violent crimes--and not only the politically violent. Out of over 1900 bombings in 1975, only 89 were attributed to political terrorists. This is further evidence that this is a police problem and not an intelligence problem." This approach would lead the FBI to focus on conduct rather than advocacy. It would limit the FBI to the collection of evidence instead of "all information" about the plans, activities, and beliefs of political groups. By making success-ful prosecution the goal, the FBI would refrain from employing illegal means (ie., warrantless wiretapping) that could "taint" important evidence. I believe this Is the only way to solve the problem of violence without risking our civil liberties and democratic values. Certainly before we authorize the gov-

ernment to conduct intelligence investigations to anticipate violence, we need to know more about the causes of violence and whether intelligence serves auseful purpose in preventing violence. I would recommend that although the record before Congress argues for prohibition, a further study of the issue is in order. Perhaps a commission should be created to study terrorism and how to combat it without sacrificing democratic values. The Commission, among its other duties, would be required to study political violence from a broader perspec-tive than the Commissions set up to study the ezvil disorders and campus out-breaks during the 1960s. It would also explore in depth whether-and under what circumstances-the intelligence agencies can play a useful role in prevent-lg or anticipating violence. I would also charge that Commission with the re,-sponsibility to explore the relationship between lxilce tactics and the occurrence of violence. As we know, the FBI engaged in violent acts in order to prevent vio-lence. It sponsored and directed agents provocateur and carried out COINTIh',-PRO operations to "prevent" violence. Perhaps the Commission might concluu,, that an intelligence agency, prone to engage in covert activities of its own is not the-proper agency to Investigate terrorist acts. Perhaps a new agency is nece.14ary that works on different assumptions than those of the intelligence community. While this study is conducted, I believe the Congress should make It clear that it wants the FBI to operate as a Criminal investigatory agency. By Charter, it should establish that in the future the FBI may only initiate an investigation of fny person when it makes a showing of "specific and articmlable" facts giving it reason to believe that an individual or individuals acting In concert are engaged in or are Imminently likely to engage In a selcific criminal act-i-violatc'n of 

federal law.600 To insure that the FBI will investigate only specific, punishable acts. I also recommend-as does the Senate Committee b--the repeal or revision of Sections 2383-2386 of Title 18 to conform to constitutional standards. As written. the4e statutory speech "crimes" serve no other purx)ose than to authorize the FBI to investigate the speech, membership, and associational activities of persons and groups under the pretext of conducting criminal investigations. Although there have bWen no prosecutions or convictions under these statutes for two decades and the Supreme Court has construed them narrowly to prohibit only "imminent law-less action" involving violence ", the:LFBI routinely relies on these statutes as abasis for investigation, and interprets them as a.Justification for prying into pro-tected activitles.42 The Justice Department's Guidelines make these activities t he basis for preliminary investigations. By repealing these statutes-and rejecting all intelligence GuIidelines--Congress will make it clear that the FBI cannot and must not investigate conduct which the government cannot punish. 

> G

(AO Reort. note 18 supra pp.182 and 185. 

Rnat' Iinal Report. noted supra, p. 20 (fn. 112).  

> 0.t

See Terry v. Ohio. 892 ITR. 1 (1068). "Retsonable suspicion" meanq specific and artlcu-lnble facts which taken together with rational inferences from those facts give rime tM a                                                                                     

> reasonablP snirpicion that specified activity baa occurred, is occurring, or Is about to occur.
> 6, Senate Final Report, note 6supra, p. 389 (Recomnmendation 98): Smith Act and
> Voorhis Act.
> "4 Brondesmbrg v. Ohio, 895 U.B. 444, 447 (1969). ti whieh the Court held that political
> groups are within their legal rights to advocate any course of action Including the "nie of force or law violation except where such advocacy Is directed to Inciting or producing Imminent lawless action and Is likely to Incite or produce such action." 45. GAO Report, note 16 supra, pp. 2&-41.

308 I believe a criminal standard should also apply to all forms of possible esplo-nage engaged in by American citizens. Today, I have focused on investigations of violence and terrorism, but I am also concerned by the Senate Select Cominittee's recommendation that would authorize the FBI to conduct preliminary and full preventive Intelligence investigations against Americans who "may soon engage in . . . hostile foreign intelligence activities."' b Again, an allegation that an American is conspiring with a hostile foreign power is sufficient to trigger an intelligence investigation, even if the espionage is not punishable under law (e.g. clandestine intelligence activities). Congress should establish a criminal invest-gutive standard because intelligence investigations in this area have also led to massive surveillance of the lawful activities of citizens. For example, Operation CIHAOS, the FBI-CIA mail opening program, anti NNA's coniumnleations Inter-cept programs were operated to determine whether anti-war activists were sup. Iorted by hostile foreign powers based only on "allegations" that this was the case. A reasonablee suspicion" standard would prevent such investigations. And, by making the forms of espionage that are now defined as "clandestine Intelli-gence activities" Slecific violations of law, Congress would make It clear that the Fill only investigates crimes. Flially, I urge rejection of propJosals to allow the Fill to engage In so-called 

"preventive" action. FIll agents already have the power to warn i~tential vic-tins, to arrest, to obtain a Judlicial warrant to st,arcl for or st-lze dangerous c.ntraliand such is bondis or weapons. New authority cn only serve to legalize conltut which is currently beyond the law, including tc.iliiqu(Ieq employed by the Fill in its COINTEIiI'I( operations. Now that the Attorney generall has I'xpressed sinllar reservations with respect to preventive action, Congress has even more reason to prohibit such activity tild to focus its deliberations on 

spci tllh recommendations to outlaw C)INTELPI() tech niques.a 

I ami calling for a fundamental change in tile Fill, I have already pointed out that the (uidelines and Senate Itecomn mendations as drafted will not niter Bureau Jirisdiction or practice. And I do not believe that stricter gidelines can accomplish this. When we speak about Fill intelligence, we are really refer-ring to a large bureaucracy which have developed son intelligence mentality. For nearly forty years it was under the sole direction of J. Fdgar Hoomver, and agents have been trained to believe that dissenters are enemies of the people and are therefore subject to wholesale investigation." Ilow cain guidelines be expected to re-elucate a bureaucracy so Ingrained with this attitude? Director Hoover  

> 1n1y

he gone, but riany of the unprosecuted agents who initlattd th investiga-tions and carrlil out, without question, systematic programs of criminal activi-ties remain. It is a bureaucracy that will not be checked by intelligence guidelines. When Roosevelt issued his directives Ii 1)39, they did not authorize the bureau to investigate subversives. still, tile Bureau interpreted them In that planner." When the "Manual of Instruction" was revised In 1978 to require a criminal statute as a ipredieate for investigation, the Fill simply cited tile speech crime statutes of the U.S. Code, and interpreted them to allow investigations of simiiti-cat I advocacy lid associational activity, which tile courts refuse to Iilinisi|." Although the Manual, like the guidelines. distinguishes Ietween prelintinary and full scale Investigations, Burean agents make no distinction, and employ lie same investigative techniques in )th." 

62b Renate Final Reloort, noto 6 nupra, p. 320 (Reommendation 44). "Statement of Attorney General Ed ward IT. TArl, Justice Department Press Release, March 10. 1076. It should be noted that while the Attorney General removed porevenive                

> action sections from the Guidelines issued by the Department. hin press release appearm to
> atlhorile them on

an "Informal baus." He states: "there also may be situations of great luinian Iteril in which the FBIl might seek to take step to prevent enormous violence front tking plme. In such situations. the FBI would undoubtedly go to the Attoril- orleneral for pernmslon to take such amruiallve steps rather than to watt pxa~lvely for the disaster        

> I-occur." To avoid misinterpretation, Congress should

enact the Recommendatt,, of lie                               

> Senate Select Committee that would ban POIN'TEI,IR( .type activities. He Senate Final
> Ilelort. note 0supra. p. 317 (Recommendation. 46 -41).
> 4Re "The Development of FIl Domestic Intelligtnee Investigation". asuoplementary
> report

imsud try th Relect ('omnitteot to Httudv (verninental (hteratloti with ltelpa.t to Intelll enre Activities. United States Senate (May 1, 1976).                      

> "OAO Report, note 18 supra, Appendix IV.
> M6A0 Report, note 18 supra. pp. 28-81.
> 6(AO Report, note 18 supra, p. 111.

# 309 

Although the ManLal also calls for the termination of investigations within 90 days, the Bureau extends inveslgations on a routine basis, and continues to insert new information In "dead files." ,s While the Justice Department and Congress try to write intelligence guide-lines to restrict the FBI to investigations to anticipate violence, the current Director resists such restriction. He states. In a memorandum to the GAO, that limiting domestic intelligence investigations to preventing force and violence could restrict the gathering of intelligence information useful for anticipating threats to national security of a more subtle nature. This Is the case because, in my view, such a limitation would undermine our institutions during their pre-liminary stages of organization and preparation and thus inhibit the development of an intelligence collage upon which to base-meaningful analyses and predic-tions as to future threats to the stability of our society." If Intelligence guidelines have not worked to date, why will they work now? Those who argue that they can be enforced rely on oversight. But can Congress or the Justice department or both oversee the thousands of Investigations under-taken each year? Can they hol the Bureau accountable if the standards for investigation are as vague and flexible as those propoe sl In the guidelines? Is congress , with its capacity to create a IIUAC as well as an Intelligence Oversight Committee a better guarantor of Bureau propriety? Will the Justice 

i)epartment or the FBI act as a restraining influence on agents, wheni the facts indicate that they are often the one urging the agents to intensify their in-telligence activities to meet the crisis of the moment? I think not. Although oversight, in certain circumstances, can Ie an effective, Indeed necessary, means to control tihe Fill and other ivestigative agencies, oversight can never he relied 

om in the absence of a charter which explicitly states the limits of FIll activity. It is time to draw the line and call a halt to unnecessary intelligence activities. It Is time to enact a charterr that :

(1) defines the Fil's inislion as investigating, upon reasonable cause, the comminission of crimes against the United States; 

(2) repeals I U.,.C. 23:3 (Rebellion and Insurrection) ; 18 U.M.C. 2384 (Sedi-tioums ('onspiracy) ; 18 U.S.C. 2385 (Advocating the Overthrow of the Glovern-ment ) ; id Is '...C. 2386 (Voorhls Act) ;13) limits lilt' collection (and dissemination) of Information to that relevant ito erinmlial Investlgation and prosecution; 

44 provides for the destruction of irrelevant Information and insures that files will lbe sealed once all investigation is terininted; 

(5) irhibitm ('OI NTEI,'RO-type activities; 

(I) lrohhlit the FIl from encouraging, assisting, or directing state and local pi114-P sgneilies iII doing ally investigative work for the Fill, which the Fill itself is wiot entitled to )do, except criminal Invesligatims within their state Jurisdicthion; 

47) and Iproviles criminal penalties for the violation of any provision of the ('1rter. und assures civil redress for the victims of much violatiolis. The purloet of the carterer Is to define the prowr role of the Fil in our free soclety. That role was best articulated by Harlan Flske Stone in 1924: The liturean of Investigation Is not concerned with liolitcal or )ther olhinions of individuals. It is concerned only with their (onltu't and then only with such (tndift as Is forbidden by the laws of the United States. When it lx)lice system 11 1Ihuyond them limits, it Is dangerous to the proljer alinistration of Just Ie and to hunman liberty.. I believe that my reconmaiendations Incorplorate tils concept and should be adopted in legislation. Enactment of a legislative Charter for the Fill is essn. til lit *x shiety based oni the rile of law and committed to eliminating official lit w hesslmess. 

'I. EI)wAmI)s. Outr scond witness is 'Mr. Morton H[alperin, who is tlw diimector of the P'oject on Nati onal Security an(i Clvii lilsrties. Mr. I laiperin formerly directed a study for the 20th Century Fund on 

# In frolulat ion, Nat ioimi Sec'urity and ( onst itutional 1r(wedures. lie has been a senior fellow with the Brookings Institution, a senior staff uuemdetr with the National Security Council, and a Deputy Assistant Secretary of )efense, subsequent to being an assistant pro-fessor of government at Ilarvar(l.  

> 0A

( iwiort. note IR supra, pp. 111-116 and 121.       

> (;AO Report. note 18 supra, p. 213.

310, Mr. Halperin is a prolific author of books and articles on the sub-ject before us and many other subjects within his areas of interest. Mr. Halperin brings with him the dubious distinction of having been the subject of activities by our Government which many of is believe have no place in a free society. We welcome you, Mr. Halperin. TESTIMONY OF MORTON H. HALPERIN, DIRECTOR, PROJECT ON NATIONAL SECURITY AND OIVIL LIBERTIES Mr. HALPERIN.. Thank yon very much, Mr. Chairman, I am very pleased to be with you. Would like to just simply sumnmarize the points made in my statement. I really begin where Mr. Berman left off. He told you that we need legislation which limits the FBI to the investigation of criminal conduct based on a reasonable suspicion that that conduct has occurred. And I want to go on to suggest that that is not enough, as difficult as that will be to do, I think it is not sufficient. It is not sufficient because there is the first amendment problem as well as the problem of the fourth amendment, that the Supreme Court has made it clear on many occasions and I think that the Constitution is clear that where first'amendment rights are involved, there needs to be further restric-

tions on what the Government can do. The Government's ability to investigate crime or to regulate conduct of other crimes is much more limited where it may intrude upon the first amendment rights of American citizens. 'The reason for this is clear, namely, that where the government investigation intrudes upon speech or on assembly or on the press, then it runs the danger of casting a chilling effect on that behavior. The Sup reme Court has held, and I believe that any of us who have been involved in the critical process know that the rights guaranteed by the first amendment depend, in part, on the right of privacy. We need to be able to engage in secret political association. We need to be able to meet in private and people need to be able to contribute to political organizations without having that information public. We need to be able to plan for political activities without the Fed-eral Government being there. And it is this right of secret political n.ssoeiation that has been affirmed by the Supreme Court time and again in a long series of case. beginning with NAACP v. Alabama and com-ing down to Buckley v. V'aleo where the Court struck down, as you know, a number of the provisions of a statute which was designedI to plrvent corruption, where there was a clear record of corruption and whAere there was no argument that the statute in fact would contribute to limiting corruption, precisely because it would limit the right of free and secret political assciat ions. Chief Justice Burger. writing partly in dissent. and indeed disqent-inm to some of the disclosure provisions, has really written quite elo-quently in the statement that I quote on page 5 of my statement about the need for secrecy, about the fact that a free society depends on enabling its citizens to meet together in private associations and that the record of harassment of private groups, of particularly unpopular private groups, adds weight to the importance of permitting secret nsociat ions. 311 And, thus, it seems to me that if there is a possibility that investiga-tion of a criminal activity is going to intrude upon first amendment rights and lead to the release of information, the citizen has the right to keep secret, that very special problems arise. If the Congress cannot enact the statute requiring the NAACP to list its members, then, it does not have the right to get that information by a theft or a burglary or even by an informer. The right of keeping members' lists secret is no less violated if they are written down by an informer, as has happened on many occasions, than, if that informa-tion is obtained by the use of a subpena which compels the publication of the list. So, in my view we need special restrictions, special procedures, even where there is a lawful criminal investigation if it might intrude upon first amendment rights. I think the principles that need to be included here are the follow-ing: First, there cannot be an investigation of lawful political activity; and second, that any investigation that might intrude upon first amend-ment rights, must be basedupon what the Supreme Court has called in numbers of cases a compelling State interest. Third, that investigations that might involve an intrusion into areas protected by the first amendment need to be curtailed so that the in-trusion is the minimum one necessary to carry out the lawful political activity. Finally, that no group or individual should be singled out for in-vestigation of criminal behavior because of his beliefs or activities. The courts have said that you cannot make the decision to prosecute based upon a suspect criteria, that you cannot prosecute, for example, antiwar groups who pray in the Pentagon lobby, when you don't pros-ecute prewar groups or nonpolitical groups which pray in the Pen-tagon lobby. And it seems to me that this principle of no selective prosecutions based on first amendment standards should be applied as well to selec-tive investigations. Now, if you accept these principles, you then have the very difficult problem o putting them into guidelines which direct the Bureau to 

use special standards if first amendment rights are involved. There are two issues: What should trigger these new standards; and second, what should these additional standards be. 

I think that some of the triggers are pretty clear. It should be clear that if a criminal investigation is going to give us information about a candidate for political office, clearly, the special procedures should be followed. If the criminal investigation is going to involve a party or an orga-nization which runs candidates for political office, the special proce. (lurvs should be involved. If the criminal investigation is going to involve organizations or yield information about organizations which exercise first- anmendment rights, by lobbying for legislation sup-porting political candidates or taking stands on public issues, the new procedures should be involved. And, then, too, if the criminal investigation is going to require the gathering of information about lawful political views or activities, then these standards should be involved. 312 Beyond that, I would say that the presumption should be in the favor of applying these standards and that any doubt about whether these new standards need to be.applied should be resolved either by applying the standards or by submitting the issue to higher authority; from the field to the Bureau, from the Bureau to the Justice Depart-ment, if there is any doubt as to whether or not there is any doubt as to the violation of first amendment rights possibly being violated by the investigation. I would also put special restrictions on any such investigation requiring the careful plan to insure that there is a minimum intrusion in first amendment rights. And, it seems to me that there is a special problem raised by the use of informers. The Supreme Court has held that here it is constitutional to use informants in the Hoffa case, which, of cour.e, did not involve any claim of first amendment rights. The issue as to whether informers are constitutional where first amendment rights are at stake is now being adjudicated in the ,Soiabst Workers Party case, but it seems to me it is the responsibility of the Congress to say what the Constitution requires and to protect the rights of American citizens and not to leave that, decision to simply the decisions of the Supreme Court, even if the Supreme Court were to say that it is lawful and constitutional to have informers in political organizations, Congress, clearly, has the right, and I would argue the responsibility to enact legislation that prevents that. Now, in my view, the use of informers in political organizations 

poses very p)ressing, very mecial and very dangerouss l)roblens, because an informant in a lawful political organization even if he is there to, find out whether they are planning a bombin g, can not simply sit. there and when a vote is-taken say "I alstain because I am an FI3 informer and I am oly here to gather information." And, when asked his views on what thle organization can do, hie cannot say that he has no views. He has to particil)ate, he or she has to particil)nt(, actively in the organization: Voting, advocating, taking stands, and carrying out the activities of that organization. And, even if there is no attempt to manipulate, even if lie is not operating On instructions to sow dissent or to cause violence, inevitably those ind ividunls who are. fake members of the organization interfet'e with the members of that organization. The right of really free assciation is a mockery when senior officials of the organization are FBI informants in there posing as bona fide members of the organization. So, I would urge that tile Congress enact a ban on any use of in-formants who pretend to be members of political organizations and that Congress require judicial warrants for the use of any informant whlein that informant may be in a position where he gathers infor-mtnioii which is in fact i)rotected by tile first. amendment. There are a number of other restrictions that I think should be a))plied and these. I think, need to be worked out in detail. My )asie point is that it seems to me that. the Ilm-eat's re.or(l sug-gests that it cannot be (lepended upoon to avoid gathering information that it should not gather, even in the course of legitimate criminal investigations. 313 But, beyond that, Congress has an obligation, as Mr. Berman has said, not to say as we said before to the revious Attorney General, we have a good Attorney General anda good FBI Director, and they will do right. think that Congress has an obligation to say what the law should be, what intelligence agencies ought to do and what the rights of American citizens are, and that we should not leave that-as I think the Founding Fathers understood very well-one should not leave those judgments simply to the will and the whim of the executive branch ofcials. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. [The prepared statment of Mr. llalperin follows:] STATEMENT OF MORTON II. IIALPV~lN* Mr. Chairmni: No more urgent task faces the Congress than to enact legisla-tltiik firmly bringing the FBI under .the rule of law and the mandates of the ('onstitution. There seens to ie broad agreement on the need for a legislated Charter for the FIll. I am grateful for this opportunity to present my own views 

on this question to the Committee. My testimony follows that of my colleague, Jerry Ilernian, and seeks to pick 

up where his presentation leaves off. Mr. Berman has, I believe, presented a ier-

suasive argument for alsiishing all doinmest Intelligence investigations. All ler-sons in the United states have the right to he left alone, free of governmental sur-veillance unless they have broken a criminal law enacted by the Congress. Investi-galtions of lawful polit ical activities have no place in a free society. But saying that and enacti ting It iihl) law is ilmortant, but not sufficient. There remains the danger that the zeal to investigate and manipulate the iolitical proc-ess will find other outlets. For tihe past several years. In fact, the FIll has predicated most of its luitelli-ge, llee itivestigatllbs ()11 l1)ssHIle violations of the criminal law. It has, however, c,( Iducted ,xtensive investlgatiomLs based on the mere proballlity that the Idetis of an organization or an individual may lead ult itiately to criminal activity. IAg-

Islntion iiust not only limit the FIll to invesligating crimes but it must limit investigations to situations in which there Is "reasonable suspicion" that a crinie has been, or is about to lie committo-d.' A second proldiemi arises froin thie presence in tlihe criminal code of statutes 

Which apieuar (lin their face to) Iunish iniere advoc-acy, In violation of lit- First Anitldinieilt. Sichtit talites. including the Smiith Act (18 1'.S.C. 2385) in1d the Vox)rlils Act (18 l'.S.('. 2386), should Ile revealed illniilg other reasons to entire fliit they tire not iised is a1 pretext by the Fill to4 continue domestic Intelligence itvestignitions iiitiler it different guise. 'i'iwre is it third lor, idein which would Iwrsist even if the Fill were Ilinited to  

> -

lnvestigitlng crilmti's. It Is it more serious problem (and one to which the remainder 

(of ily reiarlzs are directed. Normally, the Investigation of a violation of a constitutional criminal statute is linilteili oiily boy the Fourth Amendmient nuid whatever constraints Conigress chooses to, place on Federal investigative ageno'ies. However, an additional and iiiech more restritlive, set of restraints numst coie into lay if the investigations may intrude upoin areas protected by the First Annedniment. The Hupreme Court has often nidl recently undated additional constraints when First Amendment rights are at stake." *MNir. lalperin directs the Project on National Security and Civil liberties Jointly spo un xored by the ACIJU Foundation and the Center for National Security Studies of the Fund for P'ace. The views presented are his own. 

'The phrase "reonaile suspicion" and Its definition comes from the Rupreme Court d414'iplon In Terry v. Ohio, 829 U.S. 1 (1968). The phrase means "specific and articulahle faets. which, taken together with rational Inferences from those facts, give rise to a rea-sonalile suspicion that specified activity has occurred. Is occurring or Is about to occur. 

I This distinction was most recently r rmed In April of 1976 In a decision upholding asubpoena for bank records. Writing for the Court, Justice Powell noted that "I'letitnner does not contend that the subpoenas Infringed upon his First Amendment rights. Therot was no blanket reporting requirement of the sort we addressed In Buckley v. Valeo, - u.9. 

- 1976), slip op., at 54-74, nor -any allegation of an Improper Inquiry Into protected associational activities of the sort presented In 3aottand v. United States Hervioemen' 

Fund, 421 U.S. 491 (1955)" Vaisted &tt# v. Miller, - U.6. - (1976), sup op., at 9 n. 6. 314 

The reasons why there is a need for special vigilance when the First as will as the Fourth Amendment values are involved were well. artic~ated by Justice Powel. writing for a unanimoua $nprewe Court holding that domestic intelligence wiretaps without a warrant are unconstitutional: "National security cases, moreover, often reflect a convergence of First and Fourth Amendment values not present in cases of 'ordinary' crime. Though the investigative duty of the executive may be stronger in such eases, so also i ther&-greater Jeopardy to constitutionally protected plpeech. 'H1istorically the struggle for freedom of speech and press in England was I)ound up with the Issue of the scope of the search and seizure power,' Marcus v. Search Warrants etc.. 3(f7 IT.N. 717, 724, 81 S. (t. 1708, 1712, 6 L. F . 2d 1127 (1961). History abundantly documents the tendency of Government-however Iwnevoleat and benign Its motives-to view with sumspiclon those who most fervently dispute Its policies. Fourth Amendment protections become the wjore necessary when the targets of official surveillance may be those mnsuected of unortholdoxy In their political Ile-liefs. The danger to political dissent is acute where the Government attempts to act under so vague a concept as the power to protect 'domestic security.' Given 

the difficulty of defining the domestic security Interest, the danger of abuse it acting to protect that interest becomes apparent. "The price of lawful public dissent must not be a dread of subjection to an un-checked surveillance power. Nor must the fear of unauthorized official eaves-dropping deter vigorous citizen dissent and discussion of Government action fit private conversation. For private dissent, no less than open public discourse, is essential to our free society." 8

The First Amendment, of course, guarantees freedom of speech, of the press, of assembly, and of the right to petition for a redress, of grievances. The Supreme Court has correctly observed that the effective exercise of these rights often re-quires secrecy. People must be able to gather together in secret to discuss their political beliefs and to consider what lawful actions they propose to take in sup-port of those beliefs. The right of secret political association was firmly established by the Supreme Court in repelling the effort of the government of Georgia to compel disclosure loy 

the NAACP of its membership lists, NAACP v. Alabama, 357 U.S. 449 (1958). 

It was sustained and emphasized rost recently by the Court In its decision strik-ing down many of the provisions of the Campaign Reform Act. Rhcklcy v. Vallco,  

> -

U.S. - 96 S. Ct. 612, 856 (1976). Even in the face of a compelling requirement to end corruption in presidential election campaigns, the Court emphasized the need to protect the secrecy of political association, particularly where disclosure could lead to harassment. Chief Justice Burger put the issue as follows: "The public right-to-know ought not be absolute when its exercise reveals pri-vate political convictions. Secrecy, like privacy, is not per se criminal. On the contrary, secrecy and privacy as to political preferences and convictions are fundamental in a free society. For example, one of the great political reforms wils 

the advent of the secret ballot as a universal practice. Similarly, the enlightened labor legislationiof our time has enshrined the secrecy of choice of a bargaining representative for workers. In other contexts, this Court has seen to it that goy-ernmental power cannot be used to force a citizen to disclme his private affilin-tions, NAACP v. Rattan, 371 U.S. 415, 83 S.Ct. 328, 9 L.Ed2d 405 (1963). even without a record reflecting any systematic harassment or retaliation as it Selt,,n 

v. Tucker, 3864 U.S. 479, 81 S.Ct. 247. 5 L.JA.2d 231 (190). For me it is far too late In the day to recognize an ill-defined "public interest" to breaclrthe lt,,drlc safeguards guaranteed by the First Amendmekit." 'If the First Amendment prevents the states and the federal government front-compelling the disclosure of Information related to lawful political activity. It iimst also restrain the use of covert Intelligence techniques to ferret out much fit-formation. The First AmendRIint Is in no less measure violated if the FBI olotainm a copy of the membership list of the Socialist Workers Party by surreptitii,,s entry, theft, or the use of informers or a grand Jury subpoena, than if the Party is compelled to release the list by a campaign reform law. In the latter case, It often does not know that its rights have been violated. All of this suggests the need for special restrictions and additional admInistrn-tivo and approval procedures where a bona fide criminal investigation might in-trude on First Amendment rights.  

> s

.R. v. U.S. District (ourt, (Keith). 407 U.S. 31. 92 R. Ct. 2125. 21R5 (1972).             

> $Buckley v. Valley, -U.S. -- , A6 .Ct. 612, 735 (19T6). Opinion

of Chief Justice Burger coneurrnug In part and disetating In part. 315 

'The principles whieo ni 'tt apply In such situations are as follows*: There may be no investigation of lawful political activity. -

Any Investigation which might intrude into a First Amendment area must be based on a compelling state interest. Any Investigation must be carefully controlled so as to involve the minimum possible intrusion into areas where First Amendment rights might be violated. No group or individual may be singled out for investigation of violation of acriminal law because of its political beliefs or activities.' If these principles are accepted, there are two very difficult problems for tihe legislative draftsman and Administrative-order writer. The first is to develop useable and effective criterlat for determining when the special procedures re-quired by the First Amendment are to come into play. The second is to specify precisely what. those procedures should be. These are complicated matters which can only lie worked out in close (ollaboration with those familiar with the Pr(Kce- 

> (lures

of the FRI. It might be useful, however, to present a few tentative idaw. Home situations should automatically trigger the special procedures required when First Amendment Issues are involved. These Include: Any Investigation which Is likely to yield information about a party running candidates for election. Any investigation of a candidate for elective office. Any investigation which is likely to yield Information about an organization which exercises First Amendment rights e.g. by lobbying for legislation, support-ing political candidates, or taking stands on public issues. Any investigation in which information about the political views or lawful political activities of one or more Individuals is to be sought or obtained. Any investigation of a crime in which one or more elements of the offensive involves political beliefs or intentions. In applying these specific categories (and perhaps others) as well as the more general rule relating to determining if any First Amendment rights are involved, there should be a presumption in favor of Invoking the tighter procedures. One way to do this is to require any doubts to be resolved by referring the Issue io 

a higher authority. For example, decisions to open or expand an investigation that might otherwise be made in the field shmld be sent to FBI headquarters if there is any doubt about whether the special First Amendment procedures should apply. Any doubts in the FBI should be resolved by applying the stricter stand-ards or referring the matter to the Attorney General. The special standards to be applied should include a more careful review of the necessity of the investigation, a determination outside the FBI that a "selective investigation" is niot being proposed, and tailoring of inv(tigative techniques so that there is a minimum intrusion into the area of possible First Amendment activity. Special restrictions should be put on various investigative techniques. The use of informers who pose as members of political partles or associations raised, in my view, very special problems. An informant who pretends to be a

member of a political group cannot simply gather information, lie or she mainmst participate actively in the decisionmaking process of the organization, taking stands on issues and seeking to influence the posltions the organization takes and the actions it engages in. Wholly apart from any -use of informants In COIN-TELPRO-type-efforts to manipulate and sow dissent, there is an Improper inter-ferenwe by the state in lawful Political association. The right of free associaiom 

is a mockery when Fill informants partielipti In private organizations lsing as Imna fide members of the organization and influencing Its decislonm. Congress should, I suggest, ban the use of informants who pretend to be me-n-hers of political organizations. It should also require a Judicial warrant for tihe use of any informant in First Amnendment-re.tralnted investigations. Mr. Chairman, this subcommittee is engaged in an effort whose results will determine whether we move closer to or away from Big Brother as we approach 194. 1 am leased amid honored to have been invited to pIrticipate In thaes. hearings and would, of course, be hppy to answer any questions or to provide other assistance. Mr. EDWARDS. Thank you very much, Mr. lalperin. Both of your stdememts amr very challenging and well thought out. The gentleman f ron Massachusetts. Mr. DRINAN. Thank yQu, Mr. Chairman.    

> 3The mimrtm

hv, hold that selective profterution ba,,d on political beliefs or other                    

> ".m.titiomnallr lispect criteria will not be tolerated. It senis equally clear that "seletvt.vv Investigations" Ialteil on such grounds should be prohibited.

316 oMr. Halperin, do you think that the repeal or the revision of the Smith and the Voorhis Acts are essential to reform in this area? If we leave in those sections that are cited on Mr. Berman's page 15, if we do not touch them, can the FBI despite guidelines, despite what we might do, still say that in order to carry out and to enforce this law, we have to do this intelligence gathering? Mr. IIAl 4 EIN. I think that it is absolutely essential that at the very mininmm the statutes be aimed at and consistent with what the Su-preme Court says that is constitutional. I think that the thing to do is to wipe them off the books, but at tie very least, they should be rewritten consistent with what the Supreme ('olit has said is constitutional. Mr. lhtINAN. Is that what you mean by "revision" on page 15? What did the Senate committee recommend, repeal or revision? Mr. BERMAN. Both. They called for the revision or the repeal of those statutes. M r. I)iR NAN. When you say revision, what do you mean? Mr. IWRMAN. Revision would b)e to rewrite the statutes, for instance the Smith Act, which punishes membership in or advocacy of an orga-nization dedicated to violent overthrow of the Government. According to the Supreme Court, you can only prevent or prohibit imminent lawless action iilvolving violence, which I means that you would have to strike tlat statute and say the violent overthrow of the Government when it is imminently likely; that it would occur. It would have to be written in terms of the Sn1premne Court standard. Mr. JImuiNAN. it, even if we hold that, could not the FBI say that we have to do all of this intelligence gathering in order to look to find the imminent lawlessness lMr. B ERMAIN. I think that is going to be a problem and I would be for repeal. Mr. l)RINAN. That is easy to say, but Mr. I Ir ERI N. lBit theni you -do want to make it with reasonable sus-l)icion, though, that is, if the FBI, for example, is investigating tie Socialist Workers P'arty for 20 years and because they say something and they may think about doing something illegal, but. for 20 years they have heavily infiltrated that organization, but there is no cvi-(denee that they are even thinking about anything. Mr. 1)RI.A°. Would you say that the guidelines, if there are any, should apply to all investigations of allcrimes across the board? Should there be no special gmidelines for the investigation of a sub-version or extremism Mr. 1 [ 4 LPEmRI. We ire saying that there should be no investigation of political ativity, tlat the only investigation should be of crimes an(d that here those should have special restrictions to make sure that those investigations do not subvert, the first amendment. Mr. DIIrNAN. OK, you people bring out, for the first time, the Smith Act and the Nroorhis Act, as the fa liback position of the FBI. If we really begin to get tougi, would you then both feel that the repeal is almost essential, or is essent ial I

Mr. BERMAI. Since it has been the predicate for a vast number of these investigations, I think that repeal of these statutes that is part of getting the FBI out of the business of anticommunism. hose 317 

sttutes were lassd wlien.the whole country was engaged in counter intelligence )prog1rains.. 

Mr. DJun x -' Vell, II It related point, when the Attorney General, 

and the l)irector of the FBI come to the Congress and say to us that you have, to make guidelines and laws, is it not ultimately' tie Attorney General, who-after all tie FBI is a ceature of the Justice Depart-ment, of the Attorney General-must control the FBI? Shoul( WO 

not, say--yo have to do this, why come to 1s? 

Mr. B1:nm.ux. Well, I think that the Attore, Geoneral. should be Imuidated by this statute, that lie has restmsibility for-Mr. )lux".%x. Well, he does. The FBI is it total etv'ature and the Fl does only that what the Attorney General says that they shoIld do. That is very, very true. -

Mr. Il.wxru.,. have you talked to the FBI about this? MJr. IlNI:A-x. That. is'elear in the statute, but it is not the practice of the agency. 

Mr. Di.-ix. Before. we get into the statute why call we not, simply ill.isist that, the Attorney General cont rel the creature? . IMr. BERM. N. Yes; but y'ou have to give himi tile standard by which ho can control this creature. At present that standard, is a changing one, depending oil who is in-power. Mr. I)Itl.XAN. Well, all riilt.  

> Is

7erry v. 0/do, standard enough? 

M r. BER : . I think that is a rational standard. Mr. l1.iTr:lmux. The FilI investigates only under that stalldirld. Mr. i)iru.I . I [as that been mmlihed? Mr. I lm.xmix. I don't believe so. Mr. DlI.AN. Well, thank you, you have raised ly consciousness and I amn very grateful. 1 yield back the balance of my time, 3r. Chairman. .Mr. EDwADSu. Mr. Butler.  

> Mr.

B'TI.ra. I1hank you, Mr. (hairmnn. I was diverted during your testimony, but it has Ibeen very helpful and I apl)reciate having it. iin the record. I am not sure that, I am qualified to l)ursle these points to tile dlgree that, you have at this lomillellt, blut let Ius begin with a few )oints Just to helI) me understand when ai informant is aill illformant? How do yol define an informant for rIlrposes of out lawing their use by the FI[v? .AMr. bI.mIux. I think all inforinit is somebody who, at the re-qulest, of tile Bu1real either becomes or remains a ]iarticiplamt in a set - of associations for tile Pllurpos's of gatlteriig of alit| reportulig of inforatii ion. Mr. i]rl.E;n. So it is the entering into a relitonship with ile iitein-tioin of revealing what vol find thit defines anl informaiit. Mr. I ,.exitin. I think that mt different )roblen aries when tie Fill starts getting letters froi SoiImebody that says that I 1it1 at ]iiber 

,of the )emnocralic Party ill Illinois lld let' ie tell you what they 

plan. 

Mr. bltril.. That is wTat I want to be clear on. That d(oes not dis-turb yoll it hit, that is the iniiltratioll aspect, tell, is what distuirbs von? 

Mr. Il.i.m*F:rx. I think that there is t separate question of whether the ]lreall 1sholldt keep tlho.e letter or lest roy them.    

> 82 6I1 TA ..

318 

Mr '. BUTLER. But. pursue that for just a second. Certainly, you realize that when tile Bureau gets a letter that says that Mr. Ifall)erin is going to talk at the Capital on Tuesday morning, they will be able to act oit that information? Mrt. IIALPERIN. But if the letter says that the Democratic Party of Illinois is going to try to win the election by vigorous advocacy of its position, I think that that letter should Ix, destroyedd. Mri. BUTLER. Then, it is the crime element thlat permits the FBI to trigger action at that point ?  

> If. BERMAN.

But I tlink that they are. going to needle more than that anonymous letter. Tlht allegation. tlhat, unsubstantiated letter, should not trigger a Bureau investigation. There needs to be more.-Mr. BUTLxEn. But that will be a preliminary investigation ?

Mr. tI'APEmIII. Based on such a letter, an informant, should not be able to infiltrate a group. Mr. Bu'TI,Et. I am agreeing with you that it is not altogether fair-play to infiltrate an organization on tile possibility that you may have a suibversive activity develol)ing in the future. Andi, yet, tlere may very well be organizations which have made up their imfinds that they are going to have a program of violence or commit crime. It may Ix-

organized crime. It oes not have to be sul)versive. It does not 'have to be related to a national defense or anything else. And. vet. if there were the possibility that we should get. in formation, by tile use of informants as to lust what this organized general activity was going to do, it. does not disturb me a bit that tie FBI should (1o that, because they should, if they can and are that (,lever. 'that is. precisely why I have trouble with this effort to protect these--"nice guys4-who pass legislation to blanketthe FBI's effect. Mr. IALPERTN. I think the question is whether it is a lawful political organization where the purpose of informers is that the Bureau thinks they may pick up information al)out crinie. In mly view. no such informers should be. pernitted. Now, if you have a situation 'where a group of people are getting together and they ar planning a crime and you have in addition a reasonable basis, rva-sonable suspicion that that is what they are doing, then I think that it is possil)le that you should be permitted to have an informer. But Iwould like to suggest that, in that case you require t warrant; an in-former is tle same kind of intrusion that planting a bug in an office is. that is the same kind of an intrusion that a wiretal) is. Use of an in-former, therefore, should be )asei on a reasonable suspicion that acrime has been or is about to be committed. The Government. should bring those facts before a magistrate, who can authorize a bug or awiretal) or an informer. I would not want to leave that decision to the Bureau itself, based upon sinli)ly a letter saying, hey, these guys out in Chicago are going to commit a crime. Mr. Bu'mi. I see what you are saying, amid, of course, I umnderstool tIlat. fro your statement. What standards would you propose ?

Mm'. I I I.PF .. The fourth amendment. Reasonable. suspicion that 'a criminal activity is being engaged in and that you can learn about this cliniinal activity' by tle use of this techniq lie. 

But I would still prohibit tile informer from acting as a member of a lawful political organization. 319 Mr. BUTLER. You think that is an association violation?  

> MAft.

IIAPERIN. Yes; I think tlat it violates the first amendment right, to private association. ,fr BUTLEr. My time is up, and I thank you very much. Mir. ENw,\Rws. There really is not any statutory authority for the in-telligence work that is done ofn this f),assive scale on a. day-to-day basis, is there? Mr. kl-M. Absolutely none. The Bureau assumes tlv can do it un(ler Executiiye or(lers the basic stat ite for the FBI, 18 U.S.C. 53:, 

mentions nothing about intelligence investigations. It says that the 

Flif is a criminal investigatory agency. The Attorney 6exiierafhas talked about. conducting intelligence in-vestigations under the. authority of that statute which says that tle FBII may detect and prosecute crime. That is a very iii(lefinite stand-ari upon which to base intelligence investigations. I think that the clear uleaning of the statute is that the Bureau is requtired to look for reasmable calise tlat a crinli is being ('ommitte(. The other sections of the statute te Attorney General relies upon and pass the l('w guidelines under say that the Attorney General may instruct the Bureau to conduct such oiir investigations as are within the jurisdiction of the Justice 1)epautment and the departmentt of State. The question there is what such other investigations are under his uris-liction. )oes lie have intelligence jurisdiction ? I (to not think that lie can read tlat. in. 'ou are going to hjave to pin this down by statute IX'(,ause it is not, there now. Mr. EDwARIDS. Well, the Smith Act would be some underpinning even though the courts have declaredd it inoperative and unconstitu-tional, still it is there and this would be, I su)pos some kind of argu-ment, for a revision of the Feleral Crin-inal Code which reai llv should( leave out, those statutes that have, been declared unconstitutional. Mr. [ALPERIN . 1 think that there is a technical problem here that the committee should think about : namely, that the Bureau does niot receive( in any regular way tle decisions of the S lpreme Court narrowing and 

interim eting criminal statutes, so that if the -ureau decides that some-body is violating the Smitth Act it opens u1 the Smith Act and deter-nmines after reading it that they have been violating it. The committee, as pnart. of its oversight responsibilities should look at the Butreau's Ise of the Smlith Act. This use should l)e clearly limi-ited to tloso parts of the act which the Supreme Court. has said are cost it utional. You (Ililnlot expect tle field ageiit olit ill J1ittsl)ujrigll to read tle Su-preme ('o1 ure )ort an(l thwn get. out his copy of the Vinited States ( ode and then changee it. Sonebody has to issue a dire ti%-e saying that for l)Irl)oSiS of criminal in-estigation the scope of the Sniih Act is now lilite(d to X, Y. and Z. And that ias to be incorporated into lB-                                  

> rcalll iiili]agei lelit. ''llere is Iio evidenclie that that Ias been done. hlis is not oily tr'ie for the Smith Act, but, in general, Supreme ('ourt ilt ('Ieil at ions irl hot iicoloriated! into tl

le Ji real's ilit.F-pretatio s. Mr. EuwARis. Well, it is a very dangerous business to legislate a new Sil it h kct, or wlatev'er it i,,ighi be, even t hougli it is 'er--      

> .IIl'M:, N. Ithink

thfat you should repeal tihe Smith i Act. 320  

> 3f1.

EDWARDS. I think any legislation is perilous, any legislation des. ignating any Federal agency its a counterintelligence group, which the 

git idelines do, except that the guidelines are not a statute. Mr. B1Fatr.x . They are asking for those guidelines to be made a part of the statute. I think there is some uncertainty in the Justice Depart-nient, as to under what authority they are acting 

It. is necessary for Congre.ss to estalish a standard for tile Bureau's jurisdiction. Uip until now it has been a shifting standard. Mr. IHEwv.ns. But why should you establish standards that really are not necessary since there is no faw to sluppo what they are (oin except the Smithi Act and soei rather vague Executive orders an 

Attorney Generals directives and so forth. Mr. ItAL.ERIV. I think that the Bureau should not be conducting in. vestigations of peoples lawful political views and that a statute au-thorizing this would also Ie unconstitutional. It. would be a great mis-take to legislate an authority to infiltrate organizations. This couittee should simply say that the Bureau's responsibility is that at the directive of the Atiorn'ey General, it can examine and'in-vestigate crimes. Mr. BI:IMA.. I think, Mr. Chairinan, that you have to speak to the            

> issue. because what the Executive has done over the last 40 years is-o

interpret, Congre silence as a gal) in the law, something that Congress does not address, like the National Security exemnption under the wire. tapping stat ute. The Executive fills in that ga) with 1Uxecutive orders 

lain relies on the inherent power of the Executive to protect domestico tranquility." Until (ongess has legislated comprehensively in the field, even if it is to say that this is a criminal investigative agency and we need it, the Executive will continue to interpret the silence as authority andthat is the problem. Mr. Enw,%R*. What kind of an investigation do you think sho11ld have been carried oil by the FI during the stormy "days of the early 

1960's in, tile )eep South with the Kit Klux Kland 

I Mr. BtaM.. Well, I think there should have been more criminal investigations. Unlike the broad reading of the Smith Act, the FI read the civil rights stnife-tiiaking it a crime to violate civil rights very narrowly and said that it therefore did not have jurisdiction or had very, limited jurisdiction to investigate. Still, criminal investigations were proper. I think that the lltau should have been stopped at the point where they decided that. the way to get the Klan was not. to prosecute them lit to engage in coiniterirntelligence progralns in order to disrupt and 

dest roy the 10l:1. This involved tle FBI taking law enforcement into its ownt hands. Tlhat trail of authority goes all the way iu) to the Attor-nevs General of the I rnted States.     

> \1r. IIALPERIN. May I just

adld a word if I may. It eems to me con-ceptually that the problem under the Constitution is very simple. If 

tletre ish ehaviort.hat is illegal and the Federal eriiiinal laws are vio-lated, then the FIll should inivestigatt, it. If people are doing things that fli Fi thinks are dangerous to our society which are not crimi-nal. the President should cmle to the Congress and say thatthisbe-havior should he-made criminal. If the ('ongres agrees, then it be-comes law. 5onlehKlxlv is convicted under it. the 'Suprenme (1'ourt .ys 321 that the statute is constitutional, and then the FBI investigates that crninalil behavior. I think that a separate mid parallel system which justifies investigations having to do with subtle threats to the survival of the Nation or with political activity which we do not like is a vio-lation of out' whole constitutional systeil. There is always a way to deal wit2I the problem. The Attorney Gen-eral today talks about foreign governments spying oin American busi-nesses, a i lie says that there is no crime and therefore we need wire-taps aid domestic iiietlligence investigations for noncriminal behavior. But tiat seems to me to have it backwards. If that behavior threatens our society we should make it a crime and I do not see any problem that we say that it is unlawful for agents of foreign powers to claim clandestiliely to gather trade secrets from American businessmen. To sa ' that lwcatisv it happens now not to b)e a crime that tie relne(ly is ilitelligeii'e investigation is wrong. The relme(ly is to lilie tile he-hlavior a crime aild t ll investigate it ituider statutory authority. Mr. E)wmv s. Somemie vorkinig for a foreign gover-l-ll t a i(l get-ting lawfiul il'oiniation anzd tra isuiittinig it to his empl)loyer is-Mr. I I\lmIi N. I think tlat, tie coilrt of a)peals said tlit you c.an-

not make that a crime. Iresumabhly, what the Attorney Geieral is talk-inig about is these )laimijigs of burglaries or posig as employees or 

stealing trade secrets which probably is a State crii. Biut I riue.s 

what lie, is saying is that so ie of this may not be a lFederal crim u, so we need wiretal)s. -

But the federall (io'ernimet. if it waits to investigate an agent of  

> Slie

Soviet I'iiion who is volidioling bilrglaries of indlustrial Jllhmts in tIe I' ited States, then I think that Such acts shollid first be uiladel It ('rille. Mr. lEDAWARDS. Well, if this type of tight rein is put oil the FBI, what al)Oitt the local police foIrces tfliloghout thet' country? Would they hot engage in sinuilar activity on anl acceelerated scale ?

Mr'. BEu, . don't'know how far- Congress can go ill legislatilHg these )(overs anl activities for t he local 1)0lice. Ole of the reconulnen-(latiols I made ill ny pa)er that I have not really sj)oken to is that any-statite should l)roliilit the- I, II fro vcooperai'ig with aiy kind of police force inl aly kind of investigative activity whicl tile Bureau 

could iot itself conlutct. 'here is con. ilerable cooperation betwi-en 

1le l11uireau anul local 1)olice. There is an exchange of in formnation and vincou rugement. to (oii(c vi (Wiret pl~ thIat the11 lit Burea-cal) ]lot CoIluict, to llace oi t' fr its when they 'oill(i nolt have infiolrmuaus alud to en-g..,yge in luara.--seit. 'or' i..t'an'e, there wNere (( )IN'TEL lI( )-tVle (qt iolls. coliiI cted I I oil her Fe Icra I aimu Ima inag :ige s at t he ru o iest,  

> of

the lBltivll. They all swim tog.etlire alid tihe Bu luu', is at tlie, center 

of tl, p)ol. Mr. Lowmxiws. What is t hv u r oilltr to do bo t m1))im - ,11 il. a

I hun tllt ', is a fellow y) v thme nm ile (if ( )swald who ls a- l{21 ssial, "\ it, 

.11nul uuu"ight hek. ,I ( 'mist ro )m15nt or a I~Uwsiti agrenit. We ha~mve )m0 ,deu here, mIII should t hink Ior. Maybe I hmeu should be mIn iuu\vcst ig'atloll COMiinl 'iItp li ct se if lie. is 1r n t

MN11. B1 )EMA\N . \Vcl 1. thIey 11-re Y(oiilr to haet Iav csomll ( co homeIC N I~in ul liasim to sitow\ I lhat liv i-, a foriiyzn anzeuut.  

> Alim-4t

lwismnise Soimie S.u I~ tha It Mur. ( ) ,\vnld i-, forv -,eiti ;12'uit. T do     

> riot thlmik tim thle

Bure-au 'hlit Imu 1)1111 1iiiuil uuill vuv-4t UXt imn. I louIIt 322 kniow what the Bureau should do about Oswald. T don't know what the Bureau is going to ( tl)out anyone who engages in politicall assas-Siltation aiid violence. The Secret Service hasall enornlolls list of people that. it keeps inder watchl; it was reported in tlie paper this morning tlat that list ias 1 million flames oul it. I don't know how yol cotld colmllt fill iitelligenice investigation aid come ill) with the lon( assassin. I lo't thilk that it. works that  

> wI'.

I (ldot know what the lBlureai can do aloilt a small terrorist ();,,aizlatioll o wratilig and throwing hoibs at Soviet organ izations 

ail( emallssies I ,vatu.:, a reIal terrorist organizations aipjlivs J)olygtalih tests to its Illni'ers. You c llnlnoit )eiiet rate it with tllniformnant orga -llizatioii. It iINtv be beyond(I illt :,lli,,e'1e. T", r(co!l inllivatls (lilt t th liiis.-ioli tlat tb;. lIn.' li las set il foil itself ill t his area is oIt. Iliat ill-te.lliJ.eIce is 1I1etty Iseless ill sol vi ti,. 

Mlr. 1'nw..\s. lVell, yoln obviotisly tlhiink tlat the coiiit'y has to  

> lrl

yI-Ni lprot (ct itself from fonr,,ign ;p-.',it.. I'lileve is no ldollit ahollt 

M'. ri:JM.\N. No doubt. 

Miv. EI'w.\cls. ()l(. let jl ge.trit mhck to Osw,ld. 'l']tt 1ii:itte'r lils tit-tii;zl this s1l oIuIi1Iittee for a long t iie, Tle FI gets a report that 

]w Ih ,e emi (s an1 eXlpltriot, gives 11) Ihis A ierica citizelshif). goes to 

l11ic';i : iUtssitIi woli ll. coiii.' Ihack to the c4liltrv, 11nd(I lilts .S,,!(, kiI I of coiimiwitim with Castro. Fair Play for Cuba pamphlets  

> 411idl (do

th-at. Now. stlltet iniv .oIt,Inl le Iot Iecollie the silivet of an 

ill\ (t-4i~r-hilto J(t) uiiii whether ot hie is working for umotbher       

> cm :lit V, AIt WlIt tin' v,1-ll

au iiive-Stifrt ifill -4rt it, it Ow Ietst what ule'-  

> lii -

wo ul! e -kt.r i m1il illv\'t i t. t itii uIl l liheIt lir,\\" ill :Ill oi'lerl 

WO' , tjlo Il \\i, b'iiig it to it close .

Mr. IAIl'ii x.I think t int I h is :t 4iltest ionl of wilut tecli',uivs , ott    

> )iwtioii (if fac-ts

le'.nling to) -1 uanl ill nfelvilce thiitt hi1* Jit'Sollit I

WvrI~IIIiJg fol a zoN'ertiIIijt oI - fim'ini-Ii l ow.ri . it s..ils tt, till' Ihiat t!,at 

sil )l l yoill. -Il ili;(il i..lli POIL . i-. ife (if t;Ilji I nto h1ill, 

chiv'lkiiig his r.e.(rls o0 Isi.. tiles, q(, j1-.t Ixntl'iiig to se if tOhw sii.l:i'i    

> I-,riases or

\w1ietlher' Vo01 '"Ich thi st8 utlait' itat l I Ias (om itid it     

> 1ipe'e or is abollt

to ) otllll it a 'iill l, it whiit'h ioiiit AV111 (.11i In a

fill ijivv..t i,,a! iono. 'Yo oiiolislv hbave to be aIt v to d!o) sovetlimg to) 

d(eidev\ whvtI 'er t here is a tntIstIIall,- SliS,'iIII Id S, t irt .yoll can opeini     

> afit! ive\'stit loll.

Andlti I tliiik tiat ld at w ifie intlo Illie i Ilie iard ,ltl.-t iOll (f wlat kinis of invest igative t.clilli u ts sll,),ill Ie piritted Il \Vit Sl ge of tIP IWOt(Tss, 1S till Sll.I)i('i,)i l "oes-il t ti le person is ill f,,.t pngragti in Ibreaki ig so ie kinil of vriiiinal rtiles. 

MrI. Bu-inr. But ()swatl l 1111 not icacv'ivI, tlat thirestold. Tie was julst, its I ,iew it. 1iciepitilig tilts aplin rc, 'l. lie was ipr4)hlah*lv tvini ill 

wait. waiting for his i.lers. lie was tiot albolit to conmmit a' crime. lie, wA.s ust ill ii,,-:, slli ll tlie cm.-.isioli tilrise. So. we hiave llot met tilie thIireshioldi of *ouIl rSt 11114 in rts. 

As. I view vOlir tve.t ih11y. 1 ol 'N 1 -, ., tliat ti le F I woildt 111've 

Inni to lay lvt )swald 1111d1 Iiot s'tiveil him. Is that wlat Aoil are saying? 

MI. [.(mxtrxn. I thiJnk on, would have to lok at exactly what we kvew and exactly what tle liypotl esis was on what lie wv'as doing. If A-oul do not have a reasonalde basis for concluding throtl person is 

violaiiing tle law, tlien siiilly because lie went to tlie Soviet Union and 323 caine back and is in the Fair Play for Cuba Comnmittee, does not call 

for issuing a warrant. Mr. Bu",urm. Ile Ilid no visilde means of support. Mr. I IIlEIuN. WNe1l, tliel you are getting involved in saying that t Jler is more evidence here alt beyond that-Mr. Ih'riEm. We would not have information as to whether he had any visible means of sillp )ort less we have had aun investigation irig. 'lhat is what (listurlis mv'. 

Mr. ! A.1TE:lIsN. No: I am sa \ingy that as I view it, thetdegree of itl';i-,-ion has to 1K. (hetermlleil 1;tl T ly wvlether A-oil are intluling in the first anlllndtivilt areas and iv ti h.eree to \wlieli von already lave    

> "MRt( I)l,,is for

l lievin,. t tlIat tl.re-is a reasol for investigat ing. You  

> .'1n

Ihcoiw e more i:ut,',sive in yolr, investigation as your si.vpivioil 

"'rows. wlhici is the liio'i:il crimi ilal stanlardl. 1lt,' olo'ie van investi-".te soll ehoilv. bit thli,v cannot get ia wa vraint to search Nour V o uIse  

> Itil

ille 'V Iv ta'v a relisoi al le lbasis for ,otc,'llid i ig t hat thI iey are going         

> I') IlMINv' a1 VC-illI'. It Ijix', tS littai t

hut tli'v" evaliiot I'tlll' f{iii talk to Voi  

> e,,

talk I or ,,illIors or list- ltler1- lIiIls of itI\estigr,,itioI Illt what ar,. r. e:*llv tallgilni al ol! he,'i is a colitillitIll le'r' hiastl upoll tile      

> Vt'(, i0111l(' SIIiiioi thlat -()Ill(t

liii' 1 goititg to Iiatppt'i. 

MI. Itv''ri:. Is is 'oulr vi.w tlhat Ile ,,iitho'itv for tle Fll, or the 

! 1i,'e. i,,,clles tiliititil inql iries of.\'r neoi.. ,igrjol rs ?5fr. !I.\t.mri;x. N: I Ilaitk thlat it i- limiitell iy the filrt altwtiltiit. 

lat i.. th'e ,' cuilt inflliii' ilito your luIlwfil pliitic.al act ivities alut it 

M r. WhrE ' ]at part o~f tile first a'1111ildmenl are I-oil talking¢ .\i. 1 \w.i't:Iw1n. "1'f, PlIt of five "1I"'li :1iil five is.seillily ill which 

M t. l i 'i.1i. \Vil. * ,'J l41111114A 1l ir,, of Yot.* itigllor about it .

(Mt.' 1 I jj Itit h itik th It I ' 11 tI t(- ol o uttv nIl l uli pit- 

> Ai I.I

isk 'v:- Ithis mua it fa Ii,(.. (],(dd wal vr. 1 tIlnI thi nk I hat yoii halve .Mlr. ]u'irit. I thiniik tlat it is far Ii't ,lanitagitig to ask abollt l t min~k \',ti. 

I'. l',J)WRD)S. I lat to Itiake mile IloIII oiiuaeITI ll tile ()wialtl 

tl 'I t ().-w liId i, )i.. i*S 1)i h s.. i nl l resihlt t Kvitiet v. colild   

> tuttclm front

the inve't igiat ion thilt had takenl plate of Mr..'auid Mrl. 

)-waldt lifoi' lite i' of the assas-inat ion. W'e know tlllalt becilau lt 

was iighilN" i'riit te I at vlie, \i!it of an agent to Marina ()swail! 1114 

'V:1lket int lie Fill ,fli'e severil1 weeks, or whenever it was. before tile 

I.1%y of it ssas.i ilt Iioll. w it h a very hostile nlte sayi tg ".Stlayi out of 111y 

I,,stine.S." and S) forth. 

.,, forv 1il we lloW it ,lii ltItive hinl a connectil wit ai state of Iiailld that muiiah htitil do whalt he did. Mr. Il.,.r :ru N. I t think t hat the final oitl t lit we are making is I:ht the assipt ion i tlalt the ilrlllrtau liakes thwse kinds of Statemiients i- liat, if Youi will let Its (d,) what we tire (ling/ is that we will sto]p tlie.s 

Ollris. The evithleie is that tiher Io not. l'ey have not stopped these tings. Whlat they have done is'to focus their it tension on tile grops 

Ihat you call ol)s(rVI' anl tie groups that have nothing to hide. 324 

Real i(,rrovist orgalliziations. I (e SfL.. tll(, grulpls tal -ie tillrowing 

boimbs lit Rilssiall eiiba ssies. ti illll cannot get ilito these. 

MNfr. Emv.m.l. 'Till B all woild answer tl at we (.11i1iot tell what Awe 

have Ilone, tlere are it numibiler of alras Ihat we have sto)pp( this and! V(i livo sipe)d tliat anid this eflaill plot and tiis allegation. 

I ]lav( takell tooI 1111('l tile. I yield! to tile, (entlemlll. M r. D odhd. 

NFi. D om). I hatve no lle ii('s P. I vieldl to) . P~arker. 

Mr. I'ai . IA-I was V:is'illelte ,%%u'th vouii out lll a l)tlt wilit ww' ill tirilieli 1 ii' Qll! iii gi l i'es iss'edbI) Al toiln( (iieiera i Levi. iit 

1 [1hillnot elar. s to Wiietli('r you disagree with ihose gililel(s. The pii'p le tlhat 'll julst ('111im'a, laibit t. il wiiei ll vill vlil Start 11i iii t ill-

vestililoll and( antli what volitisll' an liw Vol woid olintilue, it if yoil founl thlitt Own might be lt'ilible $lisI i is lly the 

sae t ilts ii vol vd ilil these g'ii elines. (on 1ou speak ii those 

to illv('stigatte lawvful 1)olit inca! lwhaIi bill It(% do noW it )1limiit ymt to 

]honitl Iadi d ecriov invest!.liions ilr, (ar4illllmeftli when wilillorized iIIdh.r t .ut e, vnri is seitu lo t isel'ertin ilofwrlitiiti i n l lit' Ilie lvilt.es (if ildit ill ,I'1- 

> tit

H11lllv1ihis if gr lps 'whhlh llill n v l i(r wie(' will ihv t hevovi' ii.s4 (if fore oir  

> vilvieK'i' ,

adiil which Involve or will iIIlvi 'he viii ' iiiii of I( "ileril liw. 

It i li'ii gws (ill t4i list 145' t inw Wsii ici livi't' le'eit v'i ltidl. such s

overlliirowifig tlie ( ';ov( l illillt , ilbst tiilll i liiiiritl ii' filfli ilt-

ijg of flie (I overiiiiieit of lie I killedd Stals. Ilie fiilict onilng of itter-

state vcoiiitil,''e. t he jwi'iiil, 1-irillt. (if tl lie cit izt'/'n iln lhr lie, I reltl ()f Iiw I lniled Slates liiI ilaws #i te Illiite, Sti(. l rliiniirv ili-Vest l igeul nit ii mu nI xe'gili Rlt liea Iliai U f iii lNgtit iosi . Yl'melltliOt'l 10-

cetd fl'll that to lii intteiri illit, s lv' iw lit i l til ri tiilt l fi'lfw 

lilit 1it11 Vil (ltiltnot ll('('ied to the fillkscal' ilive. igal ion witholilt 1e1llly ap)ly ii ig t li', , evil' rt'iil stanairlitilis nilti it ii so limi t its 't c Ii - 

> li(illt's

ill l'li f those diir'tnt levels.  

> itl uil

tili'e. it i. 'IV lt'i lr t l it i hI ili rt level Ilie Fl (lin l iIv  

> ('.Niilliil,

I hir 4i1wii fil's.. joiiIrli' r I't rl (i" it her PiltltWi )cll' iof il i(ol*-  

> ulil 101n,

1,'ut-nrit1, Stte4 ' r ltiel r'evioln. iiillliIrv of txililig ,olilrn,- of 

in foirlinl~l i i ilt,.u,.illl h, l i 1'it i sil.. iii formliocn frt itl inlforliiaillt- :il IOilt I iith'e is til, il..I) of rllv il i u i fotinll ti. :iii l) y-iv l.I l l ' \ '1 ,4i Il ai i l l i e i11 1 i n t i e w:l\ i \ - w i l l'i p vi r'... ( l iw , 14 4 i l i t i l i t -41, . T h a tl i I ,i l i ,. -lIh litl tll,i' ,II(' l t 4r ilil i10 ) iKi' llV !,1 lbV fil Ofil 114-1-~l s . "I He(tI intil l-11-1 ,

'I'lle ,[;lIII I ( Vt v l i II ,-vrt ; i ili lr ln i i i wi ii iV\ l r. . %ii illI r lon ,imlil i'lill\ \\''+ll7 \v 'li lilt'' . f

is to hilt' ln't(.t Iillivtiusl vst:lblIwd. Now. l11l Vom fild :tliitI1r 

'lie' ! .\( ) -:iv-\" ii!l 'ul -; " iil liii'li i- -ta h ', Lililil~ i -,~ lt) hot 1 1841 'rl.i l' Pi\*(' It I f. i H111%. 1' li 1W I ,Iiii t lit' i ll I- -ill Ili Illt' ,'iju,' I -l W 'l'l . i W v aire\ il4ik ler il \ 1 4 1' .il AV (iit 111 ,1i lit].lii'ill l i il 

W ork-e, l sil. Pa ltv ii n il the'art~lil. 'i'til, 1Illll't, il di t ;\Ill," injii,\ - ttii il1 ,1 t I -

11lli Iuir W"qi~ , wVlierl~- I> \ t',11 l'f l vli v ,il -. a11 Ili , i i \'. , , , it, i

1 )VI t~ , i le mil f ,q 1Of rilll li r ,\ Ith l'l , ~lf-t 1.1 1 iae , 111 li , 1~ It jlj,r :t j-'l' it-l. 'H '] lll 

It ,-v, g illikl-, ille, l',i - l, '325 The Justice De partlioent is not going to go to court tile next (lay to a l tiat they concede that they no longer have tile right to infiltrate illis organization. They are till il court saying t they have the right to infiltrate. whigh sggets that whatever the literal!worclR are, 

hlie i1lreall uniulerstnds te101 nd tie Just ice 1)epaitilnelit itderstanids t il sit; peirfectly allowing the ilveitigitlioni of fie Socialist Workers 

Mi% PA R. V 1 rdelrstadinglln of thrli' interpretation of theme g/iiiuielinem would li tiat they would pirohiiit this activity iii not just 

tIo Socialist Workers Partv: 'but in the Commiti Pty [ ,. !..Thpy siv hlint hel guidehine wold Irestrict their activity and pireent their at i vitief in those orunniations. 

Mrt'. IIA'FlI. Well. then. if that is what they llieve. tieln they 

liould niot objeel to what Mr. Berman iaild I or sujges iig. wiihel is to 

tllrli tile poilelmh'i around nl stalls with tle first principle, thlint you 

oivly investigate a criminal ativitv which it rudes cn tie first amend- 

> hiiint;l

and then let s nismake sure that that is limited so that it does not vidah (ile first aiiellihuieilt. If ihe Mlires tiderstiiids theme words n1id 14 ls thtwe understand eli~e words ditrreitly, then we have sin-lily II interpretationi iultel, t .problem.    

> N1,'. PAiCK.R. I

want to iW sIre tilit Ioli' ullj roaeli to flshioning tile 

(l.arter fi. the Fill would is thlt ron woli himit themi to tle Invest i-gill ioll of erimp. 

Mr. Blitst,%.. Right. Now. their ma ll it small am rea called lie lre. ihimillarv ilivesligation where we miglit hiave a namfne clehk and-so on. Bilth4 ltprolImi with tile ulinesillem and with tile Senate (omnittee i.,iuliuii(lt iiiuii is th .it ailihoulg they perllit these 90-dav lrelilli- 

> lirtv

heeks lmid established sootive heks., they do not meet lile total 

.,n.l;tdi'! when they follow (lie fill flow of il'lStigationi. If there have, iay resii sl. plteeiti cn irihible faets which give them tinder ite 

g1rumilelilieS it re-11l ti Io blhV tfhin til oi'tt.Mii7lttiOll inmay sometime en-

glige ill crinihid 1 at ;vih then yoll can llllv intelligence ilvestiga-tioil. that may lus~t it yearmor2 yearsonward. 

Similarly. *the milling of '.ooil i the Seaite ('omimiflee reeoil-

Metiilt lolis "sooli will eligltge ill" Ibgllins to take oil that ilidefitellei 

ihll h 1iiiii he li ln,, be ll sraiI i ii'r flit'oit longtime. ,I f liere is Sollineglilin. it 1111111. ,ieleck. till e.tablished iifotinant elieck, 

whi,.h mats oi T further he'kiii yoii lihm arititinal busis for 

haivrti itionii, ivlo, tlinat is wilere we aR healed. ]tut 1 do not think 

(hu1 Ilimos lguilieills listhli.gii'll Iietweell lwelimilalrmV 11111d flil iivesti-

gIitionis. ind as it i-mvlitii'v. vol hlive ihe' p'.Silility of endorsing lollo.lIprlii. ,lluroii' it iell t, iiA'e'ijives i fa jn . That is where we have grot to draw thi.- lhie. I Iliik tlit we allre tallking ab u erililial ill-  

> v-(,.i iLirat

ioll, 1iig 'hiilii h Irh',erlpt ioln wit hhil I he Bulranvl fof hlow it doe, business. 

A-. it 4'riii1l ilivetigntorv ageil"\. tle ltilrciil li s dole ell and I             

> volill like to -(.e (ihut (hi1il pr-e'riihill alldilrh il lc ina ollibeo anilitiry
> lil'. I

I~.q*.l' h. i d- voil leed dlomt ic intelligence !ttliiies if 

wh:it voll Ille doin is ilivest igatinuig wiellle who IIIe ll)lur hilg tile) build-ili- 41- l1hillliilig to iussa.sillt' people or are eignaed inl other crmilge. 

Ihe whole lotion of t separate doiiestic intelligence ilm"!Stfating 

guihleihie sieemiis to ie to Slggest that there is a pail of the lureail re.rved i1i il part from (lie flet tint they are (lignged ill investigating 326 crime. Biureau representatives have emlhasized that they are not. in-vestigating to detect crime. If you continue that organization, under the guidelines, it is going to continue to operate this very way. Mr. Enw.%ans. At what point would you have the Biireaui start an investigation of the Symbionese Liberation Army? Mr. BRAN. I think the waiy that it did start, in tie investigation of the Svmbionese Liberation" Army. That is one that engagedl in bombings and that is when the Bureau became involved, when they bombed. M r. EDwARDS. When they engaged in bombing? Mr. B1v.u.xx. That is wlten the Bureau is going to fin( out alH,,it groups like the SILA. If we build this intelligence capacity to watll 

for tie SLA. the Bureali is not going to discover the SIA, tiley are going to discover us. 

Mr. PAKxER. iO I understand correctly that you would not trigger any activity on tie part of tile Bureai until afte-r a bo ibing? 

Mr. 1:ur. ,%.. No, I amn making the (distinction. Mr. l. rKEr. Wilat if infolrmation cani to tlh Bu1reau tilat tller, wtv4 going to Ix. it oliluing, an anonymou%,,ls tii. 11'liat do youi as till- )irlvl.,r of the, FBi dIo will lhat, and in fact., let nip go on all(l give yol alypothetical, if I nay. 

Let us a.slitte t hat vowt receive a tip about some ft tlire violent con-

due.t 0it is going to 'involve deatil alld estrliction. If it is tri, tli-condict. and pllanning of tiis would Ix- trildy illegal iadl fi irtlierifv,. 

the tip is anony nios. The tipster is ill fact. as is true ill a nimlnlwr of 

these ,'ases, fearfull for hbis life, andI is a dIisencianted nivmtlwr of tlile organization. not somel)dy wio bas 1,en trained andI seleetel anI pla'edI ill tie orgilnization). Ih. is jtist (lis(.nel ttte'l. And. lie ki,,w: tillit if lie gives too Ill tcl i foiluation, ttent it is likely his lift wollff I, in (liiuger I fahl.se ilis terrorist friendIs are vervy aware of all of tils iiI 

the other Ilott.'sI Ir ' v ftitl- ill t 11lr i1rlo-se and! tl tel'te is lio way of grettit allothler in fol-nuant in there. 

Now. you i]ave got soie Irotilsoti, ficltors' one. yoni have lit 

illfrnt1a it of un known reliabilitv a1141 wito iiight even IM, a crank whl, is ailingg ,up). Two, yol have iuifrnt:ition, that if trlle. iss i r.:l1             

> (ll-eat to lift' atid lrolwrt ,N;1. till rve. '( )ii hav, motlv afigi

lenit ,of a

Ild anlld lit nlilkeliitood ,f v'oolpe.rati,;n. Now. wlta't does the Bi-ai      

> do witlh that in fotll1tion

I )o Illev just hioIlu it ?

M r. fI Il NM.%x\. I ',iler tlose ,iru .Aii.ltti 'e.- wit It a ,riilijul imv,.t;,r:,- 

> fotrv

'41aila ld. als I S'. il be forv. I t hii 111 thlt t hitu4 1tay vlbe a pt'hiltiilI IW 

invi-stigatio i of short ,l,1natin wl i,.l shol ld tillow till., 11 ',i to ,', s, Chl e('kt'ling,. elltek its reveorIs. v,'eI k tll, l 'al I,,,lie mll tal-k il)(olle tlhat they think know st' Iii.I'liev ave estalisli'4l inlfim-ants. bitt tl ey air goll to hle\to C"i't l 11) wit litto)'4' that t':it      

> allegation In that tinw 1i11l

they are, .,oingt to llive to coutte 1I1) Wiil         

> reliable ill folrtllatii to trI-it lq ' tail vltlinge lvnmil th.;It.

M r. IT+\.,,rt X. (',,ild 1 jilst :+ " tlt I do lnt f}itink Ihiit thi i"4 a    

> utobleul, with It olest ici

initi'lligen'ce. I Ithiik- ity Vlt u tillt' ,-ayii thi i ,t 

tlhat A-fil ,lollld do anl wotlul (10 if i t.ltlawg.r ,riv', vot it tip tilat Iev i- illa teegna rtglho i re albout to Id\ow 1I1 tile lc;,al lighl scliool. 

# 1 ,11) not know what tle- 11ir,,-41i des in tat ('11. 4. 1 voill say that it. is a very lr-dol lvitl to address. I wold say t lat t ltey wVoi]l do 

thel same thing. 327 Mr. PARKER. Your statement has already made use of the word in-telligence investigations, we couple those two words. Intelligence is the gathering of information and knowledge. Do you think that it woUl be impermissable to collect information, just gather data, so to speak, without any intrusive methods such as informants or wire-tapping, just gather data about organizations which might, in the future, have some likelihood of unlawful political activity? -Mr. II.\uN. '1 lTere, I think, I would say that it is subject to the tirst aiiiendlinent, that is, eitlh(r gnither data about buying guns or recruiting peRople who hav. in tile past engaged in criminal activity and so on or 1do not think the Fi lU i s the right to gather information al6it t1e lawful political activities, about the political views an1d AI-sociaitiols of A.mericans, becai.S, the Bureau believes that people wlio have ,ert-ain political views are more likely than other people to vngage in pl1iti. Iact ivities. Th'lat is really Ihat the Bureal ilts bllt doing. 

Mr. IP.wtK iti. I am talking abotit lmbliv soil s ncps ow. 

Mr. 1[.\i,P'iCix. I (tIo liit tilink that tile Biireaii las a right to have ili its tilvs the position that lie Republican Party has taken on grili controll. 

Mr. . Is tihit iiot a dilerenit standard for the Bureai flian 

we Iliv, f or ( oli 'ess ? ('oilgreusiollil coiinliittees (10 that all the t inie. 

Mr. IM.N. 111i1t. is tile piipllsO of Congress gathering inforiiia-tion anAt w'lial is tile J)ilir)o'0AS of thi,' Bureaus collection of informna-tionl ? I (lo iot See ailt Ivrlsoll w tihe Beilalll could not. read the il,' ilwi-l'S if ii W\iitl i to a lid itsa itiatter of fact.'if voi look at tie Sellate i'e(l)'Od \hat \w w la e i )lot this special capability called intelli-,i 4i\'C V(' ill lie Biii'Illiii, illit i colside-rably large al nlilnt of isolation, whli c i. ill taii dilii wi0 tile, i.xolltion of tih txep,'itite Ill'liPwnch h111s led 

ti illiSSive lilOv'iii'ieits of people I( Ilili olit inforiill t hl tilahey coi ihi 

I VP ve t tel t IIi 11 t IIe NA ii li 1ittoIi I)S l. N11'. I AL'EiN . Y01 ('odild 1rolli slt ve i lot of molevY if the Iliwe1-il i',lhI ti lllemsi(W Ipil'l'. .Mr.i.\li( ic. I t liik tiiit I linive r~rllalily exceedel llY t inie. 

M I.1', [ VA I D\'\llS. fi-. Sltii'ek .? Nr. S'I.\liEK. Thil v'1ii, L . ( 'iiiil'll Doi. 1)) o\t c nltelplliate ailiV 

iitr',rtli,' . fittli2111 lit filitlv illiil t I il if view, if We, wvF to Ptlla l ft 

hev.. li ia 'lil ii('lr io \'lli'll vih l ( ii 'fe i. if we, \ve e to Silill iiv appl linve 

tO ,lrjlil,'lilt's .

Mi. 1m.vr.xN. l 1-w d ll utie I nliplove of tlil- gili hliill, s?      

> I.lS-1.\ Ir .li.

If lt ' (II C m I I ' - I t , i 1ili ' 1il ,r -l, Is ll t 'e %-p iill'1!; l f li" 

M I-r. Bini \N. Yiwl v il!l, )m:i'nr lliv .\Itol'lie,\ (Genieral coililing  

> i

:.ili -l 'illg lere il tl e ,1ii 1.1ii1i4-1ii ( nieiss says mvt s', i efrip~diiilt,. Illt tili I llW' tile, Attoliey (ll le i can re liwite thoe 

til (ill - 4 iti il Ii ii' w i (W't m 'e. 1 C iill let lis loliok fillv rile \'Ili t'writi, ti~lko , Llii elliil~s, 'I i'.iell I tllii li . il .lr'1. involved ill 1it 

E xe litivt' fillnl' il 1111 i1 v0'1i iAVV t ]( tl w t:i ii ish d 11i oliV l i'ltv bllis for tll-, Binte'ii to ol,'Flie. I d1(o iiot tiiik thilat yOl hii11 Si liiIn l'V apj l-o'e 

I lit' ,'ii, it,,litit''. 

M[r. I[.\iurili N. T'ere is tilie, qllStion to ltl how detailed tlil legislia-tiol 1liidi! hie. It S ,lls to I11' ill at (C'ollg1ss Slioiild establ isli someiiC 328 lnasi' principles and then go On to direct that tie Bureanu iS mv giitle-]iles 'oiisistenit with those princ.ipis. 'nie gtideliines should 1) public   

> .A t

lI,t the (otgress if it. wNalits co( llss additional legislation or sa tlat t lio.A gulidelilles are lnt ill colll1c(lioll witli the principles 

xwe I':ve est illisled. 

I wold also iI,'-ze the ,',illilittt. 14) addl to rtep let.,islattionu crimn ll 

1111( iV vii 51 sahi 1)1 for v iolat ion o150f right ts. I thli nk Ihut it omigh t to 

I' :0 ('ilIIP' f l il olio'iuil to willfilly Viohlte tll( statitehs 'wt (Jit ill  

> st-ttiltJ,'V

illilu'lliv.lld g. "Nlivre also) ought to 1)w civil da1-

114"l-; liko tli(r(' -i-( no'1w ill il( lie rietiilJstatttes. .I . S"'r.nEifli'tt, i.s ('X~t ly wh~at I was get tIng at wit) the f ist J)oil H. 

Imt I waist to ,ui'rsi e 1he se,. ll point. If we (do enact crilinal 

sanctions for violations of a legislative cliader. ]low is tlat to Ie en-

fo'vd How are W'4. t)ftiol tit abouti abllISC by a lFederal law en,- 

> .NJ 1.

1hi.-IA N. 1 1111 glad I hlat Yorn aw-kid t hant qulest ion. We have foundl i 1)t of ill gal l ivity right no0w aIl mlllv 'ellat4Jr ('litireli alll ('o)I-

gre,--Iii D)ri ) an liave woli l-ei e wh v tiere llilt t, Iell no osciit ions 

of :1aivoie fori' Iil a;Kive illegal oo.ilitct. I thIintk that it is a liroliln  

> of

,uiflict f interest it lightt to le ni'oliv,_i'e/] tliat tihei' FBI is an 

ii ive-ligati, yeitgene v of tle Isti,.,. epal rt i elt a 1141 tI,, two work to- 

> gtillr 11)1.

1iiil'ipresen'tt 4'iIVtim-~4-vs. Wv ar1 as.king thlat agencY N t o

ill\.,.tii1Ite itsAIl. An l this Ilas ,ai'.ih.. a plJmh'uli for the Attorney 

( ,e' .nil. which I tlinik h,, 1 '.o144Lr izes. 

For v\-amll)I. the .Juivtice I)tpartmieiit comiiiiote'i another imrest iga-

t14111 (if tl' K illtr assansii1t11 ion nti'd coin'hided that the Ilt(, nul had not     

> ]But. It'lm..\, i.'|talit .Att,'iIV

( elel: lot i r catll :I II for a n iume-     

> 1)('lih'lit ilivest igitiln 1l4 w'4llli"l'

tliv'V -ellseI thill It() ()It(e was goiing to .\ h t,, i sl , t on iioiul oIif',' ,th i)wt' t 'nl A\ s4'41MI'1 vi'\niple is till-Oii41~i&1i!'t'I U g~tl 1 ~lt1)1               

> whn,.1 1'etvsei caie ,,' efor' tllis com. mivt t', 11 1sail. we fi ve, '(.(1-

all ,,I the SI atIIt(, (if Ili lin iirtI i -. ha Ii -1 ['li lt tlul l most of tie con, di 't. 

\.;I- 114t ill , I umi'wav. ',t. tl, ' coi(' ol litl('4 tuII'11i- 1lip tlnt lle 

.D v, i ' ' i ) -a -1 1' I 1 1 1 l ail nd' t h , 1e1 ' " ~ l , l i , .' ' 1 ' re 'o t ' k Ill 1-1 11 11 11 1 1 . .'l'u1 'v ,dli llot n,,t , 1tle il,,a tiFi'R i l I'B I. 

I th ink illIt it is iJ1 A t,,, 4.l, 1. l' n ftil.l , 1-li,.v D O), 10 1ir ,,lt t,, conl-

f]it :Ill indIe'l,.deihi t ii,-1i :ti I t ,lo . An I 1 :lso think tl:it lhere i.- a

ili'I ,1 lid. vil \60 ttti'lt (Att'l- :111(1 til' 1)iletor of 111ve -11I. The "

I,, , \ '; , t ,1 4 ( )II I; Iil~ l )?. :11 4. a 1 1 c III M IW ~1 , .4 1 -11 r . , , / i z11 1 1 i] V . l l ~t           

> IIfI i' II)s(J5E4 1it (I rst ttii '?t 4,11l

i t IIIIi I I t I e "14rt' II - at thIIe satlin t linI e. 

\II f1 1'it loti, if t Io-' i'a-(s111 bot I ( f 1i, 111 v'e n'e,'oliiiiin lil(de, tit, :a1P-

1H 11 illt Ilt-lit () f 1 '-epa n'atv, ..l'j 'in I ro',wlitor tf i -Ivet' igzal<' Spec+ial cln'lvs Wil WOilli like' e'sIJe'uill *v toi SP it spi'viil pro$4''ltoJU to) (ond~lict all  

> 1l

' 1 irtt]o,1 Iof 1"I1' l a t lis s ' dwvo'i l ike to siiit 1(mg','- 

> tutei

bItislauti,, iwili w, iill lime :t slu"cial l)roseciltotr triger .\nl I th~iink it i.- :tvt , s.o'tial Stel if aly of tli(,:-.e ,.E'iiilal violation 

shtltttdl-i'd -11miold be4 ca'-iiii't out. :329 

iul', sI. itIi. I w illl I 't l ' p-0 1 . I111i I h t " w1 t l lI'lIIl. I'm4i. ill4)il'llI-iiail',.lIIIli lll)I ' ,lilhlM. I i it )i i I lli 1114a ' Illi- li' 'ien 1i:14illi 

w i li i l, s p o 'l to) t i tp f ~r l- i, im e m li ill i l 'e llil 'n 'llit- llt1 ,,. w h i c h'l %%-ii .s . w hilil I 111i t l ,if'-il l ll) l , 41111- O f.,,-Il4 il l5411415 ill 11110 1 *4 li4 )r 11ll I II) i i i ? IWillll"i if Vm i wj lli. i'4'4lliln. Ili14 Sl i1li i'tlt4ivr ' t ei' 1 1ill i el' lili)" 1 1ll-

,\ i'. lII.l i'l li' . Ith ilil+ k t ie l ' ti, i i it lll'l 1111 .i 'it l'( ll i li 11Ii  

> 141)

I p oIi.tl lilci' dll iit ,fl'tll ll'iil lt ' ili li'tl i in  ' I t o11' h t s,oli il 

ill orii iti4' i o r) ' ii orii li.. I ,iil :I%- l ili lli1, I il'lll illi V1,,4i) i hii. 4liv' ilt'(P i ll)o i i i l i iitiiI I bll ii ii.v. l' gnulii) 1,u llit. ' 4 )1iVi 

i ' il1 It iu1tI ,. ilitltl-'.- 1)4 lie ili l'l Ilii l i iti l i piniim' l i st i it'ii't i ild, if tlt. (mi Nl heS 'iV. v (pile Illi l I iil hwit is .1 ii'ty vet to S-lili' ili l il 1 l it ii wi miii 14)1, t\ 11i1., I li 114).) oi a 'lll )l I't (.;III-li10l glea filil() ll 114,1111 M e1 . (111i,-1. Owil Buill i gts" ililll1'l 1ioit ll from.li  

> )1

,0 11 , l)'111 1 11 1)1' li i. is'i':ltiii. , -f b cli, .vl Smile Own OIi 

Il. Stt i. olin iI l I. I. ( il-fI- 111 .II 111111 ilttx kl l I t il l' i tl ,l , lililt \ l'i lIs it %. 1.1i i l ll,0 .) o r i; Ili-

If '.1,111 II l l." i ill. 

I w'. il d, 'titN'. lltt ii' 1"4 i ll' ai i htllli g )l jlitil ii 'S1"i, Iil / i o n, 

,, g."-Icd'-li it 111iY lV (il'11witl t li I a''li~ ii i''ii I m. rMloll t rel A-i114'l~ 1I x-vi<l'llill, aI fruil l i I( lilvillil. l fit I; i %%l\ I'ill I pi l itiiv il I lrl'll il ll I m il. ,N 1 ir . Ill.li10 i , 1. 1 ! ll ik 1tl i 1 ci t\' v I' l ill q*li r ia b o llt il i -fil iv ile i l fl .i ill -11111 1~lll , pfi (ll l ov ll lmii,.T e it m IIt1(1 

! ilIt I Ih .-I ;It M r'. 111. w 0i l-ir iii 1)- 1.\ 111% 4 ill i hl , ( 1i ) i,- till-1I I, 

w vvl\.~li i lIuii, oli,.-it v4i M r fII' ~ iil~ll I IIII o ill ilil f ill ll 1 w rlli~il ,, 1 v lI he 

> jil

ill ,il,)g 'itI liL lli, . I t il't'' 1-4i. i t u, '.. I e'tli '1 eti' liv1,.. I " 4111 41 i' Iii' It l I "i i l ' i l ,itl iI. iv S 1 11 1 1 I I \,, I ll il l b. I flilt i il l fll' ill ilt l 

4l f~i ', w''il fo IZll .gilll t ifi l'll 11 1 \ ". 1l ii iii lil w i.t ila m oi,,i I'+'' ,, ~~~~~~~~~ ~~ll vil f\lil, 1'.. I lh oV. -Sii\ fil it 1 ll!ill'l I11i,.ill l . l l ll ili ll iliitl11 iffl iilild fl i i~ ''il, 1 1 1 , i 'll l l: ili, fO wt lilmlil' Nv \\'l ill )3i.\ \ )ili. T 111i-1l 11ii11 p -ll", Ili i i ti 11lit )-11 :tl' l l l l I lit( i, I iv t. 110 .4l 1 1 Illl 11 wil' l , l I v .II ' I l I li i lt ' v': 1t l it i l I li ,li I l l l I l - q l il ' > t il 0 \ 'ii l l'i l l i lt I f) Ih i l l i i il l l il 

rII ,- l it I li. W ool l I Iv lrA i tl h iv 1' o 1o itI m li 

.f i '. l ie ig 'p l liI i l i ,l'l Ii i~'il l ii~ li il l'l il~ i

%l I r. 111' u'i lt' i% I li . I ll" id 'm I i 44 tI fr'fg 11 1 1(1 f;i li, lsI)(l M.'f ' *-; .I \ l I ; i i Ili YI lll \ i l \ iV Y 1 11 'l i , r. i fil ll I lJ i ll l, lk .f iM lr. ( I 'i ll i ir-11I1111. N1 r'. F:,lw T hen'."' , .lx iq it ,,r ,lfl ,ill ,,,\lilt ,l 11 ,m -gil,. l ll iz-l fIfi,, f'l i' l l ,i -' l \ \-11 ' si , l ilJ i i l i (, I f I %- . III , t 1 rgil lorl i i . , i , i i I l l i l st h" '+ ,11. Ili Wi h a',li ii , It 1; 11 '.llili, i lil,; 1-4111 vll F i mil ll dli' ll edr\ i ,{ 

f( tlt ,I c,''l11111il \%illli f'ill. \0i11-1i it w 'i - 41' ill, 1 ) 4l1) and I w m, lild il'i14l1l1de ill 1it feli!. lilit 1"-liilligTc, 

\ l ' . l l ml , %%. W 4,11l . I 4l i , , 1 1 t v i l "- Ml w-< ( 11 i l l l l l l c ll t . (4 ) l lh l . . Nl . I . '- i I 

11 1:11 ' iI 111 1. il t l l , \ 14, 11cif' i i l I ! l l ' ,i, 1\ \1 w i ch' l v ml l l i ' i v v i rl l "'l i t330 up again that there possibly should be a different kind of an agency. Iain not even sure whether it is an intelligence agency, maybe it is adifferent kind of criminal investigation agency, but before we have another intelligence agency, we need to know more about the function of that intelligence agency, what it is going to be, what (1o we need it for and I think that that would require a lot more study. We have no evidence that the FBI's domestic intelligence has served a useful public purpose. except maybe in foreign counterintelligence activities. But, even there, I am not sure how good that record is. Mr. Ei)wAi)s. What we tried to do in the GAO investigation of 1974 (lome.stic intelligence operations, is to determine this. One could say that it was inconclusive of the 19,700 open cases, perhaps 19,700 of them were opened and improperly remained opened. Mr. IIAhPERIN. It seems to me tit in the sense. that the Bureau uses tile term, that is, the gathering of information about lawful political activity about people who do not want you to have it, I (1o not think that. there is ny agency in tie U.S. (;overnnient that is entitled to do that. You are not entitled to hav'e an office or"an official of the Government agencies broadcast information about people who a:v not doing any-thing that is illegal. Now, tlere is a separate problemin. which I think is dressing . The President is certainly entitled to know what is going on in the coun-try. anl certainly he has got. a lot of people wio come and tell him that tlhat information should not be gaitlered by a criminal investigatory agency nor by an organization that has fi)es. I tlink that whatever 

in format ion t'hat is gathered should be public and open. I think that in all of tie agencies of tile U.S. Governmelit. theiv is a lot of intelli-gence act ivity. and certainly no one wants to stop that. But, if the Ptresident comes in and says I don't. really know enough Ol)uxt life in tle ghletto an( I want to iinow abolit if tilere are really rats in all tile houses and therefore I want to have lU') gather thi1.4 kind of information, you (1o it openly and yol say wlat you are doing 

aind Say it is oelonly available to tile )eopl, then sure you have got aright t) gltli'r thbat in formiatioi. But what if he says what I want to know is whether the Conserva-tive Plarty is lan1n,,, to run a c'an(lilate in tle next election, well,  

> I(

(lo(e s not hiave the right to gather that in foirmation. 

Mr. EnIw.\mws. Well. thank youl. I Iave not any fturthler questions. Mr. lIxhld. 

Mr. I% D)o. No, I h~a'e no father iel. t ions. Mr. F iw.ms. We have elijoedl your llJ)cej)tions about this issue 

1111(l. tllse lrol)leis an1 lr hap. what we ought to (do is to ask the 

FBI tocolmie in here and to jist *fy the oeln files that they have, if they 

cal. ( )ne of the dif liulities lhas leeuu Ilat thev have refusedI to let tihe GCAO look at the files and lrovide .uiinniar'ies instead. I think time (CA() has realliv done a 1)rettv goo(I jol), considering tie fact that they werie not allowed access. 

We are working on flat and thank you very much. [ Whereupon, at 11 :32 a-.1. tile committee a(lijouilel.] FBI OVERSIGHT 

## Attorney General's Guidelines for FBI Activities and Additional Legislative Proposals THURSDAY, MAY 20, 1976                

> HOIU'SE OF REPRESENTATIVES,
> SUBCOM MITTI.EE oNx (x IVIL AIND ()-%NSTITu'FlONAI 1, RIGHTS,
> CoMzMITTEE ON TIHE JUDICIARY.

Vashington, D.C. 

The snlonlittee miet. puirsuant to notice, at 9:30 a.m.. in roouli 

,2)37, RaylHzoun house ()flice luzilding, lion. Don Edwards [chairman 

(4I t lie sulbmillillitte, )residling. 'resent': Relp,,esetat i vs awardss. I)rinan, and Butler. Also I s l t : Alian A. luarker. counsel: "I'lioas l. Bireen, Catherine 

].iA oy, as.sist ait ,ouuisel ; and Roscoe I. Stark III, associate counsel. 

Mr '. Eyw.\s. l1w slllJcoiiiittee will conic, to order. "l',av w contintw ,,t1 lio'arings Iegarlding the lintiule and scope 

(if legislation necessarv to clarify tle policy which should guide tile 

"dvi'lral Ii11,'c1i1 ,f IIn vestigatioll, wit it Special focus ol tle field of 

dlomilest ic intelligre',. 

()Ill- exlerielwve to (lte inleldvs receiving. what. has already lecone  

> zi

i-toric work, a report 1Y the (ieleral Accoi iting Oflice 011 Current ,ol<l(,.tic i litel li,, ',lc activities of tle FI. and tle reports of the . oilv,. ,.Ilittet.,s of b oth a11 Oii~s, as well ts views from the executive I,:ist wevk the liJews of witilesos fvii ,mtside of governmentt whio 

dii' ,Ie, )l%, i 1tp're t( (l i1 IIIVI tle (',,ii( N's,1. ass re tile Ai ericai 

1w'dli. that tlw In' v,,,es of tli' )ast will not ,1,4'1' 1 I'A e )resented. 

()u srP,'l is to 1i11,( n wU y to institlitiniillize ix" h-Ksa fegiiards for 

I]i. I',,levs' rights a11! 1 trging spirit (,f Openness al u( candor.  

> 11(w

chz '-'lict'rizi n. t lie Attorzie\ (4-,,l ual ant tile Director -f--Jhe lhis ii twwn,. 1 re luavye t wo (list infriiisl ied wil esses representing the, 

Aii) 'iean lar .\ssxwiat i(m. 1'irst, we li 'v 'Mr. Williali I. ,Spalmn, whol), is JIrcsi l,'it-elect noiii,ee of II,, Aii 'rivan liar A o< .iation. 

:1141 whoi\ was t.lai'iiiaui of . Special (,olilhiitte to Stuly F.edhral Law 

1': 111' wci ',, iit A e ,'i'es. io'a'tel b1v tile A B A. 

Mr. Sl)llll is ii ,rihlat(, of 1)arvanl and a partner il tlle law firii 

of A lton. Mill ir ail (Gainls of Atlanta. Ga. IIe is a fo n e' (' 61thu ian of tliea HBA 1ouise of I)clegatcs and a

f iiiit'r tlitt01of thle Aliicali .1 inlicaf tit' S(-Hje(t v'. 

Pre,,llt I. Mi. sp-'iun is a director of both lie National and Atlanta ],:iwv'i'l. ((iliilitt' for ('ivil Riglits I'llder Law. 

W \vvm'loIwu' , oli ]ii'' this io' ning. Mir. st)huh1hl. (331) 332 

A appearing \vitli %Ir. ,"pa11l is I Ier1)t S. -Miller, co-(lirector of tInst itutte of ('rii6i111 Law at tile (ieorgretowvu Law Center. professor Miller was the collsuitantr rel)oiler to tle special AA.l 

committee chaire(lf by MIr. Spann regarding F,'edera[ law enforceilient agencies. professor "milir has had a longstan(ling interest in the development 

of o1W e''illillal justice Systemii. 

'Tie rel)ort, of the Institute, of Criminal Law at Georgetown, en-titled "'lo (CIosed )oor," was directedd by Professor Miller. 'I'lhat 

rCl)ort dealt wit hi tile employmitent effects of a criminal record, another area of interest to this subcommiiiiittee. Iife'smor Mmiller's inowlwedg,' of tlie -workings of tie )epa'tmient 01. J list ice is well known al(i was a(li red by having been an attnviev ill tie ('ri inal )i\visioi of the I)epartii int of Justice f1(d by par-

t iciltiou ill a 1111i1er of st lijes of the structure and elfecti'ee..s 

of that institution. 

I Inight add, in thle paper thiis Iliorniig, telice was a rel)oLt of tl, gfrat tla iiae t hat tl.e ca, ile,. negligee t use of an arr(st recon'I Ior 

an investigative record. whliat, vei it light, be, can have on a private intli\'idiah Who 1(l iotllii to) (o witl, a (i'i(e, and 1111(1 never lee l  

> coni jt e~

I f am-it Ii 1g 

)et, a~l parnily, tlt' Su mrn e ('oirt has :aid Ithat there is no liability t here. 

We a)pre'iate "olo 1Ii g wit h1. is toda. 'Professor 3Iiller.   

> Mr. .spaii.

I liiider't anl Ilhat VOt will goiv(' tile( foril-11 ipresenltatiohi 

,,ll I i, ,,uIf o tile Anu 'i'vc l.a .ASsociatio,i an(d theit Profes!or 'Miller 

will join. vm ill a 1alilel to l,p,,d to (,liestions from the SubIcommittee. 

Is t hat correvt ?Ir. Eni)\v.%1w),. 'I'lle i nl l a' l)l'v(.pei. We are deligfiltel to haVe yo, 

1both1 livre.? TESTIMONY OF WILLIAMS B. SPANN, PRESIDENT-ELECT, AMERI-

CAN BAR ASSOCIATION, ACCOMPANIED BY HERBERT S. MILLER, GEORGETOWN LAW CENTER .111r. S'.xN N. It is t l'iVilee to appear before, you today on ehalf 

o f t Ie I~S 4 iat iou to 1 1() 11 s o(ver"](.IIt of thle F1ederal. 'Juretal o4 

Iln ves.t igal 1011. 11wll a55oeiationl is thle lpriiIceil11 rv'lle-vlitat lye of thlega pi'des-j  

> sioii

and 11a., long1 had anl iito'rest ill the adiliinistrio f jil ticc. 

hueli views that I vXpress today were forimuilated over thle last, 21 

year- b" till, (',lnittev to Stu l Federal Law 'tnforcvieni t

# 1 have. .rvvcuas hiairlllall of this hfpvilll eouIIiiiittee-. li the as~ist-

:1li(e(, of it s cmlltal1t. Pr)of. I lev'l,1,t S. lillher, (if tlie ( ieoi,,towm I, aw        

> centerer. who is aee.h.( i.vin e1. tgla'. thie.

Special commiluittee plil-li,-Ile,, its tilal l vp t.i-l *,evvti11; Imlr)lper IlIf~liitiie on Federal 

Il lw IA n [I',' emic tit A el ic" ill ''Jai'' a i I of It is ear. 

1114'e rec44 I illitil at j~o n for re foill in thle rvi )ot, were a ItnrovtdI by the awsoiin Mi11 s I bust' o)f I )e"~Ite, ' t~-s 1iiiyea '('t ilIK ill Ie~~ 333 arv 19N6, ill tli' ('litirct". A copy of tie fillal report was sent to eacil ,lI'lII)ter f volt' sillX2olll liittvC. ']'I W CM! I'11itt ('C aut It ie I ler as(wiit ion ''jec'ted the. ho t ion lt iat abuses (".411 solvly bIw'aiise of a few "'ild I1plls." There has l),4,l a. lobg alitI ui fortmllate history of tl progressive )oliticizatiol of thi De'pait-Jl1('hit of .J li.tic'e andit tie gor)wiig miitise of 11w FBI anti tie lIt'riwti Rev(enue Srv('c'(.e allo .,ubsequent abuses of power N. y t l-:e 

0 1gah1 izAt i011S. 

Ii v I. i ev.\ i, i 's b: It, i iist it ItioI. aI I "s tI itt I rIt' v uu iS eS0e11-

6111 to IussI:4 ti lul)lie• Of tiln' itegtv'ty of ()Ilr leeal law ('Ii',qe-l'Ie lvie-. We agree with tie stat('Iilt'llt hia(l(' li., ,Jh.t is A adi.,SIL in t le .) I A 'et (ral ist, Pape r

If i(1'town l' we e llglsg fill) (GloVi'lllllllilt wVtilld I1w* ]|w -S.' tIry. If alllge].', 11*' 11) g \'el'l1 11 lv.l . I 1-1t Iler vX t en l l I It Pl' il1 t I (Pll l~l '(11- ( ill ( l l''itW il 1lillt %\V4 ili|(| lII Il'(ecessilly . . . It. (1-ei deI I ce:'I(I m~l tilt, l K 4plq is, l111 (|mll),t , Ie p ila;ry cm()ltrol (gIl 

IliW (O\t't'l-H IM t ; hillt V'X J'ivit'n has lanlght m ii i the ltu e'' ssily fin' a ixiliary 

I m pilla-size this 'ol-,itk'ratiu ('alvu(, w I(;\%" h:ave a partt Ilien(t 

of 'Jiist le. livaea(It' IJ'ii Attorneyt' ( 'einiai amn I1)epiily Atoi 4jkvy 

(i ieralBar l Sll il th't loi'ill..t l'lt illr t he la r fes.,oni an (bv tl':1s A 111 .IN "4114ll lB ar jo.-, ' t 1. l( ',(\' l, i l V a ''|< l-t !-()]Illl il lI(, 

to :w.sulre I hat olic'ial c)milt (i, Wi ll Ibe' 'ett' illy 1,11 toN and'e I hatl, lt' FB I~ will h~e clwc] ,v v Illollitorxedl to) lprex-vit abws('., . of its l4,l p)0,\Vvl". lv' ' lilittee's 111'1t11i .'holat iwltu , ' iI I)I c I I o( ulWd1      

> '''V( 1 ) 1'eS(' I'\' .

e t .e I It'lf. ('s a ga i I.t I (' .i lit 'i' l iit Ill'! 

Tli-, lItilitI'is 1il11iilitl ) -I t )aui (v 4H' l t()\\' to prlevenlt lil-p r op erw , i ll ill le n c es m) i . o ur.1 " cli,i' ll .- 'v ', l ( ) f j , l i Wt'. '1'1 l v I\ di li VO', S

Ili't'' tbig it' llilmre ; l (iilS it -- Iiil iti i lig rlol' ,luii.ki.V• hose Li.! 

> Mlt(

V 4 IClI' 1is)itev s11c'"rc wit' s. 

'l'lu' I-ouiutrIittes O'ig i l, I Iuiilt1;ite I'I- IIati, b tt it vats (1i,.klv 

Wlt ' '( ',l TO 11 4I d v l t o) t i t( lD e lp a 't i l vi l ( )f' ,] ll-. v, t h e( F B! I , 1 11 1(1 t i t( - l i lt e] -

C't l..ii lei- )f'i el'V eh.at Al 1 )1\ (gf oel t '. ,i'i' )l e]viltti, ts  

> 1all

IX' optl ( 1It i' " 1S' I'()l' 4)tlt' 40w 14 fo 'll haw l' ( 'ellit a ('lgtlci's. I atll ako that. lliter, no. lit iltetliolto Iti Lolit a linge'r at a p'-

I uiilr aeny. J u-titq' (r FHI or interful kevei, but, that tIlw'M W(Illit,)' 0- ill te lilhlic' cYv :111 fr'ankly al arva ill whichl we lhadl I(we 

eXl'ir! i. ,. \\'o redi.edt o),l' (i(i~ vrat ion) to) a 'few agvl)(.iv . W\e( t'wllu( 

t here were ,omvC 2.7 anivgl'ts Nv' uiigiit have looketi inito if Nyou are 

:tlki t,,tlioit ll-1O' law (' ftr'cellt'llt :lgellt'ies. 

we aUn ll 0111 l' 4l libe(ralt ifls wit Imit a f' lI ll ,t'l'tlili l (di , tIe 

nliltlr' an( Il uode oi t'tJ i'(4s.i-i:1l t)\'t'l.m-iglit an(I its ilI)tu"I'ailit,' III 

pr'vt'lit i ug 1i11 )r )1)(u' intluia' v'. ()f tn w2() recomnlnlalt it')ls ill Ileo 

vntire cm)iili.tt('s r o)r, t. 17 fot'.u- 41m 1lit' Ir]( of (Cm'.." rI.-s in h'gi:lt-i)i, <(-( ti 'illq 41 oll t meit. ()' 111 pp .ropriat ing nIol,V\' .

lh ilt' iiipo'alt 1'ole ( wltirrv! pla\'s. or 5 lo4llldl play". Ill 4'l'iug Mll- Fl erlal law evlt')((t,Ijlt~ -I, i,, l)(1,111ca:t[es the, vili r, l'(wlt. 

'This role' is illui-t ratedI1 V~ .1111 1'Xlliiiiillt (o) tf the bilitogi:iph od 

Iale,'ials 111)1, wli i'li l, l itl.iitle ' iire l ill te 1v t'(l)alation () its 

report. Tile 'ol"lu'uitte collilltet iti factual ii westiation o? it-, 

1)11.I t''i.t til 11 hotf fitiu''--i)il leu il at -pt.' ts wh ich actet't 334 as a major source of information for the commiiittee. Prominent among these materials were hearings on FBI domestic intelligence and FBI over.sight held by this subcommittee. It is startling to note that although these. congressional materials refer to abuses beginning in the niid-1930s, all of the hearings on these matters took place in the last few years. It appears that Congress ex-ercised little oversight over the FBI prior to the Wttergate revelatiolns. The AlA. report emphasizes tle inij)ortance of cong:essiolal over-sight and rejects tie notion that there shoildl be an independent out-side review board for FBI operations. The Association believes over-sight tools available to Congress andl the executive bri'auw have not beein utilized sufficiently in tie past and should hIe given the oppor--tunity to function fhlly and effectively before extraordinary atp-liroacles ar-e attempllted1. 

The AIHA. biieves oversight m1ust occur on a i ntilolls basis to illuminate at all early stage potential abluses an( that ove eight, of the FBI numst be palrt of oversight of the i)epart ent of ,J lsti( e as a whole. 

Thuls, a cotiittee with plriiary esl)onsilil ity for .list ice I)epalrtilent ov'ersight should have fill and ongoing responsibility for FHI over-sight. We do not say such oversighilt ,iust be exclsive. liut point out 

that oversight by too inalny commiiittees van diissipate responsibility. 

Alln Important facet of o'ver. ic'it is tl i lip)lop-iatins process and 

we Believe tle '(mlilltttee exerci.sing oversight ov, the I)elarti lnt 

Of fustie s]hoil! Id e closely involved in app-ropriating funds for tie 

Depa rtmaa ent. ( ongi-ess. cot 11( then aioriit 01. tile pr-ior-ities and I I wforinl-an(ce of the I)ep 'i tiiiit. (,nsriig a I)i-loei allocation of C.soi- ces. It is clear that tile a)l)rroI)riations lpoc.ess has not 1weii lise(l efftcti vely in thle past as it iaaeaiis of oversight over. tile 1'~ 11. 

Al k(y pa rt (,f such o 'eii inlat relates to inte(,mal ,esom-ce allocation within t ihe I )c t ilent. ('olaires.S N. Olild 11aye diffici ltv exercising its oversight l'espolisilbilitv tiliroughli tlht' al)l)UOl'ilt i0., nprocess ii iil'fS tlhe ('Nec aat i e ti geaicv it st'lf had a i1, ana 1 svstelli folr alIlocwat ion of r-

,011 rc.S. The p)(,lNar ent of ,Jiustice reent'ly iistitlIte(l a new .)rotralll 

of r s-oure allocation based l11)011 the Iri('il) les of "'alitunaageiaient by I) )ectl i e., Thiis forces lffices 1nl(, division inl tile I i ai tient to cx-riaja1ilie their. lw1ioit i(-5 ni justi fy tile conitilai411iice OF init iation of  

> Jrogriiis. This

Should be wncouaaraged nild( tilie apl-~oplrilte coligues- 

> -ioul1

coiiiittee Shiolild uve the appiop-iat ions piocess lis it wtIv of 

t'Xpl on in with tilie 1h 1 ilt miit t I ('set tii ag of pirio nit jesand tli ilalfoca -   

> 1iof i-c-oiilives.

''lle \.Asrovintion believes the system of appointment of executive 1 iaiucli oflicklds is anl es.1,11a ad ciical aspect of ( ougiessioull ye i t. .\AIt lI ioi l tw eIHouise of Be Inesen vltllt iv yes 1)1s noit) di ret i(,Ie in tlie col fi 'll)at ) l)aho('ess, it cal hllay a key role in, enac'ti rg legis-]at ion to governl such pm'es:s. Fi ve of t e last seven Presilleints ap-

poiited n Attolrney ( nelal are. individiuls who eitlier 1ma ;1nag'd 

M, played at key r-ole inl their- 1)01it tt'til camipaigis. We t here fore recoin-

mendlegshitionproh)jibit ilag tile appjoilitllelit of indi1vidluals who ha.vo 

)la vetI a leadliug partisan .l0' in tile election of a I '.ivlent to the jlsl s of Attoualiev ( eGea I 111(1 1 )e) litv Atto-iv ( eneral. 

T'lle association also l)(lievvs tlie I)irector ;f the FlI should hli ave his p(,rf rn aance periodicallv r'ev icwed through a pioc'ess of reconfi mua-335 tion and that his appointment should be for a statutory term of years. The reconfirmation mechanism would provide the opportunity for re-evaluation of the I)irector's performance on a periodic and routine Iais rather than in the heat of controversy. Perhaps the most important facet. of congressional oversight of the FBI involves its jurisdiction. The Special Committee concluded that tle present bases of jurisdiction are imprecise, vague, and historically contradictory, providing little or no giidance to the President, the Attorney General. and the Director of the FBI. We think that. there can be no effective oversight unless there are clear standards set forth b)y legislation and by regulations promul-gated thereunder. The regulations recently promulgated by the At-torney General are an important first step but they should be respon-sie'e to a .harlv (lefin('(d congressional mandate. Finally, the dlevelopilent of sutch regulations should offer an opportuni ty for m,,an4ingful professional and citizen input prior to adoption. Before effective oversight can be exercised, Congress must have access to epartilliintal information. Tile present approach of ad hoc soltions or threats of contellpt is not a viable substitute for ai or-(lerel procedure to resolve configts regLgrding the availability of such information. therefore , wve 1llieve. Congress .must establish al)l)ro-w-rate standards to glli e congressional committees and the )epart-  

> ii tent

of Justice in this re.l)ect. in (.ol,.IIsioit. Mr. ('iairmn, T hope we have made clear our belief that congressional oveisight has many facets and that stanlifig com-

11it tees should exerc('ise slch oversight (on an ongoing, rout ine basis. 'l' l)orary select committees, ais valitalle as they have lwen and will 'o.itillie to be. only o)rvide oversight after extreme al)1iiss have oc-

(.lnr'ed. Proper Cong.essi)nal oversight shilould serve to prevent ex-tu 'inc11 al isps f roml occurr-ling. 

Tile AB1A finds that ('o gress is the primary body lin(ler ouir Con-stitiltion for exercising oversight. We ('ol tde on: rei'('(infen(lation 

Mn 1,1BI oversiglt witli tlse words: "Outside review of F1i opera-t iols is 0l)l)OS((l its u necessaryy if the alove re('on ien(lations are im-lltuiiteand ( exe'cte(L", We ur'ge congress s to take the necessary steps to insure t hat it call exercise effective oversight over the FII anl thereby ftiltill its )roler constitutional role. Tiank %o',u. 

MEr. Iin'vAR'.. . 'l':nk yl very m lch. 'Mr. Sprain. Professor Miller. (Io 1')( t lOv e a statement, ?Mr. .Mmuv.ur. No. sir. Mt. i,,w.\ uus. Th e ,,nl heuian frohit Ma.,ksachusetts. Mr. I)rinan. 

Mr'. DI muN.T~hIaik voU, .'. rian 

'I'lank yo,. 'Mr. Sjmnn. 1 ,',,1ume1Vi y ol or vout'. st'tem ent ald tie A IIA for its st Il V. 1 hIave Sei'ii this StuIOlv somte miioiithis agro. I -was happy to read thle 1,414'011l MII it| t io) IS. As a pertsoi wvlo is very fainiliar with tlie way lihe A .A works, 

:,tl w, a i el.l o(r forulter inetliber. I aili veiry 11(fiv'e ill the Sect ion 

W1, illi'i(luial rig]lts uti r'spoiisililitits. I am1 glad t hat tle .\B. 1- in\',,lved. 336 I lilvc, So1me (j1eStiois he'e" :Is to vily tie A BA did olit get, into some 

other things. For1- exiliipit, il tie. stattiiI(e't here. 1. find not thing about inft'ormiants. Unf rt tiatelv, the( lociament (does not have ai inidex. )iI tlie%. get into the (luestionl of the FIl's use off iniformers ( ,

ill forma lits, these aiioiiviioiis l)eoplv tllt tiey ly tile millions of dollars to r()oi't oil Alnericili citizens ?

M1i'. S . \e got into that in (is .ssion. MIr. l RI )NAN. It seeils to ne this is a rather central question. Mr,'. SPANN. I (1) 10t. kIow thIat we limd any inforniitiou available to iIs to eillighteu us a get, deal on whiat t. Ave could say about inforn-ants. We recognize I thlint they ate usel atil lLr]iar pe l they are a nvc's-

sary evil. 

M'. l)iuNANx. Wiy aV ' t'V yi('.%'.,.-a r ?'y. l)o .'i have :t'll" inforilla 11)11   

> 1t1.1t t

11ey 1r1, lit,1'.N 5- ry .? AhI'. ,'.%,\x. No:" no i[ t i:fiv'al inlfoimiit ion. .11i'. l)DiiNAN. All Viight. Y"Q1t IIlIVI' hae ilfo im1ationi lint thily all'e   

> iii't'"h-.2 I' V.

. P'. . N;,, . No).,ir. \Ii'. 1)i1Ni N. TlY :i' liit 11 Iii'lcv's-;ily vil. Y',i call't prove tht. ()i 1lw', %,loll' (pi-tio ii o ti' ilil't .Ai l 1(11l i\. the Fi inll the a'a 

(if" illli lig,'Ilce and ,.oiil,'iilelig 'ii'r,. lI -cv ill Ih' rep 'r lii'i't, :I n-l ii' I'iirue :iili i'iiit ilion Hint ii litl fie. F Il -1i1ii(l (1h) :- iiel lii ig iii I hait    

> As ,i

knl o . from ll th 1' s tlilv., i ll till' al( , leit''e .lirv 11,l1 V

p(')lpl, whiol twl '' 1ifi' l lt ' it :i 1li ia, c t ,0) a 'lliie o I lil'atell to he a 411,111101 it s-ilmill he' ftI'i' l( 1- 3i iliili ili 1i ll't' I -l h ii iih l I ' vt'l i av e!) 1Pt 16! ,-e''tiol od' li' F Ill. 

M.l ,'.\ "-PN. MY miili idiill reaction P- that :miloli' liii'-t lit' ini'dvoei, ill 11i14.i'i1,il 1'li l tli i ll id 'l'' 'It lit) li'i w-mli w ily ililid erl it l l l( (11.tilliii i tlit( F Il Inaiv I1 I wt "-() illiv',dl\ v(,l. .N 1". l)mtluN.xN. \Vlilit i si.-I ifiC:it 011. Wili .-t itlit jI i-li fi,'ii ionl is I c're 

for Ihliv Fll I tI 1, iviivdolvd ?Mr. Sr\-,,N-. l'rt i aili v 2 I poiiis int. We 'coiiill ieiul thit whie't, I hi'\" iiilil t t I, iiivotveil.l, liti'' in, .iiitlliiiecs .'-.llhi-lin'uI wlijc'li wotlil   

> (' lil

iil 4i)t' I' m.r lill iI. lIill" iilliI.-mll-iel iilims! bct 1mllkili ,', ilin e, r opi'leir guidehlines, to NIi'. I )n I.N \ x'. \Vilit ji-ti fi'ati ion ,1, Volli l11av' forI' tat si.r? 

Ni1'. SP \ XN. I.NIr. I )u I.\,x'. W11h It -i;11 itol'V m. 1ii'-t4itit:il jliHt I lficat ion dI ylo ll tAve       

> fi I111l t'i i'lit

I liltF :V I .Iait h.1 ave It )?over.,,i' tit, way woji'll  

> ;

liilk. 

. 4 1. Nix \ , . I ,l1;d 11 0, - ;1 v i l ah e \ W,IY e li t illk . -. ir . I : -,.i l fl ullt w it hl Ir'4rrl. tt o 1ifi'rin \i, .il l) 11112v ) :14'. iv ill tlii- 'Oitilt'tx'. I tliiik                  

> .'-, llll lli' iivllt.-, !+) 4',,l1il cl' I lintl -Il,i 'ivillm ic't. WVdol Itfil Sayv tlit(,y h

~Vi,          

> t14 it lltmlw 'v il-itlvix.
> 1i *iiv (1 1illioi. .11ii1lN1ihl ili-t

hlt vi . lle li thl oirll ' I 1) k- -14) cml-illi'l -ill. ,ilili 1'(', lflt'f i'4'iLii tihtt'il-I lii i- ' m tiiil INY.         

> i' .Ill .. l" ''g lil.lll ,al '~ l

F lil llllX l~l i )It' i- \\Mii 4V Vv l'l' l t he ' I "i iliV i. ~!-. ii" llii v I. iii'll-            

> II'll ll vto.i l -n.11j -li)t l-41

337 Mrr. SA.\Xx. Ih'e~v ll~lvoid 1o it oHl An1(,ricll (.itizens to tll, p)oillt, 

-wltrie tlIP)' h t 'y ' ('0, 'pe'lt lug with foreign agents. 1 do not t livuk you can sav tihmt I)' ,im t he forvi',igl tgntS are pIIlplio)i ug Alilel-it'a1 'itize s

sill'veilailice of the, fo'eigil flgent sto)S at tile tiiiie lie lpS, ,s tile ',,r'l il\" , n,wvol, ill tl , c'm )l-v':'v. to) I (, the, law tel-11. w ithit for -

(i .l alg lt ,will Im. uillnd ,'e I l -Ilr ve ilic(' . If ily 'vIl( talking lihiit mk !4ll' hilW Nnt 've a(1ll ti rad 1 i left or ti1t4 iml (iv l1ight orgll wi -t i(1".I %v(ld 11 0 wtiot tg''(it(% 'V ought to be4 1111(1('r sur1veillll'4. 

T'6) *I~ N.11( 11(3d Im nu'1ll6', lhu' '.lin-vil1lnce oIf foweignl agents 1)V stlt iltv' 

th t I 10 IOw 0. Of. I t I ink tIi-i: ( il t to be (efllw 41111d the vXtel'it of it    

> Oii'..it toI Ill.

def'illvd .Mr. S e'.. ''. 

NMri. \IIN~N. I will NI lilit ,(l it ave gon )it'I( *0 yonI wi t T 'omi idvr 

ti l1h, tlt"r-:Ip l-. 'l'r ,, nl f Ir thli, v1. MV,. PI  NN. I ti11 ! jll )(lkili 811, IlW(Ts t, t N vlill my m it jwi",tl-On" 

vit'w. 11,11111 is i1l the4'v m''4ol ii'll lit 10115 is 1110' extent (if what 1lie A INA 

Nr. II.\ x . op'. -iir. 11l31t Ill r tl1ilV l yli' Your l'(3 liO t10151111 li(ti 1,1,'Ivl the V 1,'~ t' l6It r14Iti'V of thitl' ] v..t.i nt l,. .. lz-tx \ "t vly ,:t i~ v lt ti.vvw, n iv tI lollicyt',' I i .AI 

I n'. Sl 'NN:. !iu ilk V."t. 

Mr t. IEmv'.Nlm. hl,rink b'41. Nit' (rilhigiu'uu .

Nlr'. I11 16-.11111,. l1(,,. 'It isv-1 v' h, l pir ll f ) i:i-. I Nvm lli 11ike to il(jllivfl.lv to ,whetlihe' p'6mII special cmOiliIlittev6 6'I'('tlId iii 1l!I7:1. lu't- now h'4'o'T dliN'11gedI ?

.Ni Sl . No. -it. it ,' 1-til l a l.,i iUvI,., - I nli ,'l l l l ui . It lois I m tit p 1(3 Ito E11(.t Iui'thit'i. It i> 11o to the' 1tI'iotit'ho- .u till A. Stlaulev'. 

1 lt'. SI'vnl ,. N "l.l :xll h i d- W

# I49 ~ i -It I4 Ih1it lt o i fl'6Ilhm I '.11(11 ''Iv~* I ti  10vlij I !it ~l'V 'al 1N. I I i I Id'IIl                  

> iIt i(I. t1I'31 11 46aIt. efr I (I i
> r

' ito ir] v t P64.hlli t'l l I'. l i ' II 'i'l- l lf (1 1111.6 to 1i4 I- t et 

. rF. ' \ N . I - I'l i338 Mr. EmW.,s. The harassment of Dr. Martin Luther King came oit of tile domestic intelligence program. The more we examine and the more the FBI and thre Departmient of Justice examine their (otiottic intelligence programs, the less substance they seell to have. I think in your discussions with 'Mr. l)rinn that conle olut as vell. 

'What is the source of tile jurislict ion ? Now it is very clear in the case 

of foreign agents where tile ju risd action lies and tie necessity for jilris-

diction anid the necessity for action. We cannot have foreign a,gen1ts traveling around this country ani spying and violating Federal iw and not 1w. under somre sort of investigation or sturveillance. And ccr-tainly the sat is trlu insofar its terrorists tire cocernetd. I'. ,I,'ANN. YVIS. 

Mr. Enwmims. Organ izaitions anld people woil are radical, w:ose 

worls are (listilrling to a lot of other lwolle. whose llh,*O of 'orl,,iet andi dress lre (liffelelt worr 'vll m leoll. We fill tihe J"lB! lrn- 'ld organizations ani people like tilit inder invest igat ion for n11n y rinf. years with no crimiiinnl condlict involvel at nil. 1Professor Miller. wallt do vII think the jiln'isdic'tion for do,,,s-lie intelligencet activities. if any. of th FI11 should e. low do ymo tink it should be letineil ?

Mr. M ILur. WelI. one of lie problems of oversighlIt interiallv I I Ie 

Department of .iist ice. .s well ns by con/rressioni1 oversilit stei.u4 from tie fat thait most FBI i v.stigltiolns io not coirle to Ilie t,eltitenio of tire )eplr 'tnilent lintil tile%- are to som extent largely conilete .We have tried to place thi's problem withill 1n wihoe r n.ge of Iv,.l,,-

iiendlations which woidl imake it. if not iplios..ililv. 'trxl''lel" dif-

thilt for lihe 1,111 to fo of) a frolic of its own. hot0li tlroilgli illtrl'lla O\11'ersight in tie It )epl tilauet aid oversight by ('ongrre's. A in) l t'r' (if lwoi pi withI whoi n I spoke bNelieve it will ctirse exitlreli, 

liflivllties if ill an initial investtiation Iv thle 1,'111 i lto Sollpt1! iin involving lo lali 1 intelligence. ylon require lit tlit )point it spl..,ifI4t Stiltite. lr. ( 1hair. ii1n. if' .I lir,1 a .tallfitor' v 'eqnain ar1v1nit tr:rl ut 0 So e ,'i t 

pary il Iheo ilvest i,, lio l :l peif lt' ci'i e b"ri ' in ilvedi. E'ver if '.iii  

> y'

a willingiiess on tlie oal 't of ll( ill'e"- i ' ! anal lie I)(r,, .!t 

of .Jilstit'i to gj . N.4w 111111'l ha. thul X r. 1111 tr.11v within the stltiltv. .uic'!h of ljji.k will d lend lpon I% intgr,'it v of tIli' invest igiton'-. tw, iitptri'if % of Ille inlternll e';rit*\'''i-a i the I )epirltilaint 4f 

,[l,.t iv. ani lift, firl iet'r l ok at while's troing ol lIv( (C nluress. 

> Wet'

stress t hat. 'llp ~nw hrar'.eiadi ,ivbct i%, (-K wit hin t hIllI h.-par-trna'ut is nrot only a niaiafrarttool, it is ai w:iv ofilui'ikinu oni Law 

111w " arI-(. l isi i li e tir ,s iar' ,. 'l'lle\" are1 iot uou, I , to Im,'d l,' tob l!-, -, 

tl ir n'Sorlr'(s' to 1un 'xl ,-iv , del.ree om ('ili1,, ilh,,.,al o. ii i;t lim; •", 

ivest igat ions if the J )a'uilnlllnert r,-e tl' t,,'lchiliai, i'olr'lv '1114 if  

> ill

tint' oversuirhIt hen.'unr~i 101 alutSSli'a l vdl1 the I )e111alirrent     

> to rlicol lltf for

lie;r :nhloc n p: it i f r,,' lnr'. So. that ay l~iv, a v,,r\" lri~ i~iall indirect am11.'wr. Mr. l,.1ii-Im,,in. ht it i fi to , , 1we In'n t wl il,'t -:, villur it 1, s to iev a Stal lnte. 1 41) 

not tli rk Iliat thiut almoe wvill r a lv I,1o t lh io). 

Afr. I hrws %x. If theI cliaii'.tinl 1 uV'01l1d Yieli. 

M r. l,'DIVA111S. Yes. 

Ift'. I)rnNAV.. -. Ii'. .lilhl'1r an1 M r. Soanln . ,li ri n,, tlie de il'i'at loll:, 

of tire committee. (till tile question al'is( of just :1lxHislhing the FI'[ 339 and letting the Attorney General and Department of Justice investi-gate what they want to? We have this sacrd cow now. You yourself say we have to put a statute on it. It is not certain that they will be responsive. I wonder if somebody sriously said let's go back to square 1. alb)lish this agency, and give tile same amount of money or more to tile I)eplartnent of Justice, to the U.S. Attorney General and say they are not bound by this organization that is such a runaway. Mr. Sr~n'. I think we agree that the actual alolition was not dis-cussed. 'lihe limitation of tle FIll agents solely to engage in tie investi-gation of crime, but not, abolition. Mr. )rHIAN. Would you think that, maybe that would be tile only 

solution ? Where you llave people who are so defiant of their own regli-

lations. and this is in their own regnulations, Professor Miller, as you know, t hey cannot cont inue Ixyondl 6) or 9() iays. Frankly. I think the Attorney Genral or tle administration could 

just. say tlat some agencies are obsolete. I an, not impressed by tile e'Iicieni'y of the Fill. Scriolls crime colit inles to escalate. "iTley have re ally no adequate 

sollit ionl. Tlv are not. lxgging for Ilore officials or Itiore agents. IieV 

lia ye 8.5 0 or ,){; and tiherv is a certain h, tleargv there. W yt ci''t we go back and iise the suiset Irinciple that the agency 

ges. olt of existence liftvi, a ceti period. 

> Mr.

Ni'.\NN. It iay 1x- one solttioi, btt it maty be a bt tth in senmin-tics if yonl aldisll tile agency mi1d then create a new one niider the At-

torntey ( general for crimle ti forceiillet. 1 (10 not know that that cures the e'il un11less thie niew o1e hats tle sae jtlrisivtional limits that we wotii Imit by statute oil this agency. Mr. I)iutxNA.. It is already tmher lile Attorney General. Ir. St.. N.N. 'ilat is right. The regil lalt iols le lits pilt tihem on 

reent Iv, we feel olghlt to Ie, mianlatei bv ('onlgres,,.. beemllise, to lise all 

expression I vlpifii ve'd arliiir iii ta Ikiii iiihit ti, l elc 'ia Id proseeitor 

provision to tie Rilbicoft conllittee, I tllink it ouglit to l, Curvel ill 

Stole. 

I thIintk wlen the Attorney General changes. whIat liii lpens ill that tifhicej rita ii,.!e(S. Hult I t hi uk if You putt it ill a t ttie a succeetdingi. Altor vy (hne, raI canfilot cltan.,re it. 

We, ei1ildlusizi. t fit w 1,4, lt ritiizile. of ,' lr.,. what Attole" 

(;eil Levi is doing nul huas, done. We think hie lia done more than 

has ben (lole in son u" time. 

Air. )RNA'x.. Well. I vivld hack to the c1lirnt. 

Mir. llew.ls. V',hl. e veatr. 11114 for n ati. vvn"n ya r.-', li re )iram'- 

> tIl

of the FBIl. intl tlhis iiu:ltles tle pres'tit'1 )irevio with whole; we 

Imv i:Iti 101i relat ions. hats come1 to thle I otie(f Rep~r('q.Ut.-it i vt's l id 

,lde,'ri bei1 ill son, detail tlie ir dlon ,t ic'-it, li i gem'e lrgrain. The );i,'l t or aIvi.ses tIt at we liave itrder sili've illa 'ce. :114l we arIv comtili l-ini' to imi',sti!!lt( tli,, O iw KIIN Khum. Ime .'iali\ Workm,' Parl, (llhe I. iliiiililltiist P.-it v USA. lnk P~anther,. 

Tl'v 1ave a list of orr,Lliizatioi, iait tlte" have kelpt 1iii,44,r some  

> C,, 11t

of' sitwtillat',, for 11atiiv, mai" Vea*s. o). certaiti"ly tIle I)ejtrt-ftniu,, vif ,mhstive kntew" aomt this. 'l'li is pttli kiiowltelue amim lail-hli it ite hearinigs awl prihited and di.-riliuted. Are t hose invest i-gait iotis al )lptolrtit u ?Mr. Ag..\gain. we cone to wlat is tealy hiing illV'estigated and the extenl of it--whllter it is a imiatter of simpilily trying to deter-,340 

1)11. afll of the 11t'tivities of thvs(, griowips. the Black Pantlers or"i the 

K InI or whvat have you. 

if the KlIan in Mississippi is futioning as a group and sending ont its litclletmnil. tell vot eave n cols nray of til' wholk. (rrOlp 2.1 en! I'eii is as guilty its lie ou' 'l.wu tlt re11i1.c' Sl)Ccific iilv(,stiga-Itio in (hat case. 

'i',, co)l Ip ik 1111l stIll-t iN1 vest1 SgjtitI,. tie Klan's Ictivitis in 

At1l:i ta. wi.iclh colsists tisiualIv of 1l nu:in ug a cross on Stolle Moun tail 

()II hFst '1 Mori'iilig. or Some suc(.]h t liii1. I d(ln't know. I think tiis  

> wmil

be4 1 1Ilucalled4 for. There vollidlb 110 -l() ionshIi i et weenl the t WI'). 

I think ili crimes coiniuittvill 1)v the lnck Pl~ali('15s. theyN 1must finld w 11 ws']lt that p il mrtic'.lar g ro)l]p dii l o rde (h r to im p hl 11l1vv l., at -l livl . Tlhat d(o'S lmt Illvall iiiwVStigt, till- ()i-tarlIIioul froutul (O 2St-to-

,:mt't. 01o V'iPisiV. jist I'C,,1 1:4- VEil ill' ,-tigiit't thev groI 11 lp that v' ill sli,-

).',' tf I Iaviv, It lr l aIIIvl, ,(1 d111( xe, t. I d tl. II il t ic II I I-r I v II 1 41l1 v tio I .     

> 1rYfmi do

IIs. of cml- 54. (vve -Yoliv 5 is it i i J('F Of somei( groli p. If you 

1llE)10lte left. andi! the midIile Ieft--- ti "() L -''p tlieill iiitlir su.-

VC i II ;vic - itI dlo(-s tio iIi ia nlc t lv -v Ii sO' at nIlI. 

Mrll. EIm-.Imms. I like, tlbat illiswer', I think it vnales a l,,t (If sew. 

Thei ' we Stl dv this t oi 'i OwIn jirlist1ict toil for dolmnstiv iilt(lli-            

> ,rl'i ,' 'IlS IP 411'lt IIt aI' V. Yl'f lv'2lllimlt

I vll .\' tl illhu t1 ' il it. lec t'all., 

II, l'gitilillte it lias I<' liive comw2 (P lll ll't ii) h\ Ii I ll' . SIo c'le'wiv'e 2ilong". 

til.e line. If Ii'On is 110) ('lillit inv'I(lvt'(. thuetil Ihero is )m0 (l2!atI t llu.    

> cm+iIII 1wV. v~t c'eIf l'l.

('v' aiilY tI lnl tilv', ti.o' ll.1 1 .11, Is i"i()ll 4v l lli rlil I n theli,'' r

I %% l Si 41 q I,. i p-4t Il tIIII ,. tI tI I 'i, IhIv I I w tIi - foi I ' I :1 I lvl t, i  

> .. t'i1iI ,~ v

i.t 11211 V il.' nI p lv l ra' i 11 i, ' lit c, \al ,i ll 't, l. i ti1,41 to ilivt'stititil l, ll u llr i' ',.itll 1tc!av'(I t a lm,,sihlv ib ill-

ill!,- t!,:11 isa 2l), i1t to tilhI place. 

N WV', . W (l'i1' d 1'o s lill' F I Stop1 Stll li itlv''-i!il in) li0l.. !A l .lliZa-i i i- a'IIv.,o,1 it) l. terrorist sulclh :I"; liO' )l,(). Wv will Sa\" tileY lievel 

1441) ~ l' 11 uivt ii ill tli I' mted Shtts Imt thlev 1-ar lle~i~ l bv swill. 

,, ! l hvrr. Th']llat is ,11-h ) it Ilo :l ,'ril'iv . W e ,'I'tailv ,N jIt wanit to 

# wi 1 Iil~ into Itic~ jlli!- ic(it iml ) f I lie11)2 j)El p while. W' 21'll- I~j jr1jIg lit 

1w F I"I' Jii'isiotiol, and1l whi'thivi slch Ilulllir, slpoilil 1bv in thl. 

, ,, t,. li .i ~tl li.,-v , j ',ltpi p (-- il li I-i< , r+< Ilt vi ) . .:ll,,III l 111111 1 (i~t                

> I,ll.lllft l" forl tilt-crlillm ll idiv\isi}l lk Itill' FI 1i

if it Av:lilt- 14, c'm ilict,' nt1ill~t4s 14r\it lll|, 

\I I1, J.KIC. ItIl do) nit hi;Iv : ' eili-f i I: Si.4 l. . liA w .(' 'f ve)' . ivilt 

111, h l is 1)1 11 I t;l'' ' ill 1 in rnl:li. vli've t I Vl.ci-.iP I -: , whesn',. 

e.. want to 4 1, i/zig a 11:1.ti,.l:r. c'il, . 'l:l iVa It, tibe 1 (1 ind0 (of ,.illie ( , l , Itjii if th N~ i t'-t 11111 il\ 1evo\.'t i. ,It l . lt ll fhc11i it IS. ill fill. 

i 1;. ( v,' o rv t } , e rvill im il li \is~ i l. 341 

Tihe real question is, at What point ShOli they have to report to tihe I)partment. The kind of a decision to be madle is whether tile investi-gat ion is to continue and under whose auspices. It seems to me at that point the I)epartment of ,Justice should start exercising sone control. I think we el)llasize this in our report. Mr. l)UnsA.%N. What (1o you Iiein investigate? It is clear they have to report vitlii GO% to 9J) lays. but right low tlwvY uise wa rraiitles wire-taps against antl(1 SlSl)eCted of this or tllt. Mr. [evi visited ilik the 

,Ot l'I ilay l)er5l(ifll begging me for t vote for a bill that would still permit tih 1'resideit to havv wva ral Ii hss wiretaps. wolld nut llrize tlie President and the Attorney General to go into court. sometimes, if lhey so desire, to geti a warrant. But tie FlIt now lilts tlat, l)Ower, piiidr tiI it/ de;th decision. 'hey go andi (1o it Nva'rrIli tIs tfiq) oil these all(gedi SIIl)v':rsive foreign nat ioiials. So when you talk about illvest igating, what dlo yol llaii .Mr. t,.x. I think we lhlve siml)Iv not, as a comminittee c(rtaillly, 

taken a position: we I ave not looked at thit parti.liar issue its it Committee. I would ot ex l)re'ss afv lti'tilar ol)i, 1ion other than tile geiieral views tlat tile A lieritan hr ,Xl)r essedl several years ago on electrol ic sitrvei Ilallce w iwli, you arec fai iliar with. uht to Speak for tle (,o'1 ittee or individual oin tihat in light of tle views tilt- Ailieric l ill itas extend(lel I think wotild probably be improper.  

> Mr.

M)rx..,,. M1r. Span , I hope tliat your committees will reunite. Ineet aind coiliv to tile coii clhisiomu wIi'liv I just suggested. It would bt. 

v''ry ll)ful to us. 

I vie ld back to tle chairman. MJr. Eiw'imI)s. 'Ii gentlemn from ('o ne4ti'ut, Mr. )0Odd. 

MrIt. I)onn. 'I'liatk you. M1r. Chairman. I just, Iave a Co')l, of questions. I was interested il reading your' statement, Mrl. Spunk. lvctly* v we had tlie LEAA reauthorizatit which allows for the Judiiciary ('oni ittee to have oversight over tite 

aut horizationl of fluids for tle )eprtmi nient of ,Justice. It is realIly 

so nt liing we. really have not exercised ill tile )ast. Mr. Sr.x x. I think le, would lie better e(li Il)d to answer that. My Own very brief answer is we believe this wou d be a part of the Oversight. process. We feel the liinitations miust b,, largely through ciigre.sioiil litI -overiglt nd Clicted t lirough statute. Mi.Mi uu~.We rval 1 N. lid lilldriess thlit IuAiol il t it( im-ic iai vomli-

mittee and tlie recotmmneii'dat ions ilt lie rl)Ol't reiltv'et t lat consideration. 

We referred to tlie legislatioul 0r esol utiotn i utroduired by the chair- 

> mnali (fIhv

thifll coiiiiittee, Mi. 1txliiio .hlich would bring thle IIon-v 

Mr. ID,,m). Yes. 1 111th 

|I'..~lW i.il':ll. WV ke :nie \e'r l'..e tu'i i l lie ,' llt Ilhat llie app)rop iaOte ,.miliiiittev tiat iS ex('isiiig iii ge, ral lit'iglit Jlltl. linvolvi-d in t lhat alppropial ion lpiX'css. Without that, tool or tinat liai dle. ,()ui i' goilig t) have dilliuulty it 

exit'l'ii, ,,g, tl I kilid of ov,rsif&rit. .\Ni. l ,,)I). 1 d ) not sl 'ak with tlte eXpertise ol' ay ,ollcagus li,,'e oil the comitice. There an, -;() iiany cmn'iittt'vs clhiiiigjiiii6tll 

to mv (legi i ce alo anhelr Iw er Ia r l me v'i tl aLreluies. It is a 1 rt tv eflic -tiv'te t )l foi, gt ting lie kind tf iii-t,'ltii .vr.-,iglit w. -ev'k. 342 The Senate voted yesterday to set up a Standing Committee on Tn-telligence to monitor the activities of our intelligence agencies. Iwonder if you would comment if you think the House should have astanding committee created or should existing committees handle over-sight ?

If you don't concentrate oversight ill one or two committees tie agencies can really avoid effective oversight very easily. 

Mr. S Thxx. This is in the written statement. Mr. 1l)nn). Yol (10 not Sipl)ort tile temlporary committee ?

Mr. S.NoN. No and! we also caution ill (he SJItli'lltt whi,'h I made this morning that too many committees would dissipate the authority con l )ltel '". 

We still come back to saving the priniary authority. oversight a-

thiority, became tlie FII is part of til ])ejil rtnient o'f ,iistie. 0Vg1t.      

> to be in tiet

c(.olllittee that hila tile DLtpalt r lit of .1 justice oversight, 

ad ttint is tile Judiciary ('omnuittee. If there is to be a committee t hat would look ov'r fill intellig en'e-

MO11! we Ii liit oil rs.lv('s, of course, we did 1ot concern oiirsel'Jes with Inilitarv itelli.Lrence and tile CIA-if there is to he a voiilittee that is ilvolve(l witi oversight of intellig('iice generally, I think that we vouldl niot take the FIll away front it. 

We took n positions oit tile c'teation of a flew coil]tlit tee. We (10 

say a temiorary Select coninittee. we do not think is the answer. 

Mr. i) nmw. We call sit here a 1 'oi(ldict oversight. We c'in I,,.islate 

ad thiink we have a.c(oml)lishied solietbll't' alld these fellows ,,() back 

(l (ilt mOvi anld we lighlt as w'el forget tl ey were ever Iber, a1 tihat               

> ve have ever )(I (,It () i(ill) Iiit t,e lvallse rilstey go

their nwrry way. Th 1is Sei s to be til'h e (J1 ii im)t lgiclit's. M i -' there i i 1 jIlSv:i'' fo rthat. I all s l.atkinii. ill f'uis rtr itiml. I silpo( '. amll (x c.i.iii it. 

I f thei.e were sWoltli way there could 1be create il p)roc'ss whrery 

tlmss, Ipv1)pN. wlto violate the letter of the liw. would lhe I)ir,(,(iitel ill 

tervis of whlat tly S ethey at. goin to (o alid what theY Ictlially do. 

Talki iig i0ia O tt i(or'iv (;, vri 1or Director of th l l'' or some oh ier higirhi ofllicial Shmi( ll( mit there bt, so ii ''iiil5i. actions. )id vooi consi(der that lt all ?

Mr. nn. Yes: it wIts c(tsidre(1. Ilit tile (o'0 1ittee (liviled. but not ill this pairticvilitr area. not il hlel failunnre to follow tl juri.sdictional  

> stil1)11(11('

laid (Iown Iby Congress. 

We t llght sinll1)ly if they lav(' ill al)rol))riation to do this and they re (oilg that. lext tillie we siv, )os. we (10111. have ally atpJ)ro)ria-

lions. ()lnce tIis is (ole-A'o a fect that ag ecly Silbstaltiallv and iifake afitle object lesson then for t lie other agencies engaged in law enforce-Illlilt° The greatest sanction I know is to cut the funds off. Mr. 1)onn. "l'liat jiust h11ur1s tile people whIlo are 81l)i)oSed to letlefit from it. That doesn't Iot her t0hen. Mr. SP.vN N. lPeople who are sil)poswd to benefit are niot l~ilefiting if they iare lisinlg I11oicy for h)ifI)oses which are not. intended to benefit tle people. If I give you money to help the poor and you spend money on riotous living, yon are tiot helping the poor, so w'hy-give you the money at 

alll. t4) Ilse it ridli(llols exampl)le. 343 But we did consider in certain aspects of this report certain criminal sanctions. The committee was divided on it, and they came out with what we have in the report. Mr. MImz-r:. I would just like to expand on it. If you look at all the recommendations of the committee they impose a tremendously heavy burden to do things that. Congress Ias not done il any full sense in the past. 

We do comment, in several places that having too many committees eXercise jurisdiction over an agency, and I think over the IRS we h:tve 12 or 13. and there may he more than that now, really disperses allhority, dissipates the ability of Congress to exercise oversight. I think the thrust of the relont is that the Congress nmust fulfill that   

> (1), igatio1.

We make 110 attem)t to tell Congress how to (1o that. We 

have sugestionls on things that ought to be done. but ill terms of tie ,1r,.oanization of Congress, we limited ourselves to saying there are i ,n~ycommnittees. It is %Try time oltsumnlilng. If you are really goillg to use tle althor-ization lroeass a wa y of clcking if they did what. they said they were going to (10 w'iei the moneys were 1il)lroIpriated. it is not a short lprov'edure. 'lo have tlie ageN go il with a pro fornma statenieiit. that 

10 ditleviit orga iizatitns are under surveillance wit bout ay real at til)t to be a ia lyticia , wit bout. asking exactly what is being thone. with aitll diue respect, Mr. E,19dwards, does it, c(Istitumte congressional ,0%,' *..ighlt. I want to spvak as a, iii(liviolual. ut I guess f can't. 

MI|r. S'An. . I tlink voln ,tal if yo nmake it perfectly chear. I reserved Slpkiig as a imdivi(mial vwen a plpearmi i ',g for tei AIBA Oi a tlliytniig w ,l,) I (! Iay ,isagree \%'itl tllit is AlA l ,lic. Mr. .\iLB.t1r. I lon't know whiat thet sitiunti l is. If\. understandinlg is it is a substantial iurdei. I do not ki\ow all tlh in's mid out's of the                           

> il, )ts to reforlli {)tIZrt''SS thiat vent on several years ago. Ap\ emni'tly ole of the keys of tie reftormis' \%as it decrease il tile
> iii itt 1n'

of 'onluiiitt ces aid s"uicowiniittees on whit.l your Members Sri ve for exactly tihat reason . 

I believe thilit Some Congr'essnvii \-]o are retiri ig volumitarily have .xprvS d tliat fristration witI ('on ress. tite. i ability to exercise their 

c(, .t ittl ioniai flunctio. be camse of tie wav Congress is organized. I speak solely as a individual nowm. Vlless Congress has the will to ,Ix,, t'ise this oversight. tile feeling I pelrsomally have is that nobody else 

,ilt do it. Neither titie Americait Bar Association nor an outside om-

hludsmai can have tie clout that Coingress has through the appropria- 

> tiolt process.

It seenis to ne that it is the ultimate weapon which you have in (Ih;iiiig witlI any agency. and the tite it is going to tak to really -lis,' that authorization process. I think, is going to )e quite extensive. Really, I think it is goiiig to reflect whether ('ongress has the will to exc,,.is this kind of oversight. Mr. Eln'w.ms. Will tle grentlenian yield? Mr. Dom). Certainly, Mi. Chairman. Mr. EnWA~rM. We have hiad oversight committees over the. FBI and th, ('IA for generations. One of the problems is that therv are a lot of well -meanintg Membrs of Congress with whom we might disagree. The4 y like the FBI to be involved in tile surveillance of radicals in 344 the country, of the left or the right. They feel insecure iii the country unless there is a Federal police agency goingg that kind of work. There was strong opposition in the Senate yesterday, to setting up aselect committee, primarily for that reason. So, when you limit, the number of oversight committees, you run the chance of having chairmen and Meinbrs who do not care, who are not interested and woll like the agencies to go their own way without congressional involvement. Mr. SL.\NN. Yes; I can see the danger, of course. Wo have said we think the primary responsibility is in the Judiciary Conunittee for get-ting into t ie, ap)ro)riations process and oversight. We have not limited or said there will be x number or y numlr of corm miittees. 

Mr. E D.nos. Well. tile Attorney (neral has issued guidelines and certainly tie pr 'ee(Iings of the I BL and domestic intelligence have im)rove(d immensely in the last few months. ]lre (AO audit reflected that in 10 field offices in 1974, there were 19,700 open domestic intelligence cases. I think we were told the other (lay that there are just a very few thousand that remain in the entire country, hut if congresss were to pass it law with regard to tile (loniLstiC intelligence guidelines, dien for tile Iirst-timne we would be institution-alizing the Department of Justice and tile FBI as an agency to in-vestigate in tie (lonestic intelligence fiehl all(l therein lies tile danger. 

M'. SPANX. Well, I would be gettilig somewhat out, of ly element, Isuppose, if we talk albut. other agencies ail(d what they do, lbult I sup-

poso to some extent it woull seem Treasury investigators are involved in some of this, too, the use of tile investigatory lowers of the Internal ]Rveine Service for improper purposes. We al(lress oulselves to that in this report. in section 4. One a(Ivan-tage, of 'ours.e. ill defining it. at least -on woul( know what agency was going to (do it. You would not have thiis one, picking it up1 and that olte 

picking it up. Tl)he primary resI)onsil)i'ty would he there and then if that ivesl)onsil)ility is al)isl at. least you have a direct shot, at where   

> W\'V lr goillg..

Wirer'as withl a Scatter . llot atl p,',a'li wi ere thieY are 1isinig in vesti-

(rators fr()oi varils a ge icis for i pl-)rer politial ,ur) )OSA.S. it i 

> In

i'liI mov ie ttifiliit to 1)11t youir fi ilgel oi A lii thle pim11 ar i* espll -

sitilit v for that investigation wo l original.. 

So. I still feel. recognizing what you say. that a sl)ecifie (efiniition al[ limitations of jurislitiol is liiiglv]y desiralble. I still feel there is an area ill which y'ou ist ]rave domestic intelligence. SOiiieone las to 

keep track of foreign agents. Sonutimn(s I think there is f ore biigal) alboit foreignI agents than there rall v is activity. I do not 'believe t ie, 

MV ic owning out of tle woodwork arid buggiiig everyone's hotel rooi ,. 

lIit I to not really know. Somemie has to 1e at ,horizel t ) he doing this. jmn, we, think 'that sought to he declined by statiitory provision. 

Mr. 'nw.\ui. You would agree that ter:ori s who are iondllilnr 

should bw e. arrested t(m)? Ml. S P. N.N. "lI'v is ,m plol)lil oi t i it..5a1otage is a ,ii m. A ,.uin. enspi ray is a' erime. If von get 100 people in this roon an] we all vote to ,ro fAvr,,ss ti let reet am1 blow ,11) the Calpitol. wvy t he whole gronlp is aluilt v. I biave to in vesi,_,aUe tlie w'l,e org.aalniziti,,l 'Ul (let erme11 wlho 

is ill that ,', sls iracy. 345 'This does.- iot iiieall t hat h'lCauis' of the activities of the local chapter that. nets liere. I have to g olit and. inivestigate the Sail .Francisco chapter wlhiclh may, Ie juist Iia.king speeches Oi stret corners. 

I low Vou lI iit t his I an lot siurv. 'If you asked irae to draw that bill, I wouili be verv relucta"it, t) to i. Maybe 11Her) could do it. I do not 1 do thillk there call be, 1imilits oil jurisdictions antd definitions as guide-lint's which. under proper regil t 1ions of tile Attorney Geieral. would avoi1 nuch of t le albuse that we' hia'e seen in the past. Mir. I'ODWAs. !"Mr. 1)rinlan. -

Mrt. l"I.\.'liankl, y'ou. 'Mr. Chairman. "Mr. Slamu, inl your paper   

> yo ,

-ate on lmm'e 3 tlat, we have noticed that it is very clear. was to time special cmmi ittee. tlat tlere is a "progressive politilCization of the l )epartlielit of ,Justice and a ._rowiniQ inisue, of the FI." 'I] en, Oil page -t. A'oi ab 1 solve compl'tely te l)resent administration 

and vo1 sa'. the y, time Attoriey om'i (''icralad )eputy Attorney (,elt-eral :Tyler. have tnlken a ! re t;aIkI st ron/r iasmIres to asj rv that. oflici'al corr lption will Ihe )ro.si uted fully and to assure t lit he li FI1[ will 1 closely iiloiiitore(l to prevent abuses of its great power. WithIi all 1le1v rn,.lect to thios, two pretitle'ent'i. 111111 ]tot, convi'ed tlat they are taking "'strog Doasi\re. l. Io vo think that th e should N ;.A'i ite soml of tli people or discipline some of the people in ltie F oII ,Io ut Vt' I'n itt ,, Ie 'biali ( s, i ,'w1ho IIn ve Ilt, ot I'Ir t lIi IIgs ( i v.y 

iillegal .

'I) thme 1, .4 of illv kntow ledl(ge. not -I single 1nen111)er of tle l'lI hlas ('veil !ee (listilplinu'd. 

MIv r v. 'lhlert. agail, incidentally, you .said there is 4iprolvrssi\'e 1liti 'ization"" tl hit acttl yII -cads iii our report 'a loing 11! I tin-fortliiiate histolw'." 

Nil'. DI)CINAN. hit t11e iiuiI li it ion. si i'. is that that. progressi ve I)(Jiti-eizalion andt tliat grow ing' Jii.,ise, hav'e not beez i1terrulted. I ailn not lerzit adei l ot aint. 

.V'. SPA.. '.,, l MNou en -Ml'. I )NN. T am clhallengig you. 

'Mlr. S1,.\-\x. Yes, I Illh, rstlnd. NMr. I )u .N . (1iVt Mie for ii.dta i.ots. strong mensi es. What strong   

> hiue:u-e

liav'e tlhev taken ?

Mr. 1;'\N hliro.leptive.lv. we think th t'regulations the hNave 

aoll t1 iiiei r'111labt'. We lhink tlkat tl e Cove rnIenit Crilias divisionn   

> 15s v-1liimhli'. There

ane snera thminglml.s whnch 1thev have olmi, which we think are definite stel 1 S in time right direction. 

Mli'. I)itNAN. Si'. VII.i ]ave tlhey doine t4) assm Ie hat ofl,'ial 'or'mmp-ti,! will Irvihh ihk.,fse.,. v,,! il . ()tIicl ml bY 4Mtiji i al.,s. Not Fl si I ' (e ()I seen ,li'il lilit'(lagiiitNoet.a 

M '. I )I, x.\ . I ,mallvi, ,re vt ] on tlt 1 sa'i state( uimtI l] l t roll a re      

> III:K Ill-' :11 uouit f

lui, :11limiiii'st i';i ioul. 

M'. S'AN N. AA Iht')) 1,'i Vv,.'0 l 0X t'xaIIIhIle. .xli'...Nlui.u:. 1)1v of the ea.1.v r','om nmelilat ions ill oir lru'limi.iarv \it,,, als the vtAnulishinllet of .I Insl,.el'or Cliei'al ill tle I))pnrt-

> i0

I 4of . '. , iice.  

> W11

siihs'(iviit lv mlet within ofic'inls. i't'pt'semtitivt's. of Il(*.e )in'wt-346 expressed very strong reservations at that time in the discussion, but they subsequently did establish a Counsel for Professional Respon-sibility. Mr. 'Tyler said at the ABA meting in Febrtiarv that the ' st was 

established as the (lire.t result of the special coniniitte ecomnmnd)I&-tioi an( (discussion witl Mr. % Spann an(linysel f."' y in effect reversed themselves. Tie investirai ion of the FBI wvhieh~is going on right. now is beiiig done under the coordination and under the general supervision of that, counsell for Professional Res)onsibility who is answerable to tie Attorney General. We feel this is a. major step. The investigation is ongoing.   

> 'Nir. DRJNAN.

If you want. to defend Mr. Sl)ann, all right, 1ut I still state that you have no proof that as you say that strong measures have been taken to assure that the FBI will be closely monitored to prevent abuses of its great power. They have a commission. They are investigating. What. specilic measures have Txeen taken ? I do not want the president-elect of the ABA to be quoted as saying that everything is-fine with the Depart-ment of Justice, and the FBI. 

I want specifics or I want to say for my own part that that is untrue. Go ahead. Mr. SPANN. Well, we have not said that they have cured everything. Wo have said they took strong measures. Mr. DBINN. Name one, sir. Name one strong measure. Mr. SPANN. You are referring to a strong measure as prosecuting somebody. Now I cannot pass on that. I do not think you can pass on it; whether wth can prosecute a Particular in(lividual, t his is tile job of the prosecutor. 

I do not care what the newspapers say, you can't--Mr. DRINA N-,. I lid not say that. Mr. SPANN. If you cant find the evidence; you ean't prosecute. We have a great attack on plea bargaining. Well, a prime reason for plea )argraining is that you can get a compromise settlement where you coildn't convict for lack of evidence. Now the question is. should you or shouldn't you ? But to say that every case muist le fully prosecuted i1eans that some crimes would go unl)uni ishe(l. I can't read the evidence without. Ieing the l)rosecutor. When yoll say we should )rosecute this l)eson for breaking in, what is that evidence. Mr. DIINAN. 'Mr. Spann. T do not want you to justify that. I jst watfnt you to give me a speVific to justify your own statement or. if you 

wI- t. ,ci ('11 retract it. lhev have taken st rong measures to asszure that. the FBI will he closely monitored. I want vou to name one. one strong measure to assure that the F1I will be closely monitored. 1 (o not know of one strong measure that 'Mr. Tyler and Mr. Levi have taken. .I'. SP.\xN. What ou think is strong, sir. and what we think istrong %[r. I)u,\x.,. Name a weak measiire, sir. T know of nothing that they have doiie. Mr. Sr.x,. We think the establishment of relations whichl were not there before is a strong neasmre. You may think that it is a very 347 weak one. 'Fle reghulitions were not there before. "Strong" is a relative word, and in that sens.it is strong. M\Ir. l),IINAN. Well, it is strong only in tile sense that 'Mr. Levi is telling the FBI to observe the law which they should have been doing all along. The guidelines just set forth iml)lement the statutory law in-sofar as we know it. Mr. SP e. We (1o not agree that the statutory law is that clear, as our report indicates. Mr. DIUT.'., When you state that this is a strong measure, you are saying tlat .11. Levi las (toile a bold, brave, strong t iing wln he has s-.1(l to the '1I troops, "Well please obey the law." It -is tie law as we see it ill tile Sulreme Court decision aboi.t arrests.   

> Mr. SPANN.

W1"e hope lie said liUore than "please." I supl)ose tlmt re-mains to be seen. 'Mr. l)IuNN. Are there any sanctions in the guidelines? Mr. SPANN. No. Mr. H)NAN. how can you say the guidelines assure people that the FBI will be closely monitori? They are just pious generalities. We would like you peol)le to do tlese things. There are no sanctions there as to what happens if the FBI people overstep them. Mr. SPANN. I think the sanctions are going to have to conie from Congress. Mfr. I)IN. 4 N. On another point, Mr. Spann, I read the IRS section of the study lere with the greatest interest. People. on this subcommit-tee and people on the Judiciary Conmittee recall well the abuses of the IRS. I am wondering whether the -ABA copped out really on page 159 where they said, tie question of IRS participation in the strike. forces of the I)epatnent of Justice had not been considered by the Special Committee. More and more as I study this-and I am also a meml)er of a Sub-committee on Government Operations Committee that has direct over-sight over IRS-more and more I feel this joinder leads to all types of abuses of the Department of Justice, when the Depaitment of 'Justice cannot )rosecute somebody on substantive crime, it gets him on his I HS default. I wonder if the Special Committee expects to go into this question. Do they consider it as central and as crucial as I do? Mr. Si,',,. I Ierb, you may want to talk to what the conimnittee con-sidered its jurisdictional limitations to mean. We had as the preface of the report indicates, the advice of a repre-sentative of the tax section of the AB.A at every ineeting-he did not niss one, was very faithful. There was a policy already adopted by tim House that the Internal Revenue Service should not engage in activities other than the collection of taxes. We simply indicated that we agreed and pa-sed on. We did not have an iiI(l(tpln(heIt investigation to any great extent although it was (isussed. - Mir. D)J..,. Would you feel therefore, that the Special Conunlit-tee, at least by incorporating the other recomnmendation of tle ABA 

would feel that the linkage of the IRS and the I)ep)artnment of Justice would !h, wroh,..,. The 1lS should just Stay witil its statt tory task of collecting taxes. 348 MIr. SA.nN',. 'tl' lliThre aain, sill't we eldors,ed tile otler recollnileida-l 14111 ions li i'Ireort alJl imsi'il (m::, lil. lisw.cr e Sl.1 ia(liViilal is that t lilt wolld be IllN view.  

> lol

('lII Ih. M\I '. S'NN. YVS. I tliillk WV'V all (14) ill ev'ey ]t'grisl tiw, (II1v .-4) to 

I Ic 1ieve tie II"iAIIs IIs of ote 'o II p w X4 x p este'( .

\lr. lDIU.XN. Let i. saY fii lillv tliat I have tile Imle tlhat yol wot ld 

"'0 ''war( withI iiivcstiTrat in lthis particular Irea l,'allm. lire art. 

all tyj, cs (4 ali1s54' t hat derive I'f, rm lliat particvilir joinler inl tlhe 

sItrike forcv and ill t ho 1lS anl thle D department of ,J tist icv. 

TI('l' re ae I lit IIy. li I lev'II tVli() k iow t hat t lIe civil I li ert ies a nd 

Ilia. lrivaV (If p)eop reaIQ beiig violated ilil li11 ue ()I' law ,,iiforce-

,1wit . (CIlliiissiomier 1)ouizI1(1 A lexainildr Jlls ,(iglit very li ig(liit hy Io , la,,'e I'cit er gji(h li iews alilt tlhis alrea. Ie lils I( t al wavs Ibv,,i   

> S1lCVes I'll ].

Th']ank %y()ti ery I- m '1b. .\!1'. I VIh ,: \ V.\ t', l ' .iiit 'l,l,. M\-. I).IK(. 'lank ()it. AlI-. ( 'Jlti aiim i. 

Mr. pann Professl' ortt'ss)r t\ miller, tils i(), iilog V)1l 11lsq'l t w()rl I'vo'llalions. 'lie A.t ,Iriiev ( .'Iie(II lluts lt.ed the word "glillelil's" 

11114l ltlts ill f't i.Slicol g iii'liuies aii(l ti ii l i(,I,'s ot hii(, cemni ittee 

Jut( ye t ts hle 'vr 6guilel ilt's. 

I)o I undensta nd y(our use ()I flie word reigililt ions ] eJ'a'hs, it ('011)-

I)orts Nvilil r'oll Ilinhldat'uios. the ABA's Special ('oimiltee's 

IeTColiiidt'l ioll, wi it'lL w u+t 14.lbe liat (CnItgreSS wolilId Set it policy by 

l(eislati()n, anl tiu, I)eoartnint of ,11i %(t ile would issue Ieguhllilloins. niot  

> griillic

i ues . I tlin k there is a iifet'rence I tween regilat ions and guide-

Iille.+. lihe Depal)rLtme'ntlit of ,J tist icQ( wo(ld5 iSgle I-(,1i0l1ions wlhi('i woul( inludei~i, all of[ tile re(IlllIrenIMl,ls thatl 11lrv illhlerenlll inl tile i.'slllivle of r(,,,ll'ilt iofns invl lolrg 1itt ice an(1 lle (.an !t b 'e cliige( arbit rarilv. 

Is that ie(, thirilst of tile A A's re(,o,.iniledatioJs ?

.11'. SPAN , s.YP. 'l'Ie I H)r loui(I ]Ills legislated i igh t il undhr llie iviadling of glileliules. ali li0 er are very clever aboltt llemii. 'i'ley 

411:11 1lle.' tlIll,s giiJi l(,l ies. 

M1r. PIf.m+ ),) feel it o)lurlit Io I)(- 'l~e ill tli(e lVcrislajion tlhat reg111iat ihit s are re(Illilt'l to )e isst4(l. 

.\Il'. SPA.NN'. YVS. .Ir. lR. Imf:. 'l'ilitik , ui. I think it is fairly cerlaiia that (he oi,-    

> two( flillicl ()f ally

Ict'ishit iv viiqtrllt ('omiliiitte Nvoill b~e juu-thiiiatitl m'er11llIio)pIul;tjj ()1 Il-I lie h)Iutlget tof tlie nlgih.1 if %%ishies        

> tN) Int ('15( and 11114 1i4'' to ll11

format ion1. This bl~t4liit51X'ti'lsl~ ii  

> lp)ttilit

wili Ii l lte FBI. iie'auls thiereire 4)1n14., ipl,'l hll l( ll,5 I here. Tv' irllivll ililitallv is Svp'I)ll li I l (I f 1p4 el'rs will 111.' xe'Xt live iust il41l willing. 1,) So.imei' . 01114' inif'rllltliill wit il lie h'gislat ive Ir1, l!1i'. 

.I fsi ioii t l)liiil of i,fial mecilltiliv exi-AI s ill thell Ow' is c'lassifiedl int',, :;i ,,mO M1 w hili, t!(. 3 vll a l i llaills and:( Ii,4,re Is It ipr,,~ l~l il) l avv N,' aflt 1 rv''.-,' l Hi t l,'4)l l , i1 at, :a1 in .\milr ,.,IIInillt(4, an l 414)  

> l

:ii ito this p)I4 li 44 alt; to 349 Mr. SPANN. It is addressed very (irectly ill the firSt p)ortiOl of t-l10 report oil lpage 14, nllder ti l)el)artelnut of Justice, under congres-sional oversight. M1'. PARKER. The first step would be the internal regulation Ib (oil-

P,'sNSS of how it handles material. 

Mr. SPANN. Yes. Mr'. lPARKERt. I)o Vou envisioni i role for tie(, General Acouinting ()tlie, the GAO, in assisting Congre.ss in carrying out its oversight functions?  

> M

r. SAN .s'. Them is a ilrovii.in oJU-r l)e't in here, but I think iIs is under the loggingrequirements. I (1o not think it is under tie 

1V4,IVIral in formation provision. I think that is the only place we spoke of tlat. I would say tiat I t link that wouli he aplprop~riute here, also. 

Mr1'. lPA'I{rv. Fine. Mr. MiuFait. In tile repor-t we dlo speak of tlie role GA() played 

mti(d t lie test ittoiiy of Mr. Starts before tlis subcoiltIitt(,e. 

Mri. mAIlK :]. 'lhre is one otiler ale-t ill wlbiech t lii'rt, Iss been aimt ost total uniiiii *v a ul that invol ves tit(l :)pointment a1] tenure of t he FIl I)i director. Ailost 'Peryote llts re(.o III lt(l(., ill fact a bill has 

al t(a vi passed titie sePiate tlhat calls for a fixel and1( si gle, flolrea t )-  

> poiltabl tern,

for tile F4111 director . Youri reco lmen(lation' 1ti s ity (lifters iii tlat you voilt allow for rea)pointment. I wonder if you 'oul,( (liscui'ss tie rt'iieaiiS for your (Ii Iret,'es wit ill s HIis or111ng. 

Ir.. "v.%,'N. We fell a F)ersol (oitng i very good jot) slhlld iiot be' 

simil)y cut oit ih'alise 0f that liijiitatiota ally more titan w( wout tilling tliet ought to be onle term for a (Co1grss,,aIl ald o1, telit for 

a Senator. I q uest ion somie of I 11(' or44'-rnriove11ior .-States. It (lepvl (ls again on the length of tile teirit. Sotm(,timei(s if yon tiiake the ter'ii lonig ettolghi, peWrh)aps o11 term is eoligh. We felt it more advisable to permit reappointitent am( you will  

> ilote

t lie repoit does not define t ie iiength of I he tern. Mr. lRumitI. I have just one final (listion wvlicli toucies oit a rev,-oi,,,bidation in, anotliver part of your report whliel lilts to do with tile limitation on eligibility to be appointed Attorney ( '(feral or a I)elpnty 

Attorney (ieierllI. Ioi would l)rolhiilfi al)pointment of a 1e11.1tt who has la1( any active political role in the campaign for the P)resi(le y. 1)o yoi see any C.onlstitutional )roblems in resrricting th,. riglt f

tie lresi(lent to 'make that appointments unler sevt iou 2. iat! iv 2. of 

tile Constitution? 

Mr. SPANN. I(ie) is lnv 'OsititutionIal autl ouitv. I will ti In tJl 

tnivrophione ov'r to li i. Wv\' w,'rT( asketl a,)lit. say. th le l'a ter of tle Texans for Eisenhower; you know, this of vo)'trs4 ' we atre not ap -proachuing at all. Mr. Pl %:nr. 'I1IV rulle womld have exel 1(1e(I M it ,'114lI a mI Boly V -

niiv, I take it. 

Nti'. SPANN. YeS. Mr. *Nfamt. There is much precedence for (ongress setting fortl, avariety of qualifications. There are many cases which have held tie ability of Congress to do this. This is sim' plv a ne native qualification. I did look at. the case law and discussed this wit Imany JJe)Jmle. We saw no constitutional 1prollen in this kind of a rt'quirvttnet. 

Mr. PAtrKm:. Tlatk yoti very tuel. My timie hIs expire. Mr. EDWARDS. Mr. Starek. Mr. STARF.K. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  

> .42 -429 77-

350 Most of lily qisioils this morning have been an1swered. I wantedI 

to plllrSue one aspect of tim guilelinies versus tie regtilations that Mr. 

Parker raised. 

I tlinik ill yor rearedd stat(ilment, Mr. Spann, oiu stated that onue 

of tie reasolls for regiulit ios is l l)Opse t to gilidielines 01 legislatiolll 

which Would retluire regulations is a fear tllit tile filtilre Attorie's 

( ieieral could change thest guidelines without notice or pjl)liv hearing. 

# I jlust wonder if in fa't tllit woll(It ituially en)vision tlhat ocelrrilg. I Jii(aii, it is hiar I to sl)e(itllate oil that. What I am getting at, with lhse glidll iles 1ow, do %,o really think an attorney genen wold try to (1,) that. wit hout Il ('ongress nuilled iately caliliitg Iearings1 

Mr. SPA Xx. I wolill sti1p)O.e that illi tilie firt I)laue (lcanging tlIi,'i --I thIink tile reguillion. oi0(1-e i sued ani l' I ,odiiel hy prolw', lpro,-essS. We wo1ltd Sllggest to )'oii tile Ipossibility tflint the guide elites 

(oill Simll)y bt ldtn away wit h or ignored. 

Let ille gi '*ot al exal llple. 'lihis goes to tilie present Attorney (14.i - 

> eralI.

W nl Jl4i lt'liott lic'hari. I4)I Iecale At torlip' (. neral. li, did pro-

vi le wulnt o1r report recomilledks. a log book of communications withI tll(, JIst ice l)epart in'lit. U nd1e' stibsequelit Att orievs ( general, Saxhe and Levi, this tling im 

still oii te 1)hooks. the giol(.ines. mlidi it is not l, inlg enif(or'ed. l otlh 

# evi d 'ylertold us they didn't like it. It i:in, lit r port. The Richards),1 guidinl, lilis iv'('. Iben re, vokei,1, By aiElliSioiil, t bey jllst don't ('1,foice it. 

.N\I r. S'r% .t t: i. Ti i ik v o, i v ery li ii 'llv .I have no fu1r11 her ullest ioi.s. 

Mr. EnmwA11ns. I thank lbothI witnesses for their very !ieli)fiil l1eti-

MM .M.Spmann. I thin k tba l iii uits cliii n ian of tihis voiilIuit to'. 

thatll tihe .AIBA\ tillit lilt.his stuiIy shinuhl 1, oin ,cliilil.led 11l ill 

tIh lill( nber. ID is very iea listic h 1 l(rn taindlodrn li inug apprnoacli to   

> thIiis vo'rY

sophist icatedl problems. It is di fficult for tilie A liiericiit) peOple 

to evolve out of lit' feu Sof teie ( 'ohi Wit iof tle 11150's I l varl v l910's 

1111 tle missions tllt were involved. It .. 'Cecii to Ill, yoj olidi : vO'rv 

v,,I I-lia l.vedi job ill tie report. 

Mr. Si'. xx. 'i'll k .roll very ,mch. We app) reciale that and! we ap-

preciate tilt' 4op1ol'tl ut 'v of alppl'a ring I'fore v'O 1. 

Mr. W'iw~ti.~ ell1, we ar ip probably going to uisk youi sotme n tore 

OIlesti,01.5. 1'i'ofe.s r Miller is vv'v 4'cse bY. W,, atr goltig to, usl lii im 

to write uis a tell ] ille ii'e of legishlit ion t hat will deltie---. 

Mr. MIt . M le I1. 

Mr. EA)W4 -. 1M1avh, II. les t hlln 1 page, that will define Ilie do-   

> li it'."s it'

iiteilI,~'o'P jilrisl ui.t ioll. if ny. of t e, ]).i rtillenl of .Jlt ist ie 

11114 Itie F'B I. It is S1ill very perplexing. 

We tl ik Yi very imiiui.lt. 

I ' it"lil " ll. at Ii a.lt.. t lie silll H'oll It Iittee 1141jolrlned.] FBI OVERSIGHT 

# Attorney General's Guidelines for FBi Activities and 

## Additioml Legislative Proposals 

THURSDAY, MAY 27, 1976 

114 3us$ orP] 0:sE, 'r.ATl\'., Si'iMM °11'r7.I-N (' IVIL. I (AD ONST'ITT"IONALII iIiT', ('ii31 IrIrEEI 'iI. TIlE ,J Ul)l('Io~lI0, 

l1 h4;dntol. P.('. 

'I'lle slnbiollnillve tl, 1)lliliut to notie, it 9 :3.5 a.31., ill i')onn 22;, ~tI.yhilli1 I1011s4' ()live Bilildinir, lilon. )on 1Elwr41w s [ellai rli-ian 

of lo siilh'olnlnittee J ])lesi(liing. 

]'resent : IRe)r('se,'l at ives ]"'dwilrds 11114d D)lillall. A Iso present Ahm A. Iai lkv% collne ; ihlt),-is P. 1 lrell li, ( 'iM Ii-en i11( JA ttkoy, assistant ,olliis.I ; antd l41s,.,)(' It. Stark 111, as-(wi4t .

> c'olllt'J.

.\f. IEm'.mn,. "l'llv slilbomll iatec, will court, to order.. 

'l'q,,lav we'', continlm.oll . henr in, ings 4,on,.tcn'ilin legzi,,.ltioll I-rv~an'ing 

1lhv F'lW's fult ii'& r-ol, ill tie field of ,loilistic itell igein' ativiti,,s. 

WV ('loutilile to explore', aiiternat ive Iniulls to 'r(,lipte (,n forcili lie    

> st iuitila'(is of

o(03 t, l-t ror t-ile FlMI. We ]I3lI' tI to 'to benilhtined as to bo(3w WO may I Hi'st expl)r,.TSS 4'OgligleSiOflii p,31i.y. l'le pImli 'y, whii lillally forl-iuiiliated, s13oilld be ile'il to all. 

()im' first, witlne., todimv is ( 'lirisloplher I. l'h. 1 3rofessor lit ,Johil 

,Jay ("'ollvge of (C'ii113ll'Just ive ill N. Pew Y -'k ("it'. Mr. I'vie rv'ei ved 

his( law degee froill ('oliiilia ill 19(4 l(d his l'l.), (1(31n tidat iiist-itil-

tion in 1974. Hlis dotoral liwi station wIts oui Ihe slibije4t 'of Army 

sl ill n., I a ,ti( vtivities. M '. i've se've! its it vollsilltallt to tile E','viil 

Siilx'oillittev on (')i ll ititi)11l Riglts with ,,s.,et to Any sllrv,,il-   

> lilli 'ml 41 N'I

i'ilis 1S. In 1341( iti loll. M r.. lVI, Wli-. 1i 0i IlllI llltut to tilE' ( lOeIl'S- 

> it-

task foi''e of di1' Sen un1t' Seleet (C'loillilutt to tlillV (1;ove'lillientl( ()lper'tillms will I'dSlev ito h1( tvlig('-1C(. Avtivitivs. 

Vt'. l'ieh is tit "liNit hor. of 133 Illmil il tint l11wst nven'it Nat ion ulagil-

zili4 oil wi3tit hp legislitio d !,( I ,ll am.t has i illle flilpl 1 nil/. lig di-'Ill i l43i of tii., flitu13'r, of 111 4lomiestic. iitilligi'ili'e activities and tel-i 

11414'. 

I''ofe' , ,mo .l i we i pleasel t4) lave yoil with Ii t ill boring. lVitholit objeftiolul youl full 411tuleunet owill be made 1 part of the  

> 1101'd,

a1ld OI O11i11u%' I.o,.,T, 11S %'011 SeO fit. 

(351l) TESTIMONY OF CHRISTOPHER PYLE, PROFESSOR, JOHN JAY COL-LEGE OF CRIMINAL JUSTICE, THE CITY UNIVERSITY OF NEW YORK M1r. I'vnj:. Th'lank y(ou, M1r. ( 1 hairnianl. Siliv Illy slatenlent is - iges long, I p'o p o se merely to suminarize it, sMid( to niove very quIickly to I e proposal for reform whicl I believe ought. to he diseussel at I his stage. Froin .s,,ann ing I lope East iiiah's testimon y on behal f of t he A('I A

I ses that sle will be dlealing prillarily with the iuest ion of FBI in-v'estigations and the I rIle of hle F1B, if anyi , il tl dlMest-ic ilttell i-gelice artsl. Whast I bla donle ill lily l)e'lnr'( I Statenilt is t (t colleel-(rate oil a ilot wilat li 1 ,J ielis aftel investigation--tlie e'lldlct of ("0IN''EL )rograii". lrive'ltivv ittioll, 11i1d what s5,( etillits is re-

ferred to as FBI "d i!: v t ricks." Ii the beginning (if tlly statement, I silinarize the FBI's COIN-'I'E, irograills to (Ilioiist rate what I think is the most imlrtant  

> flsjv'i

of tlwil and! taLit is thlit c'onistituited a coiverte l effort to atrect ti- li political prvo'.s. I k tiw t lie ,Tusti'e IDpailt lent disagrees witil hat jt dguio 111c, It 1s I look at wiatt IIIe FBI did, it seenis to mne Iiv, Flit sought , (leiliPt lIhe limits of political (ietlinee ill th l united "tates, al( to enf oIrce t hose limits by t'hl(lest illt, often illegal means. 

I sl int1:arize soi of Ilhost au.tiviti;,s t at I believe vere illegal ani helltpoint o t tht tel Fill. alt lhoiglh Direetor Kelley has regrets for sitie of Ille ('()IN'T'I' I, 1r.rais. wmld li ke to retain authority to ,otit(itct similar acl ivit if s litlt!W tie na o ' l), ''rfp event ivtf act ion.' Mr. EoIw.DmIs. I lol'lt i'liev', thlise are ill tIhe new guidelines. ''llose 

w41ri elinlillated. 

'Mr. PI.Ix. l'ExPlress athtioait v for plr-,vellfiv Ill'tiu was left olit of the In(w" glideliuues at t iw last iniilaie. hut the desire lifis tiotl been re-  

> 11011 lre1.

I'lie iuit iorit v was left oft becauI wse neither Il( .Tustive De-ill-a llelit lntl file Fill vcould lind a way to defill, "prev'eltive action.", But. leaving ;i iutlorif v for preventive act ion out of the ,,lil(lines does 

1)t, il an way lr lil ot its Itse. It Iiierely-plits Ihv In' st ice 1)I )a rtnwent ott re'ori as lbeingr silent abit the Fill 's nutlimfit . if any. to) conduct 

('OINI'E ,I{( ) Ivpe am'tivities. While the pliti,'ai context lhas elini-red, ail(1 I tlink it is uilikelv tiat we' will st' anything like ('OIN'E,,ILPRO for many years, tliere is nothing to prevent. soi,-lliio like it froiii arisi ,g inder Ilie unti of "preventive ation" or itelisi ve invest iat io."t.ir sonipe otl4-r.eithenlism. Mr;'. l")w~ims. If I Iniv i li erropt. tlie very fact of in vestigation is a sor of Irevtuiltive action. lat is what file G(') reports tlat nany (t'isIs Of d(uni-stiv intelligence indicate. A police agenev an. i the 

wa% it contlIl('ts ilnvestiaiatiois, visits neighborlhods and 'does the'work 

Ihat police agencies do. inhibit sons or organizations iinder investi-

gait ion from criminal or pmolitica at iIv. 

Mr. P1vi. I agree. IV 1ia vol have ilst described 4an Iest 1x- called 

deterrent interviewing. .. Edgar hoover boasted about it. in connec-

(ion witl the investigation of the Kit Klux KIan in Missisippi in 

19.1)5. There were a)proximatelv 456 members of the Klan at that time in Mis,,issippi, and the FBI visited every one of them. not, to gather iinformation. hut just to let them know they were, not anonymous. 

:3.52 353 It seems to me that when you have an organization like the Ku Klux Klan some deterrent interviewing might not be a bad idea. The prob-lem I have with deterrent interviewing is that it can easily become adevice for inspiring employers to fire people, or neighbors to shun them. I am not sure it can be controlled. But I would not be unwilling at this stage to say it should be banned completely. Sometimes when you have an organization that is clearly involve 4 in a criminal con--spiraey to bong and murder people, letting its metihers know they are under investigation might not be a bad idea. Mr. EiVAims. Aren't you playing God, when you say that an inves-Itation agency shouild(o that let an agency make a moral and ethi-calipidginent tind say. while we are not going to charge these people 

with a crime, we ju.ti don't like what they are doing, so we tire going to have sort of a mini-COINTET, p(O'igraln. Isn't that what you described I

Mr. Pn.,. I hope not. I an thinking of deterrent interviewing in the context of a group like the Ku Klux Klan in Mississippi in 1964 and 1965, when there was considerable information that churches had been bombed, apparently some even from the air. There was a good deal of night-riding. And there were three murders. The PBI had-a good idea who was involved in it, but it did not have witnesses. to proved with the prosecutorial process.- It was under enormous'political pressure to do something, and it decided that the wisest thing to do initially was to inhibit the activities of the members of the criminal conspiracy. So they tried deterrent interviewing. The danger of that, of course, is that then you get on ,ted Magruder's slippery slope. When you start deterrent interviewing to save lives you also run the risk that it. will be used to get people fired from their Jobs, or at least transferred out of town, or defamed in their reputations. fhleln wI' are back to ('oIN EIiliO. I wold ht,-n virtn lly (,Vi'y-

thing hbut, detelIli'nt interview from tree '01 NT!,f, relwiloil,. BtI would not. hI' quick to ban deterrent interviewii/g in thi. case of grolups 'like the ,JDll. the Pier'to Riel.m"FAI.N. or the KIK. They ite dan-

410: ro II roi. atidt -t oetie. t lwlp" io 10t tellm kiow thit thev are bing invest tgat ed for Yfe-rly iriIl ietivit v. I )elter'nt itervivifng lorry indeed he less ha rtl fu I to I heir h"'git iate it tiviti hs thait wit 1rlilg 

living said that. T may sound as if I am an advocate of preventive action. i am not. My purl'tee in defining preventive action and In trying to Specify legit iate formis of preventive action is to give the word some meaning. Tihn prohibitions mean something. I an' afraid '+ r Jtseat if ilr t Imm ('1) I\TE!.I t+ ) F:,I pr t oie act in lle dr411m't define those terin.. we wrill fwrelv iemit Ice i'ltl to .tmhtit mie s,,toe  

> epher'

t, lpli vuisi ill ;s lela:e 111, go fi em flopil, .u0sl.lt iallv %111 what it did before. So, in my section on preventive action, I list a number of prohibi-tions whieh ought to be adopted to forbid the grow abuses that, we have all come to ,msyewifw te with ('()IN rl.llO. ICor\mld Ilun this 1i into i, regul lilt iot- ksuedl by III ,-u'flive I)e"I amln(..S l hin/g which 

fh, Alovilev (;elleti 'lid iteit do in the l014B guidelines. Now, I know the justicee Departmnent is likely to say we can't define 

all of this so let's not define ally of it. But it seems to me that regula-tions can i written hypothetically. They can be written by example; 354 

they don't have to cover everything. We could ban the substance of ('()INTEl.I'l() where we have i rich factual revord of abuses, an(d by 

banning past alms we would make a start toward defining those values we wish to protect against investigative agencies. 

I won't take tie time now to review the-kinds of ( ()IN'TEIII() 

i.l ivities I wouihl imut, hi~t I think the list in ly statement. covers tihe w(ort of ( '()I N''EI,4H( ). Not t lIt I t li tIk t Iit ,egulat tions are tIe ullt imate answer, bit I thillk ttll('V would provide tit(- proper folundiltioll 

fo' 'or'reitiv legislation. In nllv .ecti ll 4)f eriminl lpenalties, I wollid 

pIrop):-4 two allivildilli'lls ito tl t crililal ol e to black I ll) I preventive acting rent igut ). 'lle irs w(uld uinake it a1 crium e to i interfere with1 titt a11ii,,,ului'nt rights. 1aNtuai-, tihat is what I think ( '( )INTI,'OII 1 was. 

I al,, not in favoin of it gvIl'ral .Statute forbid dinig ill interference withi 

1ll ( mist it it io)llIl ri .* _Its. When yoU ('liact it statuit' like that yolk get till,) t' .aille l)r,,ell'l wi m t V' 1we14l Wil hi m-'( if)!ns 211 anl 21, of title 18, 

til l )11 l{ec4) i.tii 'tiol ('ivil R1ighits Act. I1oP')oM'4'lot.S slky vW' cali't   

> et'iil

thliwx. A. l'.sit i-1' 1tlicovers It) clist' ill wlhicli a Feherfll ilves- 

> J

iralive ,)i r in tell igjI e i'! iplit Ills l'lt' pI Il4 ' .',,'('tto IA nlde l'r tios('  

> st atI

IIte'. :ltIlolgl tin' ituIlgiIag' is broad 4t.oilgl I to irIllit it. 'I'ie oll*v I"4,',.1a1 oflicials wl,) lt ve. hill pro tt wcllt it " mier of thIose i's John Ellli,i nl 'li .\n. lnd jthat too~k it special 1) oi Iot It l~d extenlsiv, lpulliv'it *v. 

So I rtcoinl!enl ljumsqage of a specific statute fo)rbidding thilk-rate i lt erfereuice Nv it Ii first itinenti iieijt rights. Til ithilses voIid( 1, defiled ill t ern- of torts law in older to make tie kinds of in fringements Il)IIiIeIl relitivel" clear. The list of six coul bv expanded, but I think 

1liv wmll1( .)i' i tile essential larills litt. were characteristic of 

It '61 )NTIEII'I{(. TI'hv vrimleS I prolXose, wlmll ix. Slecifiv. intent, crilm's qlh.>-ifrll,, only to p~I,,li..l ,elilm,rativ, ,'alllated c, -lpiravies or .! ciols. Ii k, ( '( ) INT EI 4I, IH() to deprive i~ o ph. of fir't i lteviil ie t rilzits. 

I ti i,,t liropolmiIlg to iak ' -. ll torts by vdl'ial ages F'ede ral crnilIes. liike tile ileal (if >lyeili,. statiitia s to (UOliuli('ilI)llit( '( ) I NTI' PII( ),                  

> 1c'ali.A Itlinuk IIat till' gls()s (f biistorv is very iill li t, Ithw

rltll'- 

> illvrj )rtat

ions 4)f tl i liw. If '20 vealm from nllow si similar allies (w.'ii1, 

sotl ily might say. t hat is like ('()I NT'ElIli RA). We banned that '24) 

AT',i. 4,h). 'I'litt lIhu ii-itt now ix, ienforced. And .,o I think there will 1 i't' 4 lj t'.'- i,'-I (' to l i().P''ilt' t 11111n if Ji 44-'( 1tiO '$0s 4all .3y tlit a 'tivity iiiigi,t be 1Itlln i Iby .eli tl 2-11 fr 212 of tilt ,rim inal (,(ie buit tlos.,e .,.t ii 11s at pret %, filtii lit tsigniiedI f r of her ii rlios'es so. ol 

laliluice. tihey slili iot be invok,.l. 

My other ciilutitlal stitiilt would Jliilishl fratIIdulieuit interference 

N6i1l first ameilJltuent riglits. 1N',u'a.,4 1111n1. (()JINT'1 4 , aCtions Wel' 1-iks I o (i ceiit Iv. ,,Il'he into violitlig t li' ,''i4tititiona rights of fdtIn,.!s. or to cit use t}l he to refrain fromti exerc- iniug t heir own rights. I.ll l ju risd 1i.tion1 woIil d arise lyliv i tie fli,114111lent act affecte I tle  

> [Is f

(fthl 11 h il ,i itit rt, t ('il illittlillt t itlU ori it ttat('St te t ravel, or tie, 

u-,' , if il tvi'stalv in' f, rt'igl vlmlervil facilit ies. Then, to take c'are (of buugla ries. lireak-itis, criminal treSlassem, and 

theft which wAir' )ot nIee's:itrily pirt of tie ( '()INTEI, programs, 

I wilI ail l l'1i pt rovisi)nis of tIlie Fedlral coe' that deal with suc  

> ('tillis

to alt ho'iz,e pose,'lti wlel tlhe lin'glar li qwl)luis to le an  

> t'l

ll,0( ,.ce o)f till,' Fel tiziut d ll ,ewe or ilivestigatiw, ageIlv.y. Anl in 355 

liat. vay I think we would authorize pninishellent for virti ally all of 

t lei Sliolls alimss t lint lave reeilt ly come to Iigl it. 

Now, I don't believe for a millute that. by writing it crinilial statute 

yoli stop anything. The history of sections 241 and 2 12 offers one good 

I'xaniple; the history of the. Posse Colnitatus Act provides another. The major p robleli, if any eiilimnal |lro,cutioll are to occur, is to break down the institutional conflict of interest that exists witliini the )epaitme'nt of Just ic(. No Attoriv General wants to pr)Secute a sIlh-ordlinateI, leeauls if lie does-others will o:t serve hii well ilnd lie will lose his eapacitv for leadership. I think that is trile of the I irctors of tlie. 'IA anl of mi litary intelligence. If yoll an. not loyal to yoir slibordiiiat's your suhord latest won't. Ie loyal to you.. Anid so 'ljiet. ihilt It' signals gtm out from th1 iimtn on to) W't' (loi't walit to lie. aboit WiNtiidoi'g down it tie IXottol of the Iuraucrllltacy. Suh|r)ltlinate-S 

ltick'llv gret. ti ,li sSage and don't report wroligdoing to tliti iSllieriors. 

Hhre is a iti iet assililltion that wrinigloing will Il' ct'overtl ul. I f ihe 

uV0teru lp fails, sil et' people 1Nay be forced tot retire varl i'r, lut that will 

Imo the vlnd of it. If ti r' are 1 ) IN a1y pros'ltionis tliat illst it it ilal comiflict of interest 1, as to be, ov'er('iill,. 'hie'e, ari' twoI wavS to (o tat. (O)ne is to j)iit Ilie iJistice I ) rtnlkli't ieil. lliwyers iii a po)sit iml where tey l art' 

'tsp olisdilbl for. or ai hast e ll't iglorl'. Fill ahis's. There aie at ilast ti ree ways in which t liv 'n 1w' done. Fil't, if t 'here is tlli iivest igatl ion 

of an oirilization exercising first anenili lit rigIds. Ibelause I limit Orgnmilizat iol Ills() is SiispeteI of criiiliil activity to achieve its inlds. -iSitll M )ii aiSistl-Ilit I S. uti ut'vi, tV S-4'- 11'\ iS 11Ivisil aw otlao ier'l to tliit iii pif iga tii i. I It' sli lld IN' l iilire 1i(0 see to it th1a1t t hi' illvestigiating aigeit.s live witliill their jimisli't ion 1nd liheir ialltlilriy . andt i int, 

tlr lillh I ijipo i Ii1rst al it li 'iut rights. or fouiri ii ili mli tiiit mi4rlits, i

aliv tlial.r rights. 

0iioi, O,,t' are 1i few arelll wii'l, lit' ,ll11ist ice )Di';iirltiw',uilt will bI 

ii fl'tlv'll ii w\'liit miilul i lit called ilitellit'iive act i'l vi'. 'Tatli will u11citilr 

where Hic', art. te'rroist grtm' ii1. s active in society , lilt1 wli re liire are dinisilit i', t' diiili. riiliiis like ia" v)ay 11,71. Iii t 141s4, 41tintim14)is 

.1ist i,e I )e inl1111ilill ollici ils w ill I'et it 4 t ll alolillillit tf lii f w til l i 

> to1

,Liii,,t4ii 0.i ill Illeir de'lsimuiiiiikil, to iililh, l iti i o res l i I to 

Ilill 1,' ,Iva llli f i ticiml. S Iiie, if tlhis illf',lrlllli l i 1iiV11111 v-h rI l lAn 

f 'r41 ,iiiiiiiiI ii\'i,.-l iiu iiils ill tll, fiell. lit so iilt of it will. of iit''s-

sit.V tli ,' t Ico-llie fl'll g'lii'rail ifittlligeice-I vpv imiiquuii'h,, juist too 

givel 1iiil it tlivials iii iwal'il' s ; if Ilt e mat tir, of li4t' e1liji 111141 its 

olject iwe. (Of 11i' I lit' lgaiii w\gt' t't to fi' ltrinik 4if ,Jeli MiluriliCi'r"s                                  

> -lilpl l'rv ,It!Ill. 1. }ilive liWt ri ed i')i I-l fll e~i whill illii, hilits olf ili' -Ili'ililtV Ili.l ,lu ll i. -in ll lhow~ il Ill',an ,Wtfli. it .!liarl Iwmlildls

for : til'l lI li flit' .tt riiuc (l, lmit, ra's glithliel- ill civil tlistlllI'b-W'l!:ii I woiiltl si t'SI is tlilit lth ,liis l ice I |j (ii1 lit 1.iilui tget 

iliV<lvo ed ili M wlilll ilit 'll,.n, tp lt' eop ll fit' (e i li " of il i'l igtil-timii u I44 ti t'i, t ri li. ik lit' ui Klil I(liii. flil' orglillizers of             

> 1111Y \' !h)liv-Itvi'il'liil lisl I'lil Iitlli. . ,I ishee Depatille li 1ll ll wl'ltvs illl

lhe iliv4uk-dil iilil ilil Iiniiig I t lil11 1(ad sc'll' of sfltli ilil'st i'lt ions 

I it'llan e I iat is win tI'll' grtitlitt'st lijIis4lS (if ni, i ild mcmit iilits 

nlld oftir rights occili. Ill the past. flie FBiL iii litary, and polio 356 

agents wlo sc peO (I iost "ilitt-'r Ii ,-ev llritv\" illv -S, i?(!I I1 ll S '' iI.('Ii-sifiv, to the li he lre of the o'ra,.l.izti i,, e. il,' e (lvv v lling with. "I'li ,dlid not 1111dherstnld( t ll, 1-l1,t ori,. or, ,i li ,,,rt ,'!ho ori, ill hvlI. li,,.l,! f4'11ipa!ilitie.'.z. Andl div,, rot varr' ivf] away.l\ i-vpir,.. folr the v., .sl pos,.-

sile Situaiitioni. If tlPE e'.11isi ive JDepaiiv ii offiialI ilvfolved(111 

IIat Scopinig, thie Iil(ln er IIost administrat ion, Illos(, i,,vest i& l'ai,,j, would be a1 lot 11:1I'') vi t l e" wv l(, wlm(,fl Ol .y were ill tli, x(.(l -

si'e (lolain of the FIl. It WoiI 1(! als) illip'lit(' e lie ,i1.It('e, I )epart-

ment offleials ill those ii vesti,,altions, so tliat if a fterwarl it was discovered those ili.vestilat i n. violated ii rt' 1tii ieiilnviwll rito its. tlo .se oflicinIs oi1,1 Ibe lwlI acec'initalle. 

li' iv i 1 i llvliit t': ' <'jf 'E .gi{f j I 11dl 11:i 1 5i.(; I{ hi' ;I rev'ie wing agency 1 Vi' f lie o',r orhe )"Iis of in iul all ri)-wiliere polit-ival, ll motC~ ivated, frl-0111), AN,'l 4'11)l*0('l'll141. -o) llv"'c-eflifur nldillill}i| trlittion 

,'0 ,;l , v. lI: nt If,,!r i,1'(.,I(..-( -. , 11141,1i)l I e, , i , !! " i~ '!-4)1, Il,, 

()t' ) ' i )11 I' d Il(' '( i. ; i 11 1 l l v Ii iII w ),,f , Iit 'v II * ,* 11 ,'\'{' ~ifol 11.1 1I l .I S1W i,. l.z , , I ) wil I" i I' wom', i i is I,,ll II .Ii f r ii.voi , 4 ti Io v i' 

illvv,.ti/,(!a i(;ll..I be 111,16 -1.. ()f : , , wo lld Illiv v el ,,z{, . 'T I'I l evre 

re tlivel i11r 1114. v4:at:,litv (4 alos. ;'l'lTo .I I )e;lIil JI i I,,. h-pa(l,, l(fl ha" J 'j ,' t ,,t iit) n,,- , v-.,-

Wi !. .1 Ie V\', , luil O'.wII' (I , of,'l - ,I" lI f,'vs-Jf,1:tl v. I-,)f,-i i ,l' -

r' I Ii,; I I I . i,, I , I -i ." i , II I f' :1 I ,- 1 1 : , ' ,: - , 

> Il 11ifi I

t-(e ,li li t '' I l- , I nl V tPI('i O ii it i t{~I, 1 1,, I' ,I ,I t: ,I .' 1 '111 ,,, ,.. l i, 0 . I" " V ... 141., , ,' ," Ii i, . , ," , . ,  

> fii I> 'I•

',, I' IL i ' , ' -i ,j . i . '1' , i ' i .f i ' I .. .. - , r I

i. *,g ' :. , , A i l l ,,, , , , i I .... I. r ," I .c,1 ,-., ' .         

> rII
> fn. vI1.,vI rIIItI II IAII1

, ') .,' . " ', , , i . ~ - ..: - . , , ' , .l , , ,O ASl" -' ' ] .' ' ' i 357 Department you would have some people whose careers depended oi 

l)riiging at least a few prosecutions. And so there would be some camuss m the x)oks showing that FiIl agents and intelligence agents coil( bie l)ro.Alllod for their wrongs. Having sai(d all that, I am not really iojpefill th'tt we will have  

> i111111V

(.i16i111l wIi o.l tltiol.s. So the retuainder of my statement focllses 

oi civil V('lhedies that might I , )I-eserihe(l, al(l oil mi(asler(,s to vXli dt he (lpacit ,v of l)Pi\'ate citizens io (1forne tie stali(lardis outli tled iII 1l1.V (1'i 111ll stitttS through civil litigatill. And I also dis'lls.4ed ill my statement. the notification of ('OINFEIPRO victims, and various ways in which that might be enhanced. I am critical of the criteria for 

iol ifi(.1 loll Nvlhich the .r1st ice lD'lartmielit has adopted and woii(l Ie sillpl)riseI if lir(o,. t han t weo doz(,1 victim."i were, ee'.r notified. 

I thi k I Iave spi8 k('i lou'g ( fit+li ;:ihioiit tie 'ai-iois kiiids ,if )r(o-

lisals I hav e e, 1d in 1iy statemel lt. 

4.I(P, VOM.i 'l ii.st 1i011 0ll Vlt I I,av' , ii! so fa I-. 

I~of.'ssorPYv* li 1 lc's mil si P'13 it'iit folhi :1     

> MTATFMINT OF CIIRISTOPIIER 1I.

Pyix, AHRISTANT P ieFEOR, JOHN JAY ('.I.tx;r           

> (iF' (IMINAL ,JUi4TIC., CITY 'NIl -11411 YOi-.V YO:K

Ieent hi.stiorlhes have lNImrtriy(4! thI U.S. l ).l:'ltuIPlt (Of JUstiee a. a ('tAliouI ally of te clviil rights moveni ltll thn ef ,'lip elerii |iumri of Inve-stigation it at 

pjsivi, Ityst anir, rehict ant to protect moveinti ,rgafiizers for feulr of alieuit.    

> ing ('isieratie Somthern

sheriffs. 

Now th-se histories mimst lie mwrilt n. I)oe(nents front the Bureau's own files 

flow 'staliish beyond doubt that the FBI deit4-h, itely sought to sabotage the                     

> ltiiltli' protest wirig of the civil rIghts mllOvemnilt. It (id so not oznly y(1i(hulated
> Inacetlio li Ilie ilr'reme(' of violence,

hut by the (']liliIi('5t inc uim of disruptive Iaeti|s entirely at variance with the Jirojx-ir rmo of law entorcement In a free 

> soe'ifty.

l'erhll the ioist veil of "hese efforts was the ]ireau's vendetta agtil.st thl R'v. Mli rtlii liitier Kitig. the itat ii'm lost re.4ml-f-Is black lea dr. Iliiroiu rev-i)r, tlIV oiwlfttirm that extnsive wire-taps and hugs werpe m1e(l, not to I)Mbtl4't Kig av:iilist fl.se elirges am Att orney Genaeral Kennly appihareintly had hi ;jl. Nit tit sliifa me i I relluta t iiiii. deniy him honors, and ilestroy hi Imilitleial effeetive-

ies. lligh olhiclal of le Fill ieven .u fit fr as tit s.tiid Kinx and hls wife ii  

> iwa.ka

e uof w iil it vi ,\ edi am Iighly er ,lilalirt lig umim terlns olttiItied throillu h its 

illegal suritillailli if him Ill li tels i1l4l 11l4,14m,-s irP,: ctouhitry. A e't ininlying tlI )iNI ,,11il. .i114 A1e Ir liv before King \\ias 1i reive Htite Nobel Peace l'riz', wag  

> :ill

it Wll'.im fillMS inte. It rmidl "Kinl, there is only ine ilg left for yol to do. You kli) w what It is. Yoii have ju t :21 Ipl In which to do it. flhe exact number 1ai1li.'a' ele It P l fi r :a sixe ilh, rnsoln.. It ims letilte prietleal sign itlinie. Yol n ' im,. 'liere Is I,, 'e way out for you."  

> In

liM7. tlie venlil !air~t Kii wl expanded Into a sy.4elatlIce' ililsiign  

> to

disrliuilt ai d destroy whlit .. Elgar Hoover conIdered to 1Iw "hlnk hate      

> grompis" King'u4 ,,itieri Christian Lealershik

0'onferene, nil integrated Its-

s.,liit loi of ll:ib k Sottherri ministers and white Northern liberals dleiatlid to ailtli eviig r:iill Integralitin. was llaed hili oil the hate groulf Ii i. eilt iirplt  

> iltf

ti, u :iililii. ,llihi caii Iilly (callld ia "eounterlntelligence ptrogramii" hii-s tle  

> the,

abs .ilu(, of any foor,.ign Involvitent %vat "lit prevent I lhe ri e it al black  

> rnl'si

alt wlip vouill lillte find i'llt, ,lfy" blak Alniriliut. "MNartin IDither King," 

the :ltuitrizili lu nie irandim i ,ooitimied. "nil i ll r., to I nt hat jxItlon . . . If Iev •t tt 11(14 iii u" ht-1' ll ,' (l oitilivi l o wl uit l Iilhi ril l' t riiit'g." llureall iumhleh'.Is  

> eve'

'icl,il. ed a 'rl i Ti iit lss lit IIIo rovl, tiC 1( leriliilp #f lie Negro pte leie when Kinr ii has ,i11 '. ,m il ttly dilik rtillt, l" ('il il:lit< :md Io ,k l,wer mromis were not i li (lY targets for attack. Secret 

pr, igr:iIii': of iar~i.iutint a kore liwerelount 4:ioi la thi,. 'olins itmunit.4i rtit y. the ,'mli, i'l WerlPr t v.'arly, ii Klix Kli.. Ilie atitli-wi r vimlPnt. mrid -several 

> atitlu,,li

t t v V4 ik-A. Polsom n , letters, like the I ti.. k iPl I,, hre. t a'nd sai ,iide su . - 

> L'est

I - n ! , 1 i r. K i u. were ciYnuoii. Imt ai a t-wt 1mr!!I lunirio-. andl 358 

Bureau-inspired pollee raids were used as well. Some unfortunate souls were "snitc.h-Jacketed"-falsely niade to aplpar to be "snitches" or inforianlts-and were thus caused to be driven from their organizations and ostracized by their friends. Rival groups were provoked to shoot at each other and an American Nazi driven to suicide by an anonymous FBI threat to expos,;e his Jewish ancestry. For more than thirty years the FBI systematically violated criminal laws. civil laws, constitutional guarantees, and Jurisdictional limitations in its efforts to sly on and harass domestic political activists. In itddition to tle "counter-Intelligence lprfgrouins" (called "Cointelpros" for short ), there were hundreds of 

surreptitious entries into tli premises of political groups to photograph records ani steal information. urgingg the mid-IDOWs, Fill burglaries at the offices of tile Soclalist Workers Party in New York averaged more than one a month. even though the Party was unsuspected of criminal activity. Agents came to refer to these clandestine missions as "black bag Jobs," and looked forward to commenda-tions and bonuses for burglaries well done. I,aws protecting tile sanctity of first-cla. niall also were breached. Fromn 1)-0 

to JIWI1, the Fill olned and lphotogralhe some 130,000 letters. (The 'IA tnde-pendently rifled nearly 250.(4) letters bet ween 1953 and 1973 in violation of the-same criminal and civil laws.) Other crimes which FBI agents may have committed in the name of "internal security" are mail anti wire fraud, forgery, sending obscene material through 

the mails, reckless endangerment of human life, incitement to violence, and obstruction of Justice. ('ivil wrongs covertly infllct(d ol private pfrons include libel, slander, false light invasion of lprivacy, trespass, and interference with contractual relations. The first, and most obvious lesson to Ie drawn from this appalling record is 

the utter contempt it reflects for the rule of law. As a ranking FBI official admitted to the Senate Select committeee on Intelligence Activity when asked whether the constitutionally or legality of Cointelpro was ever .onsidered : "No. we never gave It a thought." The CoIntelpro documents reveal an agency motivated les by a desire to avert crime than by a racist resentment of assertive black 

leaders, a right-wing hostility towards all things communistic and communal. and a Victorian disgust at (and fascination with) changing sexual mores. Through Its programs of harassment, the FBI brought the ('old War home. William C. Sullivan, one of the Cointelipro architects, expressed tile Bureau's attitude best In a (el)ositlon to the Senate Committee: This is a rough, tongh, dirty business, and dangrous .... No holds were barred. We have used Ithese tacth iel against Soviet agents .... [Tim saniv tactics] were brought home against any organization against which we were targeted. We (lit] not differentiate. This is a rough. tough business. The (on(l, obvious lesson to be drawn from this record of lawlessness il the failure of successive administrations and Congress to keel) the secret liureaucra-cdes of government in check. President Franklin D. Roosevelt. with his customary disregard for constitutional proprieties, unleashed the FBI with a series of seret directives andi without imposing any of the restrictions which the scandals ()f the post-Worl War I era should have suggested. Members of powerful Congre.ssional Committees. like Martin l)ies. Joseph Mc('arthy, Richard Nixon. John Rb)onev. Richard Ilehord. John McClellan. and Jamnes Eastland. saw to it that Hoover reveIved most of tle money and suplpoutt he requested. Aware of hloover's support In Congress an(d reslectful of tile rurhhessness with which he iusedl lhis secret files ol prominent persons, no attorney general from Murl)hy to Mitchell attempted to reestablilsh Justice Department supervision and control. The third important lesson to he learned from this record is that the Bureau was not Just a lawless agency out of democratic control : it was a lawluess ag'eI-y euigaged in a calculated assault on political freedom. Through Its programs (if surveillance and harnismevt. the Fill sought to Influence which views and -viuict spokesmen would he heard in the political mnarketjlaces of America. What the Supreme Court had forbidden the Bureau to do directly and openly through prosecution to suppress lawful advocacy of political Ideas, it sought to achieve covertly and by criminal means. The political intent of the CoIntel programs must be clearly understood if effective renelies are ever to be designed. Their impact on the political proess waq not Incidental. tor minor, as tie Justiee Department would have uis believe, but. (ventral and substantial. The obJective. In the words of T. Edgar Hboover. was "to exlxise, dirjpt. and . . . neutralile" various political ground. To achieve this 359 

objective, the Bureau sought to get professors fired from their Jobs, created phony political organizations (called "notionals"), published lgus college newspapers, and cancelled the motel reservations of convention-bound activists. Magazine reprints by the thousands were anonymously mailed to cole -_aumiuigtrators, politicians, and newspaper editors to inspire them to turn against anti-war and student protesters. Still other campaigns of "disinformation" and deception were undertaken to split radical groups off from potential sources of membership, money, and support. Viewed together, as they should lie, the counterintelligence programs against domestic political groups constitute still another federal crime-conspiracy "to injure, oppress, threaten, or intimi(late any citizen in the free exercise or enjoyment of any right or privilege secured to him by the Constitution or laws of the United States .... 

"If there is any fixed star in our constitutional constellation," Justlce Jackson once wrote, "it is that no official, high or petty, can prescribe what shall be 

orthodox in politics, nationalism, religion, or other matters of opinion. ... Yet this Is precisely what J. Edgar Hoover and his asso-clates tried to to. Blelindl thi wall of secrecy which they erected with tit( acquiescence of suc'cessive presidents, attorneys general, and Congresses, Bureau execute iives conspired not only to defin, the limits of political deviance, but to enforce those limits hy clandestine, illegal 

mu ns. "PREVENTIVE ACTION" Caught between the Burea'.s defenders and criIics, and painfully aware that their capacity to lead the FI[M out of the shame of ('otntelpro will lie lamit(41 If 

they do not at least appear to defend it, Justice )epartment officials have been slow to acknowledge the sIgniflcance of the recent disclosures. When NIC-TV reporter ('arl Stern pried the first Cointelpro documents out 

of tie Justice Department with a Freedom of Information Act lawsuit, Attorney generall Williarm B. Saxbe ordered the Bureau to investigate itself and appointed a Joint FB [-Justice departmentt comnittee to review its findings. The cimwlitt.e, headed by Assistant Attorney General Henry Petersen (the Watergate investi-gator who saw nothing wrong in leaking grand jury secrets to) Richard Nixopn), concluded that the "overwhelming bulk" of Cointelpro actions "were clearly legitlimato'and proper undertakings," and announced that it could find no grounds to prosecute anyone. Asked later why no administrative satlo(hs were imposed either, Deputy Attorney General Lawrence Slberman blamed It all (i 

I loover: 'If (liscipllne were to be meted out, it would have to be meted out to one who Is no longer alive." Saxhe agreed, although he agreed with le conlimiittee that a few o)f the lha '-assndnt operations "(-an only be considered abhorrent in a free soity." After inore 'oint elpro's against Puerto Rican, ('uhan, and ('oinmunmist groups were dS-

covered, Attorney General Edward II. IAV l called the Bureau's actions "ouml-

rageous and . . . and foolish." However, what outraged the former law pirofes-sor was not the Bureau's systematic( violations of law, but the "disiinesty an ad inclvility" of those actions. "Foolish" was the word Levi ('hose to (.liaral'trize "Operation Hoodwink," the FBI's camlpagn to trick ilie Mafa into attacking American Communists. "I think the sending of anonymous letters, false letters,. trying to get organized (rime people angry at the oniimiilsts doesn't vo)rk wriy well," he said, "and therefore it's foolish." Instead of ridding tile government of its dangerously foolish agents, the .t-tormey General has assigned Justice I)epartment lawyers to defend all but two of them against lawsuits by their victims. le has announced a program to, no-tify Cointelpro victims of the Bureau's responsibility for their misfortunes, but has drawn the criteria for notice so narrowly that few notices are likely to he 

sent out. While the Attorney General has sought to protect FBI agents from civil suit., Director Kelley has spoken out. vigorously in tWfeir defense. "For the Fill to lave (lone less under the circumstances," he told newsmen, "would have been an abdi-cation of its responsibilities to the American people." Testifying before this subcommittee, Kelley promised that lie would not "abridge rights" o any (iti-zen without first obtaining the approval of the Attorney General or the Presi-(lent "unless in balance there would lie a feeling on my part that it would peXr-Imaps be a good Idea." 

The Director has bmneked away from this imlpolItlc position. and has even tried to put somp distance between himself and Iloov -' FBI oy lpublilcly apologizing for snome Colntelpro abuses. But he has not given up his liellef that the Bureaua 360 

must be able to supplement its traditional investigative and arrest powers with some sort of covert action. Attorney General Levi seems to agree, at least in principle. Testifying before the Heiiate Select Committee in December 1975, Levi argued that the Bureau should have the power, subject to the attorney general's approval, to take "pre-ventive action" against persons and groups where necessary to prevent the com-mission of federal crimes that pose imminent danger of violence to life or property. Thi Attorney General offered no definition of "preventive action," other than to say that it should be non-violent, like the switching of street signs to prevent hostile imiolis from clashing. Why the FBI should be involved in preventing mobs from clashing, Levi did not say. Tentative guidelines prepared by a Justice De-partment-FBI committee later added the requirement that the violence also threaten substantially to impair the essential functioning of government. This raised the possibility that FBI agents or informants would not be able to take "preventive action" Just to protect lives or property-n curious inversion of values. It was obvious that the Departinent had not thought the problem through and when the Attorney General released his F1I1 guidelines ill March he a announced that he had "temporarily" alandoned efforts to provide express au-thority for preventive action. Technically, if not politically, the FBI now is back where it was when Cointelpro began. It is fair to assume that neit-er Levi nor Kelley wishes to revive the more venal tactics of the Hoover regiiie. lather, what both appear to want is some kind of power to break ul) terrorist combinations like the Ku Klux Klans, the Weatherman underground, and the Puerto Rican FALN before their campaigns of lolmlbiing and shooting get off the ground. Neither official Is likely to. trumpet tlhat desire, because the clandestine disruption of even violent political groups raises grave constitutional questions. It can :iso expose F11l agents to private ha suits and president ill administrations to charges of political repression. On the other lnd, both men know that it is they who will catch hell politically if the lBur'amii fa ils to prevelnt a terrorism it(l1h1n from weurring. r'lhereli lies a (ileniiii. How can the government deal effectively with politi-(ally-motivated, violence prone groups without also violating civil nnd consti-tiitiolal rights? So far, we as a nation have dodged one horn of this dilemma by retsllilig to specify fully what liberties and procedures are du to suspected criminals prior to arrest. The Rupreme Court has gradually narrowved the range of speechh crimes" that can the prosecuted in court, lint it has prescrlhed vir-tually no limits on informants and has had nothing to say a bout itiost forms 

of harassinent charaeteristic of Cointelpro. Congress has offered no guidelines either. We have evaded tile stPCOnd horn of tile dilleinna by allowing law enforcement nd fillotil igence agtneiei to improvi.e their own solutionbelhind an iron wall of secrecy. At times, the inaction Iy Congress. the president, and the attorney general has beni so (onmseots aq to srl' to say to the Bireau: 0o ahead do some-tlhing. do anything, and if you stretch the law a bit, we won't ask any questills. It has Ibeen a government by euphemisms conselisly eml)loyed by nil concerned 

> I

o avoid re. lxnsibility for questionable actions almost certa in to follow. Iidited. "ireventiwiy act ion" appears to )e n new iiihemislm far ('intelil'or, or at least tile non-violent side or those prograninl. Civil hihertnrl: ii, would lhn it iitogethr, hut Ianning the term without defining its meaning would be fillt1. A hther eulhhenlsm would rnly spring iti in Its place. The bIetter approach! NwiblI lie to authorize those few preventive actions which might properly be token in cert nin. well-deifined eireum.tances. forlid all others, and Im -pe effee-tive criuiinal, civil, and administrative ,qanetios to puni-h and detor future   

> 1*1 tit III'i'iEMIS.MR

Thl. til ,h:m "oillo N) decide, w'lnmt lay 111ii l nuol le lolle in the namll1le of ".1rvelniliv, fietion," T'wt prillvi'iles shii ld gidei tlie ei)trpri.se. First. the gov-10,' 1hit ills t4' ritthbI i1 d duIty to l erovent ijnJti 'y to 11ives il pri1,rty and. 1t1  

> s~llnie il

nstl lOP.1'14 hlll 1w, allowed to d(o so covertly oce the conspirators hive cen-wel allstral(t isclisiuiuis An1d bevii to hrooeiire weaij)|urll or w':plosives ail(] lay 

c'11lcr.'oto jd ll. to ro;lllillf (oitii of 0'ilE!1' . Se'Oid. 114' g iverliment las 5 no Isi-

III 55 111i 71 iipu tinug the 1ilioem'mitl .'ffilnl, or 'x' iernmil l ilitle.-il effoctivonoss of ally 

1)llI tally-rhot Ivii t (,d ro p. however viid,,iif if in'n1" be. by elni dfstlui, 1011-

procet(1torial ne ans. 361 

For example, nothing should prevent the FBI from taking steps to warn or protect the chosen vlctinms of planned violence or to guard property marked for destruction. Bureau informants should be free, on their own initiative, to stuff sawdust into dynamite sticks, defuse bombs, disarm weapons, deactivate im-munition or otherwise deprive the conspirators of the physical capability to com-mit an imminent attack on life or property. Where a terrorist group is Intimidat-ing a community, the FBI should be free (with specific authority from the At-torney General and under close Justice Department scrutiny) tj conduct de-terrent interviewing designed to let suspected terrorists know that they are not anonymous. However, if such interviewing is to be allowed, it must be carried out discretely, so that employers will not be caused to fire, or neighbors to shun, the suspects. Infiltration of (or the recruitment of infornmants from within) politically-motivated groups should be allowed, but only when they have indicated, by credible statements and actions, that they are preparing to commit or are de-veloping the capability to commit bombings, shootings, kidnappings, skyjack-

ings, hijackings, robberies, or similar crimes, or are actively soliciting and inciting others to (1o so. To provide grounds for an infiltration, a statement would have to go beyond abstract expressions regarding the duty, desirability, or inevitability of vaguely defined revolutionary action and actually evidence a current intent to engage in, facilitate, or promote criminal actions to achieve political ends in the relatively near future. Actions which alight justify infiltration would include the acquisition of weapons or explosives, the conduct of pars-military training, or the rehearsal of planned crimes. Authorization for the infiltration should come from outside the Bureau, possibly from an assistant U.S. attorney in the first instance or it judge through the Issuance of a warrant Regardless of who grants the authority, all officials Involved should be required to take all reasonable meatsures to minimize the extent and duration of the intrusion and see to it that use of the techique does not lead to disruption or harassment. A clear distinction should be (drawn between terrorists who shoot, beat, kid-lnap, and boml, and political protesters who violate crowd control regulations to conduct disruptive demonstrations. The nature of their lawbreaking and its con-sejuences to the community tire quite different, and warrant different kinds of treatment. Preventive action should be taken to thwart demonstrating groups bent on disrupting a city or closing down government buildings, but the action should take the form of negotiating parade permits, insisting on the use of deni-onstration marshals, erecting barricades, positioning blocking forces, and other-wise following conventional, nion-covert, crowd control techniques. Since tihe F111 

Is i mntlonal investigative agency with no crowd control responsibilities, it slm od not be involved in this kind of preventive action in any way, txc(pt lperhalps as the source of properly obtained Intelligence ol tlie s1veitfli purposes il11 CIaMl1litiths of the demonstrators. Infiltrating the organizing staff of a demonstration should 

be forbidden unless authorized by a Jidicial warrant which establishes that rea-sonable grounds exist to believe that tihe organizers intend to promote violence 

by their followers or otherwise violate the ternis of their demonstration pe, rmit. it no ease should the FI1 or any other agency of government be allowed to sabotage the denonstra tion by stealing files, forging communications, sending false extortion notes from one group to another, or spreading false rumors--all tactics used by the FBI against the anti-war protests of the 10s. The government should be permitted to monitor the demonstrators' walkle talkies If a judge finds that there is reason to believe that the radios may be used to promote violence or otier substantial violations of the demonstration permit. However, the govern-unent should not te allowed to disrupt those communications (as It often did In Ihe 190is) unless, necessary to prevent imminent viohnce. Any such lfcision, of 

course. should be made by Justice I)epartment or mayoral staff members and should be subjected to subsequent scrutiny in court. Dragnet arrests like those uisemd in Wasligtn, D)'. in 1971 to crush the May 

)ay protests should also 1w. forbidden. Where National Guard or Army troops are called out to suppress a full-scale riot, the primary form of preventive action should be the Imposition of a curfew and the guarding of persons and property. B use there is no credible evidence that any of the ghetto riots of this century were the prluict of covert organization, no covert riot control techniques such a', round-up lists, general search warrants, or networks of "ghetto Informants" should be developed. Similarly, the FBI should be forbidden to maintain lists of allegedly potential "subversives" for round-up purposes in case of some equally undefined "internal security crisis." 362 

J',oth Levi and Kelley appear to believe that it Is not the duty of the FBI or any other governmental agency to manipulate the Internal affairs of external rela-tiojis of pollticaiy-motivated groups for the purpose of undercutting their politi-cal effectiveness, however, neither appears willing to admit that that is precisely what the FBI and many police "red squads" have been doing for years. Instead 

(of ducking the issue of preventive action, the Attorney General should issue d(etailed regulations keyed to past abuses. No regulation-can possibly anticipate all of the manipulations a politically-inspired agency can dream up, but one which simply forbids known abuses would be substantial. As Kenneth Culp Davis points out in his seminal book Discretionary Justice, there is nothing to prevent administrators from instructing by illustration when they cannot specify every-thing by commands. To curli the government's perennial impulse to suppress Its critics, the fol-lowing kinds of preventive action, drawn from the public record of Cointelpro abuses, should be outlawed: 1. Sending anonymous or fictitious communications to members of political groups designed to create internal dissension, cause the group to expel members, ior prmirote misunderstandings or disputes with other groups. 

2. Notifying employers, prospective employers, creditors, credit bureaus, rela-tivev, or neighbors of the alhgedly illegal. Immoral. or controversial activities of an individual for the purpose of limiting the Individual's capacity to exercise constit tit tonally protected rights. 3. leaking information from investigative or intelligence files to the news inedin, public officials, or private citizens for the purlxose of reducing a person's reputation, casting him in a false light, or otherwise undermining his political in flUlvilce. 

4. Asking foundations, administrators, and civic leaders to (leny recognition, 

iioney, or other support to a particular individual or group. 5. Interviewing individuals at their place?4 of employment or recreation, or questioning others aiout them, in ways calculated or unnecessarily likely to iiierease the possibility that they will be fired, transferred, or ostracized. 

6. I)lrecting informants to spread rumors or to commit actions designed to promote fear or distrust within a political group. 7. Systematically investigating members of a political group for non-federal crimes and then persading local or state authorities to arrest, raid, or prosecute those members or others on the basis of that information. 

,q. Informing the news media or opposition candidates that a particular candi-late for public office viii fie attending, or has attended, ai meeting of a particular political group, or is receiving financial or other support from a particular group or Individual. 

9. Creating bogus political organizations (called "notionals") or encouraging informants to assume pollcymaking positions in political groups. 10. Forging signatures, signature stamps. letterhead, membership or business cards, press credentials, or other items of Identification for the purpose of dis-rupting a political group. 11. Using the malls or any other form of communications to transmit false. misleading, threatening, tblackmalling, defamatory, or otherwise harassing mes-sages to political groups or individuals. 12. Interfering with the contractual relationships, credit ratings, or legal status of individuals for the purpose of limiting their political participation or the participation of others close to them. 

13. PublIishing bogus newspapers, handhills, or similar publications. 14. Sending bogus letters to elected officials purporting to come from con-stituents urging them to take positions for or against particular political groups. individuals, or policies. 15. Encouraging building, fire, health, or safety inspectors to harass political groups or individuals. 

10. Sending anonymous letters to, or otherwise approaching, the operators of hotels, motels, or meeting places to persuade them to deny space or services to political groups or Individuals. 17. Impersonating individuals or group leaders for the purpose of cancelling reservations or offering non-existent accommodations for visiting demonstrators. 

18 Sending anonymous communications to the relatives of politically active individuals objecting to the activists' behavior, or to parents alleging that their children have been engaging in sexual activity with, or are otherwise associating with, political activists. 363 

19. Jamming or otherwise interfering with the radio communications of parade marshals trying to control peaceful demonstrations. 20. Infiltrating, wiretapping, or bugging the legal defense camp of political activists charged with criminal activity without a warrant establishing probable cause to believe that a felony is being, or is about to be committed, and assuring that the fruits of the surveillance will not be made available to government lawyers or Investigators working on the case. 21. Obstructing, delaying, or otherwise interfering with the mail, telephone imessages, or other communications of )olitical groups or individuals. unless necessary to prevent immediate harm to lives or property and subject to subse: q(ent notice to the affected parties. 22. Encouraging tax authorities to audit the returns of politically active indi-viduals or groups absent probable vause to believe that they have engaged in tax fraud. 23. Conducting anonymous mailings of literature to editors, publishers, admin-istrators, college trustees, and others, in an effort to influence their attitudes towards, or treatment of, politically active individuals or groups. Needless-to-say, this list could be extended and refined. What is important, how-ever, is for the Attorney General to acknowledge the political intent of tie abuses that have occurred and expressly forbid their recurrence. That step alone would go far towards imposing limits on the misuse of FBI authority. fit addition, the Justice departmentt should insist that specific permission be obtained by the Buireau InI order to employ any potentially disruptive or harassing technique not dlire.tly associated with the detection and prosecution of a specific .iline. Failure to obtain such permisiom shouhil be grounds for a variety of administrative penalties, from loss of pay and promotional oliIjortuinitles to dis-missal from government employment. CRIMINALL PENAfTIE8 It would be naive to suppose that speciflc regulations defining what may and may not be done iII the name of "preventive action" would end all abuses. Hoover   

> :111d his

agents knew that they were violating constitutionally protected rights. ('olatelpro occurred becatne F141--execttives were confident that their agents wold never be caught, or, if caught, tlmnished. There were many reasons for this confidence, not the least of which were tile llmreau's near monoply on investigative resources, its autoniofny from the Depart-ment of Justice, and the disciplined secrecy enforced by an autocratic director. An important contributing faetor-however. was the absenee of any federal crim-imll laws speclflcally protecting the constitutional and civil rights of individuals and organizations from encroachment by federal agents. The only civil rights provisions In tile federal criminal code were enacted to protect the 13th, 14th, and 15th Amendment rights of black Americans against state and private action. Section 241 was enacted to punish private conspiracies like the Ku Klux Klans; section 242 was meant to punish state officials acting imder color of state law. Section 245 was added in 198 to protect civil rights workers. Nothing in the express language of these statutes prevents their appli-cation to federal officials, but it took a special prosecutor and a White Hlouse-directed burglary to bring about that extension. United Statcs v. Ehrllchman, 379 F. Hupp. 291 (1974), aff'd 44 L.W. (1976). The ambiguous and restrictive nature of the case law interpreting the Recon-struction era statutes also tends to inhibit their application. Both have survived constitutional challenges on void for vagueness grounds, b)ut only because the Supreme Court was willing to read into them the requiremtwt of a specific intent to violate a federally protected right. Screws v. United States, 321 U.S. 11 (1951) and United States v. Williams, 341 U.S. 70 (1951). The requirement of a s1wlflc intent, however, does not foreclose debate over whether a feerally-prof-ected right was violated in any given instance by action taken under color 

of federal law. Given the unwillingness of the Petersen committee e to recognize that the Cointel programs were themselves conspiracies to violate First Amendment rights, It is reasonable to expect that government will continue to hide behind the laws' ambiguities. Narrow judicial interpretations of the privileges and immunities protected ly the acts, coupled with language restricting their application to cases in which the rights of citizenss" are violated, also limits their application in Cointelpro situations. 364 

These deficiencies in the exiting law suggest that adequate legislation cannot be achieved by adoption of a broadly worded "abuse of process" statute, or by a law expressly extending sections 241 and 242 (or something like them) to viola-tions under color of federal law. The better approach would be to tailor remedial legislation to the kinds of abuses characteristic of the Cointel programs--con-spiracles, attempts, and actions specifically intended to deprive individuals, orga-nizations, and groups of rights guaranteed by the First Amendment. With his-tory as their gloss, and the force of analogy to give their zieaning, such laws would stand a much better chance of equitable enforcement. My own preference is for one set of laws to punish Cointelpro-type actions and another to cover improper mall openings, burglaries, break-ins, thefts, and elec-tronic surveillance. The following amendments, keyed to S. 1 (94th Cong., 1st S ss., Jan. 15, 1975), are suggested. 

11506. Interference with First Amendment Rights 

"(a) OVF ENS&-A person is guilty of an offense If he injures, interferes with, or adversely affects the "(1) reputation; "(2) contractual relations; "(3) employment relations; "(4) financial credit; "(5) legal status; 

")(6 freedoni to travel li. or use a facility In interstate or foreign commerce; of anty individual, group, or organization with intent to injure. interfere with, or :iiversly affect the ability of that Individual, group, or organization to achieve lawful ends thrtiugi the exercise of rights guaranteed by the First Amendment to the federal Constitution. (i (RADim.n.-An offense described il this section is a Chiss A misdeminanor.   

> "((') .JIRlSDICTION.-There

is federal jurisdiction in this section If the actor is an officer, employee, agent, or paid Infoirmant of a federal or state Investiga-tive, law enforcement, or intelligence agency or unit." 

f 1507. FIrauduleit Interfcrence with First .4mcndi(vit Righ#-- 

> "(1

a) ( )rn ENH.--A person is guilty of an offense If, acting under color of law. he, "(1) undertakes a scheme or artifice designed to defraud or deceive another with the intent to Inipose a burden upon, or otherwise interfere with any Indi-vidual, group, or organization, because that individual, group, or organization has, is, or may engage in expressions or activities protected by the First Amend-ment to the federal Constitution, and "(2) pursuant to that scheife or artifice communilcatcvs or causes to be coni-

mu nicated false or misleading Inforination. "(b) GRADUnN.-An offense described In this section is a Class A misdemeamm;r. "(c) Juaisnxc'rzoN.--L'here Is federal Jurisditceln over an offense described in this section If "(1 ) the actor is an officer, emnlOy -. agent, or paid informant of a federal or state investigatory, law inforceiment, (or intelligence agency or unit ; or "(2) the actor, in committing the offense, "(A) uses or causes the use of tit, 'nlited States mail ;"(i) uses or causes the use of aniy interstate or foreign comuii.ation facility, including a facility of wire. radio, or television communications subject to federal regulation ; or "(() ('auses, ilndl-cc4, or inlwde-s "(1) travel by any oti;-r lrson in interstate or foreign commerce ; or      

> -12) tise by any other

pers n of any facility ii Interstate' oir fooreign colnmerce." 

fii tiddition, congresss shotil itke It a federal crime for ait eziioloyee, if any federal or state investigative, law enforcement, or intelligence agency or unit to conduct burglaries, criminal entries, criminal tremsmpese, or thefts for the purpose of gathering Information on the lawful exercise of rights guaranteed by the First Amendment of the federal Constitutirni, or for the purpome of interfering with expressions or activities prottvted by that Aniendment. This objective could be accomplished by amending the Jurisdictional provisions of the following sections of S. 1: 11711 (Burglary), 11712 (Criminal Entry), 

* 1713 (Criminal Trespass), and 1 1731 (Theft) to provide: "---There is federal Jurisdfctin over an offense described In this section if "(1) the actor Is an offer, employee, agent, or paid Informant of a federal or state Investigative, law enforcement, or intelligence agency or unit, and 305 

"(2) lie commits the offense with the intent to collect information on the beliefs, associations, or activities of any individual, group, or organization, or to interfere with the internal affairs or external influence of that indi-vidual, group, or organization, because that individual, group, or organization has, Is, or may engage in the exercise of rights secured by the First Amend-ment to the federal Constitution." ENHANCING THE PROSPECTS OF PROSECUTION Enactment of specific criminal laws will not, of itself, assure that government ofitials arm punished for their crimes. Ways have to be found to overcome the inherent reluctance of the Justive Department to prosecute executive branch employees. Nothing inakes government lawyers howl louder than to suggest that they have not been even-handed in the enforcement of the law. But the record Is clear. Sice 1924, when J. Edgar Hoover assumed his diret.torship, not oiie Fill agent has been prosecuted for a crime arising out of his employment. Annotations of the federal criminal code reveal no instances in which agents of any federal. Investigative, law enforcement, or intelligence agency have been prosecuted for civil rights violations, mail fraud, burglary, or illegal electronic surveillance, despite extensive evidence that such crimes have been committed. Itea.sn for this Inaction are not hard to find. llo''ver's Iolihy of internal pun-ishment uind quiet dismissal is well known: so too is the twenty-year agreenaiut between the Justice Department and the (VIA not to prosecute any of the Agency's operatives without the Agency's consent. Th i. politIcal influence and administra-tive autonomy of those agencies, coupled with their Internal discipline and secrecy, also limited the possIbility of scandals and disclosures that might lead to prosecution. however, nom- of these reasons-fully accounts for tlut .justl(e I)epartment's unwillingness to act even when abuses were well known. The truth Is that no department or agency head anywhere In the federal government wants to punish his subordinates. To lead their agencies, government executives must first defend theu. If they do not protect their employees from embarassment, their employes will not protect them. Tlo avoid lits danger. the men at the top let it he known, in a variety of subtle ways. that they do not want to know abm)ut wrongdoing at the bottom. Alert sub-ordinates pick up these signals etasily; they know that a ldlltical executive who punishes his agency's wrongdoers without pressure front the outside soon loses his capacity to lead. On the other hand, subordinates also know that the political 'XP'it Ive who Iarns about agency wr(ingdolng and dis's nothing risks serious enmarrmssiiiitt. shlil tie wrongdoing liter become puhilic. So they do not tell him and heo does not ask. Instead. the matter is quietly covered up. All con-cerned find It easier to "see no evil, hear no evil, and speak no evil," even if they tcvitsiinally end ip looking like monkeys. Alyoui who would enhance govern ent anc'untability intist first solve this lprilentihl. Two renw'dles nre neeoissqary. The!-first Is t break down the c'onspirnley of silone. and1( tll' second is to provide for Independent investigators and promst-utors. 

.ifrrc Justie Department supervision and rontrol 

To sugge st ways in which government secrecy In general might safely be re-diie, he is beyond the scope of this testimony. What can he done, however, Is to expl4re ways In which the Justice D'partnent enn Ie made more knowledge-alhle of FI1 Ivestigations of politically-motivated Individuals and grouls In t hI i few Ilst il .vle where such luvestigat itins a re a pl)rprlite. The(ro, ro, at. least four ways In which Justice Department Involvement can 

lie hicreist.l - by the case, by the program, by complaints, and by Inspection. If 

each of these approaches were to be built into the Investigative and review Iiniices.4. It would lie difficult for future Departmental executives to say they dlillt know. 

Lri ofmcers.-- insifar as the FBI iust Investigate any politleielly-sictive in-dividuinls 1and organizations because they are suspected of trying to achieve their lsilitlieal ends I.y Illegal nieans, an asistant U.S. attorney should be assigned to the, case. Ills function should be to serve as an advising law officer-to follow the course of the Inquiry without assuming control and to advise the investigat-Ing agents of the limits of their authority and the propriety (as well as legal-52- 629 --77---24 366 

ity) of their techniques. Where difficult legal or moral issues are involved, he should be free to obtain advice from his superiors, and should encourage the agents to do the same within the FBI. And lie should know that if the Investi-gators violate civil and constitutional rights, responsibility will rest with him t). 

Scopfsg Units.-Most of the FBI's violations of political rights have occurred in the context of formal programs---programs kept secret from Congress, the Imblic, the president, and the attorney general. To prevent such programatic nhuses from recurring, efforts to deflue the FIl's Investigative and intelligence functions should be Suplplenented by the requirement that the Justice Depart-meit play an active Itrt In "scophig" (defining the nature and scopw of) those fi-w programs that iay properly be authorized. For example, were the Ku Klux Klaus to ride again, high level Justice Department officials should be in charge 

of. or at least intimately involved in, planning the Fll's re, l)piise. It may b(, argued, of course, that to vest such a pow(vr in men like Robert .Mardlan or the staff of the old Internal Security Division would not safeguard individual liberties. But Involving Justice Department officials at that level could reduce tie number of abuses, enhance the possibility (if whistleblowingg," m11id give sucvessive administrations the opportunity and (lilty to curb and eXpM)se 

the wrongful political bases, if any, in investigations conducted under the si wrvslum of their predecessors.   

> (t eomr.e.

the seoling function ne.e not be vested in an internal security dlvi-siia or sel ,ti. A Ietter plate for it would be in the office of the Deputy At-torniey 4ienuoral. lie is tihe official most likely to 1e hanidling internal security (riSE'S on mai day-to-(ly ursis, and(l therefore most in the nlc.d for usable lnfor-aout ion on the intentilons. capabilities, and probable courses of action of ter-rorist organizations atnd the organizers of potentially violent mass hmniofst ra i ,IIns. The hoping unit, if one were to be created, ought to he c(iLvled of ns a pro-fossimul lli.e of alulysts---prsons with sulbstalttiia (re(l,,Iit itials in tle politics otf nmass protest, terrorism, and .lvii disturlbances. It, should not he a retirement hiomne for etx-iivestigators or a patronage position for lawyers without spie(.al exlpertist, ini civil rights aid liberties. With the right staff. su ih a unit would help presidents and attorneys generil di inuch more Int'llig4-litly with hysleri- 

> i1i

(lema lM that the government "do(1 somithing-anything" Pa ch time there is a boiing, a itot, or it whiff of rebellion. It would also protect them from the dangers of overre-action that (-ult arise from reading too mnmy dramatic, but itli.mbsi aitIiited informant reports. 

Ut'ricwingq U',it.--Whether or not the .Justlce Departnimit takes an active     

> part in silirvising tie

collettion of information tlat will arffr.t Its responses Iii riols. itcts of ti'rrorlisn, aid inass dhinonstratious. it should have the ability to inve.tigale complaints of FIll wrongdoing, anti to inspec4t the records of In-

v-.Nt lga timns whivh may infringe on First Amendment rights. 

Such a unit already exists In the Office of Proftessloim Responsibility. Its fmiicti',n. according to the press release issued at the time of its creation, Is to receivee aid review information or allegations concerning conduct by a Justice l)elxirtinent employee that may violate the law, De artmnentai (orders or regu-lations, or applicable standards oA conduct." The primary rensmn for creating the Office at this time may be inferred from the fact that the first Counsel on i'r fesslonal Responsibility is Michael E. Shaheen, Jr., the department'ss liaison offer with Congressional committees investigating intelligence abuses. lin the five months that the office has been In operation. It hus concentrated oil such highly controversial matters as the murder of Dr. King, the financial relations lm'twven top Fill officials and the U.S. Recording Co.. the Bureau's 

chief sippli(,r of electronic surveillance equipment, and allegations that FBI agents gave an author highly classified documents pertaining to the safety of nuclear reactors. The Office is also home for the panel of lawyers charged with notifying victims of Cointelpro abuses. While major investigations are conducted by peclal task forces, routine mat-ters are referred elsewhere. Allegations of criminal g,4vity go to the appropri. ate division: charges of non-criminal misconduct .re referred to the head of the Justice Deptrtment agency to which the employee Is assigned or to its Internal inspectorate. If these investigations do not prove satisfactory, the Counsel can undertake his own inquiry using Investigators and attorneys bor-rowed from uninvolved agencies and divisions from within the Department. 367 

At this time, every investigation underlaken by the Office remains under active study. No Fi1 agents or other Deirtmnntal employees have Ieen charged with alny crinos as a result of its work. However, two Customs agents have been charged with illegal wiretapping, and file Department has refused counsel to 

two Fi agents being suted for burglarizing the New York offices of the Socialist Workers Party on the ground that tile agents may he prosecuted. Tile need for a review unit like the (Office of Professional Responsibility can-itot be denied, but its lilitations must lie acknowledged. Its mandate is limited 

to investigating )epartment (if Justice employees; CIA and military agents are Ie.yimd its reach. How well it does with )epartmental investigations will de-is'ind both on the support it receives from tie attorney general and on its ability 

lop outlitst those who would resist its inquiries. There can be no doubt that the current Attorney General has given the office full support, and, to give it staying power, ha4 directed that the Coullsel's lsIsitioni he made a !,rinanent part of the Dleplrtimnit, rather than a tenlJaritry ehti.ent of his personal staff. However, in.lltuti,,'nllsnil dio's not gtutrantee inllucitrI. It. would not be at all surprising 

t, see till. office W-lne Il a ftew years. when liresidelits return to appointing more t ruilitiomil attorneys general and tit n(a I ion returns to lnornialcy. 

racingg prosecutors who will prosecutIe 

Enhahiag knowledge of F14 activiltIIs within tile Justice De)tpartment should iiir'use 4'oltrol and decrease the nmiibier and seriousiness of Improper investiga-

li bis ad la hrassinents. Detailed re'gulations setting what. cannot 1e done in tite 

la.1ine (if "irrt tsve action" backvid by nvw civil rights laws specifying which 

constitutional encroachilnents can !be Junished should eliminate many excuses I'tor not proi,eciiting. But neither aplpritsch will assure that government erlininals ai' e brought Ito Justice unless the instiltith0i1al ritictance to punish is overcome. 'i'horf' a ru two ways it can hie done. O)ila is to renove the prosecution of govern-

Ililtt exfnployees u111t of tih Jlstice hipart nelt anad vest it in some sort of polit-'ifhly i nde'ie'ident slmecial prosecutor. 'The other Is to lhge within the Justice lDepartnnt a slpecil staff of proSe''lut{rs who lave uI their chief duty and luliltion the prosecution of governmental eriime. Of course, tie two aliproacht's     

> itahe not ilt

llilly exclusive. 

,prwial promceulors.--'l'here have been many Ilrtissals for reolovitg tlie pros-ecutiton (of government oifficlls fro I tlie Juict' Dlpurimelnt si1e the days (,f I0-'hard Nixon. .ohin Mitchell, and the llhint Mr. 'etersen. One would create a i.mrinanont police of special proxecut ,r or "public attorney ;" anotherr w dild yu'st t fuznctlon ii lill indelwt lent prosecutorial oilmilssion. Senator Ervin a lvo'att*d r*-moving till fit lre Justice Ielmrliment front politics, although how i lt woilld enlar hie the prose('ittion of is agents still relailils unclear). Memlwrs ,if lwe Wtu'rgtp special prosecutor's ulfheo have opposed making their unit lwarnumint. on the grounds that it WOhl t helkl case to Ie SI.llal and might attra't m.n of lesser Integrity for whon lia, lroseuhtoriHl iower iN a wealwfli to, adviin,- t heir I)l1iuzal fortunes. Perhmnent or temilarry, the prolxs)als call for imakin-z tlhe prostutirs indeimdhnt by vestilng the Iowver to appoint them ill sitting ci ,urts, retlred1 federal Judges, or the president, but with the advise and consenat of the Senate and for a fixed term longer than that of the president. hlemovtl, too. would be made difficult in memory of the ",aturday Night blas-sitcr." S't- ge'ne'rally : Watrgate Reorganization and Rleforin Act o'f 1975. Hear-ings 11t, fore the Committee on Government Operations, U.S. Senate. 94th Cong., 1st Su,., Parts 1 and 2 (1975, 1976): American Bar Assoclation, P'reventing Improper Influence on Federal Law Enforcement Agencies, rev. ed. (1976): Iteniiving Politit-s from tile Administration of Justice, Hlearings Before the Suilwontnittvu on Separation of Powers, Contllittee on the Judliiary, U.S. Senate, 93rd (Cng.. 2d Sess.. (1974). 'Phie o element that all Sselal plrow-''litor l rossals have in cmimon is that they were prepared with Watergate in 1ind. They look upwards from the Crim-inal Division of the Justice departmentt In anticipation of partisan pressures from a politicized attorney general or a presidential staff bent on killing an Investiga-tion and covering tip evidence of misconduct. The wrongs they would address are conflicts of interest, implications of pirtiality, alleged misconduct, professional impropriety on the part of lawyers (or the appearance thereof). improper influ-ence, or obstruction of Justice. None looks downwards at routine abuses of the investigative, law enforcement, or intelligence functions, or seeks to remedy the inistitutional conflict of Interest of administrators reluctant to embarrass their 368 

agency. Each proposes a rare and unusual procedure to cope with polftically-charged allegations against high government officials. None is designed to attack the abuses characteristic of Cointeipro. 

A Division of Govcrni(int C(rimes.-To cope with these limitations, the Senate committee e on Government Operations has proposed a new Division of Govern-ment Crimes for the Justice I)epartment. (S. 495, 4th Cong., 1st Sess., 1975, as amended In Committee Print and retit led "Watergate Reorganization Reform Act 

(f 1976," and announve-d by ness release dated April 9. 1976.) In addition to enforcing the election laws and prosecuting all criminal cases against. highilevel presidential appointees not referred to a temporary ,peclal prosecutor, this new division would precute all federal officials and employees charged with commit-ting crimes in the course of their enmploynent. An Assistant Attorney General, ionfmivted by the president and confirmed by the Senate for a four-year term, 

would head the division. 'The president could remove his nominee from office, but he would have to explain whiy to ('ongres.. 'The Senate bill would, In effect, elevate the newly created Public Integrity Section of the Criminal visionn into a full-fledged division. However, whereas the existing section is limited top prolew.uting government, union, and corporate ,fftciaNls for interstate bribery, extortion, racketeering, and mail fraud, and poiti-cal ahndidati's and their statffs4 for election law violations, the proposed division would have nmch hromd(er dutie.,,. including the prooc.ution of FBI, 'IA, and inilihtry personnel for violations of civil and constitutional rights. Responsibility fr such cases, which now lies inactive in the erlininal and civil rights divisions, wumhld go to a new staff of pirosec'utors, with an Institutional and career stake in bringin)Jg aIt leist some pro e'ciltions to court. In niy opinioi, S. -195. its revlse(l, offers the souidest apprmeh to enhancing tie iproslieets for jprisecutifin of low-le'ei investigative, law enforc-ement, and litelligenee alinses before they reaci the scale of the ('otntellro)s. CIVIL REM EDIES8 

WhVimen :0lI I said IInIl (lte. whoever, I ant dloitful that many government agents will to, jIr, seo.utol fNor their crimes. The cumulative effect of the many Eistat,'ls.4 to) s.u'eessful investigation and m)s-eutim Is simply too great often to be- overcNome. This does not mean that eMrts at revising the criminal law and prosecutorial meha nisS should it he I)ursued: only that reformers should view then as valuable mainly for their symllic effect and as standards to be 

enforced thrngh (,ivil litigntion and the apolitical pro evs. To enhance the capality of the courts to cheek ('ointelpro nbuses, there should he it new chapter 172 of Title 28, United Slates ('|e, entitled "Illegal Investiga-live Activity." In It ('ongres should plae an arsenal of new clvil weapons against wrngful I nvest igativ'e, law enforcement, and intelligence aetivitles. Tle fir-t three sections of this chapter might well consist of the civil renelieis set forth in Ieplresentative Kastenineler'. "Freedom from Military Murveillanice Avt of 1975" (H.R. 1.12. 04th Cong., Ist ess., Jan. 14. 1975). To this could be added a hew setion 2694 to isrtnit (ivil recovery for the ('ointelpro-type offenses that woui lie outlawed by the proposei amendment to S. 1. The new section might read: 

2 694. (it'll action; Intcrfrrc ne with Fitrst Amendment Rights 

"(a) Whenever any fiflver, einployee, agent, or xmild informant of any investi-giative, law enfor'eent. or In(,lligen('e agency or unit o)f the United States, act-In, under color of law. injures, interferes with, or adversely affects the exercise of First Anendlient rights as secured by Secetions 10 and 1507. title 18, United States ('ode, that officer, employee, agent, or isid informant and the United States shall he jointly and severally liable to any person Injured. Interfered with. or adversely affected thereby in an action at law or equity, or other proper proceel-ing for redress. "(1H) In an action at law brought pursuant too this section. the (ourt may rrant "(1) any actual damages suffered toy the plaintiff, but not less than liqui-ilated damages of $1.500 for each discrete Injury, interference, or adverse effect caused thereby :

"(2) such punitive damages as the court may allow, but not In excess of $5,000. 

"(e) In a stilt for equitable relief brought pursuant to this section, the court may grant su('h temi)rary or permanent equitable relief as It may deem appro-priate, including, but not limited to 369 

"(1) mandatory and prohibitory injunctions; "(2) destruction, expungement, correction, annotation, amendment, or re-call of records; "(3) issuance, by the United States, of lulic statements of cNrrev'ti4in, retraction, or apology. "(4) the severance, from employment by any investigative. law enforc-e-ment, or intelligence agency of the United States 'if a113 ,oftvr, eniployei'. agent, or paid informant thereof fmund liable under Ihis .wtion (or guilty under ,w,<tions 1500 and 1507, title IS, United States (',de. 

"(d) In an action brought pursuant to this sect i o, the c.mirt alto may grant or order, as it may deem npiproplirte, the following relief 

"(1) declaratory judgillents; "(2) (.4ts of 1any stuicc'esi'iful antion, I ui.linig rat otzia tole att'iriie3 f 8; "(31 Indeniniflcatit. by the Uniiitel Statite- t,, u.is 4,ft-r. emitii)itoye, agent. 

or paid informant of any investigative. law ,,'jf,,rienient. or I itelllgei ve 

agency or unit for costs of i sueessfll] legal (I(fvns. invltidiig reasonabht-

attorneys fees ;- (4) ideinnife' t ill, toy ti( Uniitedl Stat is ii a iiy ai ,tff'r, flhllyiNY44'. lixe'lt. 

or paid Iniforninit oif any I tvest1igative', 1aw f.iif ir'enmtilt, or hitelligenme 

agel'y or unit found liable lib ait ai'tie i i l',;zht pulrsinant to this s,<tilitm 

in prmurtion to the degree of its r -puinsiiil lity f,,r thte wrotgftil iaIts, pri-

vided that the indemnifieatlon shall not exceed nine-tenths of the gross Iiicinie of thi' olliver, enlloyee. agent, or jsiid inforlmant lit Ifany cah'niditr yeir until t he Judgnment is il."  

> N)TE

HI('ATI ON OV COINTE PlO q A11I'SE8 O)f e'irs. .ivil remItievli, ni_,tllst g iriliont nmis'tiiiti't are lnt any good if 

the VI II (d04-M wit klaiow ofr the goverinmitlil's reslinsibil1ity for his In iiury. lit 

th, i't'ise of Co'ohitelliro, that kn ,iweIge, ma-iy soa, exist, bei(.iiuse, ion April 1. 

Aftriliey ('-i'ra 1 I.evi apllwnto'd a I dfl if law-yrs Ito iintify the,' pirograsi' i011i1s. The siloni 11id' nl't Idly w$ts a 4111fl4It1l ,wit. for Itim t imnike as mn ttml tilsirati r, ut it wa, mora lly e,.,rri',l. nuii. if pr p<rly idiminiiisti-'red. vould 

dii lntch to res 'ire iiuhlhe *' iiifil'n'e it ie I )epar liltilt. U'mlfortutnahly. Ote p-.,ilires fir neptil|vat lli, tire far frtin adequalite. Ulidotr 

tli At tirtiy (owwral's direcli vi'. ii,.101' will t ie i I' ,,lly wheii '( I ithe SiM 01'ie" (',rtilflpro nit'ivily w:s Iinipr itr. 12) :ctital ,anilt miay have isvuiirrd, imtil I3) 

htw suiits a rtr Wit aireaduiy :tan me' ail I heyv %%~ e Ow targo-ts of ('sitelp~r' 

act ivt uos." 

Thv first e'riteri.,ni fitil.s tfi jl 'ify "y t lov s f ' i 'jii ,, mi,.lvi ty tlii Itiii 

lDelon~i it nilt n'v tuitidlrs Ito his' "imiiiriIii-r.' 'lit-. 1ho hispanel himis twi'i give'ii i'otiiplitl a assentt ilnly tlly r h,,'wa i.' lm t, , .t whIimh ImKets of gm ri'-

iii t ha rw.sirilnt will Ill' i'rinitteteul t i in' tsm ,hi' g,,' rimii t for rt'slrss it 1h-sg l

w ri i L-4. Alrtcidy tlie'ru'. 1.4 revason toi tIw'liev Ih Owii wl.II' i r iett ill take~ rest nilikv'' 

vie\v 'e w Iuit Is "ii prk " I sr" ('edlintel"pri n.livity F',,r *.xiiinjile. Matry C. I ;1\'1 on. 

Ie m)s ,i v A-sl stan t A It'irui'y C e iwer:i . C)fi' e- dif Vv'):a tl t il liii; t i-st IlieN t lin the Jluires'tiV1" -w r ti ve'th'' (of "ilal i-i41ii I ,-11. . ':iit 'll fesie.rl iitmtiilt lle4 of .l'vii hef,,rt, lt, 8.4ii', tiunmi tte' s n (;,iv "uimti T1 n ,rt ;11i, ,1 :;11,1 il;tlitih'al ti1:lit,%. I'.S. ll u' , 4,r I're smItivv' . Alril 2 197. i s1 l vt , r aI l st:i-iti'- 'iti l+. MIIIny % m rhi'viis w. ,i(ii i1 l-agre ,. "l'h- f, I r.-41 , trlte 7r in ai-4o Wi ld ex oini p t Itiv .1 tisf l,, I ),Di' r? li'it front i 'i vi i.  

> Ito

t'iv' iii'-tiv where 11, h Imri,4, i Itt a,4 tlit v', i utll 'i ti4 w part 4i a firitil C',ii, l orograin. 'lhuts. ii',\ filct,4 hi ii I thi . 1I',111 i Itt ''1 , li ti ' 11ev. Mu rtl. lI 1i111'" K iitr .,,l1 00l n't lisi , t o1,' I l,-,l. Nir N',vull n, tices, have tfo Lo iili  

> fito''w

it irlis'to, Fif! iitii-grivhs. ii~i m.nlL~ lti ~r'~hsnls ii:tt 

Iget' I .' p'rw'wateii rs. 'i'ihf .m, .ietiid f.rilri' i ri-,i'tl'ts 11tlnt ie to ti ,-'' '1 im . 11i1i ' ill 'v1'11'h " 't1 lti10 

1n:e -ht'. o ai' 'iiire'ul." i hl'ati'u ' of lm'o'i li riti iiI ti ollpar In the Fll's w i"',,,r~, itI viw 'v', ttIl l0int1 will h' ;vLi ve . SI i,',' 'ti's? I ',il ipr, wls<irdk d i w,'it 

l' 'rit',l WlInt Ip1111 '111)'141 Wu :i res 1ilt ." the ha l':is, lili'tit ',ffirts. this .ri'orliii vir. 1t illv L 'i itl l ,,,: ftint w ilm l M',nt will 1w I.1 tl Jso,, tt ih r. fi' t wlei r',yiv, .'I'I thlhlr1l ,.rittri,,ii v' -utd ''4 vitiit t1i,- I ),p:m rt't ,an ft'mu heivivt: I i i 'vt i% li-i,.0 4 %%+() i ri, * ].' ,,lv nwurir' that they \.,rp I i''r.t' ,i' i ' ,ih,'llpri fi tl',." 

O)iii'i. gener , l kt P4wl'dtz, ,tiay I.. lire- i ,tire--ii Ini' . ,f itt i why il 5:"iv em , prevl,,'ily 370 

unll(5c1med abuses Wouhl not have to le given. Since mo.t organizations targeted under the Cointel programs have now been identified publicly, few, if any, new. notices would have to beIssued. Tlnose individuals and groups vio now po.si'ss some knowledge of how they were victimized would be left to their remedies under the Freedom of Information Act and the pre-trial discovery rulhs--a 

profess much like the game of "Twenty Questions." The Attorney General has tltui provided that his lawyers anld agelut. will not have to volunteer any new information it the(Colutelpro litigation uiw under way. 

The A b.ug bill 

To remedy defet s uch as titese. ('mgre swonunn Azuug hnR propl(d! legisla-

lo1 to COmell tihe .Istil.t' )epirtlnf-tcut to informm each pe-rson who was . . . the 

siliijIN't of at file or onaed li fill index creat(d, initaii l. or (ilinated . . . 

it connet 'lonm with ain Oieration or program known as "'Counter-ntelligelnue Iarogran" or "Cointeipro", . . . that he, she, or It was such a person, prvial. elalh 1su1'h persokII wi0 a lear and conci.ve statement oif such person'% riglits under thils section [allowing expungement and s.tion 552 of thk title lille Privacy Act), a l provide each such IK-rson wit ithe option of rehuldring that 

agency to destriiy eael copy (if such filte or Index ini Its IoSse.sion." 11.1t. 120311. and 11.It. 13111:3. 14th ('ong.. 2d Sess., (1976). 

The administrative imlpractialII les and arlvikey liivaion Iliat would lie Iinvtilvo4! 

IlI I 'ttiig and Iotifying tlhe tboaueoiinols if I,'eaiis llna'(l ind the ( 'ointelpro tIll's in lit a nswerliig their Iiqnliries wi d reqine'sts lia.4 liveun adequately sunlarizA'l iii testimony l-fore Iliw Silcin(nit tee onl (';ovarivil t 1infoorllliti aml In linvil. miial lilhrtles tit April 2.'. I wm hl a-ly adl. v4 oile whoa hits read thousands ,f 

laegm-s of doiiest h alelliga'nie rjsn't S ceMllhaii lay Ile ill. t11' nnilitary, awl tila Iolice, tilaf 1hd illcat iaul af evv'yeii iV h1144i0f41,ll4l 1li thIj.M' Iiles W01uld I' ii 1 '-o 

oa time and noney rivaling oinl.v Ihe' (.aiiltioll fr thtlie ih,.5 if I he first placo'. .4 ('laim ('oltinmaion 

A better a)proach wild lie ta set til) it tt'tral linms coanauiussili fo ,i-ilgil islt cit tis115 wit lli a stal ta na.,lify fill targlfi 1'II, t nathamy lharafn l'-vellhuuie for iariss uuait, 11li( at s ainirate painel to, adjitdleatte clii in for damn ge's nJi.-4Ilg (ait of tl . not iflcatioll. 'rt ria foar deciding wvlhaa slioulh Iae altifled ll Ilii' N l- lfled ly tle instr i-ineiit c'reatlig (I lhe' oiliiislo. 'e'li.v sluimld lo, ,vritttu lby generalizinlg olit past 

1iaiises. 11n.h as I have. 41(11e toa sllggesl "lr'evelttive nclimins" Mat l shonild not he imbrliitted. Of vfoiur., notliilng sdhta al fre4lea I line a aluc.iuision's st af' fron giving dldllit homiugl noftlai wii' e'a hIllaillieilaated i|t.sa' I'e itiim'a "'red. 'h'hae staff aise sh ieihl li' istrile'tod ta r(ear 'I fill fltulit s a11il 4i.fns.slh Iiijil~ly in faluur l'a niaifheatiiln. 'l' alhil 1nil 411letr of iaali'e niuy hioe general. sto as wit to uinduly shock the reciplent or invahe his right not to know, but letters should got-p Pclh intlivihdiud. groauip. or argiiizatiu which %as flie target of-it mpeiille' hartissinait ottennpt. regaarles..4 or avheflter they iv iniy lie aware aof tli attonpt or lit. 'lahua, ili r('5sjiitse top theIr reahliest fell" fnrtlher inforantioln, tle lepartmelnt should provide llin with tinnxpatirgated ')phe's of nil ree.,,rds oaf Itlfite attelt.t .

Illepartiiental resources li ,saa shtld It' ilw mi, avail lt, 1t) am aigsel for any viel ns seeking to hon'te witil!al dtrefe ittts iti ivil s its uris lag oet or lie itl flea tieil.. 'riority S110lld lih e Kitv, te1 giVtnl'g deIllied aptle to targets a (' ointelpr and sIiuilinr ietians wvho have already iled 1ult ,o thitt Ih(a'y will neat Iw delay-dl 

further by the dilatory tactles of government lawyers and evasive defendants. After tlipe olleas ]hive lnali giveii. tile staff soul s.mmiaimrize its findings hy drafting a regidhtin to iroahillit lsnlnihr iitlbait in tile Iit tire. 

'Tlue 1ai,!. to) aJuidio'iate cli.11115 shohil function ilke' a warknna compensticit board with informnal pri)(.lmlures. a definite Ila.q towarls re'slnvig doubts In foir 

#ar itle claimants, and in, cen(elictlg its laisiliess i, fihe litterests flf the elaimnour-and nait their attorneys. The nwards, foir the meist pIrt. i ied not be large. The sylaohisnllm of the Panel's flndlngs will, In nost Instances. be reward enugli. 

Tite Jutice Department may be nioiing in this direction. In a letter to Menator Percy made pulaie oil April 12. flip Attorney (leaural /iii iune I('e(| now polie.y of comiponsating the vitimsi of "wru-tag horse" raids. Extension of that policy 

to the vict ims of Cointelplro would. In flut ead. save much time. money, and Ieitivenlenee for all concerned. Victinus who receive prompt. Informative. anda eoirteoms npelogies from their governumeut are la",s likely to press unreasomiale'-Manimuni for (dninages. thile he alaptian of expechitiois clains prioafhlres wfitilil save tie government. a s well as hoe cilinaits, flit, co,.sts fof protracted liligatii. 371 

EASING TiE BURDEN OF CIVIL LITIGATION' Creating a notification and claims commission would go far towards redressing past abuses, but it would not punish similar wrongdoing iR the future. To, assure effective policing of federal law enforcement, investigative, and IntelligIcce agencies, an effort must be made to ease the burden of civil litigation. 

Standing to challenge improper surveillance 

Since political surveillance Is the breeding ground of political harasinment, Congress should make certain that the survellaice -all be challengedl in Court before the harassment begins. The chief obstacle to be overcome ii Laird v. 

Tatun, 408 '.S. 1 (1972), in which a sharply divided Supreme Court rulel that the targets of Army surveillance within the United States could not challenge 

that monitoring in court because they could not prove they had suffered siell-clently at the Army's hands to qualify as effective litigants. Their allegation that the surveillance, which was unauthorized by law and served no legitimate military need, exerted a present chilling effect upon their willingness to freely exercise their First Amendment rights was rejected as too intangille a claim. As a result, the only surveillance cases that ,.an be brought today are those where tile plahitiffs lhave evidence of direct, concrete injury, such as the loi's of it Job or proof of defamnattem. If the "prcsunption for freedom" Issocklated with F'irst Amendment lit icat lien Is to be vindicated fully. Laird v. Tatum must he legislatively overtuirned. 'rliii 'oulhl ben done by a relatively simple amendment to title 28 granting standing ti) the subjects of unconstitutional or Illegal governmental surveillance. The term 

subjects should he es'il In place of "lHersons cggrievql" or "'mrsems imiti reil" toe *eulhislze that 4',ongress rejects the Taturn det.sion. or. more pre-isely. has liead' a legislative finding that injury must ho presumed mice the plaintiff haA siei-n that le, was the subject ,,r target of illegal monitoring. Aniy such prOkoiiI. '4f            

> course, wiuld have to Ie written to effect uate hiew statillte

defiling the lg.al limits of government surveillanve affecting values ani Ilnterests protected iy 

the 311l of Rights. 

Jisdictional aniount 

Another obstacle to redressing Colntelpro abuses is the reqjuirenient that the plaintiff, in oi'der to invoke the jurisdiction of a federal eoiert. must allege that the "inatter in controversy ex(eels the sum or value of $10,000, exclusive of interest and costs." 2h I'.S.'. Sec. 1331 (a). Although the courts have been willing to accept the most strained valunatiolms of I he amount in controversy when constitutional rights are at s.ake. the .1 testiVe, Di),lartmnent efintinups to invoke the requirement. 01casionualiy. the IN-parthiet winm and the plaintiff Is told he must provide further evidence of the niony valie of his hurt. Cf. Oc.t're ich v. ,ckctivc Rtervicc, 393 U.S. 2.3,3. 239 (1968). Thus. the primary function of the requirement is to allow the government to harass in-

exlwrli-tced attorneys, confuse Judges. and run tip the c.,wts of litigati,(n, 1)1stinglnlshel commentators have noted that the requirememft, intended to reduce the volume of diversity litigation In federal courts, has no legitimate function In causes involving federal questions. Wechsler, "Federal Jurisdiction and the Revision of the Judicial Code." 13 Law & ('ontemup. Prob. 216, 225 (1148) ;

Friedethol, "New .imitations on Federal Jurisdiction," 11 Stan. L. Rv. 213. 216-218 (1959). Itis completely unjustified when applied to eases involving the. freedons of slwech and assembly-rights "not calmlale of noney evaluation."    

> llotic %. t".1.o.. 307

I'.S. 496, 529 (1939) (Stone. J.). congresss , itself, has recognized this point by suspending tie Jurisdictional aninmnt refluiremnent In several statutes involving civil rights and liberties. Fed-eral courts have been granted jurisdiction. without regard to the amount ie con-troversy, over action to redress the deprivation, under color of state law, of any right. privilege, or immunity secured by the federal Constitution. or iby any federal civil rights statute. 28 U.S.C. See. 1343(3). C'ongre also has su.,lqnded the reslulrement for victims of Illegal wiretapping (18 U.S.C. See. 2520) and for o'rwnimls denied the right to correct federal records pertaining to them 45 l.S.C. See, . W12ii W (1) )). In 1.69 the American Law Institute recommended elimination of the amount in controversy requirement in all "cases in which the plaintiff claims violation of his constitutional rights by a federal official. . . .. Study of the Divisin of Juri lhtion Between State and Federal Courts (1969), p. 172. The time has come for Congress to take that recommendation. 372 D scovery The most serious impediments to successful civil suits against improper surveil-lance and harassment have arisen in the area of pretrial discovery. In most civil suits, defendants are obliged to come forward on demand with evidence in their possession relevant to the case. Where suits have been brought against govern-ment officials for wrongful electronic surveillance, however, Justice Department attorneys have claimed that the wiretap logs are "privileged" against disclosure hevause they relate--or so it is alleged-to "national security "Executive privilege is too complex a subject to be discussed in the context of this tom-timony, but a few observations may be In order. First, the terin itself is much too broad and ought to be broken down-and preferably in legislation-into manageable concepts like an "advice privilege" for confidential, non-criminal advice among lolicy-makers and their staffs, a "sources and methods" privilege for certain sensitive techniques of investigation or intelligence-gathering, and amilitary and diplomatic secrets privilege for matters like battle plans, armaments, or negotiating positions. None of these privileges should be absolute, each should have a time limit on its invocation, and each should be defined in terms of the competing social interests the judge should weigh. Mpcond, formal procedures should be prescribed to govern the assertion of liiltimate privileges. In most Instances, assertion shmld hle a formal airt of the agency involved, approved by Its chief executive. The assertion should be 

more than a mere claim ; it should take the form of an in camera submission of evid ence and arviments to the court. In some Instances, the hearing should be olmm to plaintiff's counsel so that the inferences and claims drawn by the govern-ment vamn , challenged. To facilitate appeals and assure ciirnfful de ision-imnIking. .idlges shmld lie required to write opinions Justifying their denials of discovery. Tnt,,rloviutory appeals ought to Ie permitted under expeditious procedures. Thi rd, ,mI1r.co.-,ful Invoeitin( of an "exelti ye privilege" ouehmt not to re,.ult In dlim.nimsal of the sidt, but qhoifld---at least at the Judge's discretion---reoult in n default Jiidment against the government. Fourth. since class actlon4 are the rinuv economical way to effectively ehal-lenge road proarans of surveillance and harassment, the government should lie required to dielonse-at least to the court-who the members of the affected clns are. 

The-se siggersttons by nio means exhaust the possibilities for reform. Before 

,fr.T-n'f nmy inore, however, I would welcome the committee's respowe. Mr. F,,w,,ns. T wonder if we could have the next witness make her stnteniv,t on the sitmie sibject nl thei have the questions? 

MTr.Tn.N. Tt is lp to w'oii. Tt would be agnveeable. Mi'. J'd)W.'.:!). WoIil1 it 1be fl'eevtbl' if we did tlint and ten had Ifn1' Iti N. While Tinim Emzin is~ coming for'ward'l I iust w~oifl(1 like t, :,k t0s witness. Mr. P-le, uoniithinur about tle paiI inform-'.1 uts I 1 0 o li ve all tlhlrTh .(ii'. prpo-,10d ,l ttte. And Voii can 

1'esp ,,l, to ftis later if vyo woulld. T have qome difficulty in ineo-

no,'nitimr that t'pe of (lln.)ater into thle prolose Federaul statute. T lo,'t n,)W' ,'hf tle.,, pid informnant.s are. As vou know. they did 

9 ' '''$ 1'if all the work initui ' )Tw COINIFOPI?( priofin accordintr 

to th, G 0) Sthudv. E it w ,e can diseiiss that later.  

> TA't

me ny nl.so for the record, Mr. chairmann. tinrl also M.Nfr. P\le, 

thant in todn,' rvleod T ihave inserted 'oll. fine ar'tile in the Nation Tt ,. Rf4'7. T will :.ie \'eou n copV lner. I ,-i,,11 h,<.k t)!the VP lNair1n. Mfr. Fnw.\i.. Oir next witness repn,-entq the American Civil Lil)-eI'tiS Tnion. 'Flu foiu',uuel w'i'.~ntii 'ill be Yularir' Mys. Hope Em'stinnn a'q.,o-

'i-tiff m' 1 O t AC(LU bet"'c inl Vmhnt Sincep 190. ++ ' '3'73 

Ms. Eastman received her law degree from Harvard in 1967 and was with the Office of the Legal Advisor with the Department of Stka She is currently vice chairperson of the American Bar Assmoiation Commission on h.ighte for Women. Ms. Eastman is accompanied by Mr. Mark .Gtenstein, who is tem. porarily working for the ACLU foundation, involved in research on a variety of subjects. Mr. Gitonstein is an attorney who is well versed in the Issues before 

us. Mr. GOtenstein worked for senatorr Ervin's Subcommittee on Con-stitutional Rights and played an important role in the drafting of the Ervin bill on criminal justice information. Mr. Gitenstein Was also a member of the staff of the Senate Select Committee To Study Governmental Operations With Respect to Intelligence Activities, and in that capacity was a principal author of the "Report on Intelligence Activities and the Rights of Americans." Ms. Eastman, I understand that you will give an opening state-ment on behalf of the ACL 4U and then we will proceed with the panel. We are gladto have you here. Ms. Eastman lis been a friend of the chairman and the members of the subconunittee and the committee for a number of years. TESTIMONY OF HOPE EASTMAN, ASSOCIATE DIRECTOR, AMERICAN 

CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION, ACCOMPANIED BY MARK GITENSTEIN Ms. EAWr.M.ix. Thank you for your kind words, and for the oppor. tunity to appear here this morning. n w

I Jlave a pre,pared statement wliieh I do not wish to iehd, but would like inserted for the record. I would like to summarize it. Also, I am counting on ily colleague, Mark Giteustein, to poke me in the elbow when he thinks I have loft something out. So if you see him (1 it he will have ,mlethiniig to add. I would like to start. this morning by raising several points which appear in mylprepared statement and some which flow from listening to Professor IPyle. The ,Justice I)epalrtment is issued .these regulia. tions on doniesti intelligence activities. T has not yet released, al-

thoulgh it indicates that it is intending to at some time in the futu .guilelines on igular, ordinary criminal investigations. It is essential in ateinipt ing to evaluate wheilier there is a need for domestic intelli-genee-and as you can tell from my statement we do not believe there, is either tle ned for or coistitutional room fo' doinestle intelligence invest igations-to look at the criminal guidelines first, before evaluat-Ing the ,laiisq-nade by the Justice Department with resiet to domes, tic' intelligence. Aiiltyv Mrhik has just hnded me Foiietliing whieb I have not noticed before. and i ,nirht just begin Ibv reading it to you. It is a. request. fro1i tile Tnternal Security Division li Marh 1969 advising, the FBI tihat the Justice Department wa.s considering grand jury. "inveStigitiol of soie freriouls future camnpuis disorder,; with a view to. ward tnro:-eeug.itlider the ,iti-Riot Act, the Smith Act, the Vorhees Act, and statutes on sedition. -nisplrary. anud insurrection. It, appears 

fat pae 508 of book 3 of thu, Church committee report, the supple, PmIemta' detailed staff report t wouldlike yoi to listen.to whathe 374 Justice Depalrtment conceives that under this ordinary criminal in-vestigation it call ask tile FBI to (1o. The Internal Secturity Division asked the FBI :                                                            

> To secure in advance the names of any persons planning activities which might fall within the prescription of any of the foregoing statutes. It would also be im-l)ortant for us to know the identities of the officials of any participating organi-zations who have custody or control of records concerning the activitles of such organizations which we would seek to obtain by means of subpoenas duces te( um -l

And I might add )arenthetically or by other means: It would also be most helpful if you were able to furnish us with the names of any individuals who appeared at more than one campus either before, during, or after any activity of disorder or riot, and the identities of those persons from outside the campus who might be Instigators of those incidents. Tite FBI was asked to use not only its existing sources lIst Ilso 

alny other source yoll 11Niv be able to deelop. Now, this looks an a\vfiil lot like tie domestic intelligence authority that the FBI and time Just ice departmentt is now seking. All I want to do with this at this point is to uirge yon to aIsk thellI : Just what can yotl (10 in the context of a traditional crilminal investigation ? I know in Plrelparing for this testittiony I found 1n article on tite front page of tihe New Yrk 'Timles about tvo postal aides being held by Federal OfflCials ill an $800-000 theft at. Kennedv International Airport. It, de-fiails how tile hald lIeen_ tipped oft that tile crime was going to continue. l'ey 1 ad ke)t tielll udet sllrVAeillaillie for several weeks and (lid quite a nmlbl11er of other things. Again, this is all in the context of a tradi-tional criminal investigation. So when you go bevond this you really have to ask Vourself the question which I address a little later in 11iv 

testimony. T'think it is what Chris raised wit]h his example ill)ollt time Ku Klux Klan. What tley are really asking you, when von set ill the language and detailed l)ro'visions altogether in one lackag. is foi- al-

thorit ' to keep tra,]k of tile political views anl tle political activities 

of people. Some of which., of course, involve potential violence--I am not leaving that-l)ut to keep track of those activities of vouthls. )eople, lpel.onalit ies. and organizations so that someday they caln pre-(Iiot tl,(. violence and presumlably stop it. 

I think that that is just an unacceptablee degree of authority in a(letImocraeY. eSl)eciall v in a democracy that is governed by tIm first 'mittenden't. While no one wants to sav. of course, that we have to let tlte boml)in,. oc(u r, living under the Constitution is not always easy. As SoltMeone else I kliow is ('redited with saying, "tle Constitution is not 

l1ml0 for :sunny (ays. 'You must Miake hard choices. 'l'his may be one of I lho:,' hard choices. Althou,.l sotue information+ Mav be lIoentially use fil-anld we will co lie batck to that a little later in tle testimony-it is lst too dlangerous to let the Government collect it. 

('hris referred this morning to the slippery slope. I have referred to that in my testiiiionv today. 'What bean in 1936 as a limited pro-

gram to keep track of'('onmnunist and Fascist sulversives. led us to the program against 1)r. Martin Luther King. While time Attorney General may well be making good faith efforts to lut. a stop to these activities, he is only (,te personl. and he is not going to have tlat job forever. Even if I agreed wvitl hil, that lie was doing a good job-which I (lont, lkwcaits I (lol,'t agree I itll the guidel ines--you can't 375 

write laws just for well-lieaning people . You have to write laws for the Richard Nixons of the world. 'That is what we are coming here to ask tie Congress to do. The second thing which y'oil mnist, allress--and I think it. was high-lighted by (ongressman 1)rinan already this inorning-is the role of ilnformants. That is tile one part of this w hole puzzle that nobody in-side the Governnll t .seems willing to talk about. If I understand it (orrectly, tlle ('ht ch commit tee diint, get the information it wanted  

> OIl

the use of informants, the GAO did not get the information it wanted on t lie use of ii, formants, and yon lhaven't gotten the inforna-tiom yOUx walnt on tle ise of inforilnalts. Ald yet alout 80 percent of t le domestic intelligence investigations use informants. 

I noted something very interesting in reading tilie guidelines again last. night, and that is tlt even dliring tile preliminary investigation, (lle.king with existing sources and existing informants is permitted. 

''his puts a pre'mili on earlier Goverient efforts to insert informants 

is widely as possible. so that when tlie next investigation conles, tho.s 11110 (:" t'lisle( inforlnants. Nowhere ill t hiese gliidelines does anybody 

tell you anything 1tnit. how tley Imake tie jiuldglleut to insert the in-former in lie first instance. ()nce tie. informer is t here, all bets are  

> Off.

ad tlWmy cart go to tlose inf ouliants dii lrig the prelil inary invest igatioil. I think I would not wuit to (hela' tlie ' ,rec tive legislation I will propose while you get all tie answers on informants. But )efore aim-

tlirizing their 1ls', vou shuld11 insist on answers to these and related (illestions. I would not accept the Attorney general'ss proteslations tihat warait are -I )adl idea fM' il fOintWr-s. I al not sUre t lhat I hat is tle right, or onlv soli utin i t! certaiiilly n, sol ut ion which smokes this information omut of tle ,Juist'ice l)eplrtnleit is an essential theumie.it of -ly i.rograni. Now, in ilv lh pelparel test il()-v we uike two basic. points about tie d|,,liest.ic. intelligence 6r1g1avni. ()ne is tli1t it inevitably violates the ('oustitution. To illustrate, I would like to read you one tling which Ifound in your hearings.. The Attorney General in his testimony 1)efore the sibcommittee on February 11 started out by Saying:         

> ''he propon4ed domestic seu4irity guld.lines proceed from the

assumption that (Governineut nmoniltoring of individuals oc groups because they hold unpopular or vo mtroversial vh, ws i intolerable in our socit.v. 

()m that, sale (I.y, d however, Fil )irector Kelley observed, T feel I would be remiss In my dutiles if I were to Ignore any group that advo-cat(,, violence to acconiplilsh its objet i es. Director Kelley's statement is not. consistent with the Bihadenbrirg 

case in which the Supreme Couit said until you come a lot closer to violence, until the violence is imminent, such advocacy is protected speech no less than any other protected speech. Now. the Attornev generall also, it seems to ine. muade a significant . sessionn on that, (ay. saying that, 1inder the glidelines tie prelimi-nary investigation would be opened simply as a reaction to the Weather 

1 m'lerground Newsletter which says: "'1ihe rulers have set the time for the part y: let us bri ig t lie fiewi rks." This is )rotecte( first amend-

nvlt. specebt. At )mume point hiter it c'rosses over the boundary. But up 11it il the point in tiue tlt it does cross that bourdary, it is first amend-376 r*76 ment protected speech, and should be none of the Government's busi-i-/ ness. It should be noted that the guidelines and the Church committee/ recommendations leave open room for investigation of lawful activity because of alleged inadequacies in the criminal law. As we have said to them we say to you, it is relevant in another context, too, the wire-tapping contest were they argue that the reason they have to authorize new kinds of wiretapping is -hat the existing espionage laws are in. adequate. The answer is, as the Church committee said, to change the laws now, make it clear in the criminal law what is prohibited by law, and then investigate only that. I would like to refer you to my testimony on page 8, because I think that it is an important point that the Church committee made and It appears at the bottom of my testimony: One of the advantages of confining the PBT and the Justice DMpartment to criminal Investigations is that there are traditional external restraints Inherent In the criminal process which disappear In the domestic Intelligence context I think that fact has been overlooked. There are diverse ITS. at-" torneys. grand juries, d6lnso counsels. discovery, the trial judge, there jury and the appellate process. But none of these restraints exist in tho[ domestic intelligence area. Now, the next point that we make is really not my essential point. My essential point is that the first amendment prohibits domestic •intelligence. But the fact is tlat according to the investigations so far undertaken, domestic intelligence has not worked. And I am not going to repeat for you the statistics that came out of your GAO report, But in 17 eases, a total of 2 percent. where they gaiie4 advance knowledge 

of possible violence, it trllnis out. in many instanees to be minor doenon. strations. That is till they can come up with. It, seem. to me they, have not made their case. Certainly when you are involved in infring-ing first amendhnent rights by definition in domestic intelligence, then they should not he allowed to get away with it. Having said all this, what do we propose as a solution? T would not like to see the Congress involved in simply rewriting tle Attorney General's domestic guidelines. T think what. you need to do is a set of fairl'y silnple thini.s: Prohibit domestic intelligence; prohibit counter-intelligence programs; repeal the speech crimes sections of title 18 which serve as the basis for the done.qtic intelligence jurisdiction. Ishould add parenthetically two things about that. There is a limitation, imposed by Supreme Court deeiv*ns on those, statutei wheh ap-parently has nevrp. 'rlmeld the Fill; it still interprets the statutes as written on the hooks. Despite the fact that 15 vear. ago the Sulp1e Court (onstrued them more narrowly, they are still being interpreted as if they were valid on their face. There was no dissenting vote in the Church committee, for .repeal or modification of these statutes. it is not at, this point in our history areally controversial act. Mi'. EDWARDS. Shouldn't those statutes I eliminated in the revision of the Federal Code because of the court decisions? Ms. EAs'rr.. That is rqv next point that I am going to comp to. In tile negotiations over the revision of the Federal Criminal Code, Senators McClellan and Hriska have agreed to drop those sections. 377 Now, I would not urge you. to wait for S. 1 to become law to make these changes. As you know, we continue to oppose enactment of S. 1 even the negotiated changes. I am hopeful the Congress won't enact S. 1

in its present form. Don't wait for them. Go forward as part of the package on the FBI and repeal those "speech" crimes. The third thing I would like to discuss is where I actually intended to begin my testimony-that is., with a look at a set of proposed intel-ligence reform proposals which have been adopted by the ACLU. They aren't limited to the FBI; they cover the CIA and all the other intelligence agencies of the Government. They proceed from several basic assumptions. With respect. to the FBI, that assumption is, as Ihave outlined this morning, that there should be no domestic intel-ligence, that the FBI should be limited to the investigation of crimes. Similarly, with respect to the CIA and the other intelligence agen-cies, we recommend a prohibition ou peacetime espionage and on peacetime covert, activities. The reason is similar to our FBI position: The existence of these activities-whether espionage or domestic intAl-ligence-inevitably lead to violations of our liberties which cannot be 

prevented by less drastic remedies. To sl)ort these restrictions, par-ticularlv with reference to the FBI. the ACTAT has come up with aseries of proposals which are attached to my testimony. the highlights of which are on page 2. I would like to just urge. sonc of them on yon at this point, as what, I would see as perhaps title III or IV of the. bill on domestic. intelligence. Title I, ban dotlestic intelligence. Title IT, repeal the speech crimes, and title IlT, set up somie remedies and sanctions. First and foremost among them is a civil remedy statute. And a civil remedy statute which leaves no room, I might add-with-out getting off into a whole othor discussion-for the Supreme Court to say, oh, no, that is not a constitutional right, or that is not, a first amendment right. I think Chris is right, you can't. write a statute that makes infringement of first amendment. rights the trigger for the civil remedies. The Burger Suipreme Court has consistently. when confronted with a new view of what might. be covered by the first amendment., said, no, the first amendment doesn't cover tfhat. or no, the right of privacy doesn't exist. there. They have been very inhos-pitable to citizen suits attempting to re(lre.s constitutional and civil rights violations, as you are undoul)tedly well aware. Perhaps this is t lie right place to insert for the record some testi-monv which the ACLIT gave to the Senate last. week before Senator Tuniy's Subcommittee on Constitutional Rights with respect. to the Burger Court's hostility to citizen suits. I mnust say that although Iam reasonably familiar: with the cases. when I sat dowln and read the testimony in which they were all discussed together. I was appalled. The degree to which the Burger Court has said, "Don't bug us with this stuff," is just. frightful. Mr. EtwAIIDs. Without objection the material will be made a part of the record. 

MS. EASTMAw. Thank you. To me it very strongly buttresses the case 

for strong statutory civil remedies to enforce whatever limits you create. It is a comment that relates not only to the FBI. but, to other sulbstantive rights that you might. create. I lnow you are also consider-ing legislation on arrest records and other criminal justice records. 378 Carefully (Ilraftedl civil remedies that repair all of these court-conceived loopholes are essential. We would be delighted to bwell) draft such statutes. And I have at my si(le perhaps one of the greatest living experts on civil refe(ly statutes whose help I am sure I call volunteer as well. Mr. EDWARDS. It is (lifficult ill tie area you describee to create acriminal remedy for it local policeman who by mistake or otherwise releases an arrest record which is public information anyway, blit which just happens to be prohibited because of the filing system. It is very difficult to formulate such legislation. M's. EASTMAN. I would like to comment a little b~it, on the criminal relmledy, too. I know Chris talked about this. Maybe it, is because of        

> spending too much time in. Washiiton, or

having been here. through the last 7-or 8 years, but I (lonl't have any faith in criminal remedies when tie conulhiet w'oII ale trying to prohibit is in the Government's interest as it perceiveS it. The (overnment controls the )rosecution of off'lses its official Coimmit. For that reason I sharply (isagree, and the ACllJ sharply (lisagriees, witl Chris' negative reaction toward aspecial prosecutor. We sup)port 100 percent Mr. 1 )rinlan's )ill to create a sl(Cial prosecutor for the intelligence agencies. I urge that concept on you as a part of this package, ando whatever other packages tle Jldiciary (omnittee cones up with on illtelligence reform. I would like to ad(l a coul) e of other things which come out of the package of reforms. 'l'hese apear on )ag.,e 2 of my testimony. One issue which I think tile ,11(liciarv ('otlminittee has iot lai(I adle(ulte attention to is tile fatev of tle wh'istlelowers. the Ernest Fitzgeralds of tie wor(l. At the l)resvit time they take mbelievable risks, as I aln   

> sti e

I do iiot have to tell you, lby revealing Government muisond(ct. I

thiilk the (Coigress 1I('s to step iii al say, "no, n1o, these are, lweroes, not villains." h'ris is olle of theila mill souIrci's for the Congress 4n11A tie 

people to get tll(ir iliforlatioll, We ]l11lst protect the'e people by  

> ]itakitig

it inupossible for the Fedleral Goveln-itut to retaliate. Whet her 

you itlako retaliation against a whistleblower a (ivil or erijinal offense I am not sure. If yoi ha( a special prosecutor I would have more faith 

in making it it criminal offense to retaliate. Bit in am, event, thle retaliationu ought to bxe prollibited agaillst witistleblowers. Next, we propose-and Iguess this may not be wititin your jilris(lie-tioll, bt I fllfl lot siIre-(llastii limits on1 the oailitv to 

classify andl( keep secrets. I guess that is really a Govelnlient Op;ra-

tions OOmlllittee issue. Blt to tile extellt that you have the powers of lel-suasion the' e, I vould urge that tihis, commitilte. recomnilnd as part, of its report on the FBI, if liotiliuig else, that that Cotmutittee act ol this l)ro)lem. 'le A( ACL is also )roposing tallt it be Iia(le a Federll oesellS to lie to ( c ongress. an(d to the public., with certain carefully dra ftedI iilllita-imis. I recognize that. this is a controve sial l)roposal. The reaetion to it from sonm people is fear tlhat it wmld be used against the Dalliel 

Ellshergs and tie ot her (lisseniters ill G(Ov('llllerlt. IfMV answer to t hat is, the Goverm1lient (oes llot ieed that. They hrave pletitv of othl1r tool. 

Daniel Ellsberg. might have gone to jail *for 110 year's tin(ler existing        

> law. If you had ispecial 1)rosevlttor,

an( if ('Go\eriunent senior ofiviiils, 

other titan elected officials who nre not subject to recall at the p)ols, 379 could be penalized for lying on vital public issues, that would he very important. i nsum, we are urging oi you some, simple reforms. It is not a corn-l)licatml task for this subcommittee and for the Judiciary Committee to write a bill which will put the FBI out of the domestic intelligence busines-s, which will create remedies and sanctions, create a speial prosecutor, repeal the Smith Act-those are all fairly ('learcut thiiigs to do. The hard job is to resist the Government charge that you are tying their hands so that they eailmot recentt violence or overtlirow of tho Government. To that charge, I llrge you to rely. As I sail before, the Constitution is not na(le for smu111V (hays there'are hard choices to be made. To quote what, is at the end of my written statement, a favorite, 

phrais of Selnator Ervin's andfll an appropriate respollse in tils area" "Necessity is the plea of tyrants and the creed of slaves." Mr. EDwAVms. 'Thank you very much. Mr. (Gitenstein. 

fr. (rxxs'Ir.lx. I just walinted to underline two points that lope has made. And that is that, beginning in ,January of this year, wlen I was WNorking with Senaitor Moleale on tlie I)omestie SIuAComiiiiittee of the Church committee, we knew that tile toughest issue we would face ini drafting our recommendations wias not whether or not the Fill should ble authorized to investigate King, or tie Womein's I,ihera-lion 'Movement, or the NAACP. or the Southern Christiin Lea(herslip) Conference.. Those W'ere obv'iou sly ill ippropri ite investigations, and I

assume. that. iost of the merinlx'r of Vour conimittee would agree. ''lhe    

> Sleigh issue is

tile prevention of violeince. allnd, of Course., espiolilre. So 

we risked ilie Bureau to Come forward with their strongest Cases. "Show 

us how 'ou call justify continued iloniestic intelligence in this 6i1re11l."4 We welt tli rough as IUV r'IIsS ias we could get ou1r I llids" t.ll, We 

encoturaged tile stafi aiinl members of tile committee to (10 tile smill 

thiig. I lm) sure vOl can get access to tile salme documents w(, (iI. Al 

iey provided us' with Some 20 or-,30 cases-and I was apiIpalled. I agree 

l hai I was skeptical wlen I started. But the cases tire not strolg. Tliere 

is not it revoid for going beyond criminal investigation. And I think it is inuillmilmt oil an comilmittee that atteilipts to (heal with this issue to search vior miiniids id hearts and look it, ilie record, and tile statis-tics. The (,iAO rt r was suggesting that they didnt get to see the real 

cases , though. And I think, as Members of Coigress. you i izht to be aile to se the real files. We Saw tiheln, and there not compellingi ('ves. 

So, picking lp oil hlm,'s list loillt, that lieCessity is, not all inlpil)Iro-prialt reason for violation of civil lijirtips ldonlestlic iIjtphl oigemie. it is not evenl liec(,ssitv. You cai't prove. thaiti itis nIIE'Psal- or that it is 

(,lrectiye. sure, thlre were cases of real v'iolel(ep that the'v night have       

> lPre'ntedl, or possibly sonmle causes that

ihey did piievvlt.'But tle%, are few a1 d firI• t ween.    

> And the other

point is, certainly after these guiulilies yoil are nlot       

> yoii ig to prevent. nimud'h violence.

'7'lie gnidelilles teld to pemit S1llrVeil1-

llnce of people who don't engage in violence. They still allow voil to thiovW tle net. fairlv iroailYbhiit they air not going to )r'ev nt' much violence, l)ecalise tile key to plfveniig violence, going )ack to Con-gltaressman Drinan's point, is informant penetration. And tley place   

> some limitation

on informants. I think when you analyze tle cases 380 in the light of the guidelines, you will find that you (lont prevent much violence but just permit continuing surveillance. And the other point about lpreventing violence is that it, inevitably vill permit the surveillance of lawful activities in violation of the 

Branlenburg case. The Brandenburg case, as I read it, says that you can't proscribe advocacy of even violence, unless it is incitement to riot, or imminent violence. I am reminded of a beautiful example of where the Bureau takes the direction by the Department to investigate Ilhe (lvocacy of violence, whether Klan violence or whatever, and runs with it--an ex-aiple of the failure of communication between the tpros-ecutor and the investigator. Hope points out the sane problem in jux-taposing the Kelley (jilote and the Levi quote as it occurred in your lierings. Tile example I have in mind appears on pages 512 and 513 of hooks III of the Church Committee report, where you find a Bureau 

1uI) I'lndum about how to choose peol)le to pht'e on the security index. And ttev are talking about the New Ieft. Mr. I)IINA. What page is that on ?

Mr. G'nrr:ss-EI.. Pages 512 and 513. Ms. EAS'TMAN. Could we submit those pages for the record ? Would t lint be helpful?   

> M1.

EDwARDs. Yes; they will be accepted for the file. We will make the decision as to whether they will be part of the record. 

Mr. (AITEl.NS'rElN. A m, here you have Washington headquarters sildiiig out a directive to the field as to who is to go in the security inlex. ()f course, tfl seecuritv index was essentially those )eol)le who 

ate to be continually investigated by the Bureau. And they begin 

byv saving, peoplee in the New Iift are inevitably involved in violence. And here again this is the kind of investigation you might be permit-t ing under the Levi guidelines. MIs. , Not "night," Mark I think you "will" be permitting tl:it indler the Levi guidelines. Mr. GTThNMWs: TNu-. And here again you have the investigators, that is, tHe FBI, trying to define how are you going to select out who in the New Left is an appropriate target and who isn't. And I amn quoting 

from I he documentt: The eimergeney of the New Loft is a subversive force dedicated to the ,oi-                               

> plete destruetlon of the traditional valuies of our democratic society presents the Bureau with an unprecedented challenge. Although the New Left has no d4'-
> flnable ideology of Its own, It does have strong Marxist existentialist, nihilist,

and anarchist overtones. This is a thing you find about, the (loelimnnts--tlmv ('ai't define it, jiist like you can t define the kind of people who are vi'olen(.e plrone. Fam w, ading from page 512 now, a Bureau document. Mr. EDWAMRS. What date? M r. G(Nnms, FN. That would be April 2, 11968. This is an old doen-nieit. )ut it. does illustrate the problem. And it is trying to direct tie people in the field as to how you are going to select te violence-promn members of the New Left. And it should be borne In inld thit even if the subject's meniboermhill iIn a                    

> subiversive organization cannot be proven, his inclusion on the security index may often be Justified because of the activities which establishes anarchist
> tendencies.

In this regard you should constantly bear in mind the public statements, the writings and the leadership activities of scurity investigations which establish 

theta as anarchist-381 That is a proper area of inquiry. MI'. EDWARDS. I think you have to qive the guidelines credit for they would nullify that 1968 statement. I he guidelines (1o say, "which in-volve or which will involve the violation of Federal law." I think if you ask the FBI today, they would tell you that they are no longer in that area. According to them-and we haven't as yet checked it out-they have reduced their domestic intelligence cases under the guide-lines, and as a result of the guidance and assistance of the various select committees and other committees they have reduced their domestic intelligence cases from well over 100,000 to an existing 5,000. Mr. GITENSTmIN. I think that is fair. The problem is that this issue has not been resolved in this sense. Those guidelines permit the predi-cation of investigation upon a "specific allegation or information." The Church committee uses similar language. The point is, what is that al-legation or information? What are you investigating? What triggers it? And the )oiuit is, I was never able to pin it Bureau witness down on the record that speech, association, public statements, writings, leader-ship-and later on in the same document it says, the rejection of law and order, tile advocacy of violence as an abstract concept does that trigger an investigation ? They won't say no. The point of the matter is that they can't say no. If they are going to prevent violence it is im-po&sible not to trigger your investigations on these kinds of facts. And in all the cases where they actually try to prevent violence they did trigger in vest igations on such advocacy or association. Ms. EAST A . Indeed the quote that I gave you from FBI Director Kelley says just that, that he would be remiss in his duties if lie did not pay attention to advocacy of violence.           

> Nfr'. EDWAJIMS. Iunderstand the stateineiits of Director Kelley. Ile
> has

made a number of s eeches, portionis of which are (list dressing. But I still think you get hack to the basis of investigation based on the ]an-guage in the guidelines--I an not saying that I apl)rove of them. How-ever, I don't, think it is quite fair to go Nack to the 1968 statements either-"which involve or will involve the use of force and violence and which involve or will involve the violation of Federal law." Ms. Es'i,3r.\N. Wheti Mr. I,%%wia).vAs. That is laragraph 1 of the gui(lelines. You are almost at probable ,aiuAe for coiniiiission of a crine. Ms. NIS rMA.. Will violate Federal law and tie banning of violence wlivi, ?

i I1r. 1'J.I. I know that they are not specific. Is. E.srM. 1x. B11t tl~at seems to 1w, unless I am llissing sonuethiuig, to, he a %re iliuplortaillt. loophole, that, someone bent on investigating a 

> gi"0111)

hint, ldvocates violence and i1 or lav not lx' doing more. Ag,,od lawye. looks at tlint. gilinelie 11%id says, tlat doesn'tt tell 1ne when ie iolene ls to 1X',lI. Iater on there is discussion abolit tile inl-liii ,lc( or the 'iolelie. but it is inot really i iniitati, O l ill it iatiig tie iiestigatioi. If you are just talking about preliminary investiga-tions, ihere I.- I1o r jllirelienit tliat tile violenIce is ininli nenit. Mtr. (T'rEsT:rx. .nid theie is io limitation oil what kind of facts-in other wor'ls, if it is tissoriation or S)(echli. whliher that can trigger or lnot t riger., in1 ill vesj it''utioll. 

Let fie (.ot(ltitle witli just a stitunniry of the hlids of examples tley 

e, Is. whti,'li 1 tliuk ae tile oles tlit .vl will hiave to grapple witl, 

too. erhaps they il.ive already plresenltel tllii to you.    

> S12 !19 7-2

382 The 20 cases included a lot of really serious violence by Panthers, for example, or Klansmen. The troublesome things about all those investi-gations that I looked at-and it illustrates this same point-is, first, most of those investigations will be prohibited under the guidelines. Ms. EASTMAN. Even their guidelines. Mr. GriENSTEIN. Even their guidelines. They were not prohibited under their old manual sections. They would be prohibited under the Church committee report. So therefore if you are doing this to prevent violence if you want to adopt any restrictions which come close to 

Brandenburg,you are going to cut out prevention of violence. Because in every one of those cases what they had to do in order to prevent the violence was to penetrate a group, target informants, predicate in-vestigations not on specific acts of violence, but on the act that aPanther chapter in one city was a Panther chapter, not on a specific allegation of specific criminal action or even of any advocacy of vio-lence. In other words the investigation was predicated on constitu-tionally protected association and4 nothing more. And what always makes me suspicious of these guidelines, and troubled me by the fail-tire of the Department to pin down this imminence thing, is that the Bureau, if it is really trying to prevent violence, wants to be able to target people based on what they say and do in terms of their associa-tion rather than their conduct. It isthe only way you can really pre-vent violence through intelligence investigations. So the words are very important, each one of the words are. And that is what troubles me about this imminence thing. If they are interpreted loosely, the guidelines will permit unconstitutional investigation of speech and association and may prevent some violence. If they are interpreted restrictively I am not satisfied that you are going to be preventing any violence with these guidelines, all you are going to be doing is per-mittin continued surveillance that is going to serve no purpose. Ms. EASTMAN. I have nothing further to add except to say that I

have a couple of other things I would like to submit for the record. Mr. EDWARDS. Yes, they will be received without objection. [Ti prepared statement of Ms. Eastman follows:] STATEMENT OF HOPE EASTMAN, ASSOCIATE DIRE TOR, WASiiINGTON NATIONAL OFFICE, AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION My name is Hope Eastman, I am a lawyer and the Associate Director of the Washington Office of the American Civil Liberties Union. We appreciate this op-portunity to appear before your Sulcommittee to share with you our recoim-mendations for congressional control of the FBI. As you are well aware, the main goal of the ACILU 1 to Ingure that the Bill of Rights is an effective bulwark against governmental erosion of individual rights and liberties. Congressional investigations of the past few years--the Watergate Committce, the Church Committee, and, of course, the Impeachment inquiry by the House Judiciary Committee--have produced a staggering record of governmental. disre-gard for the Bill of Itights. The excesses of the Nixon Administration were no aberration. In the words of the New York Times, "the drift into dangerous abuses has been long, steady, and bipartisan in nature." New York Times, Sunday, May 23, 1976, 16. ACLU PROGRAM: CONTROL OF INTELLIGENCE AGENCIES The FBI's domestic intelligence role, the major focus of these hearings, k4 one part of a much larger issue. For this reason, the Board of Directors of the Anmer-ifan Civil Iiberties Union has adopted a comprehensive set of recommendntions 383 to control the nation's intelligence agencies. A copy of the entire program Is at-taceld to our statement. Although some of these recommendations fall outside the Jurisdiction or the Subcommittee, I would like to describe the highlights briefly. At the heart of the recommendations is a prohibition on peacetime covert intelligence gathering and operation by both the foreign and domestic agencies of the government, in-cluding the CIA and FIJI. To support these prohibitions and to make them effective, we would propose a wide range of sanctions and safeguards: First, there needs to be a drastic curtailment of the government's power to classify information and thereby to cover up the kinds of abuses which all of these investigations have revealed. Second, we would reverse the traditional situation by legislating a prohibi-tion on retaliating against the "whistle-blower" who reveals governineWnlI ml deeds. Third, we would make It an offense for intelligence agency officials and senior non-elected policy makers to lie to Congress and the public about aw-

tivities which Congress prohibits. Fourth, recognizing that despite the wide-ranging illegal activities whivli have been revealed prosecutions have been few and far between, and recall-Ing the Justice Department's twenty-year agreement with the CIA to let Ihe 

CIA make the decisions about prosecution of CIA officials, we would create a Special Prosecutor whose mandate was limited to investigation and enforce-mnent of the statutes which control the intelligence comniunity. Feileral offi-cials whose duties were other than ministerial would be required by the erin-Inal law to report violations of the Congressional statutes to the special Prosecutor. Fifth, we would couple this with a comprehensive civil remedies statute to enable those whose rights were violated by the intelligence agencies to sue and recover damages. The remainder of the recommendations Involve further proposals to reduce secrecy, to create publicly-determined charters for the intelligence agencies which linift the scope of their authority and their power to exchange Information, to restrict investigative techniques, and to provide for effective Congressional oversight. ACJAU PROPOSAL,: NO FBI DOMESTIC IN'rrLLIGYNCE RaU.M- .In tile area of Fll domestic intelligence, our recominendation Is a simple one. The Fil should have no such role. It should b- Instead limited to invtsti-gatling crims which have been, are being, or are alout to be committed. The iII-vestigation by tile Fill of Ix-olie who are not engaged in criminal coldluivt is fundamentally inconsistent with the tenets of our demwracy andi will inevitably Involve Inquiry Into lirst Aniendment-protected activity. Moreover, evelit vheni unencumbered by the variety of restrictions propos('d by tlilt, Attorne'y (Gt'erid or tlie Church Committee, It lias not worked. Before discussing those points with you, I would like to raise three questions on whieh I think we sill neednmore Information :, aWt will th .Justice I)enIartment's promise d crindtal Invest IgatIon guihdll lies contain? Obviously the FilI, when alerted to a threatened criho, has adequate ways to step In without waiting for tile crime to bo committed. Neither the, Fill nor tile Justice D-pa rtment has ever been very si*e4itlc about what lhy-ffeel they cannot (1o within that framework. Yet they seek tills broader authority which inevitably will fm1us onl speech as (ne of the main indicators of future pos.iblo violence. What really Is the role of government informants In existing domestic i1ttelli-gence investigations? Tile Church Committee, the GAO, and nuemni'rs of this Sulcomittee have expressed grave concern about their activities. Few facts are really known. Yet the _Attorney General argues that the matter be left in his control. What is the relationship between tile role playel by these informants and the D~epartment's assertion that they cannot always use tile traditional means of preventing a crime, i.e. arrest, prosecution, and conviction ? Are they really telling us that they are closing their eyes to crime in order to preserve ongoing surveillance? 384 

DOMESTIC INTELLIGENCE THREAT TO FIRST AMENDMENT INEVITABLE Returning to the discussion of our proposal that Congress prohibit all domestic Intelligence. we begin, as others have done, with the oft-cited words of Attorney General Harlan Fiske Stone: the Bureau of Investigation is not concerned with political or other opinioIns of individuals. It is concerned only with their conduct, and then only with such conduct as is forbidden by the laws of the United Statem. When a pole system passes beyond these limits, it is dangerous to the proper administration of Justice and to human liberty, which it should lie our first concern to cherish.-New York Times, May 13, 1924. Three days after making that statement in 1924, Attorney General Stone Issued orders to his new Director of the FBI, J. Edgar Hoover, providing 

that "the activities of the Bureau are to lie limited to investigations of violations of law." "Intelligence Activities and the Rights of Americans," Book II of the "Final Report of the Select Committee to Study Government Operations with tespect to Intelligence Activities," U.S. Senate, 94th Congress, 2nd Session. Re-port 94-755 (April 26, 197), 23-24,- herelinafter cited as Senate Relport, Book IT. Hoover himself once observed : "Our agents cannot be used as instruments for soil reform. They are law-enforcement agents. Their Job is to gather facts when there is an indication that a federal law has been violated."-Pat Watters, Stephen Gillers, "Investigating the FBI," 420 (l)oubleday 1973). llowever, he (lid not live b1y that view or indeed by the Stone directive. Onive the Fill began, at 'resident Roevelt's request in 1936, to go beyond investigat-ing crimes, it started down the "slippery slope" which led to Coiitelpro, tile wiretapilng alld attempted blhckmail of )r. Martin Lutlhr King, and the hluston plan. 'l'hose engaged iii domestic security were guided not by law, ethics or mor-itlity, but by pragmatism. As one agent told the Senate 'omilnitttee, the Constitia-I ion itnd law were "not gi veni a thought." Senate Relort, Book II, 14. The Attorney General's March 10, 1976 guidelines on domestic seciurlty investl-"gatios are offered to cure these almss. Fill Director Kelley, in a widely covered dramatic statement, has apologized for the past practices of the Pill. Yet the Attorney Genieral's guidelines will not stop,the abuses. As the (General Accounting 01lhec hits fouil, "the language In tlihe draft guidelines would not cause fily sui-

stantial change lit the nuniir and type of domestic ivest Igittions initiated," Comptroller (sene'ral of tile 'nlte States. "Reisort to the Ilouse Committee on the Judiciary: FI11I )omestic Intelligence Operatios-T'lhieir i'urpose and Scope: Issues That need to lie Itesolved ( General Accounting Office: February 24, 19761). 150. herelmitfter vited as ('A0 Reiort. I

Th reenndatlenis of the ('hurch ('ommnit tee which w ld coiffifle (]IieJt ch. i nt elligenie In vest iga tioiit "tw-No6 ffrenus-hotlhw foreign Intelligence and terror-lnm---,i in Ilrly will il t end tlihe abuses. Tie ('huncrh Reot itil rcfu-1,ttid,: --.... -. 

We have seit a consistent pattern ii whilh programs hiltlalted wit lith nil tod goids. such its preve',ntig criminal violence or Identifyi g foreign spies, were 

expa ided to whit witnesses 'chiaracterized its "vactuni cehamers," mo~i,,l-ng itI inforiitiom aoult ltwful aotivites of Amerihaii citizeins.-- Sentle lr ,plrt, flook 11, 3t 4. 

lIndhel, 4s Se 1ittr l'hi lili llrt iolnt(4! dil Inliti, se t1rte views: Thie tsk of liding oott'whether n dfNhhdnt is icoteiitjiit g vlohence or Is ozil1y liivoi'evd lit iigorois pI rtest inevitaithy requires invelgation of his 

preIt ift iteliviles.. SwnaI) 4'lte'j rt. IHook IT. 301.    

> 'ite .Attriley Gt'neril.

lii is est Inilony before tii Sii'ojit tl!tee itii Flrinl-ary Ii. 1107;. stated thi~t :       

> 'Vimt IpnIiilosvol eolmiesti(' sec4urity goi~ii ties pr(iil

trio, ow lie .ti lw ikii tliiit ({o'verilnime' t ilu:iioriiig Ir iiti lll ils en' groups bef sell. hli hold lii-polpilit r or ci' mt roversia vlew I t oh-r ,r 1 Iii l iur .,,oehlty.--'I'r. it,6;.        

> Y1 t(i ifitI saiv diae y,

Viti Dir ,td r K ,lhey hvlrwvd :

I-feel I wotil I), rvmisslii lly litr". f were to) I Liore -m ly grotip ihlt uid vol It'it s ieln to iic'tii 11 II .4 tiiettIvo. '-r 173. 

'i'lie At lorti'-y 4 eviiir:tl tom n ni ele(i thlut litder teli r guldvilne.4, a pIreflli 1:i'y 

itivestv ill ion wmll hl oI, 1wnel d I1 it relleti'litfIi a Ve'lf her 1igehhrgrii ll i.,mv.soi'ttr il lotit III l(e li,'elik (l1 l which sitI : ': l l i rs; liiv e sith h i'm 1,, for tile pitirty let us.' bi tg the Iire'worls." 'lTis i.m prolteled lirst kmendinf iit speech. See 

Un nl-n d lerr v. Ohil . -1)5 1'... (. 141109n)). Yet. i'eceinliig to Ile Attorney Getierill, it '1ld tr igger itt lit iror'inliary Fill slrvillilitee. 385 It should be noted that the guidelines and the ('hurch Committee reolunneidta-

tions leave the door oen for investigation of activities which ar in tIshellilves not criminal. In authorizing an investigation of the terrorist who advocates (ihe overthrow of our government, the Committee and the Attorney General iliso authorize the Investigation of a promiinient political leader, like Jr. King, iulwi a unsnpported allegation that he might become violent in the future. Senator Philip liart liohited iut, In his separate views on the Church rep)nut, that it is appleallng to say the Fill should be permitted to "do everything p,,.s-side" to frustrate the terrorist in the example I ive described. tliortillilitely it Is lijlsssible to authorize the lirst investigation without also authorizitg t le second. Senator Hart %ielit on to say :. i..n America we iust refuse to let tile Goverinment "do everything vi.ssible." For that would entalil slyliig oil every nilitaint o)ponent ot ofWicial policy, Just lit case souil of them waiy resort to violene. We would li-Ceole alisli'e state. 'The question, thei, Is whether it limited forni of preventhv inl-           

> Lelligence, conistent with lireserving our civil lilertlh s, can be Jilstllled

by 

the exl('ted benefits am(l in also be kept under effect ive cond rol.--im'atko ]{el)ort, Book 11, 35).  

> Vfjijs

we return to our proposal : that the FBI he liuiit,(I to the Investigalt ion 

of cominttett or imilnitment crimes. Although there Is io guarati "e that even tilis limnitation will suffice, certainly anything which goes Ieyind this liiltatioln has        

> bettet iii'nonstraidy unsuccessfiul in preventing the Fill

from s1ilIling over Into tho Investigat ion of lawful assenibly and political expression and the invasion of individual privacy. limiting the Fill to traditional (rilinal Investigations Irijigs theIr activities within traditional (lline,. As the Senate Committee stated it :

> i

. . It crinilal prosecutions, the courts have strick a lialnce between Irotecting the rights of the ac(.u.etl citizen aid l)rotecting the society which suffers the conse(Itiences of crine. Essential to the balancing lrocess are the rules of criminal law which cireumscribe the techniques for gathering evi-dence, the kinds of ev'ilence that mily lie Collectel, an(1 the uses to which                 

> that evidence n|ty bhe put. In addition, the crinihal (lefendlit Is given all Ol)-portunity to discover

smuid thenl challenge the legality of how the governmentt collected information about h1m11 an(I the use which the (overnment inten(ls to make of that Information. This Committee haut examineld a realm of governmntal Information col-letion which ias nott h)een governed bly restraints comparable to those ill criminal proemlings. We have examined the collection of Intelligence a)out the lpolitiai advocacy and actions and the private lives of American citizens, That information hils been used covertly to discredit the ideas advocated and to "neutralize" the actions of their proluonents.--Senate Report, Book II, 3. If ('ongresm were to authorize the FBI to engage in domestic Intelligence, which is aimed at predicting (rime and gathering intelligence, not prosecution, tli% tral tttoml-extenui k_retminta Inherent In the criminal process disajit)ar: Investigations manageil by diverse t,.---Att-neys,-gm~d Jilrits, the role of the defensee attorney in discovery, the trial Judge, the Jury and the ap~lfaWepr -- ........ ess. Congrew would in effect be substituting some kind of ('OINTELPRO-author-ity even if the known abuses were prohibited) for the traditional form of deter-rence we have found satisfactory for all other criminal activity: swift arrest, 

prosecution, and conviction. Neither Justice Department control nor the best ("on-gresslonal oversight Is an adequate substitute.     

> DOMTATIOC NTP,.LIoC, TIAN .OT WORKW

Supporters of an F'1l domestic intelligence program ariue that smie threats 

are so severe that government cannot walt until they are imminent, but must 

begin soner. The primary argument Is that only domeste Intelligence Investiga-tions can frustrate violent crimes. As other witnesses before this Sulwomnlittee have outlined convincingly, that argument Is noit sported by the record. Kee, e.g., testimony of Jerry J. Berman, Center for National Security Studies, May 

13. 197. rhe ('hurch Committee carefully analyzed this argument. According to the Re-;iort, the Committee had unprecedented access to actual BureuU case flies where violence wax theoretically prevented by Intelligecep InvestIgations. Yet Senator Hart, who had access to those files, comes to the following startling conclu ion :380 

The FBI only provided the Committee with a handful of substantiated cases---out of the thousands of Americans investigated-in which preventive intelligence produced warning of terrorist activity. Further, most of those few Investigations which did detect terrorism could not b tve been opened under the Committee's proposed restrictions. In short, there is no substantial record before the Committee that preventive intelligence, under the restric-tions we propose, would enable the Government to thwart terrorism.-Sen-ate Report, Book II, 350-0. The General Accounting Office, which reviewed an even greater cross section of cases, also came up with little if any evidence -that the Bureau was able to frustrate significant violent activity through intelligence Inveetgations when it was subject to no meaningful restrictions. After reviewing almost 800 actual Bureau intelligence cases, the GAO came up with a paltry 17 cases (about 2% of the total cases) where the FBI gained advance knowledge of possible violence. The actual lst of 17 cases is included in the GAO report. The results are absurd. They include such "threats" as "Plans by a subversive group to hold a demonstra-tion at the United Nations to coincide with the visit of President Nixon"; "Planned busing demonstration"; "Plans to embarrass a foreign ambassador by asking questions during the ambassador's visit to a college campus." GAO Re-port, 14L Of course, there were also serious violent threats, such as possible police ambushes, but the GAO could not determine from the FBI files whether the information on such threats was even accurate or whether the FBI played any role in frustrating the threat.    

> SIMPLE LXISLATIVE PRoHIBrToNs xEEDEo

As we said at the outset, we believe that Congress need only enact a relatively simple statute, one that restates the FBI's Jurisdiction in terms of criminal in-vestigations, prohibiting all domestic intelligence activity and banning the col-lection of information on First Amendment-protected activities.* We do not believe that it is adequate for Congress merely to pass Judgment on the Attorney General's proposed guidelines. There is no statutory authority for the guidelines at the present. Nor has there ever been. I am sure by now that you are familiar with the history of secret unwritten executive orders upon which the FBI's huge domestic intelligence program is 

based. For a detailed description, Pee Senate Report, Book II,-21-L37-A con-sensus has emerged in the Senate Committee, the General Accounting Office, and a special Committee of the American Bar Association that there is no federal statutory basis for FBI intelligence programs. Even former chairman of the House Internal Security Committee, Congressman Richard Ichord, has con-cluded that "Congress has not directly Imposed upon the FBI clearly defined duties In the acquisition, use or dissemination of domestic -r internal security intelligence." Senate Report, Book II, 186. FBI Director Kelley too seeks a Con-gressional statute. In his testimony before the Church Committee he stated: The FBI urgently needs a clear and workable determination of our juris-diction in the intelligence field, a Jurisdictional statement that the Congress finds to be responsive to both the will and needs of the American people ... 

The fact that the Department of Justice h 1a commenced the formulation .......... - of operational guidelines governing our Intelligence activities does not in any manner illmftnlgh-the-need for- legislation. The responsibility for o.onferring Jurisdiction resides with the Congress.--Hed"gw before the Select Com-mittee to Study Governmental Operations with Respect to Intelligence Activi-ties," U.S. Senate, 94th Congress, 1st Session, Vol. 6, 286. The ACLU, believing that FBI domestic Intelligence operations are without legal foundation, has taken this Issue to the courts. The ACLU now has at least two dozen major cases pending in the federal courts which involve federal govern-ment surveillance cf Americans. The question of the FBI's underlying legal au-thority to conduct Intelligence operations Is a potential isue In at least half of these cases. Chief among them are Jabars v. Kelley, C.A. No. 3005 (E.D. Mich.) and Kcnyatta Y. Kelley, C.A. No. 71-2505 (E D. Pa.). While we expect to prevail in these case, they may not provide a total answer. Even if relief Is granted in some or all of the cases, there could be room for the FBI to assert domestic In-.The statute would also have to repeal 18 U.S.C. 2868-2886, as recommended by the Church Committee. Senate Report, Book 1, 88. These s h" crimes have not been"the subject of a prosecution in two deade. ,'he Su preme Court has limited their reach to imminent lawless action Involving violence. Yet e i Interprets them as written and they serve as the basis for widespread investigation of protected speech and association. I387 

telligence Jurisdiction over a slightly different factual situation. We need the Congress to act, not to authorize as FBI Director Kelley seeks, but to prohibit. -

There is an additional reason why the Congress must articulate the limits of FBI authority by statute. The Department of Justice asserts that one basis for FBI domestic Intelligence programs is inherent executive power. This assertion is a clear challenge to this Subcommittee and to the rest of Congress. As the Senate Select Committee pointed out in its report, Congress should "make it clear to the Executive Branch that it will not condone, and does not accept, any theory of in-herent or implied authority to violate the Constitution . . . or any statutes." Senate Report, Book II, 297. This is not an academic exercise. Just last week, the Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia reversed the convictions of Bernard Barker and Eugenio Martinez for their participation in the break-in Into the office of Daniel Ellsberg's psychiatrist, Lewis J. Fielding. Two of the Judges who accepted their plea of good-faith belief that they were engaged In agovernmentally authorized operation did so because of the long-standing Depart-ment of Justice vlew-which continues to this day-that the President has an inherent power to order such warrantless searches for foreign intelligence rea-sons. Had Congress stepped in to ree1 assertion of inherent power, that defense would have been unavailable. That kind of Congressional action Is no less needed here. CONCLUSION The ACLU believes that the FBI must be restricted to enforcement of the criminal law without resort to a domestic Intelligence program. We believe that this prohibition must be coupled, as we outlined at the outset, with a series of sanctions and safeguards to insure against Executive Branch misuse of what-ever powers the FBI Is given and of whatever limits the Congreso places on It. Ours Is the simplest approach. It Is the only one which will protect our liberties. Advocates of a domestic intelligence role for the FBI will say threats of violence make it necessary. Challenge their c6itentions. The threats to the domestic tranquillity or the national security they recite are frequently hypothetical and the capability of the Bureau to counter the threats is not supported by the record. It Is wise to remember the famous warning that the English statesman William Pitt made to Parliament as It considered repressive proposals of the Crown, and of which Senator Ervin was fond of reminding Congress in the course of his many civil liberties crusades: "Necessity is the plea of Tyrants and the creed of slaves." AMERICAN CIVL LrBFRTirS UNiION.                                          

> Washington, D.C.
> CONTROLLING THE INTELLIGENc AGENCIES Control of our government's intelligence agencies demands an end to tolerance of "national security" as grounds for the slightest departure from the constitu-tional restraints which limit government conduct in other areas. Preservation of the Bill of Rights as ameaningful limitation on government power demands no

less. Government secrecy must be drastically curtailed while restoring citizens' freedom from governmental scrutiny of and interference In their lives. To end that secrecy, limit government surveillance, and create effective enforcement mechanisms the following measures should be adopted: 

A. END CLANDErsrINE GOVERNMtNT cOVER-STORIES AND COVER-UPS                                                                                                             

> 1. Prohibit the peacetime use of spies In the collection of foreign intelligence. Abolish clandestine organizations for intelligence collection. Enact precisely drawn criminal sanctions against clandestine governmental relationships with citizens' and against the payments of public or private funds and other things of value, directly or Indirectly, to citizens of our own and foreign nations for peace-time spying and espionage. 2. Make It acrime for intelligence agency officials or senior non-elected policy makers willfully to deceive Congress or the public regarding activities which violate the criminal law or limits to be imposed on intelligence agencies.
> A"clandestine organisation" is one wbo" alents. offieers. members, stockboderm, or employees. or it activtti. cbarscteristles. fanctions, name, nature, or salaries are secret. "CIttsen" Ineludes Indlvlduals and aswsoitlons, corporations, firms. partnerships, and
> other organisatton.

388 

3. Make it a criminal offense for a federal official whose duties are other than ministerial willfully to fail to report evidence of criminal conduct or conduct In violation of these limits to the Special Prosecutor (see (d)). 4. Protect "whistle blowers" in order to encourage revelation of activities which violate the criminal law or these limitations to Congress and to the public. 5. Create a permanent and independent Office of Special Prosecutor to police the Intelligence community. Tihe mandate should be limited to the investigation and prosecution of crimes committed by officials Involved in tills area. There should be time limits on the length of time the Special Prosecutor and his or her staff may serve. The Office should have a mandate to Initiate probes of other government agencies to find violations, as well as to prosecute those alleged violators brought to its attention. It should have access to all intelligence com-nuinity files, and be empowered to use any information necessary for successful prosecution of criminal offenses. If the information Is usedl, It must be given to 

the defendant. B. DRASTIC REDUCTION OF SECRECY 1. Limit the authority of the Executive Branch to (lassify to three categories of information : technical details of weaponry, knowledge of which would be of Iene-fit to another nation ; technical details of tactical military operations in time of declaredd war; and (lefeilsive military contingency plans in response to attacks by foreign powers, but not including plans of surveillance in respect of domestic activity.         

> 2. Create amandatory eXel)tion from classitication of any information relating

to U'.S. activities in violation of U.S. laws. 3. Limit executive privilege to the "advice" privilege. guaranteeing ('on-gressional access to all other information no matter what its classilhation. ('on-gress would also have access to "advice" when it has probable cause to believe it contains evidence of criminal wrongdoing or violation of the limits ('ongress Imposed by statute or resolution on intelligence activities. 

4. Make absolute the right of Congress to release unilaterally information classified by the Executi ve Bran(ch. Individuial members of congress s cannot be restrained by classification procedures from releasing information which con-tains evidence of criminal wrongdoing or violations (of th, statutory limits to be imposed on intelligence activities. 5. )eflne proper roles for Intelligence agencies (see (c)) in public debate. Make !he budgfts for the various intelligence agencies public.       

> C. PUBLIC DETER MINATION OF AGENCY'S AcTIVITIES

I. Create legislative charters for each major agency. ill j'wov'si(ils of which 

are to he puldicly kiiowii. These would provide tliat till activities not specitically aithorllzd therein be prohildted. The details would be reqtlred to he sl imlhd ,jut 

In agency regulations which are subject to public comneiit ail congressional l

> control.

2. Limit the terms of agency heads. Also increase the independence of general counsels and require their written opinloui on the legality of ally (jIwesliols near-

log the limits we establish. 3. LImit the CIA, under the new name of the Foreign intelligence Agency. to collecting and evaluating foreign Intelligence information. Abolish all covert and clndestine activities. 4. Restrict the FBI to criminal investigations by eliminating all ('OINTEI'tO-type activity and till foreign and domestic Intelligence investigations of groiip.4 or inlividtials unrelated to a specific criminal offense. 5. Limit the IRS to investigations of tax liability till(] tax crimes. IRS access to, or collection of, Information on taxpayers' political views and activities should  

> be barred.

0. Prohibit tlhe National Security Agency from Intercepting and recording in-ternational coinmunications of Americans, whether vin teecommunication. (OU-

liuter lines, or other nans. 7. Prohibit the military from playing any role in civilian surveillance. No in-formation on civilians ani military personnel exercising constitutional rights should l collecteL . bstablish a separate agency to conduct security clearance Investigationq for federal employ('es. Judgeships, and presidential allintees. Investigations should not take place without tihe applicant's authorization. Files should Iw kept sepa-389 rate 1n1 limited to the purpose of the security lInvestlgitiol. Exceptions ill tile 1)74 Privacy Act which deny people access to tlelr tiles' should be repealed. 

11. Flatly prohibit exchange of information between agencies, except for evl-hence of (apioliage 111( other crimes which may be sent to the agency responsible f,,r investigating or proseclit ilg Iheri. Existing govei xneit files (oi First Amend-mnenlt political activities should b~e destroyed. 

1). LIMIT INVESTIGATION TECHINIQUE1S 

1. r'ohibit entirely wiretaps, taiInrg of tel iliicat ,,rs, and burglaries. 

". Iestrit iail ilujierrigs, rail co t vers, hisliletiolni Elf id hank r(cor'ds, il iisljec-itill (if t ('ljvlrelli' d bt'(l'(5 ily requiring it warrant issued (i jirililable cause to believe ii (a crime its lbvein committed. 

3. r dill t al dorirstic 'utelligenee and jilitical iitft rirationi-gathbering. ( )nly ilvestigatiiis 4)f crroes wh'ichi have beven, are Ieing, or are about to be coin-11itted 1ma1y he' conducted. 4. 'roh iir tihe recording of alld keeping of files oii thlse attending political 

in'etirigs ir ergaging i fiti her peaceful pl(lit ical activit ies. 

5. Make liuuitatiois puili, i'n regulations subject to puld ic coi meitt itd1( Cnt-

grE'ssitu.i.iah (il tr(,l. 

E. .NFOIRCEMENT 

1. Make it a crriminal offelnse for alt ofli('ial knoilwinugly to order ni v iolatijoln  

> ElI'

the ahi)lvi, 'estrictions li both the scope (of theulleriy's activities itill( its teE'liiliqires. 2. It slimil(t also Ie a separate criminal offense to ffil to report violation of the restrictiis (Es'rilbed ill A, B, C. lr(i 1) to ti' Slitii Prosecutor or to deceive 

(C'milgress and1(1 t lie public about tit rire. 

3. Estalish it wide I'r rige of civil reledies for those whose rights have been vitlatetd iy inititligerlce olficils or Erganizatiinis. patternend after those n1ow 

avalaldle for victims (if iiittorizetl wiretalis anrd violations of tie Privacy Act. 

Such a staIte .i hld i intliute the present jurisdictionia Itllioltit reqliremnent :

eliniirate any need to prove actual lalnage or Jituiry ; tec('r, certain practtices to bt' tlijill-ritlis and lIrivideI Iiqiridated dii daliges fr tiose aggrieved: provide for recvet'ry ii1' ;t tirnieys lees i. 1il ('()Sts 1111(d (ISilslhIw 11 "g(iod fluith" di(,feise. F. (ONGRESSIONAL OVEI:RIGIIT ('i'te, ' S(Ulm(rter .(liittees lit entch li tim' with: jir smit'tilmi over auithoriza-tili (if ftrnls 1',01r (C'L%. Ns.\, anrid I'M ;Ilegislative altitlirority (oi tletire range (f 

iiitthl igetr'e ac.tivitiis, oversight of till a gelic'ies 'ngaginrg ili I intelligence activi-

it's; i spuhl'iil 11ul1l uiat et) (\ersee and legislate wiii reslpe'ct to: (it) ('Einpliut' 

withi sharply curtaIl.d ci iissiticatioi system, (bi fiew surveilla(e te'ln(WIlg)', 1111d (c) Ill liitb'iltge '4'' activitls w\hiich mii gt ('li gltigr individual rights; rotatrig memnershiIp for Committee iitrniliers, and limits im the length of time any staff liiir muay work for tlit, {' )llllirittee. .\,IIteEd by (I'Xl Natilnral li rd of DLirevt.ors. )ecember 6-7. 1975. and tll' l ry -1 1 13. 1976. 

r. 1. Ew\ :,uIs. '',he gel it l'olii from ii M nssl'lisetts. 

M'r. I)DiCINAN. TIll'ik yol, Mi'. (hiil rliin. And I thank all tliree of 

Ylil foir Y ll. verY V ille test,.i liy. (ioiniu( Ibiark to I'. Pl'' ,tiir'st, oil jlig I[ 1 1 \%oitlElp' i tw NIl (" i,'llli' (lito tine u'ei'"'t t'1'v'il' olin tat. Yoio sa!: ''iirtii]l' the FI'BI Sliolii(l he fioihiridel to iulimit iili Ii.s 4,f :1ti1v 2I, I IEN. tillal Siil1v('ersives for 1'lilihll ) lliiose's. .\iri I w'uiill like to call MS. E.latliil's itteiioti. too, to the flcit tI tie ACU dI nhotS itot ll('liti(ml tlie Y (,ret Serl'vice. Let's t k il' I h ienili' iV li. lilt Iieti th il llita tei ; vct'ret Sei' ice hans I1 

ltit'i'-, liii l)t'(IlliI, iii I )t: i ilt I lilat leVy expect to asis.-'-Sillite the jPjesi-ihelit. NVIie, litqi, l l'-i'idiit oes illt( I ;)t Ilti wiit cali (lbt' Sc'elvt S \-i('C (il? 

xlr. !'\it, o li ,v it FBI Shil not iliiltili li.ts. Woulduh Y"ou u..11lli.-I~llt ttiw" eople? 390 Mr. Pyin.. I think that to. understand what the term "preventive action" means you have to study what the Secret Service does to pro-tect the President. It does work from lists: Several days before the President arrives in town the Secret Service will qo into that town and will try to locate those persons who have alleged threatened the life 

of the President. If these persons are mentally unstable, the preven-tive action often will take the form of asking a member of the family to keep the person occupied while the President is in town. Occasion-ally, I believe, Secret Service agents have even taken such people out lo lunch to occupy them while the President was there. Those seem to m rather benign forms of preventive action, and a sensible accom-modation. On the other hand. I believe the Secret Service acted im-properly in Oklahoma, when it prevented a member of the State legislature from sitting in his own seat in the legislative chamber to listen to a Presidential speech. Experiences sucl as these suggest the need for drawing lines. If government is to learn from its mistakes -and successes-it must (10 so by drafting regulations which build on past experiences. The Secret Service has to have lists in order to do its job. but. regulations must specify what it can and cannot doto peol)le 

oi those lists. I might add that my greatest concern is not with the mere keeping of lists but the growth of those lists to the point where thiey become useless as well as potentially dangerous. Mr. DRINA.i. That. is another question. Ms. Eastman, I wonder if it is by design that the ACLU in their guidelines on page 3 mentioned the CIA, the FBI, the IRS, the NSA. and the military, but did not mention the Secret Service? Ms. EASTM.%AN. As the drafter of that document I am embarrassed to assure velo that it was all oversight on my part. 

M 1r. I)I.NAN. Would the sIme rules apply ?

.NEs. The ACLI board of (lir.ctors did not really address the question of the Secret Service. I can't tell you what the ACLU would say, or whether they would say something different. I think yon can draw some suggestions as to what the position might be from the other kinds of things that are prohibited. If the list is limited to peol)le who make concrete direct threats to the President, as was in your example, that is quite different from a list made up of somewhat less concrete factors. Now, when you reach the question of whether the Secret Service can take preventive action other than arrest against those people, I would like to reserve judgment. Mr. DRINXA.. Thank you. My paranoid mind suggests that if we ever did get guidelines for all these other agencies and omitted the Secret Service, that the people in the executive branch would greatly ex-l)and the Secret Service. 

M s. EASTMAN. I share that view. Mr. T)RINA . Mr. Pyle, on page 15 of your prepared statement von waffled on the question of informants. You say that they can be used. You want to institutionalize them. Yet you'also say that the FBI should not, encourage informants to assume policymaking positions in political groups. If you are going to use infonnants, why don't you use them all the wav? And why do you permit informants to assume non-policymaking positions in Iolitical group. but forbid them from going further? 391 Mr. PYLE. First, I would say that informants are an ancient Ameri-can institution. They are part of the structure of our Government. So my purpose is not to institutionalize them. My purpose here is to recognize the existence of an institution, and then try to deal with that reality. Mr. DriNA. Legalizing the institution. Mr. PYLr. If I were to write a set of regulations dealing with in-formants, I would restrict the institution sharply. At the same time, I am not ready to abolish it entirely, particularly in the area of straight, nonpolitical criminal investigations. Also, I have a problem with tie definition of what an informant is. There has been much discussion with abolishing informants without stating just what we would be abolishing. It seems to me that if there is a member of an organization who wishes to provide information to a law enforcement agency about criminal l activity in his organization, he shoul be permitted to do so. Mr. DRiNAN. 'hat is not in issue. That is not a paid informant, that is a volunteer. Mr. PYLF. So our problem is one of definition, of writing regulations dealing with informants, and of deciding where to begin to draw the lines between casual, walk-in sources, voluntary informants within organizations, and then voluntary informants who gradually become paid informants on the FBI payroll. 'Mr. DRINANN. You don't gr.(lually become. It. is like being pregnant, vi are paid or you are not paid. We know nothing of how they become informants, but all of a si (l1len these characters are l)eing paid out of a secret slush fund about which no one knows anything. The inform-ants have no civil service status. No anything. And there are thousands of them. 

Mr. PyuF. When I say gradually becoming informants I was think-ing of the usual recruitment procedure which I learned in the military as an intelligence officer. where you begin by providing the person with a little expense money, then get their signature on a receipt. and grad-mally put them into a dependent status. Tliat is wlhat I meant by the wor(i "radual." Mr. MNAN. The FBI didn't even hire tie informnants, because according to the GAO study they didn't turn ul) anything useful. I wonder in the four suits the ACLU is bringing, 'Ms. Eastnan, whether the status of the informant might. emerge there. When they assume policymaking positions in. political groups this is especially important. And I wonder if in those 20 suits the issue will emerge of 

their whole status? 

Ms. EASTMAN. I can't, say with certainty. Certainly niany of those cases involve the role of In-fo'iemrs and informants. 'o a degree. the discoveryy procedures in these cases will smoke that role out. If nv'sus-

picion is correct about the lengths to which the Government will'go to protect information about the use of informants, thin we may not learn as much as we hope to learn through the discovery process. I think that is one of the reasons wh-y-althugh I didn't write my testimony that way-the more work I (lid in preparing to come here this morn-ing, the more I came to tle conclusion that informants may be a part of the problem for you to address. Even if we learn enough in the process of discovery,'I in no way look to-t-e courts-t-place any limita-392 

tion on the use of informants in the first amenlndwnt area. I think that if anyone does tlit., the burden is oil you and no one else. If you won't 

do it no one will 110,1) 11s with it. Mr. IY3LE. ('ongressIIIan, llay I amplify mv remarks in answer to youlr question oi Ily poilt on page 15 of miy )repared state ent re-

gIar li lg l)re vet I ve a ctioi Im\I. llZIN.\Nx. Yes. 

Mr. I L. It s'eevis to nie that it, would be illicoistitlitional for (on-gicss to pass ia law forbidding li.sms w'ho gradulllv move from memlershil) to in tormiailt status not to asslulne l)ositiols of leadership within their orgaiizat ions. Mr. I) 'h-,m. No; that is not right. We could say that no funls in this appropriation for tle FBI shall he umed to pay in fomi aits. 

Mr. l Au.m:. Yes t 1at 'ott could (1o. 

Mr. Il)nN.nd. Ai(1 I ho)e that, at, le"ast. we will 1o. Mr'. PYLE. 'llat wld,! not. however, stop the flow of informal ion out of that organizat ion. It would stop the payment for it and slow tlie floXd, perhaps. 

Mr. I),i,.,. It is still a C'ime. I understand, of nondisclosure, what-ever you call it,--misprision. Mr. Pyle, do you have any thoughts on whether the FBI sldoi(1 be permitted, withi or without a warrant, to ('onlililit trespasses -olel for tlie purpose of installing electronic listeliig (h' vie'vs ?   

> A1'. P'YLE. MNyI

generalal reaction of course is no. 

Mr. lruNTA. VWhat is your specific reaction ?

Don't waffle, iiow. Mr. PYLE. I am goingr to waffle. Mr. I)UXNAN. Ms. Eastan, you won't waffle. 

Ms. EASTMAN. We are Op))sed to all wiretapping, and therefore we 

alle opIX)sed to( t resplssimg. 

MAfr. I)uNA N. That is an easy way out. Suppose they go wiretapl)itig with warrants. Would you say that under some. circumstances, since tey hav,'e, let ts assuilm,, t le right to iiuce tie device, would you assume tlat in some circumstances thev woild also have the correlative xrilt of entering ly trespla.',% of' by ideceit in order to install the electronic devices? 

Ms. E,-sTrMAN. lhe (piestion goes lie otler way, because I think, having authorized tlheim to install the wiretap. you l have in effect. al-

tlorizel tflem to trlespass. So it is not, having tolerated wiretap, would I tolera.1tv t respas, it is a:..voil williog t4) attIlorize trespass to auitlor-Aoumr question reuinids fi(e of somiething I really would like t( com-men'jt mi it I imuviht. I would like 14) matke one- io0r1 iSert ion for' the record: The decision of tli "Coui of A pl)eals last week overt uuflninr t he 4',0m 'i,'tion )f Na tinvz a lI Biarke r m tiet( 1 ak - in il ):iel l FIL-

In gs sy .'Ii Ia'. ii..I " ( ifi'e. Its siullifi.ai.lice i s rill ,v n ost dire('ct 1v (,liate( to the wa I ra t\ t i l is w iretili J)iijI , issle. lit it is related to this ttspJlaIS.s issue, loo). The reaoi tle conviction was overt uirned was bevaluse the ('0111 found that t hose two gent l('meu. ill their relationllhip wit]I 

iowardI llit, h d a reaoisoile belief t hat they were involved in agovernmentt operation. and given the 20-year history of warrant less su rveil lan e undei' execlit i-e branch Pont vol. t here was a pl)]tsilde legal 393 theory under which 1himt could have authorized them to engage ill. this break-in. Now, tlat talgllt me something that I had not, been aware of. When you are discussing leaving room for inherent power of tie President to wiretal), you are also leaving room for them to tivs-pass and burglarize, not simply to install the wiretap, but for all other purposes. The Justice Department in those. cases presently asserts the riglit to commit the black bag job under an inherent power to violate the fourth amendment, in the name of national security. I can't urge that issue on you enough in dealing with some of these other problems. Mr. I)nNx. My time has probably expired. I-. EDWARDS. But-not as to domestic intelligence? Ms. EASTMAN. Perhaps even there. If domestic intelligence has ab-solutely no relation to foreign intelligence, then they would not be able to make that argument. But foreign intelligence surveillance affects Americans-what was the argument in terns of Daniel Ellsbeerg? In the I" )nie( Ellshlerg vase. they had one never-verified, nev-er even identified, allegation that he was in touch with the Soviets. 

M r. G('rm:NSTE,'IN. I might )oiit out how the Church committee dealt with this point. It is sort of cOml)licated. It is covered inl recolnlnen(la-tions 52 and then 54. On surreptitious entry ulnrelated to electronic si rveillance warrants, general search and seizre law should apply. here should be no surrelptitious entries agerilust Anmericans. Now'. 

against foreimers they would be, a bit more flexible. In esWnce, they alutlorize "black bag .ol).1 against foreigners, foreilgners being (le-fined as nonresidential aliens who are agents of a foreign power, K(GB agents. Now, Oil the surreptitious entry related to electronic sur'veil-lance, tHe key language, is part of that reconmmenlation, which says that tile disclosllre requirements of the elect ionic surveillance statilte should not ap)],y to an A.nierican involved in lmstile foreimu intel-ligenic tivit ies or esl)iuige. So they are a roo(l bit I igliter than cr-relt policy. Blut tlhere is still soeie flexibility in there. Mr. I)mNIAN. "l'liaik you. 

Mr'. l1ylc, (10 voU wvant to jumstif bu-rlary, too? fr. PYrLE. YouIel O,)hiased volrl leset ion. An'l aided to a _reat deal of pirecision, 111A( adled to it'a pit) lic policy levisil. tilet soie kinds 

of b)lu~n--M 1. I) N,\'. Yoi nre not backing awvay ?Mr. v't: No: 1 'lm1 trying to all wer. If (ol'lrle.s allows electronic i t seems to ile I hait aithorit V to v'ouivt sili'rel)t itious entries to install tlose devices 11lulst be imiop ed. But tlen volt illighit wanlt to ii mit the occasions aid tile llace- ini line witll follrth uinlenldlllent rett1smilailleslins reqmu ireli'ent. .Am.Ir. Would vou agree with the recommendations of the (1111rh1 committee jlst cited ?Mr. I)p.x No; because as vll knoow fromit reading my article in the Nation. I ail l)i)sel to illawing (list inctiolis between constitutional rights of visiting foreigners and tiose of resident aliens and American Citizens. T'he (I'lnlrcli comilmitte, in my ju(lgment. would sell out the constitution al rig hts of v-isiilt forepi (gr;s far to cas al) . T he Con-slitition doesn't Selilk of different classes of people and persons inder tile folirtli or lifthi ainenvilnient : it says people and persons. If you want, to amend the Constitution. that is one tiling. But sliort of 394 amending the Constitution you can't read nonresident aliens out of the fourth amendment's protection. Mr. DRiNAN. How sharply do you differ from the position enunciated by Hope Eastman? Or do you? Mr. PyLx. I am not certain which position you are referring to. Mr. DRINAN. I think that my time has expired. I yield back to the chairman. Mr. EDWARDS. Thank you. We had our own domestic intelligence program here in the House for a long time, you know, and we stopped it. Ms. EASTMAN. Thanks to you in large measure. Mr. EDWARDS. Thank you. Father Drinan and the others worked long on it. And the world has not come to an end since the files have been shifted over and locked up in the Archives. When we talk to the Department of Justice and the FBI about the domestic intelligence program and the alleged FBI jurisdictions, they always get back to terrorism, which is a crime. l en yqu ask about the Communist Party they say, we are assessing that. Those political parties with alleged connections to a foreign government are not going to be apart of the domestic intelligence program. I don't think that under these guidelines they can, even though the FBI might want to con-tinue jurisdiction- because it is rather pleasant to have a large juris-diction-they don't fall within the guidelines. The basis for investiga-tion in the guidelines do iot vary too much from yours, except that they will involve the violation of Federal law. As you say, Hope, the guidelines don't say "immediate." What you say is that it must be immiinent-the criminal activity is about to take place. That is really the chief difference. Ms. EASTMAN. But that is an important difference. Mr. EDWARDS. Of course, it is an important difference. Ms. EASTMAN. If you don't have that very clear limitation, you have rimoved back the investigation so far that Mark has to be right, the o-aly thing they really needed this speical authority for is to investigate speech very early on, to take speech as some indication of later conduct, and move from there. That is precisely what we say they can't do. And alsa--how can I say this nicely? I think maybe you are too trusting of them. You read the guidelines in a restrictive way. But count tiem to read the guidelines in as unrestrictive a way possible. Of course, the guidelines, as Mr. Pyle pointed out before, have no force of law. They are not even regulations. The next Attorney Gen-eral is free to disregard them. Mr. EDWARDS. With your rights in law you can get into difficulty, because before you know it you are licensing things that you have left out of the law. I might say that that is one of the problems, Mr. Pyle, with your listing of COINTELPRO-type activities that should not be under-taken, is because the law doesn't say that it can't be done, therefore we can (10 it. 

M[r. Pir.. Excuse me. My list would take the form of a regulation and I would not make that a closed-end regulation. The regulation could end with a provision that no activities similar to the above shall 395 be undertaken, and we might add, without the permission of the Attorney General and notice to the appropriate committee of Con-gress. I agree with you that legislation cannot begin to specify all of these matters. That is why I have drafted legislation which would turn certain torts into crimes when done by Federal agents with the intent to violate first amendment rights. And I back those criminal statutes up with civil penalties, so that there could be enforcement through private litigation if the reluctance of prosecutors persists. Mr. EDWAMDs. With regard to informants, Ms. Eastman, do you 

object to the use of informants in criminal investigations by the local people? Ms. EASTMAN. 'I think my comments are restricted to areas where the first amendment is more directly involved. I am net prepared to say that they don't need some reexamination, regulation, and control. But at the same time I am not at-this point prepared to say that they should be banned. Mr. EDWARDS. What about the use of informants by the FBI in espionage cases with regard to Russians? Ms. EASTMAN. Again, I think we are all too ignorant to make those judgments. We don't know how they decide to use them, who the targets are, where they go. It is easy to say espionage is so serious, it is different, it is not the first amendment. hut you don't know what they use them for. I would not be prepared to say they are OK. Mr. EDWARDS. You have no rca1problems where tle protections of tie criminal justice system are present. The big objection to domestic intelligence programs is that these traditional -protections aren't there? Ms. EASTMAN. Right. Mr. EDWARDS. So in the case of an informant where there is an espionage case involving a foreign agent, there would be sonm crii-inal justice protection built into it? Ms. EASTMAN. Maybe. If you assume that an espionage investiga-tion leads to a prosecution, yes, I think that may well be true. There are controls there that arn not present in the domestic intelligence area. I am not prepared to believe that that is the goal of most espionage investigations, however, especially against foreigners. How inany prosecutions have there been inl the history of the espionage laws of the United States Mr. GITENSTEIN. My experience in talking to people at the Bulreau is that they don't want to prosecute espionage cases, they want to use persona non grata and other techniques, and in some cases COIN TELPRO. Mr. EDWARDS. They have by law, they can't lock tip Russians. Mr. GITENSTEIN. Even against Americans they would prefer to con-tinue, for example, electronic surveillance without resorting to crim-inal prosecution, just to keel) tabs on what is going on. Ms. EASTMVAN. There is a question I raised in my testimony. Thcv worry about informants, and they talk about j reventive action: wheth-er it is in the guidelines or not. Are they saying they want to let tile crime continue so that they can keel) watching these l)eol)le for other nmore important reasons? 'hat makes mie very iconifoitable. Mr. I)RINAN. MS. Eastman, the regiilar law of criminal proceilre 

. I-,Pt that a law enforcement official. wllen lie is not in uniform, 396 

may induce a person to commit a crime, but lie may not central) that person. It is at relatively sophisticated area of the law. But I wonder low this comes out in connection with what the ACLT recommends on A-2 in its gii(lelines. W11ould this be a violation of yourt proposed tguide-lines when a person, actually an FBI agent, without a lllform. without identifying himself, actually receivess a.group of individuals? Should thiis h)e a crime uider your guidelines, make it a crime for intelligence agency officials willfully to deceive congress s or the public? This individual is not receivingg Congress, bItt he is deceiving a se-tion of the public, lie is a (lolille agent. Woilld you say that ayINv 

double agent, of that kind. an informant, if you'will. or an111 FBI agent who is an imlnderground agent, would violate that gulidelinle ?

Ms. EASTM tN. I don't. think that guideline is intended to reach that kind of a situation. It, is ained at senior policymaking officials. Mr. 1)IN .XN. Should "ou have another guideline ?Ms. EASrx[AN. Yes; I think 1)erliaps we should have another gui deline. 

Mr. l)iux.\x. Therefore, would you say that anv double agent. any underground person, any person whose very existence depellds 110ll Ills receptionn of a group of persons, whether they are Citizens or not. that, that in and of itself should be permitted ?

Ms. E.ST.AN. I am not sure, became I havent thoulit abolt whAt other kinds of situations which do not pose first amendment prol)lei smight involve. The law of entrapment is wholly ' inadequate. Much more leeds to be prollilbited1. not aftlofrized. Mr. DiIN.N-. ]But, I think in the area of criminal investigation, narcotics, real espionage. an l so on, that we (o have a body of law hliat governs that area. But whien it cones to the (Imtestion of intelli-gem'We-seekin g, we don't liave any law. And I think it is a very (lifhetilt quest ion whether an FBI aeit can go underground, deceive those around hill, (lieving identity as a lw eji form iemt official anl(. by t lat imials. ol)t'ai illielligelwe. Mr. PVle? Mr'. Vyix. I think we have , problem hiere. "'This morning. most of the discussion has moved from intelligence on t lie one hian! to criminal investigations on the other, as if somehow they belong in separate coi-p)artments. In thle 1940's. 1950's. and 1960's. lnelltigence and criminal niestigations were separated within tie FBI. In the inilitarly and elsewhere, they were structurally separate. too. it there is no reason they have toI)e sel)arated. Tle practice of the FBI siice about 1973 h)ad beenl to justify all of what was formerly domesticc intelligence work as tLe 1,a(ling edge of vaguely defined criminal investigations. and that is likely to be its practice in the future. The abuses of political rights in the future are likely to take place in what are, at least, arg ua)ly. criminal investigations. Thus. simply to ban or regulate time use of informants for intelligence pursl)es won't accomplish much. I would not go so far as to write a law sayin,. thlat deception by under-cover agents or )aid1 informants is to be forbidden. However. I would like to see sonie regulations, and perhaps legislation. forbidding the filiitation of (rilme )y agents or i nfornwrs. The Nei' York 'antlier 

('a,, tle larly cs in ( 'anden. and otflir instances in whihl political groups have been charged with criminal activity, involved criminal 397 activity could not have occurred if FBI inforwiants had not provided tle means. And so I would change the rules of governing informiants to forbid the Government to provide the dynamite, money, or other means to facilitate the commission of politically motivated crimes. Mr. Di.-A.-. That is entrapment. There is a lawv against entrapment. Mr. Pyxx. No; the current laws of entrapment, as I understand it, do not go that far. As long as the court caif find that there was some 

intent to do some bombing in the minds of the defendants, the Gov-ernment's role in providing the bombs will not be seen as entrapniint. 

I disagree. In may opinion, intent is not static. It goes up, it goes (lowii, it Copies and it goes. When the FiBI or police coime along and pro'ile peol)le with the capability to do things, this affects their intent, ald can become a form of entrapment. I would rewrite the law of entrap-mment to forbid such practices. Mr. DIu-NNN. What about the other side of the coin, where the FBI alleges that they put informants or (loulble agents into organizations, and tley get into a 1)olicyinaking position and they (leter the group f oIi1 violence? Mr. PYi 1 E. I would forbid that also. It is not the function of Govern-ment to engage in the covert manipulation of people. Mr. DRINA.N. Thanik )yol. I yield back to the chairman. 

MY. EDIWARDSM M'. Parker. 

Mr. MIS( ii. Ms. Elastilliall, the ACL[U position, as you have atic.-Idated it. here this mnoriim, is that there uldl be n(o domestic intelligence role for the FBI: is that correct? 

Ms. EAsT '. Ilat is correct. 

Mr. ThRmu:m. That tley shoulld be limited to investigation of .rimies. 

Tl lbInguage'..,., which .ouIt use(d in your statenemit on page :3 is that. tle FBlI should be limited to iivestigatiig ,'-ilses wlicl have 1)een, are Ieimig. o1 are abolit to be Commhittced. (oul(i yu define for ne cr1iuls whic'lh are about to be (ooiiiitted. or wlat that Ieans to tlie ACLI"? 

Ms. EIS.'..,,. 1 v'ill give y-ou all example of the olne I began w'ith earlier r~m t is m or n mmi~ . It pl)l)e .-r )s li ....--I t link: it w as lie front 

)age of the May 25 New York riies---tNwo postal aides held on 

s, S,000 tIeft. A(tihig oi a ti), tihe Fl1 kvp)t mider surveill ce for 

•2 weeks )ostal of,'ials who were a!iotit to steal t le money and s)end 

it. AWVlmi they had adle,!tuate infornliatioml about wilat t! Pe' had dolne an(d let them (10 .S1ome of the spliiliiig. they alIreste(d thenl. Now, I ani 

amiswering a general question by (Vi\* 'g an example. Mr. 1)A1mKi. Ill other words. it would require siiellow, the gather-

iingr of some in formnation that there was going to he ciiinal ao'ti'ity ?

Ms. ES'.A,. Yes. it is the stanldaid,. I tlIink. Ivasoilbalb slis,i.i,,l. 

Mr. PARKF.R. Articillable facts? 

Ms. EAsT N. Articulable facts.   

> M1'. PARKER.

But we are talking about what facts 11inder that stand-ard wold trigger an investigation.? 

Ms. EASTMAN. Correct. 

Mr. 1P.ARKE. IA't me imll)OSe. the0n, a little flrthlr wizli so1e, lrvlpo-theticals for you. You lse as al exilple on page 7 of N'onr statement time 1lder"r'mi'md Newsletter. Let's assume that voil are the )'ial ag,.,ent in ehl-arg(' of tile Washington FlT office mid you receive a note from the head of tile Americanm Legion which sa\"s, "The rlers have   

> S2 621) 77----.20I

398 set the time for the party, and let us bring the fireworks." I assume that would evoke no reaction from you at all I  

> Ms. EASTMAN.

No. Mr. PARKER. Let us say that the letter came from the chairman of the American Legion, and it says, "The rulers have set the time for the party, let us bring the explosives." Would that change your view at all? Ms. EASTAN. No. Mr. PARKER. Let us say that the letter came to you from the Weather Underground "rhe rulers have set the time for tile party, and let us bring the fireworks." M1s. EASTMAN. No. Mr. PARKER. Let's say a letter came to you from the Weather Under-ground and it says, "'The rulers have set the time for tlie party, let us bring the explosives." Ms. Eas'rMAN. No; I don't think it would change it. Mr. PARKE. You dont think that the information or tie track record of either individual or grotip which is making those statemints is something whicll might lead you to investigate or trigger an in-vestigation of any kind? Lt me change the facts MIs. E.AsTMr[AX. Let me answer as to tlese facts before vo1n cllalge them. You are offering ic one fact and telling me to give you a yes or no. Mr. PARKER. I will give you more facts. 

Ms. EASTMAN. NO. What Vo are really saying is, von have no facts-vyou have information on the reliability of trio Source. and per-haps you have information on other violent actions which have taken 

place. What other information do you have? Mr. P)ARIKER. I don't have any other source. Let us say it is tile Weather Underground newsletter, which has claimed in "tei past ;

months three different bombings in three differentt cities? Ms. EASTMAN. And what has the FBI done in response to those crimes-what have they learned in response to these claims? Mr. PARKFR. At tiis'point, let us say they have learned nothing. Mr. GITKNSTEI.N. Are they investigating the grotip as perpetrators of those acts? Mr. PARKER. For the purposes of starting this investigation, let is say they are not at that point. Would you start an investigation, is thm nature of my question. M1s. EASTMAN. I would start a congressional investigation as to vhiv they hadn't started an investigation on the other three bombings. Yo7u are separating tlemnt in a way in which I think it. is somewhat un-reasonable to assume that they would be scpurated. You are not mak-ing a judgment, then, oin the basis of the piece of aperr. That is wlbat I am trying to avoid. making tlat the trigger for the FBI's interest. You have an ongoing investigation, and you are not going to have that sort of a situat ion when you are limited-

Mr. PARKER. Let me get. back to the piece of paper that is the trigger. Let's start with fresh facts. Let's say this is the first we have heard 

)f this. and yot are the special agent in lmrge. Tie message is, "'h'lle riders hlav'e set the tinie for the part . we are resl)plihle for a bom)iNg 399 which took place at the New York La Guardia Airport, and we are going to bring the explosives." Ms. EASTMAN. I think that you have added a vital tenet. I think that the right answer is to investigate the bombing at La Guardia Airport and see where that leads you. Mr. EDWARDS. Isn't there a possibility of a conspiracy for a new bombing? Mr. G-ITENSTEiN. There might even be a straight criminal conspiracy possibility there. But the piece of pa per standing on its own, without any evidence that they were engagedin past criminal activity-Mr. PARKER. So the simple statement, let us bring the explosives, would bring no response from you at all ?

Mfs. EASTMAN. Let me add my furtlr reaction to the thing you are proposing. It seems t6 me to highlight the need to know what the criminal guidelines say. Mr. PARKER. I think it could be stated that most criminal guidelines are going to give the FBI some authority to involve themselves in some type of investigation that they believe is going to be a violation of Federal law, or an allegation of a violation. Ms. EASTMAN. Of course. But what else? Mr. IARKER. My question to you is, How does the language in the domestic security gui(lelines which premises any investigation at the beginning, or the starting of any investigation b3y the FBI presently, on activity which involved or will involve the use of force or violence. andl-not or, but and-which involved or will involve a violation of the Federal law. How dAes that differ from the language which says. they ought to be able to investigate crimes which have been and are about to be committed ? It is a matter of semantics. M[r. GITENSTEIN. The tough issue for me, Mr. Parker. is trying to distinguish between authorizing an investigation of the .Socialist Workers Party, for example, wiich might fall into those guidelines where violence is not imminent and cases where violence is imminent. In other words, somewhere in the future they say they are going to overthrow the Government and engage in all of those acts, )lit they haven't decided when that would be. In that case, I would have serious doubts about authorizing an investigation under these guide-lines on the one hand, and on the other, authorizing the investigation you are talking about, where you have a piece of paper, a credible allegation, and the suggestion the group engaged in a committed act before, which to me is straight criminal investigation. I would au-thorize the latter but not the former. The problem with the guide-lines is that they appear to authorize both. Mr. PARKER. I think the question you raise is actually under con-sideration right now by the Attorney General, and we will find out what the answer is for the Socialist Party. Mr. EDWARDS. If there is any decision made that the present guiide-lines would authorize the investigation of the Socialist Workers Party and continuing surveillance of them, then they had better throw them out the window. 

Mr. GCTEiNsTr.IN. Let me pose one other hypothetical that is goi ng to 

be tough to deal with, too, and which you should keel your eve on. That is the case of a new group where you have no indication o)f the credibility of the allegation-changing Mr. Parker's hypothetical a400 little bit-where they are mot saying that they ever engaged ill any criminal act bfoi , tlhy are jlist leaking that allegratioii IlI(l tlve Blureau gets tile illformaltion, now. what should you (1o in that situta-tioli e My personal view is. you (lon't do anything unless you have got acredible allegations. tile informant is reliable, and you are talkinlgo about a specific act. If they' say, we are going to blow uI) tie Wash'-in gton Monument on sitli anld Such ca date, thll yOl have mot rva-

sonale suspicion that they are going to engage in a crime. Mr. IPARiM.. You have jtist inlulided a nulber of judlgmellt fai(.-tors in ,omur answer to that. I think what we ar searcJing for is how 

you put those judgment factors (lown il black and white on a piece of paper. Mr. GiEWNSTEr:N. I thillk icojnlirn(latiolis 42 and 43 of the Church ('011111)ittee do it. I iav'e mv loubhts about 4-. 1 iont know wluy we had 

t fro that extra step. 

Ms. EAs'rM IAN. Also I think one of the problems with the hypothetical wliichi v"oii lsp and which "Mark picked lp on is. that you can read that. as I did when I selected it as my example, as f fairly nonspecific kind of a threat. Now, if you interpret it as a specific threat relating to l)ossible 'rim inal activity at the Washington Moinuient on the Fourth of July. you ighi,,,lt ome lip with a wholly different reaction to it. That may be the (lifficiltY ini that example. But the example itself is 

not as vlear as I intelled< it to be as an example. C0uld I ask a question of you. Both of you seem to put heavy em-phasis on the language of the first section of the nlidelines Nvhieli links violent activity and violent action which is a, violation of .rilkii-nal law as being sonme extra special safeguard tluat wouldn't be there if O, F'v')i ,'hII4. w ' iiot tlhere. I (1ll t nlderstatIl what the si g-1ifitalice of t!at is. Violvi activit v---I ('al't thi lk of any violent activity tlat would ho witliii tile ijurisd iction of the FIT in tle first. nstaice Ihat is not a violation of Federal lIaw. So I dl't k1ow that t a t adds very ini,. . May) e I aui ist isiIdit a1(idins' "ou react ion.   

> Mi. EDWAim)s.

I think there is a lit, )lit iii tlie Departnient of ,Justice and the FBI about what it means. I lon't think anyone krows exactly what. it means. 13t I do know thlat in the stresses and strains that are going on over t he're with regard to thle iliterpretat iou of t I.tit paragral~)1 1. that all of tlese orgr.,anizations of 1)eol)le that have b~een inler investigation for vtars are being, looked at again. It seems to me that tile only possiblee iiterl)retation of that paragraph 1 wouvld have to he that tlie invest igat ions, the openling of tile investigations, tlo preliminary investigations would eventually-and it will probably take aw'hile-1;ave to Ibe confined to tile violations of Federal law. 

Ms. EASTMAN. I (lo1t un1d1estand. MaN-be this is really lily question--

d(1 you interpret t lit sec'nl clause aS b'lwitZ )ointerl at ihe ultimate eondut that, they use as tle basis for justifying the investigatiOn. or that the facts flint come to their attention wlicl would trigger tlhe investigation are teilnselves violations of the law? Now, if it is the latter. T understand why voto think it is a real limuitation. If thev can only investigate current activities that are a violation of law on tl likelihood that some day they will lead to violent activities, that would Ie a real limitation. Blt I clever read tl "it that, way.    

> MV'. EiDW.RDA. My

iterpretation is very strict. Mr. Parker. 401 

Mr. P,\IRKEn. Tie empllasis I placed on it was to try to find the semantic difference in tie language you used, crimes about to be 

committed, the same language that is in the guidelines. Professor Pyle, do you have the same view as the ACLIAT with respect to the facts and circumstances which would initiate investi-grations using tie hypotheticals that we were using earlier?  

> Mr.

PYLE. When I first heard your hypothetical I immediately in-ferred the Weather Inderground's history, iiiluding the fact that t hey nmde bombs ii a townhou-se in New ' ork and that they claimed credit for a number of bondings of corporate headquarters. 'Tip Weather Underground has such a track record for bombing that if they were to use the word "fireworks," I would know what it meant. IWould want the Governitient to know where that "party,' was going to take place, and I would want its people there to investigate, to guard,  

> li(i

to watch. And I would also wanit the govelent to exalllne its records of past crimiiilai investigations of tie underground for leads. I don't have any trouble at all with that hypothetical. lhere is .iiotther h'l'pothetical which int rigues me, because it opens a verv fruit f il lille O inquiry. Reilieilier tile rao;al tin imoil inl Birmingham and the bionbing of a(]lii 1ch Sulndav school one Si aldav ollnollig ill time, Spring of 19(3? All the FIll k'lew for a fact was ilat thw bolibiing hadl occurredI. Il 

light of revelt events it was reasjonlable to a-sulle that tle bombilig 

was tact'liv motivated. The Bureau a-iso was aware-that. there was Ili 

that city al organizatim with a track record of night-ridiing anld violent, aiitiblick rhetoric. Butt it had no facts linking the organiza-tionl to th l)omliug. I lowever, it knew of no ,thler organization in 

tile leigl)orhood witl a siliilar record of racist criminality. Under 

those circilmnstauices. was it uulreasonalle for tite FBI to investigate lie local Kut Klux Khan ais a possiblee st ispe't in tliat Iomm hillg? MY answer clearly is yes. ()f vou rse, I would have 1,) justify that a swer on the basis of ilonnvrim imal in formation, i l.rnl liig rumor, cause 

there might not be aImy criittual colivietiouls. This informiatiomI might :ilso incldmle a, great deal of rhetoric protected b)y the first ameimo ent 

froim l uilislmilIelt. although not invest igatiolt- -rhetoric full of 1ii1i1-

sions to tie racist violence of the 1,S70's, ISO0 . andi 1900's. 

Ms. E.s'r.\t.N. "Your exnile clitiges I lie sit nation totally. You are 

talking ab out. io% d you find out f'oti I. ast vo.lltIct aibouit a new  

> i)oltll)i

ag whit is inl fa.t taking place. That is tlie example that '(JI 

gave. What we ar, talkiir alout he re, which l(ii ,111ges for me, tlv pi'-

tuare eli irel' .is it is pol it ical l itorie wiiel1 is vage, 1and talks about soiii activity some (iy in, tile fia ti.e. "'fvimt is nonspecific.      

> Mr. I1'1,F. Il n11w

origi la hv 1)ft ic' iS, i lle ( ;ovitmuma 1it had set t ie( date for lth '"Ilirtv.' 4) ,.. have a (Ito, (.,ta, i. ii te a'lativehlv near filt li'r. 'TIe message talks albolit "firework." and 1 -'vause of tle roa iles Ic rd we katew tI a t ivwmk'. 1om . tt tia be a, .11eli sli i

for tile ex d .t bi :.11 t i le -t1tteii i t e a liv t t$1t iit-'vi -         

> MS. EASTM AX. 'Ilta tuav go lack to t

iva (iicuntuies w i'l i le facts   

> thaimt. tliat

exaitph le atmai-ll . 1i-: -114 hefol-e.lntidott lmg(th 

difilreice 1si ('veu tl" in' ov oil just (litflnedI m'ind i lit otli' which is hat the( crimei had aheady~h 'tamkeu place. Now. to thle vextilt thait voli      

> have facts that go beymid

1( tat s'i iijle 't ea eiit that put t tilie i1Nvest iga-402 tion in the context of an imminent crime, I don't have any trouble with it either. But when it is short of that, and it is just a statement, even just a statement by the Weather Underground, I have trouble. Mr. PARKER. You want to categorize information gathering, or in-telligeence information? [S. EASTMAN, I want to limit intelligence information to very imminent crimes where the criminal Justice system begins to have an interest in it. As I said at the outset of lny tesnimony-what was Seim-tor Hart's phrase? Do everything possible. But we ,can't do everthil)g possible. And I think that is. where you draw the line. "Mr. PARKER. Just one other question of the ACLU. Under the re-duction of secrecy section of your statement which you, attached to your prepared statement, you talk about making absolute the rirhbt of Congress. You suggest that all Members of Congress would be in-dividually and unilaterallv free to release any information which ,,oN-tains evidence of criminal wrongdoing. I would like to un(lestwld that a little more before I file a formal protest with the ACLU. Isn't there really a danger that by granting to each Member of Congress that power unilaterally to disclose something that has been classified you could be damaging someone's career or reputation, and the in-formation could turn out to be untrue? I am very concerned about an ACLU position which would advocate that. Ms. EASTrTAN. Well, it is certainly by no means an easy issle to develop policy on. And I thifik that to the best of my ability to coinvev to you the thinking of the board of directors which adopted this policy after some debate, it is that-again. I am struggling because T don't want to put words in their mouths that are not there-it as 

T understand it, I think that the judgment is that when you are deal-ing with an area of massive Government misconduct, a proven track record of massive Government misconduct, and massive coverup by the executive branch of its own activities, and where the Congress had done a creditable job of ferreting out some of that misconduct, with the help of the press, that that right on the part of the Congress is necessar-, and that perhaps it reflects-and again I can't speak for the board of directors. because I dont know what is in all their 80-some minds,-but I think it reflects a judgment that, the rights of Govern-ment officials may be different from the rights of ordinary citizens.   

> Mr. PARKER.

I think we argued during the impeachment hearings that the President was not above the law. I don't know that I under-stand how a Member of Congress is above the law.    

> MS. EASTMAN. I

am saving it the other way around, that the right of the executive branch official to be free from the impact of disclosures may be less by virtue of the Government official's position and the Government official's activities. I don't have any trouble with the privacy questions that were part of your example, because I don't really read that policy to extend to things that are unrelated to his conduct as a Government official. I do see that there is some difficulty with the kind of adverse publicity affecting criminal trial possibilities. That is the only other issue that I see. And I think that also was pretty much settled during the Watergate era where people were able to get a fair trial. And as the ACLIU argued in the Watergate era: when vonafre dealing with-official crime, even if you have to forego a criminal trial because of adverse publicity, the remedy is to forego that trial, 403 and not stop the disclosure. I hope that is kind of giving you an idea of what they have in mind. Mr. PARKER. Not at all. I still don't understand how you can open it up to a grab bag of individual citizens who are going to perhaps allege problems that don't exist. The one important thing that aGovernment official has very often is his reputation and his job. Yoou would allow one Member of Congress to decide that a Government official is doing his job improperly, and then be free to unilaterally reveal information that will damage that person's career. Mr. GITENSTEI.N. But all the documents that I saw that were classi-fied in the Congress were not classified because they might jeopardize someone's privacy, but for other reasons. So a Congressman who gets 

-a Government document is not going to be helped by the classification. It is a problem he faces all the way around. Mr. PARKHER. I realize the classification problem, and Congress should address itself to that problem. But it seems to me that you are creating an entire set of other problems. .Ms. EASTMAN. That is what I was trying to suggest at the outset. I think the ACLU understood what some of these problems were, and made a judgment that the problems were necessary in the interest of the basic objective that they had in mind, which was controlling intelligence agencies. And again I think-we are not talking about ageneral policy that applies to the Agricultural Bureau, and its overall operations, or indeed probably 90 percent of the agencies of the Gov-ernment. This is a specific, limited policy which is designed to be aresponse to an overwhelming record of abuse in the area of intelligence operations which affects the constitutional rights of American citizens. Now, whether that kind of provision would be justified elsewhere at this time I have no idea. But I believe the ACILU is right in saying thnt, it, is justified here. Mr. EDWARDS. Mr. Starek. Mr. STAREK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Professor Pyle, I greatly appreciate the listing of preventive action based on specific acts or specific, for lack of a better word, examples. I wonder if you can address for us the ACLU's recommendation that the FBI have absolutely no domestic intelligence functions? Mr. PYLFE. Generally I agree with the ACIU. The )omestic Intel-ligence Branch within the FBI should be abolished. I also believe that virtually all FBI investigations should be criminal investigations. However, that does not begin to solve the problem. With a little ingenuity, particularly with the many speech crimes that remain in title 18, the FBI can continue to do virtually everything it did in the 1940's, 1950's and 1960's without a separate domestic intelligence or internal security staff. So you have got to go further, accept the rest of the ACLU package, and get rid of the speech crimes. Having (lone that, there are still going to be areas in which there would be investigations into political beliefs and actions. For example, suppose we have another war and people start burning their draft cards. That is a crime, The law has been upheld by the Supreme Court. The FBI has to investigate the ,;rime, and to investigate the crime it will have to look into people's beliefs. Again we are back to Jeb Magruder's slippery slope. 404 Suppose as a result of that war we have more mass demonstrations in Washington. Tlhe Justice Department needs a certain amount of intelligence in order to anticipate the 'size of crowds. But there will 

be a great deal of pressure on the Justice )epartnint, some of it joiningng from a very alarmed White ]-house, to go further and infiltrate tie organizers of that demonstration to find out. who is "behind" them. 

'I'll(hse demands will cOlie l)evause, Government officials will suspxect that the-- protest organizers intend to aid and ab(,t the enemy in time of war. It is at that, juncture that we will need carefully drawn lines, both in regulations and legislation, to prevent that kind of intelligence-gatleving. And I think tile Attorney General has imde a good start on that with his guli(lelines oi civil disturbances. T1 most difficult )roblemI I see is in the area of terrorist ijivesti-gations. I Iozn't know what this wortl "terrorism" means. I have beell trying to (lefille it. I (al comlle U1) with layiiwns definitions, anl I can 

consult all sorts of dictionaries. But I would ot want to see that word 

Used to (lesigpilate a category of investigat ions in the Fll's manual. 'Io mme the word terrorismm" is very Iiucli like (lie word "subversive." It is a rubbery word that you can wrap around almost anything. It, s i',sns to imply a criminal conspiracy, but it. does not mw'escsiily'iIv (henote ally overt criminal actions. There are a lot of terrorist activities or terrorst statements that can create fear and foreboding in a(.ollnlllliiiityv wit]bout onst ituting a .i me. Anid, like it or not !,,p)l)l(, Iinve 

the right to scare tile Ixjesuis Out of Aitierican citizens with violent-su,1iding rhe(,toric, so long / as that. rl-toric is not a(('compalnie'd by conispiracy or uttP )nSt to coinmit or incite traditional crimes. Mr. Sm't:K. But in your answer to the questions posed by Mr. P)arker, I received tie impression that you thought it would be per-feetly all right fort he Bureau to begin an investigation of a particular griouip based oil the past. history of that group. Mr. P YLE. Yes. Bunt the past 'history we are referring to was the history of a criminal organizations. The Weather Underground that )om d)(. Let's take a (ase like IJ'af/, v. Vniteid ,S'ta/c. A fellow at the Vasl-

ington Monumient stands ia(1 says, if I ever get L; B. J. in my gun-sights I will slot limu (l.ld. Nmw. does that man that you c1111 ilvesti-gate t hat ian amd all of Ihis political associates because of that, state-ineint Ii mbd at a ra lI IY. I don't IIlinkl so, bee(alse I (hlut attach a great 

deal of ('rev 1ibilitN t'o a stateinvieit like that. however, there (o come cil'eullisll aes wiere tinl orgallizat ionI, b-callse of its al utilities. 1I'ecan.-e of t he context ill wlii'lcl it mmakes its stiatellimills, light very 

well le illvestig(ated evell thl)lglh its nieillillblS hlav-e Coillllitte(d n)() (liiit('s. [III'est igati(l woudII )e a)l)rl')riate, wiire e)Ole Wlo have johiied( I li irg: izit11 il mio w bow to Ilnike Iomlls and seil to Iave w1(11 re'.''llil m dlv tihe om-'gnlliz.ltiol I' l~ v 1aVe ]1el'(' that valpability. 

Al V ppddvi'€ !le is. I aill not smie I knuow how to (1' iaft :t I'('gjll iti() tIllltt w0,mll lpv'r mit Iibt khi )f itivest itati)i i (1 yet foreclose tie kii' ls 

of zil)II., we litnv'e hadi. So. I fall back iipon mlmv proposal for having aWt W'si-sI tll U .S. ;it Io y iii v i lvei.,I ill tlie illV(.tigiti(ion early y Oil 1llt(]  

> a

sCpilug wm it ini evolved so thlit %.(o}1 (l't have ilt ilvestig Itioll of om. K1,Iaii imdgnmat atill v rge ines itinS of (ot hevr Klmii thpr,1r]miu l IlI", lind. I tliilh a pom)i Yo i avt' got tobilild in ,i.i,,'itio ol i)t h sysft(,ill. 405 Mr. EDWARs. Then you differ strongly with the ACLU position? Mr. PYLx. I expect. I do, y.s, although I have hopes that thy will come aromid to my position. Mr. EDWAIUS. YOU could have a conItinuIolis investigation going on for 5 years under your definition. Mfs. EASrMAX. Under (urlvis' formulation, no matter what kind of internal Control Ineclhallisilns vOlt create, ('xacIX'N wlat ]has gone on in tile past would be perlIllissible. -- "-

Mr. 1)VL:. May I eSl)(Id to that ?Ms Mark is adding, especially if Robert Mardian NIS. E A, STM' A N I k is.di would be Attorney (eineral. You callot write tlwse things for well-eiianing people. 

MI. Ei)wmmIs. I will ad(11, if Mr. Starekl will lwrlit. and tlen viel to Mr. Pyle, anid that is exactly thw expanded authority that the FBI llts lad indefilitely ov(l deca(les. And yet I t hill we ;re lari 1put to find one or two cases of )omilbing of the tei'orisiii type tlint they have 

Ieen a!Ilet to Stop ill ilfe li('l'e tilie c,)iSl)ir a'y stat it,., fl(I (n )

forthI. I )idI ''N1t iik f1' __ 

Mr. l) x. I agree witil tlat. 1"lron 1i11, linlitel rese r'ci in tite foreign ilitelligelce ,1 rel I tlink t hat is tri, also. Most ()f t lle si.',,-s-

fill (espiolnage ivetigatioili by tlie 1"IMI c"hit' 1,('a(lst theiere wns awNalk-in inforimant whoi) .11-(l, thi crazyy gily tl'o)il tlit' Soy ict lil, ,,1S\ 

ilst asked flue to give lilt Soll( dOCw.-l ('itS. The fact tliat tli(e \'It.,, ii ajority of (Iii(,Stic, aIll( foreign i iiteligeice iives tigations byt lie, Ithe 1 have failed doe" lit ,surprise nJe. ()iie r:I-

soi for these failures is that. the Bureau has been run Iy riglit-wing ideologies rather I llali dislpassionate. fact-orietilk iliit'l"'tigat,,,4. Bult 

(veil if tlhev llt\.v failed ill all their i vest igatio wlii,'li I n)I't believe. I would still liaiv' to say that tler should e perniitte(d to invest gate a group witi at track reIor d lik'tt l Nii Klux Klan1, wheii Vol-have : racial l)ol)i,ng ill th1e conillinitv. ()I- wheln 'lyo-Ilve asitlat ion like the olle ill Mr. P arktr's liypothltitical. I sayv this eveni 

though 'I fuilIly e'xpec(t thait thle 1)11 reai I 11111N y iit'er catch t lie- lOiilXi'5. But to return to an e liir point. voil s'eei to think that becauitse I would grant the authority to initiate ail investigation. based 1 j)Mi-

ereldilble rhetoric, tllt I would permittthat invstigation to go on in-definitely. I would not. I just find it impossible to specify when threats and rhetoric become creiil)ie in tie light of a groll s history and therefore warrant the opening of an investigation. The judgllmets are 

too subtle to 1e (-ast into relations or laws. Th greater grain for 

(ivil liberties, it sepins to tiue. will come if we concentrate on finding ways to shiut down invest gations of politically io tivated groups whiell 

allegations against them prove )eess. hint i. a jprobllenl we have- not leen able to solve in ouir (Governnt how ( you shut soietlhiing down once it gets stlrtedl ? I think that the .r'eationi of a SOl)illg lunit, tile Ilse of aSistalit U.S. attorneys, tile Iuse of review uliits, of strength-etled coil ressiollli over'si giit. N ill ihli!p in that regardI consideralliv. Yoll will inhibit tiito nolindlet of improper invest lgat ions. You wvill put people into thle aIu innist rii p (-aslli nllit it (Iovil. The 

At tll'nev General' gilidelinies, I bx-he, lielake all tfort ill this di- e-tion by 'littinlg time limits (in certain kills of iiivestiuttions. How-ever, tliit safeguard is not goiilg to be v y elpfiil, if the FBI lar 406 stop an investigation on the 90th day and resume it on the 92d day simply by calling it a new investigation. So my inclination is to put people into the process who will have a different outlook from the Bureau which lacks the capacity to tell a revolutionary from a crim-inal sounding group from one that actually engages in crime to achieve political ends. M[r. EDWARDS. Mr. Starek. Mr. STAREK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Pyle, I am somewhat concerned about your recommendation to iiil c(l an assistant U.S. attorney earl,, on in a FBI investiga-tion. Congress has seen the miserable failure in that regard with respect to the Office of Drug Abuse law enforcement program. And I am not so sure thfat the record of the assistant U.S. attorneys in-Vwived in investigations early on with respect to doliestiv intelligence would be any better thlan the way it was with Federal, State, and local law enforcement officials charged with criminal dirlig enforcement.. 

Mr. Pyir. There is some historical support for your position. Dur-ing World War I miny- of the abuses in domestic intelligence occurred because politically appointed U.S. attorneys and their assistants wanted to persecute German-Americans. These lawyers, rat her titan c rbing, the bureau. became advocates of abusive investigations. On the otler hand, the-education of young lawyers has changed in recent years. They are more likely than FBI agents to understand the requirements of ti first amendment and to be tolerant of political diversity. So oni balance. I believe tlat the mlore Justice l)epartnient lawyers you have in the investigative p,.ocess tim inore law-abiding tat process will become, and the fewer incursions tlere will be into  

> )irely

speech areas. By adding young attorneys I think you will add r)-ople who will say. wait a mlnite, t is is nonsense, this is silly, this is a waste of time. This proposal is not meant to be a cure-all. What Thave proposed are successive ways to reduce the volume of improper investigations. So at one point I would use the assistant U.S. attorneys. even though some of them might become a(lvovates of excessive • action. At another stage I would insert a scoping unit, so that when these investigations become programmatic there will be somebody to squelch the nonsense. And then I would add a reviewing unit so that tim succeeding administration can expose wrongs committed under previous administrations. Even under those restrictions abutss are going to occur. But there should be fewer abuses than before. Mr. STAREK. Ms. Eastmlan, (lid I understand you correctly to include in your recommendations from the ACLU a prohibition against FBI's counterintelligence function in addition to domestic intelligence functions? 

.Ms. EASTMAN. Counterintelligence? Mr. STA r,K. Yes. Ms. EAST, A . No. Mr. STARER. I thought I heard you say that, and I wanted to clarify it. fs. EASTMAAN. No. What I said said was that there should be no peacetime espionage capacity in the United States. Counterintelli-gence is obviously something different, no more or less controversial, but different. 407 Mir. STAREK. Who would you recommend take over the peacetime espionage investigations? Or do you think there should ])e none?   

> Ms. EASTMAN.

Investigations of espionage against the Unitel States, or the United States involving itself in peacetime espionage?   

> Mr. STAREK.

The first. fs. EASTMAN. No; what I am saying is that counterintelligence or counterespionage investigations to determine who is involved and what they are doing to stop it it seems to me is a straight criminal investigation matter. It may have different techniques that need to be looked at, but it is a criminal matter. Those proposals are addressed to the United States itself engaging in peacetime espionage. Mi'. STAHF.K. Thank you very much. Mr. EDWARDS. Mr. Parker, any-further questions? Mr. PARKER. No thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. EDWAIWS. I think that Mr. Gitenstein suggests that we examine case by case the open files in domestic intelligence which is something the Select Committee did. and which we were only able to do through the GAO under certain unfavorable restrictions, would be more valuable to our work on this committee as the FBI examines them-selves. And then as the Department of Justice examines them there-after, or concurrently the futility really of some of the investigation will come to the top, and they will start to close them out obviously. And the GAO report indicated that in 10 field offices there were 19,600  

> Olpen

cases. And now they claim that in the entire UYnited States there are only 5,000. So there 'inst have been an awful lot of paper saved in the last few months. And I think 5,000 is probably way too many. Mr. GiT.NSTEN-. Of course, you have got to be carefI'l about how they define a case. The Coimmunist Pariy of the Uj)ite(I States is one case. And the-King case is one case. I have seen the roomful of files on the King case. It would fill up that whole desk. 

Ms. EAsrMA.N. Again, out of ignorance, you might also have to watch what they now label as a criminal investigation and not adomestic intelligence investigation. Mr. EDWAruS. And also your suggestion with regard to the guide-lines for criminal investigations will be examined with some care. Well, we thank the three witnesses. Their contribution has been considerable. And we really appreciate your coining. Thank you. [Whereupon, at 12:45 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned, sub-      

> ject to tile call of tile Chair.1

"I. AI)I)ITIONAL MATERIAL 

Material SiIbmitted for the Record by ACLU (Prom the Privac y Report, November 19751 

POLITICAL SURITILLANCE: CASES FROM TIl% ACLU's DocKgr The dictionary definition of surveillance is "a watch kept over a person, eisciily one under suspicion." lPolitic, al surveillance is a ivatch kopt over aperson whose political beliefs are "under suspicion"-a search for the ideological vieniies of the government. 

Anyone who reads the pmpers knows that the United States government has ,P(,n (oIduetlng Just such a svtare. for 1any years, and tluit we, itN citizens, are the iprns "under suispiclon." The government's surveillance aipparatus vac1'4laws5s ail the favorite devlces of bad tlfction-wireitaps, hidden tape re-,i)rders, ilaznted informers til( agents lrov(Xlteurs, fake ildentification 1tili4rs, forged letters, oqpened mail, the circulation of false rumors, and hundreds of houi inds of cross-indexed intelligence dossiers. It would be ludicrous if It were not real. olse and Senate Investigating committees, presidential commissioIs, and eltterprising investigative relporters have ill brought to light important knowl-edge about the gowvrnment'H st-arch for Its enemies. There is now another, In-(.r-itsingly signilieant source of inforniation abot survelllance--the courts. 

Through litigation, I)rought ily or on lWMlaf of "persons under suspicion" who 

are victims of pm)li al surveillance, a great deal is being learned almt the 

surveillance apparatus: its techniques, its purported Justifications, and its ex-,esstM. In much of tilis litigation the A(1I, INlldation is joidyinga centnl role. Tlhe lsiit' of survt.illanii does not stand11 alone. It is rooted in the larger prolh-lein of government secrecy (usually cloaked In a rationale of "natlhoial secti-i-Ity", whi'h lIrillits all Indulgence i tinnlistitutional IJraci(fes t ht. eolll not witl.'l'i ld the test of public scrutiny. And, of course, mirveillniice is not n s1ng1(, 

act ; it 1x it lpatt4rn of itstlllts on privitey, somije, silh its wiretaps and sar(iies fr I onk re(ords., a part of tie surveillance itself, others, shll fits ti di,(screditing 4f pl iltical activists a1d tle (I5s('olllgeillell t of iitlital dissejit, an outgrowth of slirveilla nce. 

TI'i sitrvillItee' (ase4s d(,-wril in l ill his l'iriac le'porl all illutrate Ihe c'1,owe i',h llixshill bet w4''n govternimtneil st~-rec.y anid tite Inil lvidhal's right to j)rlvalcy. Iflirein Iits om-, Very lmirlaiit acomlil nikent (if stirvi'Illanc iii )iga tit41: that 

It brings to jpiilile Iciw ma fly miit I t tit Ii m i governmlenit al profgramns t haut liuive 

tiiiiri.-h|ed iaily In,'i.4, Iley irl,-iiivisll,. W IIET APH 

f all I i' devic's ili the sitrv'ill lll{'' itr,-'liv , tlie \%ir4't i i Is the m t llIn iiwlls. 

A w i retalp Is qlite si'ii;ly aI drg'not, tnripllJinilg till Si'ech by all parties to every 

c(i oversail ill on a tllxpl'4! pliohl4. 'h'lh A(IIU hits Ilig argued th iti Ill) \a l'rel i

('an e've'r satisfy Foutrth A.luclllei!lt tianlda rds If searv'ii (t'iZl Fer : It is by 

d.'liilth iti | It eii't It iil ii)n1i11ly firliul'ihu geml -rlmll s,:ir-1. 

Thell (.1,1ll-|s :111(l Ihv Iit,,l itel(s reiiiI - lr, ri,,r .mi~ ';liI alllhoolityv fir thle i1,,- (of 

%%inul'ttjis ili irlini il Iiil e.t Ivlhtiolls. llo), vijoily that rto-i rlllr-l i'lt k -ri'rclil-v'iivoil iki id liuiw frl'tlltivilly It Is ignoirel is a11no1)ther story.) ili "'li"miticn1l .'('lnt riy'" Ii -t\',ig-iiltl.m4 hli'iwviv r. lHie , +fut11o liranli as lutl. l g vl'l 1111441 te rhi;.:Ii t,       

> \\ilt-0 .ll) willllw li 111(..l lllproo'al.

. ll' ]{hTwe 19702 the llrk' halit- whlilllh'l ;IwayI. -it thilt vt'lml| : tit( Sil|oreln( Cmt l i 1'.8 . v. 1'.,8. District Court, .107 U'.S. 297 1 |9721. olc ,larilg that the govrtielti'it may iot use warrauti lnl,. aps ili ilmlest iv 

II 114:11ial SAt-eility Ii ivest igiltloisl: the court t of Apix'als for Ili( districtt (of the 

('"diliillu:u ('ir'uti, in z.riboti v. .Hitc,3. 516 F.2d 5M.t (D).('. ('ir.. 1975), nllig h:lt 4.V4'h1 ill 11l.1? , 11:11 stillr'ity illv'stiglillis rela eI d ti) ffireigi a affairs, wairrllit-(409 410 

less taps may not be used -against a domestic organization which is "neither the agent of nor acting In collaboration with a foreign power." Despite such deci-sions, however, the government continues to lay claim to very broad "national security" powers In defending warrantless taps, as illustrated in two current ACLU cases. Morton lalperin was employed as a senior staff member of the National Se-curity Council. In May 1969 the FBI placed a tap on Halperin's home phone; tile tap remained until February 1971. It was one of the 17 taps in a program initiated by President Nixon, Attorney General Mitchell, Henry Kissinger, and FBI Iii-rector Hoover called for the purpose of discovering who was leaking "inside" information, especially concerning the bombing of Cambodia, to tile press. The tap was placed without a warrant, and remained on the Hlalperin phone many  

> nionths

after Hlalperin had left his government Job--in fact, while he was acting its a consultant to the Muskie presidential campaign. Throughout the entire period tie FBI sent reports of Intercepted conversations to Henry Kissinger and the White House. Abdeen Jabara is no American-born lawyer, practicing in Michigan, who has been prominently active In Arab-American political organizations. From at least October 1972, and very possibly before, Jabara's phone conversations were intercepted' by the FBI. In this (ease the interceptions were only one aqpect of acomprehensive surveillance of Jabara's activities, which included the monitoring a1d reporting of all his public speeches, infiltration by FBI agents and In-formers into organizations of which he was a member, inspection of his baitk records, the compilation of extensive files describing his professional and political activities, and the disemination of derogatory information about him to other government agencies (and even agencies of other governments, such as Israeli intelligence) and opposing political organizations. Both men are suing for relief that includes money damages. Halperin v. KOs-8inger, C.iv. 1187-73, D.D.C.; Jabara v. Kelley, Civ. 3905, E.D.Mich. The wholesale intrusion into what the courts have called "the reasonable expectation of privacy" is particularly striking in these cases. The Ilalperln tap picked up 21 months of conversations involving not only Hlalperin himself lut also hin wife, three children, relatives, friends, associates, and visitors to the lalperin home, and including many legally privileged husband-wife commi-ni(ations. The Jabara Interceptions, among all their other intrusions, violated i1w(: legally protected c'ondfientiality of attorney-client communications. 

The tal' itself. as a mechanical device, is unselective; it is up to the agent lis-

telling in. the "monitor," to decide what conversations are worth hearing, log-ging, and reporting. The vagueness-indeed, tl total lack--of standards for making these selections is revealed in the deposition lit the lalperin case of all Fill agent in charge of all "national security" wiretaps in the Washington, ).C., are i. lie stated that FB nioriltors are exme'ted to rely on their "experience." intelligence, " and their "own evaluation" in deciding what calls are "Ierti-m-sit." Perlinent to what? This Is not necessarily specilled in the agent's instrue-I lits. alth ough he may lie given at list of conltacft to keel a particular watch ftor. The, mnontrttr41 d(o lol hy frot recording c, inversalloitS involving a spouse or children. In ftact, it the early stages of a survellnnec . they will he especially nt itltlve to smeh etinv'rstions as a Ineins tf coniliig "sort of a cmk" on thl, .0liet. S~oluetilzes. ninmitors will make notes on th ret' or four "no va nine"' callq rather liau have a lik pale in tl log- Just to show they are on the Job! Mon-itors are, expected to) aid In physical surveillance (if tht- subject, rioting the times, lidlt[es 1i1ud Co1f11ts of his business and social engogmments is well as periods      

> w,,i lie is lit holi it-.

It Is extremely difficult, even In litigation, to force the government to admit to wlin-tappirtg. In .Iahara, after prolonged wrangling In the courts, the govern-ment finally revealed that three attorneys general had authorized 13 separate warrantless taps on which Jabara's conversations had been overheard, but re-fused! to say why, claiming "executive privilege." The claim asserted only that the surveillance was "dheined necessary," based on "Secret" and '"Top Secret" intelli-gencet avallableh to the President. "to protect the Nation against actual or poten. tial attack . .. or to obtain foreign Intelligence." However. there has never been any allegation that Jahara wtis acting for or with a foreign power or that he was suspxcted of any illegal activity. In Halpcrin, former President Nixon tried to  

> I

Overbard through taps placed on the phones of the ether parties to Jabara's con-versattons. 411 

assert a claim of "presidential privilege" to avoid te.stifyilig on his part ill the wiietap surveillance program, in particular, on his reasons for believing the sur-velillatce to be justified. The court rejected that claim, and Nixon's testimony can now be obtained. The frustration of these and similar wiretap suits is the difficulty of bring-

lng the cases to trial because of the enormous obstacles in obtaining disclosure of the government's actions and justifications in any matter deemed (by the govern-nient) to relate to "national security." One compensation of the lung-drawn-out discovery proceedings, however, is the opportunity to expose the government's repeated disregard for the law and the Constitution. a result of the exercise of unrestrained discretion under the banner of this same magic phrase, "national security." UNDERCOVER AGENTS AND NFOR'M .Next to the wiretap, the most intrustive technique of surveillance is the under-cover agent. By infiltrating a "suspect" organization in the guise of a fellow worker for the cause, by winning the trust of its members and taking an active part in the furtherance of its activities, perhaps even a role of leadership, tihe undercover agent does not merely collect information laut also affects, and some-times perverts, the nature of the organization itself. 'Flie most common results of the infiltration of a apolitical organization, Iemyond the fat dossiers collected oii is members, are the disruption of the group and the discrediting of its cale. Again, two cases from the ACLU docket can be use( inl illustration. Beginning in May 11170, campus security police at Kent Statte University ill Ohio employed 15 undercover agents to infiltrate student organizations. ( )ne 4sf 

these agents, posing as a student, joined the campus chapter of Vietnam Veterans Against the War, participated in its meetings, nd was invite(d into its members' homes. For more than three months he filed written reports on Its members' polit-

i-al and personal activities and secretly copied their private papers. Then. Irandishing a Chinese-made machine gun and a Vietnamese rocket-propelled grenade launcher supplied by his superiors, lie tried to induce the group to kill "tie pigs" and blow up cmul)S buildings with explosives lie offered to ilpply. The group rejected these schemes, but were so shaken by his persistent that they reported hdin to the local police. After his arrest for possession of illegal firearms, his undercover status was revealed. Kent ,'taft I. 1'.A.W. v. Fjke, C72-1271. N.l).Ohio. More )iza rre, is the tal- Of the Berlin lemnocratic (li mid th' lAiwyors Mili-tary )efense ('olinittee ill West Oerinany. The flrst of these, a grollp of Aellri-vain civilla ns residillg in Berlin, worked for the Niv;NvrI calilidacy ill 1.172 

m1ll(1 Id c nuev' foarmallly athilittlHI with the I)eI Iarati,' Party in 1973: it wits al',, aet ive ill lorfall tig 'i ler registration, 4;.1. rights., and ll -ii'uichi iiant. ]Tiw sa'u aid 

i1 Ii associali n oaf Aiinerician attorneys proviliiig civilinn (')lillsel to i. . e.S -i ti'i'l Sti ittimalieal ihro ls. Ill 11174 lllellil'rs ('r ia th gi( llais andll1 i number oir '.s.  

> ciii

Zel-s resII,i h l iirtl il ihraught suit aigailst lhe Army., %vlliclh,l it viii iel'y (lIhili'4l selarcl ftir srtires (i ' " seiidie'll " All( "tlistrlT ttioll." wil, t'01alid li j. 

iiiaissiVe suvtei ilhlimae 4if their hlwfil politi a nll(l lurae' sils l m Icl ii's .. i lia'l atl-

Ing wiretaps. inliltratim lU d dirli tion by undercover jigat-ts. t,, lis(, (I,* ill-for relrs, cland estin, photographyv, the ('tllection of extensive (lossiers, the 'ire.ila-t1)1 i t r ilh'gat iaallS i illiu I'lluor s tietrimientol it) their iarOfesi.(ulil Iareers, 0114a n ill'           

> hitorl't-pti oof tha-ir mail. A-etir later, it was

lvar-red that tile Arny hiial aiii-to ilied a Imild ill ntonrlr itiside I,.MiD' for it cotisidlvi-ihle timiil' after ill(i, suit %v,' 

filed. al (1 that tlhl a gelit had Iteemi in a jissi tol!! to aI'j ort Ib'ck ito 1he A rmi itttorniey-clit'it conversations In which strategy for ilie suit was ililSn(,(i(. IClIt' surveillance sdit 14 not tha' only raxe affected lay this hreicl(i of tht lt-gally prl vi lege! Iwyar-.llelt c'aommniclation : the volivict(ion in one coil rt-ilstriliil ifendledt )' y l I H7 ham already been reversed because of tlie. inf iramier': ilre'eaic' mid the use of wiretnps., and others may be reolpened. I |lonts ,"riftliti by tol-

level Intllligenlce officers show that they knew the, wse Of the agemit toa lt, ,,r liihio|s legality. fra tight with "flap Ilwotential." iln their wvrd.4. thotigh they ai.sia ('onihlered his lares-mwe an asst which ('ohlle "of extreme VIIliii' In pl:a:i +hig t.oilntiractlons." BRHii Ila'aTi' ('tub i i. ,tt'l. i,!pr. a'iv. No. 31lit7-1. ID.I).C. lint tie illmler)v(er agent loem not simply sluiply 1111ial4's. ,iite's. a nil evanfoi fi-g(verlmiment (lais ers. Ite is al.so it p rlici tiat in tit' ("teit,: on wh lci lie Is ls'itu! .     

> m1id ,all very easily he ilh '

misod as 111l 51  getut jara aV(H'utail r to iiscretlit in 41  '-iitial ly 412 

destroy the organization by seducing its inembers beyond legal dissent Into violent, (rilninal acts. Because the agent Is in a position to manipulate as well as observe, his presence may be a mechanisin of entrapment. The Kent State case is chased In part on the argument that the plaintiffs' First Ainendment rights were violated by an attempt to entrap them which, had it succeeded, would have thoroughly discredited their political activities. 

COU NTEKI NTELLIGENCK 

Kcoit State is an example of a government effort to disrupt dissent through entrapinent. The Ariiy tried to undermine I,MI)(' by spreading rumors that Its ltwyers were "Marxi~t-leAinists," a characterization sure to preJudice then in the eyes of the officers sitting on courts-martial,.and that they only took (uses with headline value and then (irolM'd them wheit the publicity (lied out, an allegation designed to seare away potential clients. But tie government's efforts to disrupt dissent have gone far beyond this scattershot approach. We now know of the existence of a wore formal and foriihilalde 1)rograin tended to hreak the back of dolnestic dissent, it Imrti('u-lar, tit,, political left, the antiwar movement, and black activist. The Fill's (')JINTEI'I( ('ounterintelligence program) apparently Iegan lit 1956 mtid, says tIle lurean, was discontinued [it 1071. It consisted of seven programs, tiv, (of 

tliiii for the surveillance of certain kinds of domestic orgatizations anti for tit( disrilitl iti, exlmure, and neutralization of these groups and their Indlividual Ijenilhers. All seven were authorized at different tiiwes by .1. P1gar Hoover, mind itone were revealed to any attorney general, although several atlorpieys geiieral were aware of Fill efforts to penetrate two targets. the ('oniunist Party and several white "hate groups." The House Appropriations Sulwomnittee, aecord-ilg to the FIll, knew about the program. Among the undertakings: seililu.g iionoyioiS or forged letters to organizations aiid their inenbers, leaking detri-1lial investigative material to "friendly" inedla, using Informnanits to disriipt 

a group, informing eniployers and (reolit liureaus of meiiirs' activities (sexual its well its piltical ), uiIlerniiining tie political canlidacies (f targeted intiivId-nal Is or takiig overt netion to pr-Juulhee Julicial proeeedllgs ili which they were itriv(ye4i. and( iiiforiiiincg families ( usually Iby alnolynlolns (o l ulnhtalltiolls) of tlieir radicall or ininmoral" activity. With respect to the live doiiiestle iprogra ins, tle FIll repoKrts inileitttit hlo of 2370 "prolpsals," lit 527 of which 'known results were obtaililed." Muhiunumod Ke1Iyatta is an example of one "known result" of the C()JNTEF, R'() efTort. Keiiyitta was a leader lit lie Iloa<k ,.ivii rights movement i, Missis-

si ppi IIt lie la te '6N. when the Fill listed hin oil its "ALi titor Index" a lilaved hint under Intense su rveillittie,. Eventitally, toy -ireti itinig fMlse rumors 

lilit Ke'iiyatl i to his a ssol'iites it, Ille iitov'iieit a11 senlting lin, forged threatening letters pirlprting to 'oinie front thttii, the Ilttrean Silt''teedvil iln driving Kenyattia ulid his fitilly oit of tite State (to Punnii.vlva thn, where ho 

wa& itg;tlia plied umher stIrveilhlie) and iii discrediting ti organization lit-I ! i , dlI*,1414d Io li e idoltit wlier, its fu ids were lis ontiniut'd a iiii Its aliIviti-s drastically 'vrtalled. K'niatta v. KIIU'le. 71 (Civ. 2595. E.l). 110. TF lite iist 4i gii lie.itt irt'viluithi ls (or' IN'I'EI.I'IMt) doii tu'i io., hItve cottie ris filit r',.tlllt ," Il igait mi by liiother of its targ,, . Oile, 1olwianli '4 W workers 'iirl v. It was tlk silt %%hiI slouk loo-i offtlicial a'kiwiwl,,dg,,uileit ntti,! ii uhsriptit tif 

I '(il N'l l'Ml ) IlIy the Flll. mi1 againi Jist rei€eitlly hrotight io light middit lift:1 ,,vidheile 111ll it -l is o,., e fo,, r tite . ,, ,ii .w .hiii(lpiv, v,' timije-4, tol ii, !l,wii s~ tt I itz onl i tlit'-rv h,,,vitg SV" l' it iil ,rs fror ito other rva..,:ii, ltliiti IhiIr jlhilki,:l itllaliti,,i, : i uo, o ,ir ii ,-se, r llsir ig flit, vtmivu'r. lo, s it lll lVB 1 .m. Ne',,,;li.Nt llore,'.r I'arlti v. .ltloriuw!) (wttcpi' l. : ('iv. :11140. .1I.N. .2                                     

> With 1iiltillogii's for soitili. is dil . ilistIll '4'.' if ltrivit.u-u,' u;ahl'l'tiltu ifrte t++i'y "ill-, Vill lhi. t*.% iiiiH 1,4tl l!1I ((I)INT I:II'P IO llai li lii( it-ii 14) (owlli!+l'-ii , "l'ul ltIIi. (illlii't,. ii, eirulvr."'

W\ith ru'+ljie't I') tl lil nltriila rll lirel;;triu l i 'lild ('Ii N'Tli ,li'Ilt!-NI'v I.'f. IDiret.lor (Ilirvtici' lKu'llo'y 'itel if' uitit ili 'l i F i'- '.i- 

> til

virently ii it4 ,tl'wi iiiilhority- "flit ,somiie additional effort itist lbe iuitll- io ti'ittl ize iuih uliIrtilt 11i- revoluitliiiiy ili veili' i t." +'lhl ut I. ernsor'l by the 1l'itlelm |1Ightm J)efellxe 'iid, ntid the ln v ,rs r,,lre-         

> .iii t~i~ h4liiit ffis are not aMiliated

with the ACLUI1. 413  

> POLICE SUBVEILLANCE

Relatively few people, out of the total population, have been subjected to surveillance by wiretaps. But enormous numbers of people have been subjected to routine police surveillance because of their political activities. The ACLU docket includes class actions against the police departments of such major cities as Los Angeles, Philadelphia, New York, Kansas City, St. Louis, Chicago, and Houston, as well as some smaller cities and several state agencies, for activities ranging from photographic surveillance of public demonstrations, infiltration of political organizations, and harassment of demonstrators to the compilation of "intelligence" or "non-criminal" dossiers on politically active citizens, running into the hundreds of thousands In some of the larger jurisdictions. A major obstacle in all these cases has been the Supreme Court's 5-4 decision in Laird v. Tatum, 408 U.S. 1 (1972), a class action for injunction of the Army's surveillance of civilians. The majority ruled that the plaintiffs could not point to any actual injury to themselves or to any governmental act directly against them specifically, but were attacking the "mere existence" of the intelligence operation. Furthermore, according to the majority, the plaintiffs' contention that the gathering, storing, and dissemination of political information had-a chilling effect up)n their exercise of First Amendment rights was "disproved" by the fact that they had exposed themselves publicly in bringing a lawsuit! Yet it is precisely this contention which lies at the heart of the civil liberties argument and which, ultimately, must prevail. The First Amendment embraces a clear right of associational privacy which is violated by any "official" notice of aperson's lawful political activities, even if there is no concrete harm such as exposure to retaliation or the loss of a Job. Nonetheless, most surveillance suits involve some evidence of injury, as, for example, the disruption of professional services provided by the attorney-plain-tiffs in Berlin Demooratio Club through wiretap interception of privileged lawyer-client communications, or, in that same case, the deportation of an American civil-ian activist by West German authorities at the behest of U.S. Army Intelligence. An important early victory was won In Handechu v. Murphy, 349 F. Snpp. 766 

(S.D. N.Y., 1972), a challenge to the political surveillance operations of the New York City Police Department's Special Services Division, In which the court denied the defendants' motion to dismiss In part because it could be shown that the revelation of an antiwar organization "member" as a Special Services agent had resulted In the destruction of the group. A court of appeals reversed a lower court's denial of a class action against police photographic surveillance In Fall River, Massachusetts, in part because of a leak to the press of a police photo showing a congressional candidate's wife leading an antiwar demonstration. Yaffe 

v. Powers, 454 F. 2d 1802 (1st Cir., 1972). A measure of the distance traveled by the courts since 1972 in their sensitivity to the First Amendment claims of all the victims of surveillance, not merely those who can demonstrate concrete injury, is the swift action early this year by a district court in Texas in dealing with Houston police dossiers on over athousand politically active local citizens covering a period of more than ten years. The court denied the defendants' motion to dismiss, granted a preliminary injunction, and appointed three masters of the court to obtain custody of the files, guard against their destruction or dissemination, and design procedures for notifying everyone mentioned in the files so that they may consider whether to join the class action. Greater Houston ACLU v. Welch, 74-11-9, 8.D. Tex. For the most part, a rationale for the conduct of wide-ranging political surveillance by police agencies has been limited to general statements about the need for intelligence in relation to possible civil disturbances. There is no expla-nation of why It is thought necessary or legally proper to wiretap and infiltrate political organizations not connected with any criminal investigation, or to photograph participants in lawful demonstrations, or to compile "non-criminal" dossiers on thousands of citizens who publicly support almost any political cause, including tidbits on their personal lives as well as their political views. "Ex-cesses" tend to be described, as In a police affidavit in Hand shu, as "aberrations in violation of departmental policy." That not merely the "excesses" but the routine practices as well are being questioned may be indicated In recent moves by some police agencies to redesign and publicly explain their "political intelli-gence guidelines." They do not appear ready to question, hnwever, the validity of their authority to conduct any political intelligence operations at all. S2 6;29 -77----.27 414    

> PERVERSION OF LAW ENFORCEMENT

Any political surveillance conducted by any law enforcement agency, whether a local police department or the FBI, represents a perversion of the agency's law enforcement mission. Some particularly striking situations illustrate that per-version in its most extreme form, when agencies are deliberately used to "get" the government's political enemies. Allard Lowenstein, a member of Congress from New York from 198 to 1970, was defeated for re-election in 1970 and was a candidate for the congressional nomination in 1972. He brought suit against his opponent in that race, John Rooney, officials of the FBI and IRS, and a number of White House aides to former President Nixon for conducting special investigations into his personal life and political activities and turning that information over to his campaign opponent, and for placing his name-on the White House "enemies list," which may have led to an IRS audit of his tax returns at the behest of Nixon's aides. Lowenstein contends that the misuse of governmental agency powers In these politically motivated investigations constituted a conspiracy in violation of his First, Fourth, Fifth, and Ninth Amendment rights of privacy, and in violation of the rights of the voters to exercise their electoral powers free of deceptive practices. Lowenstein v. Rooney, 74C593, E.D. N.Y. 

Teague v. Alexander, Civ. No. 75-0416, D.D.C., Is a class action on behalf of persons who were subjected to special 1RS audits and investigations solely because of their political associations and opinions. It focuses on the activities of an IRS department called the Special Services Staff, organized in response to White House pressures to "do something" about certain groups or Individuals whom the Administration deemed "extremist" or "dissident." The purpose was not to collect revenue, but to investigate and harass. During its four-year life, SSS collected files on 8,000 individuals and 3,000 organizations. When the opera-tion was closed, the files were incorporated into the regular IRS records. And there they remain. The suit seeks money damages, a permanent injunction against IRS political surveillance, and the destruction of all IRS records having to do with tax-payers"political beliefs and associations. DISCRETION AND JUDICIAL REVIEW 

If there is one encompassing theme in this depressing recitation of the govern-ment's assaults against its citizens in the name of "national security," it is the unbridled discretion which the government enjoys in its choice of goals and methods. The determination of what constitutes "national security" and of the meatis to be used to protect it are the exclusive province of the executive and are insulated from the influence of Congress, the courts, and the people. The WThite House, the FBI, the CIA, the IRS, the Army, and local and state police agencies all seem unable--and are certainly unwilling-to explain by what standards they define and conduct their mysterious missions, and it is becoming clear that in fact there are no standards. Even those few decisions of the courts which have ventured to place positive restrictions on the permissible scope and methods of surveillance have in practice failed to curb this exercise of unbridled disretion. And that is largely because the surveillance apparatus itself has remain hidden from view. This, one hopes, can be rectified, and this is one reason why surveillance litigation must be vigorously pursued. As new assaults and new victims are revealed, new lawsuits are being added to the surveillance docket. In July, ACIU filed a class action against the CIA, the FBI, and the Post Office for opening, reading, and photographing-without warrants--first-class mall addressed to or sent by U.S. citizens corresponding with citizens of the Soviet Union. The mall surveillance program, initiated in 

1%53 (and supposedly terminated in 17)73, although ACLU alleges that it con-tinues today), is characterized in the q uit as "an extended conspiracy" against tens of thousands of U.S. citizens. Driver v. Helm*. ('iv. No. 75-0224, D.R.I. Late in October. another ACLU class action was brought against the National Security Agency. the CIA, and Western Union International, RCA Global Communications, and ITT World Communications, among others, for intercepting private over-seas cable communications--again, without warrants--compiling a "watchlist" of American diqsenters having "foreign contacts," opening their foreign mail, and infiltrating their organizations with undercover agents. Chandler v. Helms, 

OWv. No. 75-1773, D.D.C. 415         

> WHAT ARE ACLU'S SURVEILLANCE SUITS MEANT TO ACCOMPLISH ?

First, discovery: a full revelation, under court order, of the methods the government has used in each of its surveillance operations and, just as important, a full explanation of the government's purported justifications. Most of the cases on ACLU's surveillance docket are in this intricate, sometimes tedious pre-trial stage, for government agencies do not willingly yield what they see as "their" secrets. The first aim is thus to pierce the wall of secrecy and to bring home to the American public the dangers of secret government. Second, a judicial declaration that each of the surveillance practices at issue is a violation of the Constitution, and a permanent injunction against their further use. Third, money compensation to the victims of surveillance. The combination of declaratory and injunctive relief and the award of monetary damages is intended to forestall the resumption of "business as usual." Fourth, the orderly and complete destruction of all surveillance files. This promises to be a monumental task, for surveillance information compiled by one agency is almost invariably shared with others, often even disseminated outside the government. What is ultimately sought, then, goes beyond the redress of past wrongs. It is subjection of the entire political surveillance apparatus to continuing judicial review, so that not just specific surveillance operations, but also the scope of the government's authority to conduct political surveillance, can be tested by the standards of the Constitutiona 

In the States   

> CALIFORNIA PRIVACY BI.L

Governor Edmund Brown, Jr., vetoed what would have been the California Information Practices Act of 1075, a privacy law modeled after the federal Privacy Act of 1974, but providing more limiiited exemptions for law enforce-ment investigative records and establishing a state commiion to oversee im-plemeutation of the law and investigate violations. As adopted by an overwhelming majority of both houses of the state legisla-ture, the law would have: (1) prohibited maintenance of any records describing how individuals exer-cise their First Amendment rights; (2) permitted state agencies to collect only relevant, timely, and accurate information; (3) permitted individuals to see, copy, and amend their records; (4) prohilited disclosure of personal Information maintained by an agency except for the agency's "routlule uses" as established by law, or pursuanit to tho individual's consent; (5) provided civil and criminal lpnaltt-9 for violation (6) prohibited denial of a state bueneflt to an individual who refuses to dis-close his or her Social Security number, unless disclosure Is required )y statute. The ACLU affiliates in California helped to draft the law and lobbied vigor-ously for its adoption. Initial objections by law enforcement agencies had re-suited in some early compromises, to the apparent satisfaction of all. Concerns about the costs of implementation were met by dropping a provision that would have required agencies to notify every person on whom they maintained r cords. Two weeks before the veto deadline, the bill's principal Senate sponsor invited the (Covernor's questions, particularly questions about costs. There was no re-sponse until, Just one day before the deadline, the various state agency head., who had been silent during the five-month legislative hearing process, first voiced their objections to the projected costs, which they estimated at an ex-traordinarily high figure. The Governor did not even consider the measure until the very evening of the veto deadline, and then only in consultation with his cabinet, all of whom were opposed. No supporter of fhe loll was Invited to com-tribute to the discussion. a For further informations: Readers may obtain the 27-page ACLU privacy, Recrery., and surveillance docket for 500 by writing to the Privacy Project, ACLU Foundation, 22 East 40th Street New York. New York 10016. A more detailed analysis of particil.mr quravelil.     

> lance. The Abuses of

the Intellge ce Agpeiofe, by Jerry J. Berman and Morton 11. Hlalperin                       

> (1975. 185 pages), may be ordered from the Center for National Security Studirs at 122 Maryland Avenue, N.Z., Washington, D.C. 20002. The cost is $2.75.

416 

In the end, Just minutes before midnight, the Governor vetoed, saying the bill contained provisions "which are entirely too complex," and that the proposed commission would "add another unneeded bureaucracy to our government." But, in the estimation of Benjamin Bycel, legislative director of the ACLU of Southern California, "What the governor was really saying was that an intri-cate and important piece of legislation was too difficult for him to grasp in afew short hours late at night. Brown's rejection of the privacy legislation was made necessary not by its complexity, but by his own refusal to take a hand in its formulation-even though he had been asked to do so." 

In the Courts 

ARREST RECORDS A decision by the Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia has articulated the constitutional issues, and in particular the right to privacy, in the transmis-sion of arrest records from a local police department to the FBI. Utz v. CuJwnane, No. 72-1116 (D.C.Cir., Oct. 3, 1975). The plaintiffs in Utz were not seeking expungement of their records, or chal-lenging the validity of their arrests, the constitutional property of sending particular arrest records to the FBI for specific law enforcement purposes, or the routine dissemination of fingerprints to the FBI. Rather, they were contend-ing that the routine dissemination of arrest records, either before a conviction or after exoneration, by the Washington, D.C., Metropolitan Police Department to the FBI is a violation of their constitutional rights of due process, privacy, and the presumption of innocence, at least so long as tile FBI continues to re-disseminate such records for other than law enforcement purposes. The Court took note in particular of three points. First, that the records at issue were those of people who had been arrested but had not yet faced trial, or had been acquitted, or whose cases had not-been prosecuted. Second, that the mere fact of an arrest is, in our society, often viewed as an indication of guilt or wrongdoing, and nowhere more so than in the employment market. Third, that the records are sent by police to the FBI in full knowledge that the FBI makes them widely available for employment and licensing purposes. The Court expressed "severe doubts" about the constitutionality of the police department's practice, although basing its decision in this case on a District of Colombia statute. "We agree that there is a substantial bundle of constitutional rights which may be unnecessarily infringed when such [pre-conviction or post-exoneration] arrest records are transmitted to the FBI with the knowledge that they will be retransmitted to a multitude of organizations for a multitude of purposes, all of which are susceptible of abuse."  

> CONVICTION RECORDS

The Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circult has held that a company policy of refusing to hire any person having a conviction record for any crime more serious than a traffic offense violates Title VII of the 1964 Civil Rights Act. This is be-cause such a policy, in its effect, discriminates against blacks by disqualifying them at more than twice the rate whites are disqualified, together with the fact that the company, Missouri Pacific Railroad, could offer no "overriding business justification" for its policy. The-plaintiff in this case was a black man who had served 21 months on a conviction for refusing military Induction. The Court held that the district court should enjoin Missouri Paciflc's practice and determine whether the platntiff should be awarded back pay. Green v. Misaouri Paeifto 

Railroad, 17 CrL 2378 (8th Cir., July 23, 1975). TESTIMONY OF ARYEIT NEIER AND BURT NEUORNIE, ON BEHAiF OF TiE AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIEs UNION, BEFORE TIlE U.S. SENATE SUBCOMMITTEE ON ("ONsTTU-TIONAT, RIOITS, MAY 19, 1976 (Aryeh Neler is Executive Director of the American Civil Liberties Union. Burt Neubornt is lProfe.sor of Law at New York University and former As-sistant Legal Director of the American Civil Liberties Union.) We appear here today on behalf of the American Civil Liberties Union, anation-wide non-partisan organization of 275,000 members dedicated to the ad-vancement of the principles of the Bill of Rights. 417 

In your letter of invitation, Mr. Chairman, you noted that this is the 70th anniversary of Roscoe Pound's address to the American Bar Association on the causes of popular dissatisfaction with the administration of Justice. When Roscoe Pound embarked upon his critical re-examination of the role of l1w in American life, he unleashed a current of legal idealism which has sought to transform American law from a device for the maintenance of the status quo into a device for the Just resolution of disputes. We have come a long way from l'ound's beginning. When Pound wrote, in 190, only tile rich and the power-ful could view American law with satisfaction. Powerless segments of American society correctly perceived law as a hostile force. The primary role of law was the protection of privilege. It is a tribute to how far we have advanced In the last 70 years that the weak and the powerless have come to regard American law, not necessarily as an implacable enemS, but as a potential ally which pro-vides them with hope for justice. Mr. Chairman, we are grateful, on behalf of the American Civil Liberties Union, for the opportunity to discuss with you a disquieting phenomenon which threatens much of the progress we have made toward realizing Roscoe Pound's dream of equal Justice through law. )uring the last several decades, two extraordinary occurrences have made possible our progress toward Pound's dreami-the emergence of the Federal Judiciary as an easily accessible and sympathetic forum for the protection of the rights of the politically powerless and the growth of a segment of the American liar dedicated, not to servicing the rich and powerful, but to vindicating the rights of those who traditionally have lacked access to the courts. The combination of a receptive Federal Judiciary and an idealistic (lvil rights-civil liberties bar culminated in the transforma-tion of law from the preserve of the privileged to an engine of social reform. In the last few years, however, the ability of the Federal Judiciary to perform its historic and primary function as guardian of the Unitedx States C)imstitution has been seriously un(lermined by a series of restrictive decisions of the current Hupreme Court. Moreover, at the same time that the current Court has sought to restrict access to the Federal courts, it has delivered a series of severe blows to the newly emergent public bar. Mr. Chairman, if the current majority of the Supreme Court Is perinitted-by shutting (]own access to the federal courts and by crippling the public bar-to dismantle the apparatus which was responsible for the transformation of the role of law in our society, the progress of tile last seventy years will evaporate. To much of America, law will, once again, become the enemy to be feared and evaded, rather than an ally to be respected andl revered. The current Court's assault on the role of the Federal Judiciary and the public lar has occurred in four areas. First, the Court has severely restricted access to the Federal courts by aggrieved individuals; second, the Court has pIlaved significant, and perhaps, insutperable obstacles in the way of persons seeking to band together to seek class action relief from the Federal courts; tlird, the Court has struck a blow at tile continued existence of an independent public bar by denying Fed(eral courts the power to awar(Lattorneys fees in nmay cases: and, finally, the Court has drastically restricted the ability of a Federal court to grant ne aingfui rernedles---tvein to successful plaintiffs. I. TI. 10.8'171c'rl'lV OF ACCESS 10 Tile FEDIHAL COURTS Sine thit (Civil War, tile F(dral triil emlrts have serv,,i as the primary (iti-                                                                 

> fo rcement nrin of t ie Jiii of Rights and 13th, 11it and 15th Aiindments. While state emirts retain Ia (incHtrrelnt othiligatti, ti einfror', the F'cderal ((Instl itit lon, it has hI,,l the lssn nif our history and it rellins tie fixed belief of virtually every exis'rleitwed civil rights lawyer lit A\ erica-tlit l"cderral courts pro vide the ,ost effectIve fortin within which to ,nif,irce fhe (o',nstinution of the

I'nit 'l $tate~s. ( ',mi,-gress his codifiiled this j udgnmnt ill tlle Ci'vii Itiglhts Act (if 1.,7 1, (-l2 U'SC 

* 198.3) wlielh guaran o-i ut's a Ful'eral .imli('i : foruiam w lii ineve- s ate (or i l offl-cials interfe-re with Federal constitutional or statutory rights. 'nfortunately, the columilild of (Collgmess has liecim severely wenkenf-d toy the current Court. First, li cases like It'nirth v. ,eldin, 95 S. ('t. 2197 (1975) and Rizzo v. Goode, 

I .S. (1970), a imijrl y of tile (-urrvit Ciart Ias reslricted tie class of persons who may coiMpllait to the Foleral courts about violations of their Federal con-stitutional rights. In Warth, the Court ruled that minority residents of tile Roch-418 

ester area could not challenge suburban exclusionary zoning practices which condemned them to a ghetto existence because they were unable to point to a spe-

ciflic housing project which they would have resided in, but for the exclusionary zoning. Of course, the very existence of exclusionary zoning prevented the plan-ning or construction of such projects-reducing the decision to a crude exercise in Catch-22. Tit Rizzo, the Court ruled tat Black citizens of Philadelphia, who had been the target of proven police abuse, could not seek an order directing the Mayor to establish a police complaint procedure, since they were not currently suffering any abuse at Me8 hands. The extremely crabbed view of the standing doctrine enunciated in cases like Warth and Rizzo I as a "prudential" matter by a majority of the Court, leave thousands of Americans with festering constitu-tional grievances, but without a Federal court within which to resolve them in 

an orderly nianner. Second, In cases like Paul v. Davis, U.S. (1976), the current Court has read the Civil Rights Act of IS7I in a grudging manner to refuse access to the Fed-eral courts to persons who have been seriously injured by lawless government action. In Paul. a police flier had erroneously stigmatized the plaintiff as a"known" and "active shoplifter." When the erroneously stiginatized pltinitiff sought Federal Judicial relief, the Supreme Court ruled that police injury to repu-tation-even If knowingly and maliciously caused-was; not a deprivation of constitutional rights and, thus, could not he redressed in Federal court. Thus, per-sons whose lives have been seriously affected by lawless governmental action are denied access to a Federal forum, unless they can shoehorn their Injury into the narrow constitutional categories enunciated by a majority of the current Supreme Court. Third, the current Court has dramatically expanded the doctrines. of asten-tion and comity to force case after case out of Federal court. Despite the ruling 

of Monroe v. Paper, 365 U.S. 167 (1961) that civil rights plaintiffs are not obliged to exhaust state Judicial remedies prior to seeking relief In Federal court, the current Supreme Court ins clamped it de facto state Judicial exhaustion require-wuent on civil rights plaintiffs---imposing a delay of from 1-2 years before many civil rights paiIntiffs may gain access to a Federal forum. The availability of expeditious Federal relief from constitutlnal violations has been a critical factor in transforming abstract constitutional doctrine into practical reality. Accordingly, the draftsmen of the Civil Rights Act of 1971 and eight members of the Supreme Court in Monroe v. Pape recognized the delay which would be causedd by requiring resort to state court as a pre-condition to M-dertll Judieial review would dehstropy 42 1T.S.(. § 11K)I as an effectIve, dvice for the protection of Federal constitutionil rights. Accordingly, it is now well settled that a clvil rights plaintiff need not exhaust state judicial remedhie before seek-

lng Federal Judicial review under tl Civil RitIds Act (of 1871. UT nfortinafely, however, the current Court has made n mockery of thte notion of direct aid in-corniplicated access to Federal courts by Imposing at least hiree forins of state, eximiustion ol prf}mpective civil rights plaintiffs. First. in Pretser v. Rodri9uez, 411 U.S. 475 (1973), the current Court invented  

> it

sweci-.s of cnse falling within the term "core habeas corpuv" In conn, etion with which It Imposed a requirement of exhaustion of state judicial remedies. Second, in a series of eases exemplified by Bfochnint v. Indiana State Employiec* Asition--U..- .. (1976), the current Court has dramatically lrsiadeutdl the concept of abstention Into a virtual de facto exhaustion requirement. In the view of Chief Justice Btirger. and perhaps a majority of the current Court, whenever the challenged action of a state official might violate state constitin-tional or statutory law, a civil rthts plaintiff must ek relief In state emrt on state law grounds, prior to seeking relief In Federal court. If such a view of abstention/exhaustion prevahil%-and there are disturbing signs that It may-speedy access to Federal court will come a thing of the past. Suich a view would disturb settled notions of Fedpral jrlmlictlion datln- back to Home Tele-phone (f Telegraph, Co. v. ('tyj of Los .4noele, 227 UT.S. 27P (1918). Finally, In the wake of Younqcr v. Tfarris 401 U.S. 37 t1971), which forbade Federal Judilcal Interference with pe-nding state crimin,!! proceedings. the cur-rent Court has ousted the Federal courts from wide areas of eonstitutional adjNdlcation in the guise of co~mity. In Htffmman v. Pursue, Ltd. 420 IT.S. 592    

> 1Other recent

cases similarly restricting standing are: Rehleuinojer v. Resrrqt* ('om.   

> miltfe to

stop the War, 418 U.S. 208 (1974) : United States v. Richardson, 419 U.S. 106        

> (1974) ;Laird v. Tatum. 408 U.S. (1972).

419 

(1971), the Court declined to permit a Federal court to enjoin an unconstitu-tional state civil court injunction. Thus. by the simple expedient of commencing a state civil proceeding against a potential Federal civil rights plaintiff, state officials can now deprive that plaintiff of access to a Federal court. Moreover, in Hicks v. Miranda, 122 U.S. 332 (1975). the current Court ruled that even If a Federal plaintiff wins the race to the courthouse and seeks Federal judicial review prior to the initiation of state judicial proceedings against him, the state may nevertheless oust the Federal courts by filing a proceeding even after the Federal action is filed. Such a reverse removal power renders it an act of some courage to seek relief in Federal court, since a predictable response under Hicks to a I 1983 complaint will be the commencement of state criminal proceedings against the Federal plaintiff. The net result of expanding the law of standing; narrowing the cause of ac-tion granted by the Civil Rights Act of 1871; and pyramiding abstention and comity into a disguised exhaustion requirement, has been the creation of ajurisdictional maze which must be run in order to gain Federal review of Fed-eral constitutional questions-a far cry from the simple, direct and effective remedy intended by Congress in 1871. Unless Congress re-asserts its will, the current Court bids fair to repeal 42 USC 1983 by judicial fiat.       

> 11. RESTRICTIONS ON ACCES TO CLASS ACTIONS

In 1966. the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure were amended to authorize in-dividual litigants, whose separate claims might not be sufficient to justify the expense and uncertainty of judicial review, to aggregate their claims into aclass action and, by combining into a class, to match the legal resources avail-able to corporations or the government. The class action promised the ability to provide legal redress to thousands of Americans who might otherwise lack the resources or the capacity to protect their rights individually. It also promised the emerging public bar the opportunity to provide legal services to far more persons than had been thought possible in a conventional procedural posture. From the beginning, however, the Supreme Court has narrowly restricted the use of class actions and the current Court has cast serious doubt on class ac-tions as a remedial device. The Supreme Court's attack on class actions began in 8 nyder v. Harris, 394 U.S. 332 (1969), when the Court ruled that members of 6 class could not aggregate their Individual damages to satisfy the jurisdic-tional amount requirements of 28 U.S.C. 111332 and 1331. Since one of the primary purposes of class actions was to prnit powerless individuals to ag-gregate into a powerful, ad hoc entity for the purposes of litigating a specific claim, Snydcr was a serious blow. After Rnydcr, poor persons, whose claims rarely, if ever, exceeded $10,000 Individually, were forbidden to aggregate and were. thus. often excluded from Federal court. As bad as Snyder was, however, Zahn v. International Paper Company, 414 U.S. 291 (1973) was even worse. In 

Zahn, the Court ruled that even If the named plaintiff individually satisfied the 

$10,000 Jurisdictional amount, no class action would be permissible unless the mnmbhers of class each satisfied the $10,000 jurisdictional amount. Thus, class actions have now been transformed, through the magic of a hostile Supreme Court, into a device for the protection of persons whose claims must each be large enough not to require class actions in the first place. Of course, where aJurisillctioiial basis other than diversity or Federal question exists, aggregation is unneceswary, since Jurisdictional amounTt Is not an Issu. Even in such situa-tionq. how(,v(,r, the current Court has evinced strong hostility to class actions. In ERcn v. ,iacquelfruo d Carlisle Co., -- U.S. - (1975), the current Court required persons wishing to bring a cla's action for damages to notify each member of the (lass at his own cost. If, as seems likely, the same rules are applied to injunctive or declaratory class actions, only the rich will be able to afford a class. action, despite the fact that Its purpose was the equalization of litigation resources between rich and poor.         

> Ill. RESTRICTIONS ON ATTORNEYS' ('EIS IN CO(NSTITUTIONAL CASES
> Throughout

most of olr history, the avil lability of ,o.unsei ill Colst it utinnal cases has btem accldontai. The lck of an eenoile base forced persons seeking to vindicate constitutional rights to r.ly (on vilunter coulm.s, provided by sym-Jiathetl attorneys who donated their services to n case. Mltuh Is ,,wed to volun-teers such as Clarence Darrow, Osniond Fraenkel, ('harles Rouston, William 420 Hastie and Arthur Garfield Hays, whose talent unlocked constitutional rights for thousands of impoverished persons. However, reliance on volunteer counsel had its obvious limitations. Availability was sporadic and never came close to meeting the demand for legal services. Accordingly, as the public's perception of the role of law grew closer to Pound's ideal, pressures for a full-time, professionalized public Interest bar grew apace. Hundreds of able lawyers, eschewing traditional practice with its monetary rewards, hoped to embark on a career as representa-tives of the politically powerless. In part, the public bar was subsidized by founda-tions; in part by cause organizations such as the ACIU and the NAACP. The creation of the OEO Legal Services Corporation was an important step toward Institutionalizing the public bar. The most promising source of support for an independent public bar lay, however, not with the foundations; not with cause organizations dependent on voluntary contributions; and not with the govern-ment. Rather it lay with the traditional power of a court of equity to award counsel fees to a deserving attorney In a case which benefitted society. Viewing the public bar as private attorneys general, the lower Federal Judiciary sys-teniatically awarded counsel fees in appropriate cases to lawyers whose efforts had vindicated the rights of the public. While rich awards were by no means automatic and by no stretch of the imagination even close to what could be earned in the private sector, court awarded fees did constitute an ImiMrtant source of financial support for the public bar. In Alyeska Pipeline Service Co. v. 

Wilderness Society, 95 S.Ct. 1612 (1975), the current Supreme Court ended the practice of awarding attorneys' fees In constitutional caves. In an ironic abuse of statutory construction, the Court reasoned that since Congress had repeatedly expressly approved the awarding of attorneys' fees In specific contexts., courts lacked the power to award such fees in the absence of express Congressional approval. Following such reasonjjg to its logical conclusion, when Congress wishes to approve a practice, it should not expressly authorize it, for fear that the Supreme Court will forbid it In all other situations. Whatever the nuerits of 

Alyeska Pipeline, it struck a sharp blow at the public bar by cutting off Its most promising economic base. Given the depths of Idealism that motivate the public bar and its proven resiliency, it will doubtless survive-but in a weaken(d condition. Coupled with the current Court's assault on the role of the lower Federal Judiciary and its unremitting hostility to class actions, Its action in Alye-Rka 

further threatens the ability to enforce the constitutional rights we have won over the pist 70 years. IV. RESTRICTIONS ON" REMEDIES 

The fourth, and perhalm most disturbing, assault on the lower Federal courts as ani effective forum for lhe protection of constitutional rights Involves a series of Supreme Court decisions disabling the Federal courts from providing effective relief-oven in those cases where a Federal Judge has found that a violation of constitutional law has taken jlace. Thus, in Imnblr v. Pachtnian. 424 U.S. 409 (1976), the current Court ruled that a Federal court lacks Iwer to grant coni-pensatory dainages to a person who has been the target of malicious and uineon-

stitutional action by a state prosecutor. See also, PirsrOn v. Ray. 3801 !.S. 5,17 

(1907) (absolute immunity for Judges) and Tenney v. Brandhore, 341 U.S. 367 (1951) (state legislators imninmune). Similarly, in Edrlman v. Joralon, .115 U.S. 6.51 (1974). the current Court deprived the lower Federal courts of the power to award daninge4 against a state agency wl,'b. had unlawfully injured a Federal plaintiff. Earlier decisions had already deprived lower Federal court of alhlity to grant lamatzes against mnunicipalities.. Monroe v. Paper, 36V5 U.S. 167 ( )UMR 

City of Kcnosha v. Bruno. 412 I.S. 507 (1073). This, when a civil rights plaintiff seeks conilwnsatory damages int a federall court he is likely to lose-even If he wins on the merits. If the defendant is aJPdge. n state legislator, a lro(seenfor, or a Iocal or state governmental agency. current Jldve-made Jaw deprives a Federal Judge of the power to award d images. Morenver. even when sueh tn nhsomte prohibition on damnnngs is absent. the, enoUrts have tfahio11,ied a good faith defew,'e whieh, more often than not, will poreellude ndanuige award. E.g. Pi'rsmo v. Ray.. 3,6 U.S. 547 (197). It is no exaggeration to characterize the current law of constitutional compe, nation in tie Fevderal vom't.s as a trap f'or the unwary. The current Couirt has linked it.q prohibition on dnn)ges with an equally drastic assault on the power to grant effective Injunctive relief in constitutional cases. 421 

In Rizzo v. Goode, - U.S. - (1970), the current Court stripped the lower Federal courts of the power to fashion flexible equitable decrees to deal with po-lice abuse. In Rizzo, a Federal Judge, after a scrupulous and painstaking trial which documented twenty Instances of unredressed police abuse, ordered re-msimsible city officials to institute a program for the resolution of civilian com-plaints against the police. The Supreme Court reversed-after chastising the trial Judge for exceeding his appropriate role. Rizzo merely continued a trend exempli-fied by O'Shea v. lAttlcton, 414 U.S. 488 (1974), in which the current Court reversed a similar imaginative decree aimed at controlling rampant racial dis-crinulnation in the administration of Justice in Cairo, Illinois. If the current trend (-nitinues, Federal Judges will soon be stripped of the capacity to fashion mean-iiigful relief to prevent future violations of law. Indeed, it is merely a continua-tion of this trend which has led the Solicitor General to urge that Federal judges   

> be striplped4

by the Court of the power to order effective desegregation decrees involvitg the transportation of pupils. 

> CONCLUSION

It is, of course, a truism to note that the value of a constitutional right is no greater than the procedures which exist to vindicate it. A constitutional right without a forum to enforce it is meaningless; a constitutional right without alawyer to enforce it is illusory; and a constitutional right for which no remedy exists is downright dishonest. Yet, the sum and substance of the decisions of the current Supreme Court lead Inexorably and dishearteningly to precisely such a dilemma. Indeed, much of the procedural retrenching of the current Court appears to ie a kind of guerrilla warfare aimed at many of the more controversial substantive decisions of the Warren era. Rather than forth. rightly confronting these decisions and seeking to reverse them openly, some members of the current Court appear to have chosen to reverse them covertly by dismantling the apparatus needed for their enforcement. Reasonable per-sons may agree or disagree with many of the substantive decisions of the Warren ('ourt. If they are to be reversed, however, It. should be an open process after full argument; rather than by the cynical and covert emasculation of the Federal courts which hns been the disturbing pattern of the current Court. If, as Mr. Justice Frankfurter oberved, the history of liberty is inextricably bound up with procedure, the current Supreme Court has seriously endangered our liberties by playing fast and loose with the procedures we have painstakingly erected to protect them. It is time Congress put a stop to such unprincipled and high handed behavior. We call on this Sub1committee to begin the process of examining specific legis-lative remedies to deal with thp obstacles the current Supreme Court has placed in the way of jllieial protection of constitutional rights. The American Civil Liberties Union would welcome the opportunity to assist in this process. Thank you.     

> -SF.NATE
> 194th Cong., 2d

mess., Report No. 94-755J        

> iNTF.LLIGENCF. ACTIVITIES AN) THE RIGHTS OF AMERICANS-BOOK 11

Final report of the select committee to study governmental operations with respect to intelligence activities, United States Senate together with additional supplenental, and separate views. I. INTRODUCTION AND SUMMARY The resolution creating this Committee placed greatest emphasis on whether intelligence activities threaten the "rights of American citizens." "

Tile critical question before the Committee was to determine how the funda-wental liberties of the people can be maintained in the course of the Govern-

' . Rem. 21. eec. 2(12). The Senate specifically charged this committee with Inveotgating      

> "the conduct of domestic intelligence or

counterintelligenee operations against 'nited                                         

> States citizens." (Sec. 2(2)) The resolution added several examples of specific chrIgoR of
> Io 4tle "Illegal. Improper or unethical" governmental Intelligence activities as matters to
> ho fully Investigated (ec. (2) (1)--CIA domestic activities: Se. (2) (.'1-Houston Plan; See. (2--( 10)-surreptitious entries, electronic surveillance, mail opening.)

422 ment's effort to protect their security. The delicate balance between these basic goals of our system of government is often difficult to strike, but it can, and must be achieved. We reject the view that the traditional American principles of Justice and fair play have no place in our struggle against the enemies of free-dom. Moreover, our investigation has established that the targets of intelligence activity have ranged far beyond persons who could properly be characterized as enemies of freedom and have extended to a wide array of citizens engaging in lawful activity. Americans have rightfully been concerned since before World War II about the dangers of hostile foreign agents likely to commit acts of espionage. Similarly, the violent acts of political terrorists can seriously endanger the rights of Ameri-cans. Carefully focused intelligence investigations can help prevent such acts. But too often intelligence has lost this focus and domestic intelligence activi-ties have invaded individual privacy and violated the rights of lawful assembly and political expression. Unless new and tighter controls are established by legislation, domestic intelligence activities threaten to undermine our d(enocratlc society and fundamentally alter its nature. We have examined three types of "Intelligence" activities affecting the rights of 

American citizens. The first is intelligence collection-such as infiltrating groups with informants, wiretapping, or opening letters. The second is dissemination of material which has been collected. The third is covert action designed to disrupt and discredit the activities of groups and individuals deemed a threat to the social order. These three types of "intelligence" activity are closely related in the practical world. Information which is disseminated by the intelligence commu-nity " or used in disruptive programs has usually been obtained through survell. lance. Nevertheless, a division between collection, dissemination and covert action Is analytically useful both In understanding why excesses hnve- occurred In the past and in devising remedies to prevent those excesses from recurring. 

A. Intelligence Aotivity: A New Form of Governmenial Power to Impatr Ofiti-

gena' Rights 

A tension between order and iberty is Inevitable in any society. A Govern-ment must protect its citizens from those lent on engaging in violence and crimi-nal behavior, or in espionage and other hostile foreign intelligence activity. Many of the intelligence programs reviewed in this report were established for those purlxwes. Intelligence work has. at times, successfully prevented dangerous and abhorrent acts, such as bombings and foreign spying. and aided in the prosecu-tion of those responsible for such acts. l11t, Intellicen.e uctlv ity il the past decades has, all too often, exceded the restraints on the exercise of governimental power whih are Imposed by our country's Constitution, laws, and traditions. Excesses in the nuno,. of protecting steurity are not a recent development in our nation's history. In 1798, for example, shortly after the Hill of ItIghts was added to the Constitution, the Alien and Xlhit ion Acts wer, passed. These Acts, passed Ini response to fiart" of pro-14ren,.h "subversion", made it a (rime to criticize tit, floverinment.' l)uring the, Civil war, l'residient Abrahllln Lincoli sumlwsndtd the writ of hahias corpus. I lindreds of American cltizeis wir,' liroseciito-d for anti-war slatn.aont s dtiring World War 1, and thomisads of "radical" alitans were seized for delirtartion during the IK20th Palier aids. li)iring the Second World War, over then opp.sition of J. ldAgar Hoover and military intelligence.' 1..1,0W   

> Ja 1)a

te-A nierica us were )apprehtenl ed anti inearcern ted in detention camps. -

Th,,e act ions, however, were fitlilanint-etally different from tit(, liltelliaence 

activities examined by tills Comiiltttete. 'i'ly were geinerally executed overtly 'Just its the term "Intelllgence activity" enconlpaxise aetivitles that go far ,,yond! the co'l-elion and nnalysls of Information, the terni "Intelligence community" iwltmlex liersons rm It!niz fr,m the [,resident to the lowest field operatives of the Intelliene ag,.encleq. * The Allen Act provided for the deportation of all aliens Jud ged dangerouss to fp ieace and safety" of the nation. I Stat. 570. June 25. 1798) The didtion Act madle It a feileral crlini, to publish "false, scandalous and malicious writing" against the United States gov. ernmiit, the Congress. or the President with the intent to 'excite against then" the "hatred of the good people of the United States" or to "encourage ar ait uny hntll.' dvw oig of any foreign nation against the United Staten." (1 Stat. 598. July 1 1. 179"1 There were at least 21 arrests. 15 Indvtnientt. and 10 eonvietlns under the edition Act. (Se Jnps M. Smith. Freedom's Fetters: The Allen and Meditt"i Law# and Amrrican ('Ir                                    

> libhe,'trf (Ithaca :Cornell U. Press. 1950).) 'Franciel Blddle. Ift Brief Auhority 1O4rdpn (ity: laonheday, 110f12). p. 224: Roger l)atlei,,. Concentration Camps UIRA: Jopans# Americans and World War If (New York: lici, Rinehart. and Winston. 1971). p.

61. 423 under the authority of a statute or a public executive order. The victims knew what was being done to them and could challenge the Government in the courts and other forums. Intelligence activity, on the other hand, is generally covert. It is concealed from its victims' and Is seldom described in statutes or explicit ex-ecutive orders. The victim may never suspect that his misfortunes are the ini-tended result of activities undertaken by his government, and accordingly may have no opportunity to challenge the actions taken against him. It is, of course, proper in many circumstances-such as developing a criminal prosecution-for the Government to gather information about a citizen and use It to achieve legitimate ends, some of which might be detrimental to the citizen. But in criminal prosecutions, the courts have struck a balance between protect-Ing the rights of the accused citizen and protecting the society which suffers tile consequences of crime. essential to the balancing process are the rule of criminal law which circumscribe the techniques for gathering evidence,* the kinds of evi-dence that may be collected, and the uses to which that evidence may be put. In addition, the criminal defendant is given an opportunity to discover and then challenge the legality of how the Government collected information about him and the use which the Government intends to make of that information. This Committee has examined a realm of governmental information collection which has not been governed by restraints comparable to those in criminal pro. ceedings. We have examined the collection of intelligence about the political ad-vocacy and actions and the private lives of American citizens. That Information has been used covertly to discredit the ideas advocated and to "neutralize" the actions of their proponents. As Attorney General Harlan Fiske Stone warned in 1924, when he sought to keep federal agencies from investigating "political or other opinions" as opposed to "conduct . . . forbidden by the lws": "When a police system passes beyond these limits, it is (angerolis to the proper administration of justice and to human liberty, whOch it should be our first concern to cherish. 

"... There is always a possibility that a secret police may become amenace to free government and free institutions because it carries with it the possibility of abuses of power which are not always quickly apprehended or understood.' Our investigation has confirmed that warning. We have seen segments of our Government, in their attitudes and action, adopt tactics unworthy of a democracy, and occasionally reminiscent of the tactics of totalitarian regimes. We have seen a consistent pattern in which programs initiated with limited goals, such as preventing criminal violence or identifying foreign spies, were cxtanded to what witnesses characterized as "vacuum cleaners",* sweeping in Information about lawful activities of American citizens. The tendency of intelligence activities to expand beyond their initial scope Is atheme which runs through every aspect of our investigative findings. Intelligence collection programs naturally generate ever-increasing demands for new data. And once intelligence has been collected, there are strong pressures to use it against the target. ' Many victims of intelligence activities have claimed in the past that they were biliog                                     

> subjected to hostile action by their government. Prior to this investigation, most Ainricaus would have dismissed these allegations. Senator Philip hart aptly described this phe. nomenon in the course of the Committee's public hearings on domestic Intelligence activities :.4

"As I am sure others have, I have been told for years by. among others, soine of my own family, that this Is exactly what the Bureau was doing all of the tme, and in my Kreat wislom and high office. I assured them that they were wron i-it just wasn't true, it couldn't happen. They wouldn't do It. What you have described Is a series of illegal actions intended s?uarely to deny First Amendment rights to some Americans. That Is what iny                                                                                                                                                                                       

> children told me was going on. Now Idid not believe it. "The trick now, as Isee it, Mr. Chairman. is for this committ" to be able to figilre not how to persuade the people of this country that indeed It did go on. And how shall we Insure that it will never happen again?But It will happen repeatedly unls.. we can bring ourselves to understand and accept that It did go on." Snator Philip Ilart. 11/18/ 75, Iliarlnxv, Vol. 6. p. 41. 'As the Supreme Court noted In Miranda v. Arfropla 884 U,1. 486. 488, 486 !1966) erem before the Court required law officers to advise criminal suspects of tlhir c,,nstltti. tional rights before custodial interrogation, the FBI had "an exemplary record" In this
> area-a practice which the Court said should be "emulated by state and local law ,,nitrce. mnent agencies." This commendable FBI tradition in the general field of law enforcement pr¢en-ptts asharp contrast to the widespread disregard of Individual rights In FBI domestic Intellirene operations examined In the balance of this Report.
> New York Times, 5/18/24. Mary Jo Cook testimony, 12',2/75, Hearngs, Vol. 6, p. III ;James B. Adams testimony,
> 12/2/75, Hearings, Vol. 6. v. e.

424 

The pattern of Intelligence agencies expanding the scope of their activities was well described by one witness, who in 1970 had coordinated an effort by most of the intelligence community to obtain authority to undertake more illegal domestic activity: "The risk was that you would get people who would be susceptible to political considerations as.ppposed to national security considerations, or would con-strue political considerations to be national security considerations. to move from the kid with a bomb to the kid with a picket sign, and from the kid with the picket sign to the kid with the bumper sticker of the opposing can-didate. And you Just keep going down the line." I

In 1940, Attorney General Robert Jackson saw the same risk. He recognized that using broad labels like "national security" or "subversion" to invoke the vast power of the government Is dangerous because there are "no definite stand-ards to determine what constitutes a 'subversive activity', such as we have for murder or larceny." Jackson added: "Activities which seem benevolent or helpful to wage earners, persons on relief, or those who are disadvantaged in the struggle for existence may be regarded as 'subversive' by those whose property interests might be bur-dened thereby. Those who are in office are apt to regard as 'subversive' the activities of any of those who would bring about a change of administration. Some of our soundest constitutional doctrines were once punished as sub-versive. We must not forget that it was no so long ago that both the term 'Republican' and the term 'Democrat' were epithets with sinister meaning to denote persons of radical tendencies that were 'subversive' of the order of things then dominant." 10 

This wise warning was not heeded in the conduct of Intelligence activity, where the "eternal vigilance" which is the "price of liberty" has been forgotten. 

ft. The Questionm 

We have directed our investigation toward answering the following questions: Which governmental agencies have engaged in domestic spying? Iow many citizens have been targets of Governmental intelligence activity? What standards have governed the opening of intelligence investigations and when have Intelligence investigations been terminated? Wheie have the targets fit on the spectrum between those who commit violent criminal acts and those who seek only to dissent peacefully from Government 

1il icy? To what extent has the information collected Included Intimate details of the targets' personal lives or their political views, and has such information been disseminated and used to injure individuals? What actions beyond surveillance have Intelligence agencies taken, such ns nttempting to disrupt, discredit, or destroy persons or groups who have been the targets of surveillance? Have Intelligence agencies been used to serve the political aims of Presidents,  

> (o

her high officials, or the agenel" themselves? How have the agencies responded either to proper orders or to excessive pres-smires from their superiors? To what extent have intelligence agencies disclosed. or concealed them from. outside blles charged with overseeing them? Have intelligence agencies acted outside the law? What has been the attitude of the intelligence community toward the rule of law? To what extent has the Executive branch and the Congress controlled intel-ligence agencies and held them accountable? Generally, how well has the Federal system of checks and balances between the lorinches worked to control Intelligence activity?  

> ('.

Summary of the Main Problem* 

The answer to each of these questlonm is disturbing. Too many people have ben spid,, upon by too mtny Government agencies and to much information has been collet-ted. '1'he Government has often undertaken the secret surveillance of citizens on the basis nf their political tbliefs, even when those beliefs posed no threat of violence or Illegal acts on behalf of a hostile foreign power. The Gov-

ernment, olprating primarily through secret Informants, but als, using other In-trsilve techniques such as wiretaps. microphone "bugs", surreptitious mail open-Ing. and break-ins, I:us swept In vast amounts of information about the personal      

> 9Tm Chsrleni Unaton t,,stimony.

9/28/75. Hearing. Vol. 2, p. 411.           

> "0 "The Federal Prosecutor", Journal of the Amcrica Judicature Rociely (June. 1940).
> p.18.

425 lives, views, and associations of American citizens. Investigations of groups deemed potentially dangerous--and even of groups suspected of associating with potentially dangerous organizations--have continued for decades, despite the fact that those groups did not engage in unlawful activity. Groups and individ-

uals have been harassed and disrupted because of their political views and their lifestyles. Investigations have been based upon vague standards whose breadth made excessive collection inevitable. Unsavory and vicious tactics have been em-ployed-including anonymous attempts to break up marriages, disrupt meetings, ostracize persons from their professions, and provoke target groups into rivalries that might result in deaths. Intelligence agencies have served the political and personal objectives of presidents and other high officials. While the agencies often committed excesses in response to pressure from high officials in the Execu-tive branch and Congress, they also occasionally initiated Improper activities and then concealed them from officials whom they had a duty to inform. Governmental officials--including those whose principal duty is to enforce the law-have violated or Ignored the law over long periods of time and have ad-

vocated and defended their right to break the law. The Constitutional system of checks and balances has not adequately controlled Intelligence activities. Intil recently the Executive branch has neither delineated the scope if permissille activities nor estallished pr,.edures for stiwirvising intelligence agencies. Congress has failed to exercise sufficient oversight, seldom questioning the use to which Its approprlatlonP were being put. Most domestic intelligence issues have not reached the courts, and in those cases when they have reached the courts, the judiciary has been reluctant to grapple with them. Each of these points is briefly illustrated below, and covered in substantially greater detail in the following sections of the report. 

1. The Number of People Affected by Domestic Intrlligence Actirity 

United States intelligence agencies have investigated a vast number of Ameri-can citizens and domestic organizations. FBI headquarters alone has developed over 500,000 domestic intelligence files," and these have b4n augmented by addi-tional files at FBI Field Offices. The FBI opened 65,000 of these domestic Intelli-gence files In 1972 alone.'" In fact, substantially wore individuals and groups are subject to intelligence scrutiny than the number of files would appear to indicate, since typically, each domestic intelligence file contains Information in more than one individual or group, and this information is readily retrievable through the FBI General Name Index. The number of Americans and domestic groups caught In the domestic Intelli-gence net is further illustrated by the following statistics: Nearly a quarter of a million first class letters were opened and photographed in the United States toy the CIA between 1953-1973, producing a CIA computer-ized index of nearly one and one-half million names." At least 130,000 first class letters were opened and photographed by the FBI-between 1940-49M in eight U.S. cities." Some 300,000 Individuals were indexed in a CIA computer system and separate files were created on approximately 7,200 Americans and over 100 domestic grouim during the course of CIA's Operation CHAOS (1967-1973) ." 

Millions of private telegrams sent from, to, or through the United States were obtained by the National Securlty Agency from 11147 to 1975 under a secret arrangement with three United States telegraph eomnlanies.u An estimated 100,000 Americans were the subjects of United States Army Intelligence files created between the mld-1900's and 1971." Intelligence files on more than 11,000 individuals and groups were created by 

the Internal Revenue Service between 1969 and 1973 and tax investigations were started on the basis of political rather than tax criteria." " Memorandum from the FBI to the Senate Select Committee, 10/6/75. "Memorandum from the FBI to the Senate Select Committee, 10/6/75. "James Angleton testimony. 9/17/75 p. 28. Be @ee Mall Opening Report: Section It. "FBI Mail Openings." Chief, International Terrorist Oroup, testimony, Commission on CIA Activities Within the United States, 8/10/75. pp. 1485-1489.      

> NStatement by the Chairman

11/6/75: re: SHAMROCK. Hearings, Vol. 5. pp. 5I7-4O,                           

> 17 8e Military Surveillance kReport: Section I, "The Collection of Information ahout the Political Activities of Private Clitlsns and Private Organations"
> NSee IRS Report: Bection II. "SeleeUve Rnforcememt for Nontax turposes."

426 

At least 26,000 individuals were at one point catalogued on an FBI list of per-sons to be rounded up in the event of a "national emergency"."z 

2. Too Much Informatorn Is Oollected For Too Long 

Intelligence agencies have collected vast amounts of information about the intimate details of citizens' lives and about their participation in legal and peaceful political activities. The targets of intelligence activity have included po-litical adherents of the right and the left, ranging from activist to casual support-ers. Investigations have been directed against proponents of racial causes and women's rights, outspoken apostles of nonviolence and racial harmony; establish-ment politicians; religious groups; and advocates of new life styles. The wide-spread targeting of citizens and domestic groups, and the excessive scope of the collection of information, is illustrated by the following examples: (a) The "Women's iUberation Movement" was infiltrated by informants who collected material about the movement's policies, leaders, and individual members. One report included the name of every woman who attended meetings," and an-other stated that each woman at a meeting had described "how she felt oppressed, sexually tor otherwise"." Another report concluded that the movement's purpose was to "free women from the humdrum existence of being only a wife and motherr, lout still recommended that the intelligence investigation should be continued." 

(b) A prominent civil rights leader and advisor to Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., was invemstgated on the suspicion that he might be a Communist "sympa-thizer". The FBI field office concluded he was not." Bureau headquarters directed that the Investigation continue-using a theory of "guilty until proven innocent :" "The Bureau does not agree with the expressed belief of the field office that 

-i--- - is not sympathetic to the Party Cause. While there may not be any evidence that ----------------- is a Communist neither is there any substantial evidence that he Is anti-Communist." 

(c) FBI sources reported on the formation of the Conservative American Christinn Action Council in 1971." In the 1950's, the Bureau collected information about the John Birch Society and passed it to the White House because of the Society's "scurrillous attack" on President Eisenhower and other high Govern-ment officials.! 

id) Nome investigations of the lawful activities of peaceful groups have con-tinued for decades. For example. the NAACP was investigated to determine whether It "had connectlons with" the Communist Party. The investigation lasted for over twenty-five yea", although nothing was found to rebut a report during the first year (if the investigation that the NAACP had a "strong tendency" to "steer clear of Communist activities." " Similarly, the FBI has admitted that the Socialist Workers Party has committed no criminal acts. Yet the Bureau has in-vestigated the Socialist Workers Party for more than three decades on the basis of its revolutionary rhetoric---which the FBIT concedes falls short of incitement to violence-and its claimed international links. The Bureau is currently using its informants to collect Information about SWI3 members' political vlewp, Includ-ing those on "U.S. involvement in Angola," "t od prices," "racial matters," the "Vietitan War." and about any of their efforts to support non-SWP candidates for political office.* 

1* Memoranduin from A. ff. Belmont to I, V. Bosrdman, 12/8/54. Many of the memoranda 

rited In this report were actually written by FBI personnel other than those whose names were Indicated at the foot of the document as the author. Citation in this report of specific memoranda by using the names of FBI personnel which so appear Is for documentation           

> rjriMsxe only and Is not Intended to presume authorship or

even knowledge in all Ca"es. s0Memorandum from Kansas City Field Offie to FBI Headquarters. 10/20/70. (Hear. Ingm. Vol. 6, Exhibit 54-8). 11 Nniorandum from New York Field Ofe to FBI Headquarters, 5/28/69, p. 2. (Hear-itigis. Vol. 6, Exhibit 54-1).                             

> "Memorandum from Baltimore Field Office to FBI Headquarters, 5/11/70, p. 2. uMemorandum from New York Field Office to FBI Headquarters, 4/14/64.
> 94 Name deleted by Committee to protect privacy.
> U

Memorandum from FBI Headquarters to New York Field Office 4/24/64, re CPTr7A, 

Necro question. James Adams testimony. 12/2/75. Hearings Vol 6 P. 137. Memorandum from F. J. Baumgardner to William . 8 ullivan, 5/29/68. Memorandum from Oklahoma City Field Office to FBI Headquarters. 9/19/41. Fee Development of FBI Domestic Intelligones Investigations: Section IV, "iFBI Target Lists." Chief Robert 8hackleford testimony, 2/6/76, p. 91. 427 

(e) National political leaders fell within the broad reach of intelligence investi-gations. For example, Army Intelligence maintained files on Senator Adlal Steven. son and Congressman Abner Mikva because of their participation in peaceful political meetings under surveillance by Army agents.00 A letter to Richard Nixon, while he was a candidate for President in 1968, was intercepted under CIA's mail opening program.8 In the 1960's President Johnson asked the FBI to compare various Senators' statements on Vietnam with the Communist Party line and to conduct name checks on leading antiwar Senators.8 (f) As part of their effort to collect information which "related even remotely" to people or groups "active" in communities which had "the potential" for civil disorder, Army intelligence agencies took such steps as: sending agents to aHalloween party for elementary school children in Washington, D.C., because they suspected a local "dissident" might be present; monitoring protests of wel-fare mothers' organizations In Milwaukee; infiltrating a coalition of church youth groups In Colorado; and sending agents to a priests' conference in Washington, D.C., held to discuss birth control measures."k (g) In the late 1960's and early 1970's, student groups were subjected to intense scrutiny. In 1970 the FBI ordered investigations of every member of the Students for a Democratic Society and of "every Black Student Union and similar group regardless of their past or present involvement in disorders." " Files were opened on thousands of young men and women so that, as the former head of FBI intelligence explained, the information could be used If they ever applied for a government job." In the 1960's Bureau agents were instructed to increase their efforts to discredit "New Left" student demonstrators by tactics Including publishing photographs ("naturally the most obnoxious picture should be used"),' using "misinformation" to falsely notify members events had been cancelled, and writing "tell-tale" letters to students' parents, (h) The FBI Intelligence Division commonly investigated any indication that "subversive" groups already under investigation were seeking to influence or control other groups.4 One example of the extreme breadth of this "infiltration" theory was an FBI instruction in the mid-19O0's to all Field Offices to investigate every "free university" because some of them had come under "subversive influence." "

(I) Each administration from Franklin I). Roosevelt's to Richard Nixon's permitted, and sometimes encouraged, government agencies to handle essentially political Intelligence. For example: -President Roosevelt asked the FBI to put in its files the names of citizens sending telegrams to the White House opposing his "national defense" policy and supporting Col. Charles Lindbergh." -President Truman received inside information on a former Roosevelt aide's efforts to influence his appointments," labor union negotiating plans," and the publishing plans of Journalists. M-1resident Eisenhower received reports on purely political and social contacts with foreign officials by Bernard Baruch," Mrs. Eleanor Roosevelt," and Supreme Court Justice William 0. Douglas."1                             

> 80 Senate Judiciary Subcommittee on Constitutional Rights. Report. 1978. p. 57. 01 Senate Select Committee Staff summary of HTLINGUAL File Review, 9/5/75.
> -Ft'BI Summary Memorandum, 1/81/75, re: Coverage of T.V. Presentation.

mLetter from J. Edgar Hoover to Marvin Watson 7/1/6. ",ee Military Report: Sec. IT. "The Collection oi Information About the Political Aetivi-ties of Private Citisens and Private Organlsatons.,, * Memorandum from FBI Headquarters to all SAC's. 11/4/70.                                                        

> Charles Brennan testimony, 9/2/715, Hearnls vol. 2p. 117. Af memorandum from FBI Headquarters to all dAs, 7/5/68.
> Atmtrartx of New Left Documents *161. 115, 48. memorandum from Wahington Wield Office to FBI Headquarters 1/21/69. 0Memnrandum from FBI Headquarters to Cleveland Field Oflee, 11/29/68. 60 1ill Manual of Instructions, SeC. 87. B(2-). aSfMemorandum from FBI Headquarters toW nAptonto 11.14 Oftco 742860.

Memorandum from Ste hen Narl to. rgar Hoover 5/21/40; 6117/40. "Letter from J. Edgar Hfoover to (hote Allen. 12/8/4. "Letter from J. Edgar Hoover to MaJ. en. Harry Vaug n, 2/18/4. 

* Letter from J. Edgar Hoover to M. J. Connelly, 1/2%                    

> erettera from J. Edgar Hoover to Dillon Anderson a//55. ,Letter from J. dgar Hoover to Robert Cutler, 2/18/5s. Letters from

J. Edgar Hoover to Robert Cutler, Q/21/58.4/27/58, 428 

-The Kennedy Administration had the FBI wiretap a Congressional staff member," three executive officials," a lobbyist," and a Washington law firm."' Attorney General Robert F. Kennedy received the fruits of a FBI "tap" on Martin Luther King, Jr.," and a "bug" on a Congressman both of which yielded informa-tion of a political nature." -President Johnson asked the FBI to conduct "name checks" of his critics and of members of the staff of his 1964 opponent, Senator Barry Goldwater.' Ile also requested purely political Intelligence on his critics in the Senate and received extensive intelligence reports on political activity at the 1964 Democratic Convention from FBI electronic surveillance.M -- President Nixon authorized a program of wiretaps which produced for the White House purely political or personal information unrelated to national security, Including information about a Supreme Court justice." 

3. Covert Action and the Use of Illegal or Improper Means 

(a) CJovert Action.-Apart from uncovering excesses in the collection of intel-ligence, our investigation has disclosed covert actions directed against Americans, and the use of illegal and improper surveillance techniques to gather information. For example: 

(I) The Fill's COINTIELPRO-counterintelligence program-was designed to "disrupt" groups and "neutralize" Individuals deemed to be threats to domestic security. The FBI resorted to counterintelligence tactics In part because its chief officials believed that the existing law could not control the activities of certain dissident groups, and that court decisions had tied the hards of the Intelligence community. Whatever opinion one holds about the polities of the targeted groups, many of the tactics employed by the FBI were indisputably degrading to a free society. COINTEIIRO tactics included: -Anonymously attacking the political beliefs of targets in order to induce their employers to fire them; -Anonymously mailing letters to the spouses of intelligence targets for the purpose of destroying their marriages; "

-Obtaining from IRS the tax returns of a target and then attempting to pro-voke an IRS investigation for the express purpose of deterring a protest leader from attending the Democratic National Convention; "

-Falsely and anonymously labeling as Government informants members of groups known to be violent, thereby exposing the falsely labeled member to expulsion or physical attack: -- Pursuant to instructions to use "misinformation" to disrupt demonstrations. employing such means as broacasting fake orders on the same citizens band radio frequency used by demonstration marshals to attempt to control demon-strations," and duplicating and falsely filling out forms soliciting housing for persons coming to a demonstration, thereby causing "long and useless Journeys to locate these addresses": 01 

Sending an anonymous letter to the leader of a Chicago street gang (described as "violence-prone") stating that the Black l'anthers were supposed to hat. "at hit out for you." The letter was suggested because it "may intensify . . . ani-mnosity" and cause the street gang leader to "take retaliatory action"." 

(11) From "late 196.3" until his dejith iii 1GIW. Martin Luther King, Jr.. was the target of an intensive campaign by the Federal Bureau of Investigation to "neutralize" him as an effective civil rights leader. In the words of the mIai in charge of the FBI's "war" against Dr. King, "No holds were barred." s• Memorandum from J. Edgar Hoover to the Attorney General, 2/16/61. * Memorandum from J. Edgar Hoover to the Attorney General. 2/14/61.    

> mMemorandum from J.

Fdgar Hoover to the Attorney General. 2/16/61. Memorandum from J. Edgar Hoover to the Attorney General, 6/28/62. Memorandum from Charles Brennan to William Sullivan, 12/19/66.                                                                                                             

> MMemorandum from J. Edgar Hoover to the Attorney General. 2/18/61. 64 Memorandum from J. Edgar Hoover to Bill Moyers. 10/27/64. "Memorandum from C. 1). DeLoach to John Mohr, 8/29/64.
> "Letter from J. Edgar Hoover to H. R. Haldeman. 6/25/70.
> &Memorandum from FBI Headquarters. to Man Francisco ield Ofl'e. 11/20/6q. soMemornndum from (Midwest Cityl Field Office to FBI Headquarters, 8/1/68: memn-rantlm from FBI Headquarters to (Midwest City] Field Office. 8/6/68.
> -Memorandum from Columbia Field Office to FBI Headquarters, 11/4/70, ro: COIN-TELPRO-New Left. 66 Memorandum from Charles Brennan to William Sullivan. 8/15/68.
> 61 Memorandum from Chicago Field Offie to FBI Headquarters. 9/9/6R. M' Memorandum from FBI Headquarters to Chicago Field Ofce, 1/30/69 re: COINTEL,-PRO. Black Nationalint-Hlate Groups.
> 43 William C. Sullivan testimony. 11/1/75. p. 49.

429 

The FBI gathered information about Dr. King's plans and activities through an extensive surveillance program, employing nearly every intelligence-gather-ing technique at the Bureau's disposal in order to obtain information about the "private activities of Dr. King and his advisors" to use to "completely discredit" them." The program to destroy Dr. King as the leader of the civil rights movement included efforts to discredit int with Executive branch officials, Congressional leaders, foreign heads of state, American ambassadors, churches, universities, and the press.® The FBI mailed 1)r. King a tape recording made front microphones hidden In his hotel rooms which one agent testified was an attempt to destroy Dr. King'*s marriage.' The tape recording was accompanied by a note which. Dr. King and hlls advisors-Interpreted as threatening to release the tape recording miless Dr. King committed suicide." The extraordinary nature of the campaign to discredit Dr. King Is evident from two documents: At the August 1963 'March on Washington, Dr. King told the country of his "dream" that: "all of God's children, black men and white men, Jews and Gentiles, Protes-tants and Catholics, will be able to Join hands and sing in the words of the old Negro spiritual, 'Free at last, free at last, thank God Ahnlighty, I'm free at last.' "

The Bureau's Domestic Intelligence 1)ivision concluded that this "demagogic spev'h" established I)r. King as the "most dangerous and effective Negro lead,,r in the country."" Shortly afterwards, and within days after )r. King was named "Man of the Year" by Time magazine, the FBI decided to "take 111111 off his pedestal," "reduce him completely in influence," and select and promote its own candidate to "assunme the role of the leadership of the Negro peopde." In early 1968, Bureau headquarters explained to the field that Dr. King must be destroyed because he was seen as a potential "mnessialh" who could "unify and electrify" the "black nationalist movement". Indeed, to the FBI i was apotential threat because he might abandonn his supposed 'obedience,' to white liberal doctrines (non-violence)." " In short, a non-violent man was to be secretly attacked and destroyed as Instirane(, against his abandoning non-violenee. 

(b) Illegal or Improper Means.-The surveillance which we investigated was not only vastly excessive in breadth and a basis for degrading counterintelligence actions, but was also often conducted by illegal or inmproperMeans. For example: (1) For approximately 20 years the CIA carried out a program of indis-criminately opening citizens' first class mail. The Bureau also had a mail opening program, but cancelled it in 1966. The Bureau continued, however, to receive the illegal fruits of CIA's program. In 1970, the heads of both agencies signed adocument for President Nixon, which correctly stated that mail opening was illegal, falsely stated that it had been discontinued, and proposed that the illegal opening of mail should be resumed because it would provide useful results. The President approved the program, but withdrew his approval five days later. The illegal opening continued nonetheless. Throughout this period CIA oftclals knew that mail opening was illegal. but expressed concern about the "flap potential" of exposure, not about the illegality of their activity.,n (2) From 1947 until May 1975, NSA received from international cable com-panies millions of cables which had been sent by American citizens in the reason-able expectation that they would be kept private." (3) Since the early 1930's, intelligence agencies have frequently wiretapped and hugged American citizens without the benefit of Judicial warrant. Recent court decisions have curtailed the use of these techniques against domestic targets. But past subjects of these surveillances have included a United States Memorandum from Baumngardner to Sullivan. 2/4/64.          

> 10 Memorandum from Chicago Field Office to FBI Headquarters, 12/103168: memorandiim

from FBI Ieadouarteru to Chicago Field Office, 1/80/69, re: COINTELPRO. Biac'k Nnttnnnliat-HatP Groups. " William C. Sullivan. 11/1/75, pp. 104-105. Andrew Young testimony, 219/76 . P.8.                  

> "Memorandum from Sullivan to Belmont, A/80/68. *Memorandum from Sullivan to Belmont, 1/8/64.
> ," Memorandum from FBI Headquarters to all SACs.

3/4/68.                        

> 71 1See Mail Opening Report: Section II, "Legal Considerations and the 'Flap' Potential."
> 7' See NSA Report: Section I. "Introduction and Summary."
> 82-I29-77-28

430 

Congressman, a Congressional staff member, journalists and newsmen, and numerous individuals and groups who engaged in no criminal activity and who posed no genuine threat to the national security, such as two White House domestic affairs advisers and an anti-Vietnam War protest group. While the prior written approval of the Attorney General has been required for all war-rantless wiretaps since 1940, the record is replete with instances where this requirement was ignored and the Attorney General gave only after-the-fact authorization. Until 1965, microphone surveillance by intelligence agencies was wholly un-regulated in certain classes of cases. Within weeks after a 1954 Supreme Court decision denouncing the FBI's installation of a microphone in a defendant's bedroom, the Attorney General informed the Bureau that he did not believe the decision applied to national security cases and permitted the FBI to continue to install microphones subject only to its own "intelligent restraint"." (4) In several cases, purely political information (such as the reaction of Congress to an Administration's legislative proposal) and purely personal in-formation (such as coverage of the extra-marital social activities of a high-level Executive official under surveillance) was obtained from electronic surveillance and disseminated to the highest levels of the federal government." (5) Warrantless break-ins have been conducted by intelligence agencies since World War II. During the 1960's alone, the FBI and CIA conducted hundreds of break-ins, many against American citizens and domestic organizations. In some cases, these break-ins were to install microphones; in other cases, they were to steal such items as membership lists from organizations considered "subver-sive" by the Bureau." (6) The most pervasive surveillance technique-.has been the informant. In arandom sample of domestic intelligence cases, 83% involved informants and 5% involved electronic surveillance." Informants have been used against peaceful, law-abiding groups; they have collected information about personal and political views rind activities." To maintain their credentials in violence-prone groups, informants have involved themselves in violent activity. This phenomenon is well illustrated by an informant in the Klan. He was present at the murder of acivil rights worker in Mississippi and subsequently helped to solve the crime and convict the perpetrators. Earlier, however, while performing duties paid for by the Government, he had previously "beaten people severely, had boarded buses and kicked people, had (gone] into restaurants and beaten them [blacks] with blackjacks, chains, pistols."" Although the FBI requires agents to instruct in-formants that they cannot be Involved in violence, it was understood that in the Klan, "he couldn't be an angel and be a good informant."" 4. Ignoring the Law 

Officials of the intelligence agencies occasionally recognized that certain activ-ities were illegal, but expressed concern only for "flap potential." Even more dis-turbing was the frequent testimony that the law, and the Constitution were sim-ply ignored. Foe example, the author of the so-called Iuston plan testified: 

Questitm. Was there any person who stated that the activity recommended, which you. have previously identified as being illegal opening of the mail and breaking and entry or burglary-was there any single person who stated that such activity should not be done because it was unconstitutional? Answer. No. Quction. Was there any single person who said such activity should not be done because it was illegal? Answer. No." Similarly, the man who for ten years headed FBI's Intelligence Division testi-fied that: "... never once did I hear anybody, Including myself, raise the question: 'Is this course of action which we have agreed upon lawful, is it legal, is it ethical or                                                          

> U' Memorandum from Attorney General Brownell to J. Edgar Hoover, 5/20/54.
> 74 See finding on Political Abuse. To protect the privacy of the targeted individual, the Committee has omitted the citation to the memorandum concerning the example of purely
> personal information.
> "Memorandum from W. CSullivan to C. D. DeLoach 7/19/66, p. 2. 7Opneral Accounting Office Report on Domestic Intk Ionce Operations of the FBI, 9/75. 7

Mary Jo Cook testimony.12/2/71, Hearings, Vol 6, p. ill.                      

> fIary Rowe deposition. 0/17//T5, p. 9.
> !!p,4,ca1 Agent No. 8deposition. 11/21/75, p. 12.
> Hufton testimony, 9/2/75, Heariing VoL 2, p. 41.

431 

nioral.' We never gave any thought to this line of reasoning, because we were Just naturally pragmatic." U

Although the statutory law and the Constitution were often not "[given] a thought",'c there was a general attitude that intelligence needs were respon-sive to a higher law. Thus, as one witness testified in Justifying the FBI's mail opening program: "It was my assumption that what we were doing was Justified by what we had to do . . . the greater good, the national security." ,5. Dficiencies in Acountability and Control The overwhelming number of excesses continuing over a prolonged period of time were due in large measure to the fact that the system of checks and bal-ances--created in our Constitution to limit abuse of Governmental power-was seldom applied to the intelligence community. Guidance and regulations from out-sd(e the intelligence agencies--where it has been imposed at all-has leen vague. Presidents and other senior Executive officials, particularly the Attorneys Gen-enl, have virtually abdicated their Constitutional responsibility to oversee and set standards for intelligence activity. Senior government officials generally gave the agencies broad, general mandates or pressed for immediate results on pressing problems. In neither case did they provide guidance t, prevent excesses and their broad mandates and pressures themselves often resulted in excessive or improper intelligence activity. Congress has often declined to exercise meaningful oversight, and on occasion has passed laws or made statements which were taken by intelligence agencies as supporting overly-broad investigations. On the other hand, the record reveals instances when intelligence agencies have concealed improper activities from their superiors in the Executive branch and from the Congress, or have elected to disclose only the less questionable aslects of their activities. There has been, in short, a clear and sustained failure by those responsible to control the intelligence community and to ensure its accountability. There has been an equally clear and sustained failure by intelligence agencies to fully in-form the proper authorities of their activities and to comply with directives from those authorities. 

6. The Adverse Impact of Improper Intelligence Activity 

Many of the illegal or improper disruptive efforts directed against American citizens andi domestic organizations succeeded in injuring their targets. Although it is sometimes difficult to prove that a target's misfortunes were caused by acounter-intelligence program directed against him, the possibility that an arm of the United States Government intended to cause the harm and might have been responsible is itself abhorrent. The Committee has observed numerous examples of the Impact of intelligence operations. Sometimes the harm. was readily apparent-destruction of marriages, loss of friends or Jobs. Sometimes the attitudes of the public and of Government officials responsible for formulating policy and resolving vital issues were in-flllenced by distorted intelligence. But the most basic harm was to the values of privacy and freedom which our Constitution seeks to protect and which intel-ligence activity infringed on a broad scale. 

(a) General Efforts to# D)scredit.-Several efforts against individuals and groups appear to have achieved their stated aims. For example: A Bureau Field Office reported that the anonymous letter it had sent to an activist's husband accusing his ife of infidelity "contributed very strongly" to the subsequent breakup of the marriage." Another Field Office reported that a draft counsellor deliberately, and falsely, accused of being an FBI informant was "ostracized" by his friends and associates."  

> '

William Stullivan testimony, 11 /1/75. pp. 92-9O. Thp quote Is from a Bureau official who had supervised for the "Black Nationalist Hate Group" COINTELPRO.                                       

> "Question. Did anybody at any time that you remember during the course of the programs disciiss the Constitutionality or the legal authority, or anything else like that? "Answer. No. we never gave it athought. As far as Iknow.

nobod," engaged or ever had                                                 

> Riiy idea that they were doing anything other than what was the policy of the Bureau which lhnd been policy for along time." (George Moore deposition. 11/8/75, p. 88.) "BranIgan, 10/9/75, .41. "Miemorandum from St. Louis Field Office to FBI Headquarters, 6/19/70.
> 0Memorandum from San Diego Field Office to FBI Headquarters 4/80/69.

432 

Two instructors were reportedly put on probation after the Bureau sent an anonymous letter to a university administrator about their funding of an anti-administration student newspaper." The Bureau evaluated its attempts to "put a stop" to a contribution to the Southern Christian Leadership Conference as "quite successful." '

An FBI document boasted that a "pretext" phone call to Stokely Carmichael's mother telling her that members of the Black Panther Party intended to kill her son left her "shocked". The memorandum intimated that the Bureau believed It had been responsible for Carmichael's flight to Africa the following day.' 

(b) Media Manipulation.-The FBI has attempted covertly to influence the public's perception of persons and organizations by disseminating derogatory information to the press, either anonymously or through "friendly" news con-tacts. The impact of those articles is generally difficult to measure, although in some cases there are fairly direct connections to injury to the target. The Bureau also attempted to influence media reporting which would have any impact on the i public Image of the FBI. Examples include: Planting a series of derogatory articles about Martin Luther King, Jr., and the Poor People's Campaign.' For example, in anticipation of the 1968 'poor people's march on Washington, D.C.," Bureau Headquarters granted authority to furnish "cooperative news media sources" an article "designed to curtail success of Martin Luther King's fund raising."" Another memorandum illustrated how "photographs -,* demon-strators" could be used in discrediting the civil rights movement. Six photographs of participants in the poor people's campaign in Cleveland accompanied the memorandum with the following note attached: "These [photographs] show the militant aggressive appearance of the participants and might be of interest to acooperative news source." 1 Information on the Poor People's Campaign was provided by the FBI to friendly reporters on the condition that "the Bureau must not lie revealed as the source." 2Soliciting information from Field Offices "on a continuing basis" for "prompt... dissemination to the news niedin . . . to discredit the New Left inovenent and its adherrents." The Headquarters directive requested, among other things, that: "specific data should be furnished depicting the scurrilous and depraved nature of many of the characters, activities, habits and living conditions representative of Nev' Left adherrents." Field Offices were to be exhorted that: "Every avenue of possible embarrassment must be vigorously and enthusiastically explored." "

Ordering Field Offices to gather information which would disprove allegations by the "liberal press, the bleeding hearts, and the forces on the left" that the Chicago police used undue force in dealing with demonstrators at the 1968 Democratic Convention." Taking advantage of a close relationship with the Chairman of the Board--described in an FBI memorandum as "our good friend"--of a magazine with national circulation to influence articles which related to the FBI. For example. through this relationship the Bureau: "squelched" an "unfavorable article against the Bureau" written by a free-lance writer about an FBI investigation; "post-poned publication" of an article on another FBI case; "forestalled publication" of an article by Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.; and received information about proposed editing of Kings' articles." 

(c) Distorting Data to Influence Government Policy and Public Perceptiofl.-

Accurate intelligence is a prerequisite to sound government policy. However, as the past head of the FBI's Domestic Intelligence Division reminded the Com-mittee: 'The facts by themselves are not tol) meaningful. They are something like stones cast into a heap.Y, " 'Memorandum from Mobile Field Office to FBI Headquarters, 12/9/70.                                              

> N7 Memorandum from Wick to DeLoach. 11/9/66. sMemorandum from New York Field Office to FBI Headquarters. 9/9, 68.
> ,See King Report: Sections Vand VII.
> ,o Memorandum from 0. C. Moore to W. C. Sullivan, 10/26/68.
> ,1 Memorandum from 0. C. Moore to W. C. Sullivan /17/68.
> ,Memorandum from FBI Headquarters to Miami

Field Office. 7/9/68. " Memorandum from C. D. Brennan to W. C. Sullivan 5/22/68. wMemorandum from FBI Headquarters to Chicago Field Office. 8/28/68.           

> "Memorandum from W. H. Stepleton to DeLoach, 11/8/64.
> 'W Sullivan, 11/1/75, p. 48.

433 

On certain crucial subjects the domestic intelligence agencies reported the "facts" in ways that gave rise to misleading impressions. For example, the FBI's Domestic Intelligence Division initially discounted as an "obvious failure" the alleged attempts of Communists to influence the civil rights movement." Without any significant change In the factual situation, the Bureau moved from the Division's conclusion to Director Hoover's public con-gressional testimony characterizing Communist influence on the civil rights move-ment as "vitally important." 1

FBI reporting on protests against the Vietnam War provides another example of the manner in which the Information provided to decision-makers ---an be skewed. In acquiescence with a Judgment already expressed by President John-son, the Bureau's reports on demonstrations against the War in Vietnam empha-sized Communist efforts to influence the anti-war movement and underplayed the fact that the vast majority of demonstrators were not Communist controlled.* 

(d) "Chilling" First Amendnent Rights.&-The First Amendment protects the Rights of American citizens to engage In free and open discussions, and to asso-cite with persons of their choosing. Intelligence agencies have, on occasion, ex-pressly attempted to interfere with those rights. For example, one internal FBI memorandum called for "more interviews" with New Left subjects "to enhance tie paranoia endemic iii these circles" and "get the point across there Is an FIl agent behind every mailbox." "o -More Importantly, the government's surveillance activities in the aggregate-whether or niot expressly intended to do so--tends, as the Committee concludes at 

1). 290 to deter the exercise of First Amendment rights by American citizens who bcome aware of the government's domestic intelligence program. 

(c) Prcvcnting the Frec Exchange of Ideas. Speakers, teachers, writers, and publications themselves were targets of the FBI's counterintelligence program. 

"The Flil's efforts to interfere with the free exchange of ideas Included :

Anonymously attempting to prevent an alleged "Communist-front" group from holding a forum on a midwest campus, and then investigating the judge who or-dered that the meeting be allowed to proceed.'O' l'sing another "confidential source" in a foundation which contributed to a local college to apply pressure on the school to fire an activist, professor. Anonyinously contacting a university official to urge him to 'persuade" two pro-fessors to stop funding a student newspaper, in order to "eliminate what voice the New IAft ha" In the area. Targeting the New Mexico Free University for teaching "confrontation poli-

tics" anid "draft counseling training." 7. Cost and Value 

Domestic intelligence is expensive. We have already Indicated the cost of illegal and improper intelligence activities In terms of the harm to victims. thc injury to constitutional values, and the damage to the democratic process itself. The cost in dollars is also significant. For example, the FBI has budgeted for fiscal year 1916 over $7 million for its domestic security informant program, more than twice the amount it spends on informants against organized crime.' The aggregate budget for FBI domestic security intelligence and foreign coun-terintellig,,nce is at least $80 million." In the late 1960s and early 1970s, when Memorandum from Baumgardner to Sullivan, 8/26/68, p. 1. Hoover himself construed the Initial Division estimate to mean that Communist Influence was "Infinitesimal."                  

> "' See Finding on Political Abuse, p. 225.
> See Finding on Political Abuse p. 225.
> '"New Left Notos-Phladelphla," 9/16/70,

E41tion #1. 101 Memorandum from Detroit Field Office to FBI Headquarters. 10/26/60: Memorandum from FBI Headquarters to Detroit Field OfflicgW/27, 28, 81/60; Memorandum from Baum-gnrdner to Belmont. 10/26/60.        

> Ito) See COINTELPRO Report: Section III. "The

Goal. of COINTELPRO: Preventing or disrupting the exercise of First Amendment Rights." 1tdThe budget for FBI Informant programs includes not only the payments to inform-  

> ants~ for

their services and expenses, nut also the expenses of FI personnel who 4%1perVIser informants, their support costs, and administrative overhead. (Justice Department letter to Senate Select Committee, 3/2/76).             

> IN The Committee Is withholdlng the portion of this figure spent on

domestic security Intelligence (informants and other Investigations combined) to prevent hostile foreign intelligence services from deducing the amount spent on counterespionage. The $80 million figure does not Include all costs of separate FBI activities which may he drawn upon for rlonistIc security Intelligence purposes. Among these are the Identification Division (main-taining fingerprint records), the Files and Communications Division (managing the storage and retrieval of investigative and Intelligence files), and the FBI Laboratory. 434 

the Bureau was joined by the CIA, the military, and NSA in collecting infor-mation about the anti-war movement and black activists, the coat was substan-tially greater. Apart from the excesses described above, the usefulness of many domestic intelligence activities in serving the legitimate goal of protecting society has been questionable. Properly directed intelligence investigations concentrating upon hostile foreign agents and violent terrorists can produce valuable rmults. The Committee has examined cases where the FBI uncovered "illegal" agents of a foreign power engaged in clandestine Intelligence activities In violation of federal law. Information leading to the prevention of serious violence has been acquired by the FBI through its informant penetration of terrorist groups and through the inclusion in Bureau files of the names of persons actively involved with such groups." Nevertheless, the most sweeping domestic intelligence sur-veillance programs have produced surprisingly few useful returns in view of their extent. For example: Between 1960 and 1974, the FBI conducted over 500,000 separate investiga-tions of persons and groups under the "subversive" category, predicated on the possibility that they might be likely to overthrow the government of the United States.'" Yet not a single individual or group has been prosecuted since 1957 under the laws which prohibit planning or advocating action to overthrow the government and which are the main alleged statutory basis for such FBI investigations.1' A recent study by the General Accounting Office has estimated that of some 17,528 FBI domestic intelligence investigations of Individuals in 1974, only 1.8 percent resulted in prosecution and conviction, and in only "about 2 percent" of the caws was advance knowledge of-any activity-legal or illegal-obtalned.1 One of the main reasons advinced for expanded collection of intelligence about urban unrest and anti-war protest was to help responsible officials cope with pos-sible violence. However, a former White House official with major duties in this area under the Johnson administration bas concluded, in retrospect, that "in none of these situations . . . would advance Intelligence about dissident groups [have) been of much help," that what was needed was "physical Intelligence" about the geograJ)hy of major cities, and that the attempt to "predict violence" was not a"successful undertaking." '" 

Domestic intelligence reports have sometimes even been counter-productive. Alocal police chief, for example, described FBI reports which led to the position-

Ini of federal troops near his city as :

"...almost completely composed of unsorted and unevaluated stories, threats, and rnors tbat had ero.9sed my desk in New Haven. Many. of these had long before been discounted by our Intelligence Division. But they had made their way from New Haven to Washington, had gained completely unwarranted credi-bility, and had been submitted by the Director of the FBI to the President of the United States. They seemed to present a convincing picture of impeding holocaust." ",      

> IExamples of vaulable Informant reports

Include the followin : one Informant reported a plan to ambush police officers and th location of a cache or weapons and dynamite: another informant reported plans to transport Illegally obtained weapons to Washington, D.C. : two informants at one meeting discovered plans to dynamite two city blocks. All of these plans were frustrated by further Investigation and protective measures or arrest. (FBI memorandum to Select Committee, 12/10/75; Senate Select Committee Staff memo-randum: Intelligence Cases In Which the FBI Prevented Violence, undated.) One example of the use of Information In Bureau files Involved a "name check" at Secret Service request on certain persons applying for prem credentials to cover the visit of a foreign head of state. The discovery of data In FBI fles Indicating that one such person had been actively Involved with violent groups led to further Investigation and ulti-mately the hssuance of a search warrant. The search produced evidence, including weapons.               

> of aplot to assassinate the foreign head of state. (FBI memorandum to Senate Select Committee 2/23/76)

Iu This Is the nuimter of "investiXative matter" handled by the FI In this area, Including an separate items the investigative leads In particular cases which are followed up by various field offices. (FBI memorandum to Select Committee. 10/6/75.)                    

> 10' Shackeirord 2/13/76. p. 32. This offirinl does not recall any targets of "subversive" investigations having been referred to a

Grand Jury under these statutes since the 1950%.                                         

> 11 "Pll DurtnrfI-Itstellilence Oprntlon,--Thelr Purpose and Scope: Isuies That Need
> To lip Resolved." I?port by the Comptroller General to the House Judiciary Co'umlttip. 2'24/74, pp. 135-147. The FBI contends that these statistics may be unfair in that they eroneentra eon

lnvestigations of Individuals rather than groups. (Ibid.. Appendix V) In res onse, -GAO states that Its "sample of organisation and control fles was s(Ificlant to dtormilne that generally the FBI did not report advance knowledge of planned violence." JI most of the fourteen instances where such advance knowledge was obtained, it related to "such activities as speeches, demonstrations or meetngs--all esentially nonviolent."             

> (Ibid.. p. 144) w0 Joseph Callfano testimony. 1/27/76. pp. 7-8.
> 110 James Ahern testimony, 1/20/76. pp. 16. 17.

435 

In considering its recommendations, the Committee undertook an evaluation of the FBI's claims that domestic Intelligence was necessary to combat terrorism, civil disorders, "subversion," and hostile foreign intelligence activity. The Com-mittee reviewed voluminous materials bearing on this issue and questioned Bureau officials, local police officials, and present and former federal executive officials. We have found that we are in fundamental agreement with the wisdom of Attorney General Stone's initial warning that intelligence agencies must not be "concerned with political or other opinions of individuals" and must be limited to investigating essentially only "such conduct as is forbidden by the laws of the United States." The Committee's record demonstrates that domestic intelligence which departs from this standard raises grave risks of undermining the demo-cratic process and harming the interests of individual citizens. This danger weighs heavily against the speculative or negligible benefits of the ill-defined and overbroad investigations authorized in the past. Thus, the basic purpose of the recommendations contained in Part IV of this report is to limit the FBI to in-vestigating conduct rather than ideas or associations. The excesses of the past (1o not, however, justify depriving the United States of a clearly defined and effectively controlled domestic intelligence capability. The intelligence services of this nation's international adversaries continue to attempt to conduct clandestine espionage operations within the United States." Our recommendations provide for intelligence investigations of hostile foreign intelligence activity. Moreover, terrorists have engaged in serious acts of violence which- have brought death and injury to Americans and threaten further such acts. These acts, not the politics or beliefs of those who would commit them, are the proper focus for investigations to anticipate terrorist violence. Accordingly, the Com-mittee would permit properly controlled intelligence investigations in those nar-row circumstances" Concentration on Imminent violence can avoid the wasteful dispersior, of re-sources which has characterized the sweeping (and frultless) domestic intelli-gence investigations of the past. But the most important reason for the finda-mental change in the domestic intelligence operations which our Recommenda-tions prol)se is the need to protect the constitutional rights of Americans. In light of the record of ahlswr revealed by our inquiry, the Committee is not satisfied with the position that mere exposure of what has occurred In the post will prevent It- recurrence. Clear legal standards and effective oversight and controls are necessary to ensure that d'unestie intelligence activity does not itself unthruine the democratic system it is intended to protect. [From the New York Times, May 25, 1976] Two POSTAL AwDta HELD i1 $800,000 THEFT (By Max H. Seigel) Two Postal Service employees at Kennedy International Airport were accused yesterday of stealing $80O00 and then going on a spending spree totaling nearly $150,000. The rest of the money still is missing. The theft was considered to be the largest embezzlement of currency in the history of the post office. Both the theft and the spending were said to have occurred while Federal officials were keeping one of the two suspects under surveillance. The officials                      

> M1 An indication of the scope of the problem Is the increasing number of nffirial repre-sentatives of communist governments in the United

States. For example, the number of Soviet official. In this country has increased from 38 in 1961 to 1,079 by early 1975. There were 2,698 East-West exchange visitors and 1,500 commercial visitors in 1974. (FBI Memorandum, 'Intelligence Activities Within the United States by Foreign Governments."                                                                                                           

> 8/20/75.) "' According to the FBI, there were 89 bombings attributable to terrorist activity in 1975,. as compared with 45 In 1974 and 24 in 1978. Six persons died in terrorist claimed bom'in ga and 76 persons were injured in 1975. Five other deaths were reported In other types of terrorist incidents. Monetary damage reported in terrorist bombings exceeded 2.7 nlyeion dollars. It should be noted, however, that terrorist bombings are only afraction of the total number of bombings in this country. Thu., the 89 terrorist bombings in 1975 were among atotal of over 1900 bombings most of which were not, according to the FBI, attributable clearly to terrorist activity. (k131 memorandum to Senate Select Committee. 2/23/76.)

436 

reported that they had been tipped off to watch David Walker, 48 years old, a foreman of mails, two weeks before the theft occurred, last September 22. An unidentified person had reported to the postal inspectors that 1a. had been approached by Mr. Walker and had been offered $100,000 to transport a mail pion11 from the Postal Service facility at Kennedy Airport to a pre-arranged point Outside. At the time, the Informant said, Mr. Walker had told him he had another person working with him inside the airport mail facility. The informant then discussed these matters with Mr. Walker In a telephone conversation, which he taped and subsequently turned over to postal inspectors. The officials reported that their investigation then disclosed that the theft had occurred In the registry section of the airport mail facility. A Postal Service registry bill, bearing the signature of Helen A. Helton, showed that she had been the last-known person to be in possession of the 12 parcels of mail that were stolen. Mrs. Helton, 47, of 38-26 Corporal Stone Street, Bayside, Queens, a $250-a-week clerk, was arrested with Mr. Walker yesterday in connection with the theft. According to Gavin Scott!, an assistant United States Attorney, most of the money that was taken had been shipped in 10 parcels from the Banco Nazionale in Milan, Italy, to the Irving Trust Company, here. The other two parcels had Ieen shipped from tile Royal Bank of Canada, on the island of Granada In the British West Indies, to the Chase Manhattan Bank. A spokesman for Chase Manhattan said that this shipment had involved only $2,000. A spokesman at the Irving Trust Company said that the hank was not respon-slide for the money, since it had not received it. lie added that it could be assiimed that the shipper had insured the parcels. 

KXPSK DrTrUE LIST= 

Edmond 11. Mullins, a postal inspector who signed the complaint against the two suspects, listed some of their expenditures. lie said that three weeks after the theft, on Oct. 14, Mr. Walker had paid in cash about $1,500 that he owed his Bank AmeriCard account; on Oct. 28, he Iought a tract for $2,250; on Dec. 30, he purchased a Ford Elite for his wife for •4,108; on Jan. 6 of this year, he bought three parcels of property in Jamaica, Quens, for $500.000, paying $100,000 in cash: on Feb. 5, he bought a $15,500 Jagiar ear for himself; and on Feb. 19, he paid $5,000 In cash for a Ford Thunder-bird, which Mrs. Ilelton bought. In.opector Mullins noted that Mr. Walker, who lives at 188-25 121st Avenue, St. Alhans, Queens. earned only $17,000. Neither the postal inspectors nor other officials were able to say yesterday how the two suspects could have removed the packages of currency from the airport mail facility. loth Mr. Walker and Mrs. Hlelton were arraigned in Feleral Court In Brooklyn before Magistrate Vincent A. Catogglo. lie ordered each held in $50,000 ball 

pending a hearing June 3. 194th Cong., 2d sews., Report No. 94-7551 I'P1'1.EMF.NTARY DETAILED STAFF REPORTS ON JNTE.T.JOENCE ACTIVITirs AND TIlE  

> RtIGHTS

or AmERICANS-I0OOK III 

Final report of the select committee to study governmental operations with res l .t to Intelligence activities United States Senate. 

I r(x('F1P 1I'lack Panther Part), 

> ('('alnIlanllst

('ongr ,q of Racial Equality Kit Klux Klan Ln tin American Mi it tenian Nation of Islam 

National States Rights Party l'rogn ,ssive Labor Party 437 

Nationalist groups advocating Independence for Puerto Rico revolutionary Action Movement Southern Christian Leadership Conference Students for a Democratic society Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee Socialist Workers Party Workers World Party Miscellaneous "

Tile overlap with the Security Index is indicated by the inclusion in 1968 of Students for a Democratic Society and the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee Ili a list of organizational afflliations for the Security Index. By 1968 the Security Index also contained persons without organizational affiliation designated "Anarchist" and "Black Nationalist." "

Tie Rabble Rouser Index was renamed the Agitator Index in March 1968, and field offices were directed to obtain a photograph of each person oh the Index.", The Domestic Intelligence Division also stressed the dangerousness of the "New Left" movement and the need to include its "leading activists" on the Security 

> Index.

"The emergence of the new left movement as a subversive force dedicated to the complete destruction of the traditional values of our democratic society presents the Bureau with an unprecedented challenge in the security field. Al-though the new left has no definable Ideology of its own, it does hmve strong Marxist, existentialist, nihilist and anarchist overtones. While mere membership 

it it new left group is not sufficient to establish that an Individual is a potential threat to the internal security of the United States, it must be recogniZed that many Individuals affiliated with the new left movement do, in fact, engage ilk 

violence or unlawful activities, and their Iotential ldangerousnes.4 Is I'clearly demonstrated by their statements. conduct and aetilns. "The Bureau has recently noted that in many instances security investigations of these-individuals are not being initiated. In some cases, subjects are not being recommended for inclusion on the Se-kcurity Index merely because no membership in a basic revolutionary organization could lWe (staIlis.hed. Since tile new left is basically anarchist, many of the leading activists in it are not memihers of any basic revolutionary group. It should 1e borne it ind that ever if a subject's membership in a subversive organization cannot be proven, his inclusion on the Security Index may ofte I,,, justified because of activities 

which establish his alnar('histie teldciiles. Ili this regard, you should constantly bear itn mind the public sIatemnnts, the writings and the l'adership activities of subjects of security investigations wh'ieh establish them as anarchists are            

> proper arraR of inquiry. Such activity should be actively lIir.114ed through in-

vestigation with the ultimate view of Including them on the Security Index. It Is entirely possible, therefore, that a subject without any organization nal affililation (an qualify for the Security Index by virtue of his puilie pronoiuenents and activities which establish hiq rejection of law anti order anti reveal hlim to bf. a

potential threat to tle security of tie United States." IEnhasIs added.] 

Field offices were cautioned, however, "that mere dissent and opposition to the Governnental policies peursmd in a legal constitutlouil manner are not siffl-clent to warrant inlislon in the Seiurity Inel]hx." Agents were to report infor-mation "to show the potentiafl threat 1nd not merely show anti-Viettnam or peace group sentimints without also revealing alv'e.acy of violence or unlawful action which would justify an Investigzation." At the same time that these lnstructlins vere i'-ued. tle FI1 Instituted a

COINTEI1RIO program against the "New Tft." The Agitator Index and tile 'ecurlty Index srvpd as indheators of the prime, s-ee'eects for effort. mlnder ('OTNTETPR11f to disruijt grnmiles and discredit inelivl.dis in the "New Left." The FRI diI not develop ifs new Security Index polleles alone. As the ('om-mission on Civil Disorders hnd encoiraged the F1l to) 1(,tntify "rahible rousers." so President Johnson ordered a eomprelivt.ive.-ye review oif the G,,vernnvent'. emergency llanq ifrr the Octuieer 19617 .Mi r ,n the 'entagn againl-t the Vietnam var.                   

> 110SAV' Lette'r No. u1Q AS,1 /I A'IR.
> S-1 SAC Ttter No. (14-14. 2/20/6.
> Memi eirandiuim from FBI ler'ndquarterm to all RAC'P. 3/21/6A.

qSAC Rettpr-n. O -21. 4/2/R.   

> 10See lt0port

on COINTErLPRO. 438 

Attorney General Ramsey Clark was appointed chairman of a committee to review the Presidential Emergency Action Documents (PEODs) prepared under the Emergency Detention Program. Subsequent decisions were sum-marized in an FBI memorandum: 

- "After extensive review, In which the FBI participated, a proposal was sub-mitted to the President that certain documents be revised. It was proposed that the Emergency Detention P1rogram be revised to agree with the provisions of the Emergency Detention Act [of 1950]. "Tie Internal Security Division (1SD) (if the department has raised questions as to the ability to disehnrge the rcspoiisildlitles of the Attorney General under the Emergeney Detention Act of 1950. By letter dated 2/26/08 the Department requested a conference with the FBI for the purpose of reviewing the implemen-tation of the Emergency I )ettntion Program..." UNITEr) STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR TiE DIsTRIcT or COLUMBIA CIRCUIT 

No. 74-18&3 ('NITED STAIRS OF AMERICA 11. B13RINARD L. BARKER, APPELLANT No. 74-1884 UNITED STATFS OF AMERICA 

> V.

ErENIo R. ARTINEZ. APPELLANT Aplpenls from the United States District Court for the District of Columbia (D.C. Criminal 74-116) Argued 18 June 1975 Decided 17 May 1976 1)otit IF). ,Slhult: appointedd by this Court), for appellants in Nos. 74-1883 and 

7.1 1 qR4. 

Philip R. Hcyman, Special Assistant to the Special Prosettor, with whom 

Ulenrj R. Ruth, Jr.. Special Prosecutor. Peter M. Krdinder, Counsel to the Spe-cial 1'rosecutor. Maureen E. Oerltn and Richard D. Weinberg, Assistant Special Prosecutors, were on the brief for appellee. Leon Jaworsak, Special Prosecutor at the time the record was fled, entered an appearance as Special Prosecutor. ?,an Afclharl Rchaeffer, Attorney, Department of Justice, filed a memorandum on b1,hnlf of the United States of Ameriea as amieus curiae. -

Before: TLVNTrITA, and Wrwry. Circuit Judges and METIznI.* United State* Distri t Judge for the Fastern District of Virginia. Opinion Per Curtain. Circuit Jiidge WILKrT and Dfqtrict Jud'.w MRNIRTOE filed opinions reersing the Iiiudment f the District 0onrt. Dissenting Opininn filed by irtuf Judge T,rvirTHAT,.    

> PER CURIt.A :

The mandate of the court is that the J.ndgment of the District Court Is revered and the ease is remnllded for a new trial. Judges Wilkey ond Merhige have filed separate opinions. Judge Teventhal dissents. RItting by designation pursuant to 28 U.S.C. 1 292(d). 439 

Wzi KEY, Circuit Judge: Two of the "footsoldiers" of the Watergate affair, Bernard Barker and Eugenio Martinez, are with us again. They haven't been promoted, they are still footsoldiers. They come before us this time to challenge their convictions under 18 U.S.C. 1 241, for their parts in the 1971 burglary of the office of Dr. Louis J. Fielding. I. FACTS During the summer of 1971, following the publication of the now famous pentagonon 1'alr'," a decision was made to establish a unit within the White lluse to investigate leaks of classified information. This "Room 16" unit, composed of Egil Krogh, JDavid Young, G. Gordon Liddy, and E. Howard IHunt-and under the general supervislon of John Ehrlichman-deternlltled, or was in-struci d, too ,olitin all possible infornation onl Daniel Ellsberg, the source of tile I'iiiiaies Papers leak.' After Elisinrg's psychiatrist. I)r. Fielding, refused to be interviejewed by FIl agents, the unit decided to obtain copies of Ellsberg's medi-c(II records ti rough a covert olpration. ilunt had been a career agent in the CI.% before his employment by the White Iliuse. ()ne of his asignments was as a supervising agent for the CIA in connection with the Bay of Pigs Invasion, and, as "Eduardo," he was well known and respected in Miamli's Cuban-American community. A fact destined to be (t considerable importance later, lie had heene Bernard Barker's imunediate supervisor in that operation. When the "!ooini 16" unit determined that it would 

Ih-best if the actual entry into iDr. Fielding's office were made by individuals not in the employ of the White House, Hunt recommended enlisting thie assistance of soini ,pf his former assoiates in M.iamni. Hunt had previously reestablished contn*t with Barker in Miami in late April 

1971, and he met Martinez at the same time. lie gave Barker an unlisted White House number where he couid lie reached bey phone and wrote to Barker on White House stationery. On one occasion Barker met with Hunt in the Executive Office Building. By August 1971 llunt returned to Miami and Informed Barker that he was working for an organization at the White House level with greater Jurisdic-tion than the FBI and the 'IA. lie asked Barker if he would become "opera-tional" again and help conduct a surreptiti 'as entry to obtain national security information on "a traitor to this country w'ie was passing... classified informa-tion to the Soviet Embassy." lie stated furth, r that "the nan in question ... was being considered as a possible Soviet agent hilself." Barker agreed to take part in the operation and to recruit two additional peo-ple. lie contacted Martinez and Felipe deDiego. Barker conveyed to Martinez the same information Hunt had given him, and Martinez agreed to participate. Liko Barker, Martinez had hegun working as a covert agent fir the CIA after Castro came to power in ('uba. Although Barker's formal relationship with the 

CIA had ended in 1966, Martinez was still on ('IA retainr when he was contacted. Both testified at trial that they had no reason to question Ilnt's credentials. He clearly worked for the While house and had a well known emiakgroiind with the CIA. During the entire time they worked for the CIA, neither Barker nor Martinez was ever shown any credentials by their superiors. Not once did they receive written instructions to engage in the operations they were ordered to per-form. Nevertheless, they testified, their understanding was always that those operations had been authorized by the Government of the United States. That they did not receive more detail on the purpose of the Fieldinr, operation or its target was not surprising to them; Hunt's instructions and actions were in com-plete accord with what their previous experience had taught them to expect. They were trained agents, accustomed to rely on the discretion of their superiors and to operate entirely on a "ned-to-know" basis. On 2 Septenber 1971 lhunt and Liddy met Barker, Martinez, and deDlego at ahotel in Beverly 1111,. Callornia. flunt Informed the defendants that they were to enter an office. search for a Imrticular file, photograph it, and replace it. The following day the group met again. Hunt showed Barker and 'Martinez identifica. tion papers and disguises lie had obtained from the CIA. That evening the defend-ants entered Dr. Fielding's office. Contrary to plan. it was necessary for them to use force to effect the break-in. As Instructed in this event, the defendants spilled pills on the floor to make it appe:ir the break-in had been a search for drugs. No 

file with the name Ellsberg was found.                    

> IAmore dtalled discussion of the organization aid purpose of the "Room 18" unit Is
> in our opinion In Usfted

States v. Khruehman, No. 74-192. at pp. 3-4. 440 

The next day Barker and Martinez returned to Miami. The only funds they received from Hunt in connection with the entry of Dr. Fielding's office were reimbursement for their living expenses, the cost of travel, and $100.00 for lost income. On 7 March 1974 the defendants were indicted under 18 U.S.C. 1 241, along with Ehrlichman, Liddy, and deDiego for conspiring to violate the Fourth Amend-ment rights of Dr. Fielding by unlawfully entering and searching his office. On 7

May 1974 the defendants filed a Motion for Discovery and Inspection with an accompanying memorandum outlining, inter alia, their proposed defense of ab-sence of mens rca due to a mistake of fact mixed with law attributable to their reasonable reliance on apparent authority.' On 24 May 1974, in a memorandum order, the District Court rejected the defendants' position, on the ground that "a mistake of law is no defense."' On 12 July 1974 the jury returned verdicts of guilty against both Barker and Martinez. I. LFCAL ISSUES The court's determination at the outset that a mistake of law could not excuse defendants' conduct led to two Important legal errors whieh require reversal of the Barker and Martinez convictions. First, the'defendants were prevented dftrhg the trial from offering complete evidence as to the reasonableness of their belief in hunt's authority to engage them in the Fielding operation.' Second, at the end of the trial, the District Court rejected the defendants' pro-pomd instructions setting forth their th(;ory of the ease.' The jury was advised that to convict they need find only that the purpose of the break-in was to enter and search Dr. Fielding's office without a warrant or his permission, and for agovernmental rather than purely private purposes; a mistake as to the legality of such an operation was no defense." Barker anti Martinez raise two arguments to sustain their position that they lacked the mens rea required for a conviction under section 241. The first is that their reasonable reliance on Hunt's authority-their "mistake of fact mixed with law"-negated the element of intent which is common to most serious erlinnial offenses, including conspiracy. It is this claim which requires reversal. Had the law as it stood in 1971 been correctly appraised by the trial judge, amore ample scope of proof and different Jury instructions would have been granted appellants, all as discussed in I'art IV, infra. The second argument is blised upon the particular element of "specific intent" contained in section 241. While the court's opinion in Ehrlichman analyzes this second argument in detail,' a summary here may be helpful to distinguish the two arguments.          

> I1. TIlE "SPECIFIC INTENT" REQUIREMENT OF 18 U.S.C. j241

It is settled law that a conviction under this section requires proof that the offender acted with a "specific intent" to interfere with the, federal rights in question.' This does not mean that he must have acted with the subjective                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     

> Ilarker Appendix at 55.
> 3United States v. Ehrichman, 876 F. Supp. 29. 85 (D.D.C. 1974). ,Ree generally Offer of Proof, Barker Appendix at 86.
> 8Barker Appendix at 104-05. S'rr. 2525-26: "In order to establish the requisite intent the Prosecutor must show that the object of the c4nspIracy and the purpose of each defendant was to carry out awarrantless entry Into and search of Dr. Fielding's office without permission. "In determining whether or not each defendant had the requisite Intent, you should keep in mind that amistake of fact may constitute adefense to the conspiracy charge but a
> mistake of law is not adefense. "Thus, If one of the defendants honestly believed that avalid warrant had br-en obtained, such amistake of fact would render him Innocent of the alleged conspiracy because it cannot be said that he Intended to conduct awarrantless search. "On the other hand, If the defendant was fully aware of the relevant facts-that the search lacked both warrant and Dr. Fielding's permission, but erroneously believed that the search was still legal, that would constitute amistake of law and amistake of law Is no eltlie. "In other words, an individual cannot escape the criminal law simply because he sincerely but Ineorru'ctly believes that his acts are justified in the name of patriotism, or national securltv, or aneed to create an unfavorable press Image, or that his supertorq, had the authority without awarrant to suspend the Constitutional protections of the Fotrth Amendnment." 'nited States v. Ehrllchman, No. 74-1822. at pp. 9-22.
> See, e.g., United States v. Guest, 883 U.S. 745, 753-54 (1966).

441 

awareness that his action was unlawful. It is enough that he intentionally performed acts which, under the circumstances of the case, would have been clearly in violation of federal law, absent any other defense. In the instant case, the District Court instructed the jury that a conviction was appropriate under section 241 if they found that the defendants conspired to enter and search Dr. Fielding's office, for governmental rather than personal reasons, without a warrant and without Dr. Fielding's permission. Barker and Martinez argue, however, citing United States v. Guest,' that the court erred in failing to advise the jury that a conviction was only possible if they further found that an unauthorized search of Dr. Fielding's office'was the predominant, as opposed to incidental, purpose of the conspiracy. They conclude that such atest could not be met here, since their primary objective was the inspection of Ellsberg's records, not the burglary of Dr. Fielding's office. Admittedly, the Supreme Court's brief discussion in Guest of the "specific intent" requirement is susceptible of the interpretation the defendants would place upon it. The Court did use the words "predominant purpose" to characterize the kind of intent to interfere with the right of interstate travel which could trig-ger the application of section 241.' That such an interpretation of the specificc in-tent" requirement is incorrect, however, was made quite clear by the Supreme Court in its most recent major decision on the requirements of section 241, Ander-

son v. United States." In that case, the primary objective of the conspiracy was to influence a local election by casting false votes. As an Incidental matter, false votes were cast for candidates for federal office as well. The Court concluded that "specific Intent" had been adequately proven: A single conspiracy may have several purposes but if one of them-whether primary or secondary-be the violation of federal law, the conspiracy is unlawful under federal law." Moreover, the Court emphasized, there was no requirement under section 241 that the defendants have entertained the purpose of changing the outcome of the federal election. It was enough that they intended to cast false votes for candidates for federal office and thereby dilute the voting power of their fellow citizens.'" Thus, under Anderson, even if the defendants had as their primary objective the photographing of Daniel Ellsberg's medical file, so long as one of the pur-poses of the entry was to search Dr. Fielding's office without a warrant or his content, the "specific intent" requirements of section 241 were met. Like that of Ehrlichman, the appeal of Barker and Martinez on this ground alone would falter. IV. THE DEFENSE OF GOOD FAITH, RFASONARLE RELIANCE ON APPARENT AUTHORITY 

A. The primary ground upon which defendants Barker and Martinez rest their appeal is the refusal of the District Court to allow them a defense based upon their good faith, reasonable reliance on Hunt's apparent authority. They char-acterize this defense as a mistake of fact "coupled with" a mistake of law which negated the men. rea required for a violation of section 241. "The mistake of fact was the belief that Hunt was a duly authorized government agent; the miss take of law was that Hunt possessed the legal prerequisites to conduct a search-either probable cause or a warrant."" It Is a fundamental tenet of criminal law that an honest mistake of fact negatives criminal intent, when a defendant's acts would be lawful if the facts were as fie supposed them to be."' A mistake of law, on the other hand, generally        

> '383 U.S. 845 (1966)
> 10 Aspecific

Intent to Interfere with a federal rgt must be proved, and at trial the defendants are entitled to a jury Instruction phbrase In those terms. Thus for example, a

c'onspiracy to rob an interstate traveler would not, of itself, violate 1 241. But If the Dre-    

> dornirnsnt purpose of the

conspiracy is to impede or prevent the exercise of the right of     

> Interstate travel or to

oppress a person because of his exercise of that right, then, . . . the         

> conspiracy becomes aproper object of the federal law

under which the indictment In this   

> case was

brought 1d. at 760.                                 

> It 417 U.S. 211 (1974).
> I" Id. at 226.
> UId.
> "Barker Br. at 81-82.
> IWharton's Criminal Law and Procedure 1157 (Cum. Rupp. 1974) Williamm. Crim-Inal Law: The General Part 152-74 (2nd ed. 1961)

* Model Penal Code | 2.04(l) (P.O.D. 1982). It Is important to distinguish simple ignorance of fact from mistake of fact. Simple Ignorance is generally not an excuse, because In such a situation the defendant cannot claim him act ion was lawful under the facts as he affirmatively believed them to be. See                          

> United States v. Barker, -U.. App. D.C. ----514 F. 2d 208, 267 and n. 78 (1975) (Wlkey J., dissenting) ;Williams, supra, at 151-5&

442 

wll not excuse the commission of an offense.1" A defendant's error as to his authority to engage in particular activity, if based upon a mistaken view of legal requirements (or ignora-nce thereof), is a mistake of law. Typically, the fact that he relied upon the erroneous advice of another Is not an exculpatory circui-stance. lie Is still deemed to have acted with a culpable state of mind." Thus at first blush the trial judge's rejection of the defense proffered by the defendants-both in his pre-trial order and in his Instruction to the jury-seems legally sound. lie advised the jury that if the defendants honestly believed a

valid warrant had been obtained, this would constitute a mistake of fact which would render them innocent of a conspiracy to conduct a search In violation of the Fourth Amendment. If, in contrast, they simply believed, despite the absence of a warrant, that for reasons of national security or superior authority the break-in was legal, such a mistake of law would not excuse their acts." B. With all due deference to the trial Judge, I must conclude that both charges were in fact incorrect, and that this error must be faced by the court on this appeal. The technical difficulty with the first instruction points up the deeper problem with the second. A governmental search and seizure is not rendered lawful under the Fourth Amendment by the simple fact that a warrant has been obtained. The search is constitutionally proer only If the accompanying warrant is based upon legally sufficient probable cause. A factual mistake as to whether a warrant has been obtained, therefore, would not necessarily excuse an unlawful -earch-because that search would not necessarily have been legal under the facts a the defend-ant believed them to be. As the District Court instructed the jury, only a mis-take as to whether a valid warrant has been obtained would excuse the defend-ant's action, and that is a mistake of law. That the recipient of the warrant may have relied upon the opinion of a Judge in determining that he had legally ade-quate probable cause to make a search does not, under traditional analysis, alter the situation. Ills mistake remains one of law, and, under a strict construction 

of the rule, will not excuse his unlawful nct. It is readily apparent that few courts would countenance an Instruction to a jury-even assuming a criminal prosecution were brought against government agents in such a situation 'o-which advised that since the mistake in acting on an invalid warrant was one of law, it would not excuse the agent's unlawful search. It is neither fair nor practical to hold such officials to a standard of care exceeding that exercised by a Judge. Moreover, although the basic policy behind the mistake of law doctrine Is that, at their peril, all men should know and obey the law," in certain situations there is an overriding societal interest t in having Individuals rely on the authoritative pronouncements of officials whose decisions we wish to see respected." For this reason, a number of exceptions to the mistake of law doctrine have developed where its application would be peculiarly unjust or counterproduc-tive." Their recognition in a particular case should give the defendant a de-fense similar to one hased upon mistake of fact, I submit, with one important difference. Ills mistake should avail him only if it Is objectively rcawowuble under the circumstances." The mistake of a government agent in relying on a magis-14 Wharton's. &upra note 15. at I 12: Williams, supra note 16, at c. 8; Hall & Seligman,            

> Mistake of Law and Mena Rea. AU. ('hi. L. Her.

641. 642 (1941).         

> IT See Perkins on Criminal Law 926-27 (2nd ed. 1969).
> 14 Tr.

at 2525-26, note fl, supra.                                                                                               

> 1" Police officers, receiving and acting on such defective warrants, are rarely prosecuted. Ree Modol Penal Code 2.04 (P.O.D. 1962). 20 For nfull dlacumslon of the various rationales which have been forwarded to support the mistake of low doctrine sep United btate8 v. Barker, -U.S. App. D.C.
> 514 F. 241 208. 227-87 (1975$ (lazelon J. concurring)
> 11 See-Hall &Seligman, supra note 16, at 676-88. In support of the general proposition that in compelling crvijmstnreee the law will not deny adefense to Individuals who have mistakenly relied on the authoritv of apublic official, see Cox v. Lotsiana,

879 U.S. 559     

> (19(15). Raley v. Ohio,

860 U.S. 428 (1959). and United States v. Mancuno, 139 r. 2d 90 (Sri Cir. 194.). Hee also Perkins, supro note 17. at 926-27. 2 See generally Williams, supra note 15, at 293--345.                             

> IIn view of the strong public policy backing the mistakp of law doctrine and the necesilty for compelling justiflcation to overcome it, It would appear rarely tenable to allow a

defense based tipon an irrational reliance on the authority of a public official. See Hall &Selicman. supra note 18 at 047. In contrastt although there to some authority to the effect that a mistake of lot must be reasonable to negate Intent (Wharton's. supra note 15. at 382 n. 19). the better, and more widely held view Is that even an unreasonabe mistake of fact. If honest, constitutes a valid defense. Williams, awprm note 15. at 201 Model Penal Code, Te',tative Draft No. 4, at p. 186 (Commentary on 12.04(1) (1953). 443 

trate's approval of a search can be considered virtually per 8e reasonable. (The first instruction of the District Court, therefore, was incorrect only in charac-terizing a defense based upon the belief that a valid warrant had been obtained as one of fact, rather than as an exception to the mistake of law doctrine.' Simi-larly, if a private person is summoned by a police officer to assist in effecting an unlawful arrest, his reliance on the officer's authority to make the arrest may be considered reasonable as a matter of law. The citizen is under a legal obliga-tion to respond to a proper summons and is in no position to second-guess the of-ficer's determination that an arrest is proper. Indeed, it is society's hope in rec-ognizing the reasonableness of a citizen's mistake in this situation to encourage unhesitating compliance with a police officer's call.25 Other situations In which a government official enlists the aid of a' private citizen to help him perform a goyernmental task are not so obviously reasonable on their face.' If the official does not order the citizen to assist him, but simply asks for such assistance, the citizen is not under a legal compulsion to comply." Also, if the circumstances do not require immediate action, the citizen may have time to question the lawfulness of the planned endeavor. Nevertheless, the pub-lic policy of encouraging citizens to respond ungrudgingly to the request of of-ficials for help in the performance of their duties remains quite strong. More-over, the gap (both real and perceived) between a private citizen and a govern-ment official wlth regard to their ability and authority to Judge the lawfulness of a particular governmental activity is gre't. It would appear to serve both Justice and public policy in a situation where an Individual acted at the behest of a government official to allow the individual a defense based upon his reliance on the official's authority--if he can show that his reliance was objectively rea-

sonable under the particular circumstances of his case. c. This brings us to the District Court's second instruction to the jury. Although the defendants characterized their mistake as to 1hunt's authority as one of fact, rather than law.8 they requested an instruction which substantially coin-cides with my view of the proper test: 

[l1f you find that a defendant believed lie was acting out olf a good faith reliance upon the apparent authority of another to authorize his actions, that is a defense to the charge in Count 1., provided you find that such amistake by a defendant was made honestly, sincerely, innocently and was areasonable mistake to make based upon the facts as that defendant perceived them."  

> 2

The trial Judge's error in this regard was certainly understandable. When the issue is 

1ne of reliance on authority, the distinction between law and fact becomes extremely diffi-cult to discern. See United States v. Barker, - U.S. App. D.C. -, - 514 F. 2d 208, 

227-70 (opinions of lazelon, C.J., concurring, MacKInnon, dissenting, and Wilkey, dissent-ing). Indeed that difficulty underscores the correctness of my position in this case that in situations where a citizen is innocently drawn into illegal action at the behest, and on the authority of a government official, he should he allowed a defense of mistake of lair based upon his reasonable reliance. If his mistake were labelled one of fact, it wuld provide acompete defense no matter how unreasonable the reliance. See note 23 supra. 3 This common law exception to the mistake of law doctrine is codified in section 3.07 (40 (a) of the Model Penal Code, which states :(a) A private person who is summoned by a peace officer to assist in effecting an unlaw. ful arrest, is justifled In uing any force which he would be Justified In using if the arrest were lawful, provided he does not believe the arrest is unlawful." See the discussion of People v. Weiss, 276 N.Y. 384, 12 N.E. 2d 514 (19219). in the opinions of Chief Judge Bazelon, concurring, and Judges MacKinnon and Wlk,3y dissent.                  

> Iu, In United States v. Barker, -U.S. App. D.C. -, -,514 F. 2d 208, 234-36,

242-43, 265-70. 

f' The Special Prosecutor argues in the instant case that since the defendants were not ordered to aid In the Fielding break-in, they can draw no support from the common 111w 

•all to aid" rule. He cites section 8.07(4) (b) of the Model Penal Code for the position that when one is "not summoned" but nevertheless nids a police officer In making an unlawful arrest-unly a mistake of fact is a valid defense. It would appear, however, that a citizen who Is "asked" or "entreated" to assist a police officer bears a heavy civic responsibility to comply. He is effectively, if not technically "summoned." In such a situation, although we might hesitate to presume the reasonableness of his action as a matter of law. if the citizen can show that his mistake as to the officer's lawful authority was in fact reasonable under the circumstances, I submit he makes out a valid defense. 

m Sce note 24 supra.  

> J

Barker Appendix at 104-05. 444 The District Court refused this instruction, regardless whether denominated a mistake of fact or an exception to the doctrine of mistake of law, and advised the jury simply that a mistake as to the legality of an unlawful search was no excuse."0 It is clear from the above discussion of th search innocently conducted under an invalid warrant that the court's instruction did not state the law, and that amistke as to the legality of an unlawful search may sometimes be an excuse. The tri~l judge can Justify such an instruction In this context only if there is no legal possibility of equating the reliance of Barker and Martinez on Hunt's apparent authority with the reliance of a police officer on a judicial warrant subsequently held invalid. _And this will be true if and only if Barker and Martinez could not show both (1) facts justifying their reasonable reliance on 1-hint's apparent authority and (2) a legal theory on which to base a reason-able belief that Hunt possessed such authority. Baker and Martinez meet the test as to facts. There was abundant evidence In the case from which the jury could have found that the defendants honestly and reasonably believed they were engaged in a top-secret national security operation lawfully authorized by a government intelligence agency. They were enlisted for the break-in by a White House official, E. Howard Hunt, whom they knew as a long-time government agent with the CIA. They were told that the operation concerned national security Involving "a traitor to this country who was passing . . . classified information to the Soviet Embassy." Further, their long experience with the CIA had taught the defendants the importance of complete reliance on, and obedience to, their supervisor. That they should be expected to operate on a "need-to-know" basis was neither unusual nor cause. for inq-iry. Barker and Martinez likewise meet the test as to the legal theory on which Hunt could have possessed such authority. That the President had the authority to confer upon a group of aides in the White House "more authority than the FBI or CIA," was in 1971 and is now by no means inconceivable as a matter of law. I certainly do not assert that the President here actually did so act (see the court's opinion in Ehrlchman), nor do we in this case need to decide the question of Executive authority to conduct warrantless searches pertaining to foreign agents, which Issue was left open by the Supreme Court in United 

States v. United States District Court (Keith)." 

What Is so evident from the trial court's instructions and his previous legal memorandum, and likewise in the concurring statement of my colleague Judge Leventhal in Ehrlichman, is that neither the trial Judge nor Judge Leventhal agree with the theory that the Chief Executive acting personally has a constitu-tionally conferred power, where the objects of investigation are agents or collab-orators with a foreign nation, to authorize a visual or auditory search and seizure of materials bearing on the suspected betrayal of defense secrets, without Feelnring a judli(ial warrant-in short, that in this very carefully defined area," there does exist a constitutional Chief Executive warrant. They may be right. 

But that is not the issue here for Barker and Martinez. The issue is whether, given undisputed facts as known anl represented to them, it was reasonable in 1971 for Barker and Martinez to act on the assumption that authority had been validly conferred on their immediate superior. The trial judge and my colleague have been unable to restrain themselves from inferentially deciding the issue deliberately left open by the Supreme Court in Keith in 1972. and having done so then proceed to tax Barker and Martinez with a failure to have acted on their 

unestalillshed rationale in 1971. That the President would have such power under the Constitution is and has always been the clear position of the Executive Branch. Significantly, the present Attorney general only recently commented on Keith to this effect: "I'm Un4ted States v. United States District Court, while holding that the warrant require-nient of the Fourth Amendment applied in the domestic security field, the Court. expressly stated that 'the instant case requires no judgment with respect to the activities of foreign powers, within or without this country.' (Emphasis the                                                                                    

> 'Tr. 2525. See note 6supra. 8' 407 U.S. 297, 321-22 (1972). Barker and Martinez do not allege that they thought the l'resldent personally had authorized the operation, nor does the issue arise here as it does In Ehrlfchman. Laymen Barker and Martinez would not be expected to have cognizance of the forty years' practice whereby forelgni affairs surveillance were authorized without awarrant either by the Attorney General or President. Their Justification Is areasonable mistake, of law. and in their position and known facts areasonable mistake of law In-

volves a mistake as to Hunt'$ authority, not that of the Attorney General or 'resident.             

> SSce Zireibon v. Mitchell, -U.S. App. D.C. ,_-. 510 F.

2d 594, 6R9 (1975) (en bane) (Wilkey, J. dissenting), cert. denied, 44 U.S.L.W. 3587 (19 April 1976). 445 

Attorney General's.) It is not without significance that the words of the Court focus on the subject matter of the surveillance, rather than on the physical loca-tion where it is conducted."" No court has yet ruled that the President lacks this prerogative in a case involving wiretapping of foreign agents or collaborators with a foreign power., In the instant case, the Department of Justice, while supporting the Special Prosecutor on other issues, within the limits of a 300-word Memorandum, took the pains to state: "In regard to warrantless searches related to foreign espionage or intelligence, the Department does not believe there is a constitutional difference between searches conducted by wiretapping and those involving physical entries into pri-vate premises. One form of search is no less serious than another. It is and has long been the Department's view that warrantless searches involving physical entries into private premises are justified under the proper circumstances when related to foreign espionage or intelligence." (See U.S. Brief p. 45, n. 89).3s 

Finally, on 19 February 1976, the Attorney General announced his decision, on the recommendation of the Deputy Attorney General and the head of the Civil Rights Division, not to prosecute former CIA Director Richard Helms for his personally authorizing a 1971 break-in at a photographic studio as part of anational security violation investigation.36 Helms, like the present defendants, was involved in a 1971 break-in to conduct a visual search for evidence of national security violations. The positions of both Helms and the present appellants rest upon good faith belief that their warrantless physical intrusions were legally authorized. Helms' belief, which led the Justice I)epartnment to decline prosecu-tion, was that a statute authorized him to ignore the commandments of the Fourth Amendment. Barker's and Martinez's belief was that there was authorization within the White House for this intrusion relating to national security-a legal theory which, if valid, would be of constitutional rather than merely statutory dimensions. Though both were mistakes of law, appellants' view thus appears to be supported by sounder legal theory than that of Helms, who seems to assert that a statute can-excuse constitutional compliance. Yet even in the case of Helms, the Attorney Genoral concluded that any prosecution for the physical search would lbe Inappropritlte. 

a The Record of the Association of the Bar of the City of New York, Vol. 30, p. 331 (May-             

> June 1975).
> uUnited States v. Butenko, 494 F. 2d 593 (3rd Cir. 1974)

oert. denied, Ivanov v. United   

> ,tates, 419

U.S. 881 (1974). United States v. Brown, 484 IF. 2d 418 (1th Cir. 1973). Cf.                

> Zweibon v. Mitchell, -U.S. App. D.C. -, 516 F. 2d 594 (1975) cert. denied, 44

Ur.S.L.W. 3587 (19 April 1976), (distinctly non-collaborators with the Soviet Union were the objects of electronic surveillance).                                              

> Js Memorandum for the United States as Amlcue Curiae, p. 2.
> NThe Department of Justice announcement said: "The Department of Justice will not prosecute former CIA Director Richard Helms and nohers for their role in a1971 break-in at aphotographic studio in Fairfax City, Virginia, Attorney General Edward H. Levi announced today.

"The Department's investigation involved the surreptitious entry by CIA agents nnd I'airtax City police into a photographic studio on February 19, 1971. "The Federal statute under which prosecution was considered is Section 242 of Title 18, United States Code. "The leading case interpreting that statute, sorews v. United States, 325 U.S. 91. 104 (1945). requires proof that the accused willfully deprived an individual of a specific and well-defined constitutional right. "After studying the facts carefully and interrogating the witnesses at length, the Department concluded that the evidence did not meet the standard set by the Screws case to establimh a criminal violation of the statute." rhp written announcement was amplified, according to The Washington Post of 20 February 1976. pp. Al and A6, as follows: "Justice Department sources said that Helms clearly thought he had the authority to approve a break-in and did so to complete a security investigation ...                                                 

> Eft was Impossible to prove he (Helms) had intent to violate anyone's civ'l rights,' one Justice Department source said ...
> "The 1947 law setting up the CIA says. 'Tht Director of central Intelligence shall be
> responsible for protecting intelligence sources and methods from unauthorized disclosure.' "r Under this jaw Justice Department attorneys said they felt Helms could reasonably

arguie the protection required extraordinary means." Mr. Helms' counsel Is reported as commenting, "If the government has a right to conduct eloctronic surveillance, then it has a right to make surreptitious entry." The Washington                                                         

> Post, 20 February 1976, at Al.
> Naturally Ishare my colleague's distaste for the necessity to rely upon an Executive Department's press release. or anewspaper article related thereto. Where prosecution im
> declined, however, by definition no Ianer is ever filed in acourt. An official written announcement of the Department of Justice, giving aterse summary of the legal rationale supporting the decision,

is more than Is usually available and all that can ever be expected. 82--629- 77-29 446 

The trial court rejected the pleas of appellants Barker and Martinez that they should have been allowed a defense on proof of reasonable, though mistaken, belief that their actions were duly authorized by an organization "at the White House level.., above the FBI and the CIA." Either tile Attorney General was wrong on 19 February 1976 when he declined prosecution of Director Helms, or the trial judge here was wrong when he barred the evidence and jury instruction which might have acquitted Barker and Martinez. I believe, as set forth in the previous nineteen pages, that the trial judge was wrong and the Attorney General right. But even if I am in error on this, of one thing I am certain : In 1971 there was not In the United States of America one Fourth Amendment for Richard Helms and another for Bernard Barker and Eugenio Martinez. As to the rea.8onableness of the legal theory on which, Barker's and Martinez's actions rest, they thus have at least the position of the Attorney General behind them. This is not to hold here that the position is correct, but surely two laymen cannot be faulted for acting on a known and represented fact situation and in accordance with a legal theory espoused by this and all past Attorneys General for forty years. It is i iinplic!t recognition of this that Judge Leventhal feels obliged to attempt to undermine the theory on the merits" by trying to distinguish between wiretapping and physical entry; according to Judge Leventhal, the first 

perhaps constitutionally granted to the President, the second never.M Since the issue here is not the correctness of the legal theory, but the reason-ableness in 1971 of acting consonant with it, and since the Department of Justice addressed the issue to this court in only one paragraph, it brief reply to Judge Leventhal may suffice: (1) a physical trespass is usually necessary to install awiretap, whether the tap Is authorized by the Judiciary or the Executive; (2) such physical trespasses have repeatedly been authorized by Judgets, Presidents, and Attorneys General ; (3) they will continue to be so authorized until the Supreme Court rules otherwise; (4) what is the constitutiornal differtwe between a physical entry (Presidentially authorized) for the purpose of an auditory 

search (wiretap) and a physical entry (Presidentially authorized) for the pur-pose of a visual search (photographing documents) Y What Is the constitution-ally relevant distinction between surreptitiously listening to (or recording) acitizen's spoken words and looking at (or photographing) his written words? (5) If there is no difference, then when the Supreme Court reserved the question of wiretapping (auditory searches) in Kcith, lid it not also logically and neces-sarily reserve the same issue in regard to visual searches? We all know that physical entry for the purpose of auditory search has been authorized by President and Attorney General for forty y(tars in national security rel ated( cases. It is the e'istitutional validity of this which the Supreme Court  

> 37

Albeit Judge Leventhal makes his statement in Ehrlichnan, where tile issue (of appar-ent approval by a higher authority does not arise. No one represented to Bhrlchman that lie was acting on higher authority for Ehrlichman was higher authority In that case. Ner 

cmirt's opinion in Ehrlichman, No. 74-1882, at 21. With regard to the comparative positions of the offices of the Attorney General and the Special lr(secutor, and with all due respect to the public service tMt special task forv.e hits rendered in a time of crisis. it is a special task force created In 1973 whl .h will shortly disband and close its iles. The Attorney General has been with us since President Wasih.  

> ington's

first cabinet meeting in 1789. and is not about to go out of business. The Attorney Gtenerai, then, represents a long perspective of what our legal problems in this most deli-cate area of national security and constitutional principles have been for 200 years and are likely to be in the future. ThaZ pc .spectlve of the Attorney General is deepened by the vast aticumulated experience reposing in the personnel and files of the Department of Justice, heightened by the close personal relationship between President and Attorney General at some periods of our history, and sharpened by the current awareness of the present Attor-ney General as to what great problems In this area loom in the Immediate future. In evaluatingg the conflicting views of the two offices, these factors surely must be placed In the balance by any court-ultimately applying constitutional principles to national security iprdlems. 2 Judge Leventhal asserts (p. 10) "rtlhere may well be a critical difference between electronic surveillance and physical entries for the purpose of search and seizure . . .." and a pprov-es the Special Prosecutor's stress on certain language In Keith. The partially quoted thought from the Supreme Court complete is "Though physical entry of the home is th, chief evil against which the wording of the Fourth Amendment is directed. its broader spirit 

now shields private speech from unreasonable surveillance. (Citing Kato, Berger, and 

,iluermen) Our decision In Katz refused to lock the Fourth Amendment into Instances of 

actual physical trespass." 407 U.S. at 313 (emphasis supplied). I cannot agree that Justice Powell's language, specifically cited by Judge Leventhal nnd the Special Prosecutor to prove a constitutional difference "between electronic surveillance and physical entries," supports the difference at all. I respectfully suggest tle opposite mening Is conveyed. i.e., lphy'ical and electronic entry stand on the same footing, good or haI. And that is all that It is necessary to understand to validate Parker's and .Martlnez's argument that they lacked the requisite criminal intent In 1971, given the state of Fourth Amundmnent law then and now. 447 

has never voided but speciflcally reserved In Kcith. We all know (or suspect) that physical entry for the lpurjose of visual search has been authorized by i'resl-dent and Attorney General for many years in national security related cases. It is the constitutional validity of this which the Attorney Genoral reserved in one 1*iragraph of his two-page memorandum in this case, but %hkih has never reached the Supreme Court. Unpermitted physical entry into a cltizen's dwelling is no doubt the core of the Fourth Amendment prohibition against unreasonable searches and seizures,' but ptI.sical entry for an auditory or visual search may stand on the same footing, whether consUtutionally firm or infirm. 0That auditory and visual searches and physical entry to effect them stand on the same footing, is what bhe departmentt of Justice memorandum maintained. It also stated that both are valid in the strictly limited espionage and intelli-gence area. After Katz " in 11t67 ruled out vonipletely the patently untenable distinction between trespassory and non-trespabsory wiretaps and held that the uIpplication of the iYurth Amenldment could not turn on the presence or absence* of a physical Intrusion, it would appear arguable that lihyslcal entry for either an auditory or visual m-arcvh for nauterial related to an agent or collabsirator with a foreign nation, if authorized by the President or Attorney General, would bo vi1id undhlr the Executive's constitutional foreign affairs powers. This court.-heetl not ptss and does not pass on the corrmtn.ss of the Attorney General's positlon. I do think the defendants Barker and Martinez were entitled to aet in o(,Jo'tiie good fr,1lth O4 the fits known to thein in regard to lunt's IM14s14lol 11114l inpliciltly onI te validity of a legal theory, still to be disproved, whlith ha Iteen vigorously eSlim. .d by. president and Attorney generall for the Inst. forty years. I ththik it plain that a .iti ,n should have a legnl defense to f

(.rimliml ch.irge ariI:ig out of an unlawful arrest or seare.h which lie has aided il tho reams.'mable ielief iRT the individual who solilited his assistance wis a

4l1y qtuthorized offie-r of the law. It Muis error for the trial cort to bfir this defense in the admission of evidence and instructions to the Jury, and the celli-vietlons mist accordingly be reversed. 

toIt can he readily agreed that the framers of the Fourth Amendment were primarily concerned with physical intrusions by governmental officials into the sanctity of the home. It Is extremc-ly doubtful, however, that this tells us anything about how they would have r,-garded electronic intrusions. Not being blessed with the telephone, they never considered the prohleri, of wiretaps. A good argument can be made that electronic. "non-trespaeeory" searcles are more intrisive than their "tresilmsory" counterparts. United States v. ,S'mith. '121 V. Stupp. 424 (D.D.C. Cal. 1071) reasoned ."fEllectronlc surveillance is perhaps the most objectionable of all types of PPArches In light of the Intentlon of the Fourth Amendment. It Is carried out against an unsus pectlng Individual in a dragnet fashion. taking in all of his conversations whether or not they are relevant to the purposes of the investigation and continuing over a considerable length of 

time. If the government's "reasonableness" rationale In accepted in this case, then it would apply i fortiorari to other types of smerclies. 1llnce they are more limited in time, place wnd manner, they would be even more reasonable." Id. at 429. #0The only pofsihle rationale for distinguishing electronic information gathering from 'hvsical searches Is that, In the District Court's words, the former is "less Intrusive" than the latter. Exactly why this might be so Is not explained In Judge Leventhal's opinion. 

see note :, uupra. The 1Ipecdal Prosecutor, however, defend@ the distinction by repeatedly emrphaIei .nc In bis brief that a wiretap is non-tretln*aorj/. tie suggests that If the Gov-ernment must effect a trespass in order to place wiretapping or hugging eqeinment--and certainly If a trespass Is made In order to photograph documents-then immunity from the warrant requirement In cases related to foreign affairs Is lost.                                        

> The Special Prosecutor cites no anthority In direct sup port of this proposition, lie relies esentlally on an absence of discussion of the question to create aheretofore unsuggested distinction. Neither loIc,l. history, nor case law, however, provides an adequate basis for hi artificial differentiation.

From a lngic'al standpoint, if a President has the authority pnrsiant to his foreign affairs powor to ripprove surveillance aetIvitl's. it would appear that his prerogative is no differ-ent from tht of a cotrt reviewing a warrant request in a more mundane criminal petting. If the'r, Is a nationall security" exempfeion (which neither the Supreme ('ourt in Keith nor this cotrt in /wreihori ruled omit), the tnsk of determining whether mch a search Is Justified fails to the Exvrutivv. rathe-r thin to the emlrt s. All the Plements of speed, seerpey. and ]xeelitivi expertise which sxtip'ort vesting this power In tMe 'resident where wiretapping 4whtther "tre'spassory" or "non t reliamsry") is Irivolved also apply whpre a photographic search Is In qoesilrn. Court-ordered surveillance nrc xnietimps tresprasnry, sometimes iot, deeponillnc on the reqtilrui'ents of the situation, and- so are Executive surveillances In the forelun flairs ftlh. The record in a recent case In this court provide,; docunentatlon of Judicial authorization for government agents to "Intercept wire commimnliations (ete. and to1 Install and main-taiml on elecfro t,. ,av ,es lr,, init ,evlee within the f room of a huildling at a specific ndmre i to Intercept ilertain eeifledi oral communications . . . concerning iertaini dlescribi-4 offensRe. Installation of the above described Pavesdropping device may be accom-IAlshd by nny reasonable means, including surreptitious entry or entry bT ruse." United     

> rfata v. Harker. ---

IR. App. D.C. 514 P. 2d 209. 241 42 (1074) Mstc-                        

> Kinneen. J.. dissenting). Of course. if atrespass Is not necessary in aparticular case to effect ani eavesdrop, the conrt need not grn tultomsly

authorlse a surreptltiols entry: hut few would question a eourt' power to do so In cases In which it is required.  

> $I

United States V. Katz 889 U.S. 847 (19071. 448  

> MEr-or.,

District Judge: While I generally concur with the positions taken by my Brothers with respect to the "specific intent" requirement of 18 U.S.C. 

1 241, f am not, despite my concurrence with the results reached by Judge Wilkey willing to fully subscribe to the views expressed by him in his analysis of the mistake of law issue. Our differences arise from my inabilUty to acquiesce in the broad framework inherent in his analysis. My views in this regard follow: Defendants Barker and Martinez rest their appeal on the district court's refusal to instruct the lury that a "good faith reliance upon the apparent authority of another to authorize [their] actions" is a defense to the charge of conspiracy under Title 18 U.S.C. 1 241. The district Judge advised the Jury that a mistake of law is no excuse, and, therefore, that a mistake as to the legality of the search in issue was not a defense to the charges contained In the indictment. In that regard, the district Judge was applying the general rule on mistake of law that has long been an integral part of our system of Jurisprudence. See, e.g., Lambert 

v. California, 35 U.N. 225, 228 (1957) quoting Shelvin-Jarpenter Company v. Minnesota, 218 U.S. 57, 68 (1910). See generally Hall & Seligman, Mistake of Law and Mens Rea, 8 University of Chicago Law Review 641 (1941); Keedy, Ignorance and Mistake in the Criminal Law, 22 Harv. L. Rev. 75 (1908) ; Perkins, Ignorance and Mistake in Criminal Law, 88 Univ. of Pa. L. Rev. 85 (1939). The most commonly asserted rationale for the continuing vitality of the rule is that its absence would encourage and reward public ignorance of the law to the detri-ment of our organized legal system, and would encourage universal pleas of ignorance of the law that would constantly pose confusing and, to a great extent, insolvable issues of fact to Juries and Judges, and bog down our adjudicative sys-tem. See United States v. Barker, 514 F. 2d 208, 230-32 (D.C. Cir. 1975, Bazelon, Chief Judge concurring), Hall & Seligman, supra at 646-51. The harshness of the rule on the Individual case is responded to by either or both of -two thesis: In. dividual Justice and equity is outweighed by the larger social interest of main. training a public knowledge about the law so as to discourage and deter "illegal" acts; and, as discussed by Judge Leventhal in his view of this case, the rule is subject to mitigation by virtue of prosecutorial discretion, judicial sentencing, executive clemency, and/or jury nullification.' E.g., Perkins, supra at 41. Exceptions to the rule, however, have developed In situations where its policy foundations have failed to apply with strength, and alternative policy consider-ation strongly favor a differelit result. The exceptions have b(en both statutory, e.g., Act of August 22, 1940, 149, 15 U1S.C. 1 80a-48; Public Utility Holding Com-pany Act of 1935, 1 29, 15 U.S.C. 179z-3, and Judicial. E.g., United States v. Man. euso,. 139 F. 2d 90 (3d Cir. 1943) ; Moier v. Meier, 206 Okla. 406, 288 P. 2d 888 (1951) ; Anno., 29 A.L.R. 2d 825 (1953). See also Model Penal Code 12.06(8), 3.07(4) (a). The instant case fits the pattern of a set of circumstances that has been recognized by some, and that in my view should be endorsed by this Court a1 an exception to the general rule. Defendants Barker and Martinez contend that they were affirmatively misled by an official interpretation of the relevant law, and are entitled to an instruction to that effect, permitting the Jury to assess the reasonableness and sincerity of their alleged reliance. The Model Penal Code states the defense as follows: A belief that conduct does not legally constitute an offense Is a defense to aprosecution for that offense based upon such conduct when:... (b) he acts In reasonable reliance upon an official statement of the law, afterward de-termined to be Invalid or erroneous, contained In (i) a Atatute or other en-actment; (11) a judicial decision, opinion or Judgment; (fit) an adminis-trative order or grant of permision; or (iv) an offcal Interpretation of the public officer or body charged by law with responsibility for the Inter. pretation, administration or enforcement of the law defining the offense. 12.04(3) (b). See also Proposed New Federal Criminal Code, Final Report of a National Com-mission on Reform of Federal Criminal Laws 1 610 (1971). The rationale of the section is well illustrated by the cane of United States v. Mancuso, 139 F. 2d 90 (3d Cir. 1943). The legal Issue therein was whether a defendant could he pun-ished for failure to obey an order made by a local draft board when its issuing IThis Circuit has held that Jur instructions on nullification are tn roper. United v. lJogherty, 478 I. 24 1118 (D.C. Cu. 197S). The Court acknowledge, b weTer, that aftv stll may acquit In disrerd& of the instructions on the law given by the trial Judge.   

> It. at 11812

449 

of such an order to the defendant was interdicted by a judicial decree which was itself, erroneous and subject to reversaL The court in that case stated: We think the defendant cannot be convicted for failing to obey an order, Issuance of which Is forbidden by the court's injunction. While it is true that men are, In general, held responsible for violations of the law, whether they know it or not, we do not think the layman participating in a lawsuit is re-quired to know more than the judge. 139 F. 2d at 92. (Footnote omitted) The introduction of an "official" source for an individual's reliance on a mistaken concept of the law in acting "illegally" significantly diminishes the strength of the policy foundations supporting the general rule on mistake of law, and adds policy considerations of grave Import that would favor an apposite result. In my view, the defense is available if, and only if, an individual (1) reasonably, on the basis of an objective standard, (2) relies on a (3) conclusion or state-went of law (4) issued by an official charged with interpretation, administration, and/or enforcement responsibilities in the relevant legal field. The first three is-sues are of course of a factual nature that may be submitted to a jury ; the fourth is a question of law as it deals with interpretations of the parameters of legal authority. Exoneration of an individual reasonably relying on an official's statement of the law would not serve to encourage public ignorance of law, for the defense requires that the individual either seek out or lie cognizant of the official state-ment upon which le or she relies. Some knowledge of the law, verified by an In-dependent and typically competent source, is required. Furthermore, pleas of ignorance of the law will neither he so universal nor so abnormally confusing to the fact-finder as to discompose the judicial process. The defense is precisely limited to he consistent with its icicles, and it involves issues no more corn-phex than those tchh-d on a routine basis in other matters. Mirurthermore the (defense advances tile policy of fostering o),edlence to the decisions of certain individuals and groups of IndividualN that society has put In Ismiilltits of prolnhtiviilre il the, gtivernhi g structure--i.e., c urt.,. expeitive officials and legislative bodies. While the Poliey is unquestionably str,)tgest when 

applied to thome bxlies that apply or make law with the most apparent finality, i.e., legislatures and the courts, It has application as well to those in official positions that "interpret" the law Il a largely advisory capacity, i.e., opinions of the United States Attorney general. Thit reasonablen-ss of the rliance may dissiplte if one depends on niounforcealile advisory opinions (if minor o(mclals however. The policy is limited by the actual existence of an nipprIl Driate "of-li'ial(s)" ald doems not support all ahrogat ion of the poliles behind the general mistake nf law rule if an In(livih l pla(,,s his or Itr reliance, thoilgh renonable. In a stranger to pul)lic office erroneously Ibelieving him to he fill ot,.i:il.' SInai-larly, the defense does not extendl to reliance on Individuals. who although employed in a public capacity, have no Interpretative or administrative resloon-siblIttles In the area associatel with the legal concepts Involved in the mistake.n oplinon or d elslon. The defense has 1een most commonly accepted when an Iidividnal t. in reliance on a statute later held to be unconstitutional.' or on an express decision of tui'onstltiitionality of a statute Iy a ('oeunetent eourt (if general Jiirisdict io that I suli iiuent 'ly overruled.' Most Juirlsdiciions will not pkermilt a defense lijised oil reliafCne upon Illt ie advice of ('O11n4qe.l.s "T11 defenRe,, however, I not limited to those which have Ieen ntost commonly acepted As I have heretofore madp reference. In State v. Davis, 216 N.W.2d 31 (Wisc. 1974), the defendant was exon. rated on the basis of a reliance on erroneons advipp of n county corporation counsel and assistant district attorney. In Pcoplc v. Fcq-luIon, 24 P.2d 965          

> 'Similarly, the defense of mistake of law historically

given a private prison when be r,'sllonds to a request by a pollee officer to aid in making an arrest and the arrest proven       

> 'ItirnAtflYto IIt vbeen unlawful. In limited

by the requirement that the party ahied hole the authority to make te arrest. X.g Dietraebs v. Setaw, 48 lad. 175 (1873) ; Mioyer v. S',er. 20r Okla. 405. 288 P. 2d 88, 84 (1951). X.4., Claybrook . State 164 Tenn. 440, 51 SW. 2d 499 (1932) • stateY. odwin, 12R               

> ". 31 S.M. 221 (1898). But as@ Dupre* Y. State 184 Ark. 1120, 44 8.W.

2d lt9 

> (19-32).

'Rg.. Ulnlted States v. Mancuso, 189 P. 2d 90 (8d CIP. 1948) : Rtnte v. O'Neil. 147 Town ill.3 128 N.W. 454 (1910) : State v. Chicago. 141. & St. P. Rv. Co., 130 Minn. 144, 153 N.W. '42n (1015): State v. Longtno, 109 MIss, 126 87 Ro. 902 (1915): State v. Jones, 44 N.W. 623. 107-1. 2d 324 (1940). R6u# se Honovpr v. ttae. 519 Ale. 5T 11R77). s E.O. Staley T. t tate. A9 Neb. 701, 131 N.W. 1028 (1911). State v. Whiteaker, II     

> Ore. 65n, 247 P1. 1077 (192n1).

450 

(Call. 193.3), reliance on the advice of the state corporation commissioner and deputy commissioners was held to excuse a violation of the state's blue sky laws. See also Tecxa8 0/o. v. Statc, 254 1'. 1060 (Ariz. 1927) ; state v. White, 140 S.W. <M9 (Mo. 1911) ; State v. Person, 1 S.E. 914 (N.C. 1887). But see U.,5. v. .ac-          

> :taval/e, 178 F.2d 812 (7th (3ir. 1949) ;Hopkins v.

State. 09 A.2d 4.56 (Md. 1049) 

tayryv. Static, 131 N.W. 1028 (Neb. 1911) ; State v. Foster, 46 A. 8,33 (R.I. 110M). 

Arguments against extending the defense to reliance on the advice of govern-ment officials take a form of the following prosition: Minor government officials will have the ability to effectively "immunize" Individuals from i)rosecu-tion. In response, It must be noted that with respect to a particular statement, a government official is him.wlf culpable if he knowingly mistakes the law. Hence he may proffer mistaken advice without retribution only until he discovers Its ilnvalidity. To argue further, that incompetent or dishonest minor officI.als may exist in numbers serious enough to question reliane on their decisions or inter-pretations, inherently characterizes those public servants upX whom we must depend for the uiltinmate success of the operation (if our government, as suspect. Ifor one, am not willing to assume that the incidence c.f incompetent, iwsensitive or dishonest public officials is significant enough to dispute the premise that in general, public officials miert the respect of the public. Furthermore, mir citizenry are not so naive as not to recognize that all of our institutions, are susceptible of being made up of both savory and unsavory individuals. till yozne will have cause to he concerned about the extent of the exception too IIhr generally rule. Judge Levential notes that "ft1he i tentiailly broad range of Illegal aetlviltes that a government official might request a private citizen to do, would make it linpoSsihile to rely on the educational value that normally inheres when a inistake of law Is recoignized as an excuse InI one case that srves to defile them all for similarly ircuimstanced defenders in the future." The argument Is one of great ai'mal. Nevertheless. it smacks of a (listru,.t of pIlille offi.ialN. yet to so categorize it may be unfair. In essence, It asserts that since there exists a large number of public officials who may well be asked to advise or decide on amy rild of iegal problems, tihal many mistaken Judigmnents may lie advanced anId mnmlpers of the public should Im-required before acting In accordance therewith to examine those Interpretations at their peril. The argument, assuming as Ido that it is not directed at corrupt officials, requires the individual citizen to 

le more cognizant of and have a better understanding of the law than apulic(. :ifi(*lal who is reslonsible for and specflcally employed to make Inter-pretations of tile law in the relevant legal field. 8uch a burden Is, iI my view, unreasonable. Finally, it should be noted that the strength of the arguments prenlsed upon the potential extent of the defense Is mitigated by the reoulrement 

of objective reasonablene~. If a public officials' opinion of the law is fairly out-rageous, the jury may conclude that a reasonable, jan would take appropriate SIeps to verify It prior to reliance thereon. Applying the defense to the facts of this case, the record discloses sufficient evidence of reliance on an official Interpretation of t, law for the matter to have been submitted to the jury. Barker and Martinez assert that they relied on Ifunt's nuthority as delegated from an Intelligence superstructure controlled by the White House, and firmly believed that they were acting in a legal capacity. The Executive irmich of the United tates governmentt is vested with substantive respoisildlitles In tlh field of national security, and decisions of its officials on the extent of their legal authority deserve some deference from the itlillc.1 A Jury Imay well find that John Xhrlichman, then Assistant to tie 're ildent forjDomestic Affairs. expressed or implied that tie break-in of )r. Field's office was legal under a national security rationale, and that Hunt, as an executive official iII agi-hietvei-n capacity, passed the position on to the defendants, which they, acting its reasonable men. relied upon In performing the break-in 1Averdingly, while I concur with Judge Wilkey that the Jury should have been histructed on a limited mistake of law defense, I believe any such Instruction should. in the event of a retrial be couched consistent with the views here-In expressed.     

> LFVEN'rAI.. rirepit .Iluf/e dissenting:

Tis opinibn considers the, alileala of Bernard L. Darker anmd Eugemlo R. Martinez. vho were convicted of conspiracy Thisl It not to ay that I concur In the view of the Attorney generall that there I, a

"intimml security" exception permitting physical Intruuslon In a eltizen'n.home or omep                              

> (Iu %'leeftl' nalproval ot the Preident or Attorney General, even In the absence of avlld warrant. That Issue In not before us.
> 7See Footnotes 4and GIn Judge Leventhal'e opinion.

451 

in violation of 18 U.S.C. 5 241, and sentenced to three years probation. They were charged, along with co-defendants John I). Ehrlichnzan and 0. Gordon Liddy, with conspiracy to enter without lawful authority the offices of Dr. Lewis J. Fielding on Septenier 3, 1971. in order to search for confidential information concerning his patient, Daniel Ellsherg, thereby injuring Dr. Fielding in his Fourth Amend-we, nt right to I* secure against unreasonable searches and seizures. Barker and Martinez present considerations and issues that differ in some re-spects from those discussed in the opinions Issued today lit the cases of Ehrlich-man and Liddy. I would reach the same result, of affirmance. Whatever equities say pertain to the case of these defendants of Cuban origin, who claim that their actions reflect their patriotism, were taken into amount when the trial judge limited their sentence to a modest probation. Their qu est for complete exculpation 

does not entitle them, in my view, to a ruling that the trial Judge was mistaken its to the iprtlrient principles of law.' My oplmifon explaining why I dissent from the reversals contemplated( by Judges Wilkey and Merhige, is vast li the conventional fori of opinions that present first a statement ,of facts, then an orderly discussion of the legal principles more or less seriatim. This case also calls, I think, for an opening excmination of pnz-vleunient and wonder. Is this Judicial novelty, a bold injection of mistake of law 

is a valid defense to crinimial liability, really being wrought lit a case where (hefendants are charged with combining to violate eivili and constitutional rights? ('an this extension Ie Justified where there was a deliberate forcible entry, Indeed am burglary, Into the oflce of a doctor who was in no way suspected of any Illegal-ity or even Inpropriety, with the force compounded by subterfuge, (lark of night, amid the derring do of "salting" the office with nuggets to create suspicion that the tied was done by addicts looking for narcotics? Judge W bgkhy begins to cast his spell by describing Barker and Martinez as "rootsoldiers" here in court again. Of course, they are here this tiue for an offense that took I'lave the year Isfore the notorious 1972 Watergate entry that led them to (,nter Ileas of glllty to burglary. Every violation Ef civil rights depends not 

only on thos who Initiate, often happily with ama officiaLorientatlon of sorts, but also on those whose active effort is necessary to bring tile project to fruition. To the extent appellants are deemed worthy of sympathy, that has been provided by tile probation. To give them not only sympthy but exoneration, and absoli-tion, is to stand the law upside down, in my view, and to sack legal principle in-stead of relying on the elements of humane administration that are available to buffer any grinding edge of law. That this toleranve of unlawful official action is t lefenste uvailahle for selective undermininimg of civil rights laws leads me to siake my head boti in wmder and despair. I. FACTUAL DACKOGOUND Barker and Martinez are both American citizens.' They fled Cuba for Miami, Florida, after Fidel Castro came to power. Both Barker and Martinez have been covert agents for the Central Intelligence Agency. Martinez worked for the CIA from 1959 until 1972, and was involved in Infiltrating Cuba and supply-Itig arms and ammunition to Cuba from a United states base. Barker worked undercover in Cuba before his arrival in Miami lit 1960. lie was terminated in I1MI. During their CIA employment both Barker ani Martinez were Involved with the Bay of Pigs operation, and Barker's Inmediate superior for that ven-nire was E. Howard Ilunt, known as "Eduardo" In Miami's Cuban-American ct i llillnity. Ilunt, alioing with Egli Krogh, David Young and G. Gordon Liddy, enota-l! 

the White llommre "Room II'" Unit. Tlhe unit was established under the super-vision of John Ehirliehnai, then Assistant to the President for Domestic Affairs, 

It Defendants also contend that the district court erred In failing to dismiss the Indict.                                                          

> wiiut for grand jury improprieties; in failing to correct for prejud lclal publicity: and In falling ti give aJury nullification charge. The grand jury point Is deAlt with In nole 54. Intr. Their clahns ot error In refusing to dismiss the Indictment or order aconttnIance or 'hauge of venue on prejudicial pretrial publicity grounds should be rejected for th reasons v4.t forth In United

States v. Ehrlichmnan. decided this clay. at note R. A right to a jury nulllflcallon charge was rejected by this conrt In United States v. Lhugherty, 154 U.S. App. li', 76, 03-100, 478 F. 2d 1113. 1130-1137 (1972). and that decision controls defendants' clnim an well-

t Parker was an American cltlsen by birth, lost his citizenship while living in ('0ba, I1it              

> rt'lulItired It. (Tr. 2187). Martines became anaturalized citlzeu In July 1070 (Tr. 2149).

452 to investigate and stop leaks of classified information. Publication of the "Penta-gon Papers" was the catalyst for the Room 16 unit's formation, and obtaining information on the source of that famous leak-Daniel Ellsberg-became the unit's primary concern. After Ellsberg's psychiatrist, Dr. Fielding, refused to be interviewed by FBI agents, the unit decided to obtain copies of Ellsberg's medical records by a surreptitious entry of Dr. Fielding's office. To avoid White House employee involvement In the actual search, Hunt re-cruited Barker, and through Barker, Martinez and Felipe De Diego.' Barker testified (Tr. 2197ff) that Hunt said he was in an "organization that had been created in the White House level-this organization he described as a sort of superstructure that was above the FBI and the CJIA" and "had been formed because the FBI was tied by Supreme Court decisions... and the Central Intel-ligence Agency didn't have jurisdiction in certain matters." He spoke of "some kind of upheaval in the intelligence community in Washington" and asked if Barker would like to beconie operational again, which Barker termed a "very happy thing to us." While conducting these negotiations, Hunt represented himself accurately as working in the White House.' We may assume for present purposes that a jury might reasonably find that Barker and Martinez did, as they later put it, believe or assume that Hunt was a "CIA man" in the White House, notwithstanding contrary indications.' Martinez was aware that his participation in the ldan might have been illegal for a "normal citizen." (Tr. 2170). On September 2, 1971, Ihunt and Liddy met Barker, Martinez and De Diego at ahotel in Beverly Hills, Celifornia. Hunt informed the defendants that they were to enter Dr. Fielding's office and photograph the files of one of his patients. They were told that I)r. Fielding was not himself the subject of investigation. There was no discussion of authorization for the entry and search. The group met the following (Jay, and Hlunt showed Barker and Martinez identification papers and disguises obtained from the CIA. On the evening of September 3, Barker and De Diego, dressed as delivery men, delivered a valise containing photographic equipment to Dr. Fielding's office. Later that evening they and Martinez, having leen told that the "',llsberg" file 

was the one they were to search for and photograph, entered Dr. Fielding's office and rifled the files. They entered by force, breaking the lock on the office door, and also tised force, a crowbar, to opem Ii)r. Fielding's IlIe callets. Although the plan was to accomplish entry without force, it also included the alternative that Inm the event force had to Ie used. Barker and his colleagues were to nmke the entry look as If it had been by an addict seeking drugs, and accordingly, before h'avlug, they scattered pills nhloit the offie. Tihe next day Barker and Martinez reilried to Miami, hImvlng failed to locate the Ellsi'erg records. As a defense to the March 7, 1974, indictment for consplring to violate Dr. Fielding's Fourth Amemdment rights. Barker and 'Martinez sought to discover and present evidence as to the reasonableness of their belief In Hunt's authority to conduct the Fielding ollerntion. Their motion for discovery and their proposedd Instruction based on the defense of reasntinbhle, reliane on H1unt's apparent au-thority were denied by the District ('ourt." At trial tl, defendauts wert- never-

I Although De Diego wan indicted under 0 241 along with the other defendants. the                                                                                                    

> District Court on May 22. 1974. ordered the indictment as to De Diego dismis4pd without
> ,reijm'ice on the ground that the Government could not meet its burden of Xhowinr thlat Its cae, wasm not tainted by the use of immunized testimony. This court rpve-,sed that order
> U'nlted States v. )iego, ifl7 U.8. App. D.C. 252, 5i1 F.'. 2d 918 (1957). The Special
> 'roiectitor, however, subsequently elected not to pursue the prosecution.
> 'Barker visited and telephoned Hunt in his Executive Office Building oflfep. awl nlo rrefeiv, letters from Hunt on White House stationery, all serving to corroborate Iunt's
> etiployment. 'The BaIrker-Martines brief notes (p. 12) that with

respmot to Martine's reporting "Edntrdo'&' visit to Miami to hi. CIA case offic*'r. "Itlhe failure of bin came owle-r to                                                                                                                                                        

> rTepo.nn on the first occasion was siIficant to Martines because normally when be
> r'potted the presence of someone associated with the CIA In Miami he was told whether
> the person's name was cleared. (M.. Ty. 2157-58). On the second occasion the case offieer's
> dental thnt 'Eduardo' was in the White House. something which Martinez knew to he a
> ftAct. led Martines to conclude that his case offieor either was not supposed to know about Hunt or that his case officer did not want to convey Hunt's Importance. (M.. Tr. 2157)
> At alater Point Barker told Hunt that he had also assumed at the time' that Hnt was still
> with the CIA and simply had been positioned at the White House by the agency, aeustomary ('IA practice. (Hunt. TIr. 919-20).'--
> 0S:ee United States v. Ehriiehman. 876 F. Hupp. 29. 85-86 (T).D.C. 1974) :Barker Appen.
> dix at 101-05. The text of the proffered instruction is set out in note 15 infra.

453 

theless given latitude to testify extensively about the circumstances underlying their involvement In the Fielding break-in. The Jury was advised that to con-vict they had to find the purpose of the break-in was to enter and search Dr. Fielding's office without a warrant or permission, and that the conspirators were governmental employees or agents acting for governmental rather than purely personal purposes. The court further Instructed the Jury that a mistake of fact may constitute a defense to the conspiracy charge, so that if a defendant honestly believed a warrant had been obtained, this mistake of fact would render him Inno-cent, because it would not be said he Intended a warrantless search.' 

It. AFFIRMATIVE DEF N: ES 

The defendants' principal argument on aPlieal Is the claimed error of the Dis-triet court t In refusing them a defense based upon their good. faith reliance on Hunt's apparent authority. They say the incus rea required for a violation of section 241 was negative by a mistake of fa, L "coupled with" a mistake of law.$ 'rhtey amplify: "The mistake of fact was the belief that hiunt was a duly author-Ized agent; the mistake of law was that Hunt possessed the legal prerequisites to c,,nduet a searchi--4ither probable cause or a warrant."* In the alternative, they cont4'nd that hunt's Indtcement estq)s the government from prosecuting under enitrupment prii(ples. I turn to the entrapment question first. 

A. Entrapment 

The defense of entrapment, developed as a construction of legislative intent, has been evolved for the case of an otherwise Innocent person who lilts been inidmted to commit a (rine by a law enforcement agent whose purpose was prose-   

> (tIatioll. Recognition of

the defense works as an estoppel (in the government, pre-venting It from reaping tile benefits of the prosecution and conviction It sotght t obt11il Un11| byIIiun m ns." 

The entrapment rationale is wholly Inapplicable to this case. In recruiting Barker and Martinez, Hunt was not acting as a law enforcement official seeking too induce their partieliation in order to have their prosecuted and punished, Ile instead .ought their aid for other governmental ends which his unit Judged best served by illegitimate Invasion of the rights of others. The true entrapment 

defense seeks to prevent government officials from realizing benefits from unlaw-ful inducement, anl thereby to deter official Illegality. Extension of the defense to rea('h limit's Indtiemnent of Barker would Kerve to reinforce the illegal conduct of the government agent, who could then delegate the "dirty work" to private citizens shlehd from responsibility by the defense that they had been recruited 

ly it government agent." 

B. 7'he Claim of Mistakc of Fact 

It i settled doctrine that an honest mistake of fact generally negatives crim-inal Intent. when a defendant's acts would be lawful if the facts were as he sup- 

> 1

Tr. 2524-26. While the trial Judge said "valid warrant," there was no testimony or eintention that defendants had a belief that a warrant had been obtained. A person can act 

ii!tio the basis of a warrant that has been issued In fact, even though it is later held invalid without Incurring personal legal responsibility. This would come within the narrow clas.o o! 

co s where a reasonable mistake of law does constitute a defense. as get out In Part I1D2, 

of thi opinion. See also Model Penal Code 1 2.04(8) (b) (P.O.D. 1962). ' Barker Br. at 31. 

* llnrker Br. at 81-82.        

> -Ree. lHughes, C..J. In Sorrells v. United

States, 28T UhS. 435, 448 (1932) : "We arm Itnablp to conclude that it was the Intention of the Congrm in enacting this statute that Its processes of detection and enforcement should be abused by the instigation by government ofliclalI of an act on the part of persons otherwise Innocent in order to lure them to its com.mlisinn and to p unish them. . . . Thin. we think, has been the underlying and con. trolling thought in the su stions in judicial opinions that the Government in such a case is eostoplwid to prosecute or that the courts should bar the protectionn" rorrells was followed In Sherman v. United States, 856 U.S. 869 (1958). and United States v. Russell, 411 U.S. 428 (1078). In Bhens. 56 U.N. at 372 Warren. C.J., In apassage quoted In part, w*t'. approval of Rehnquist j. in Russeli, 441 U.S. at 434. stated '.The function of law enforcement in the prevention of crime and the apprehension of               

> criminals. Manifestly, that function does not include the manufacturing of crime. ...Con.

gre"s could not have intended that its statutes were to be enforced by tempting Innocent loersons into violations."      

> It Congress is presently considering

a major extension of the entrapment dpfn,'n In the              

> bill IproIxised to codify and revise title 18, . 1. 1 551. 94th Cong., lit

5eps. (1975). As of the present. it i not known or knowable whether or in what form this proposal will be passed, and what Congress may contemplate as to cases previously tried. 454 

Jos('(I then to le.' This Is (.oisidlerd a matter of essential fairness.U Even had the facts been as Barker and Martinez claim now to have supposed then, however, their Fielding break-in would still have contravened the clear requirement of the om irth Amendment. Classifying mistakes as either of fact or of law Is not always an unambiguous task." At trial, defendants offered an Instruction that rather elusively muddled the two types of mistakes, and set them in an incorrect context as to the "spelflc intent" required for the crine." The brief before this court attempts to correct that prior lack of clarity by advancing the proffered defense with a closer atten-tion to the discrete policies underlying the mistake of fact and mistake of law defenses. It may he convenient to take up the appellants' defense in terms of the recognized doctrinal distinctions before turning to the applicability of exce options. For purposes of this appeal It can be assumed that Barker and Martinez under-took the Fielding break-in while believing that the ultiniate "target" was aforeign security risk for the United States. The defendants (to not simply claim that they were factually mistaken about the purpose of their mission, however; they also urge that their error in believing that Hunt was a "duly authorized" agent was a factual error. Although defendants claim to maintain a distinction between mistake of fact and mistake of law, this contention en-tirely erodes the distinction. Defendants did not claim, or offer to prove a belief, that the President or Attorney General personally authorized the break-in ; nl('r 

did they seek to advance any other s ,pecitli factual basis fo)r the belief that I unt was "duly authorized." They certainly did not offer to prove that they believe( John Ehrlichman "expressed or Implied that the break-in of Dr. Fielding's office was legal under a national security rationale." (Merhige, concurring at 8). They 

(lid not seek outside advice about the factual requirements necessary for such an undertaking. The appellants (1o not claiin they mistakenly believed they were acting under a warrant. Nor do they claim any other representation of fact, ex-press or Implied, or mistake of fact. Martinez says lie lielieved that liit was still employed b~y the CIA. lie has appiarently Iut hilnself ini a no-lose lpillhn on 41 this iolnt, for when his CIA 

east' offer relld to his iniquiny that Iln t was not then employed by ('IA. ite assumed thils answer was a rns, o' ('over. lit this nistake of fact--whetlher re. sonable or not-was irrelevant. for even if liit had then lbeen employed iby 

('IA. his employment would not have valilated the r.ak-lit and search. At Iottomn, the defendantst' "mistake" was to rely oil llitit's White House and ('IA connections as legally validating any activities undertaken in the name of 

national security. They hind teen told that the matter was something that could not lie handled by the FBI because of court decisions or by the CIA because of Its Ilttifted jurisdiction. Martinez conceded in testinmony that lie was aware that 

I See, e.g., United States v. Feola. 420 U.S. 671. 686 (1975) : 1 Wharton's Criminal Law Andc Procedure 6 157 (1957) : 0. Williams, Criminal Law, the General Part 1 52-74 (2d Ed. 1961): Model Penal Code 12.04(1) (P.O.D.) (1962).  

> U,

'e. 1. M. Hart. Jr.. "The Aims of the Criminal Law". 23 Law and Contemporary Problem. 401, 414 (1958). Cf. Morisette v. United States, 342 U.S. 246 (1952), and diL-eimlon In note 49 infra.,  

> 160eherally,

Glanville Willams distinguishes between them as follows: "'Al fnct In 

something perceptible by the senses, while law In an Idea In the minds of men." William., ('rminal Law, the General Part (2d ed., 1981). 1 100. p. 287. 

U Defendant's proposed instruction read: "You have heard evidence during the coiirs 

of the trial pertaining to the state of mind of certain of the defendants at the time they Agreed to participate and thereafter did participate in the September 8, 1971 entry of the offle, of Dr. Lewis J. Fielding. I Instruct you that a defendant's motives In committing acts which the law forbids are not germane to whether an offense has been conmitted. However. mince specific intent Is an essential element of this offense. if a defendant acted out of agood faith belief that what he was doing was with authority of law and not in violation of the law, that I a defense to the crime charged, even it that sincere belief that his actions were lawfully authorized was erroneous." "This is not to may that a mistake of law on the part of a defendant would constitute adlefense to the crime charged. Neither Ignorance of the law nor mistake of law would excuse the criminal conduct in this case. However, if actions are taken as the result of mistake of furt. as opposed to ignorance or a mistake of law then the dfendant has not formed the re'ijulsite Intent for the crime charged. Aeeerdingy. if you find that a defendant believetl he ws acting out of a good faith reliance upon the apparent authority of another to authorize his actions, that is a defense to the charge In Count I. provided you find that s'uch a mistake by a defendant was made honestly, sincerely. Innocently and wAR A reason-

Ahle mistake to make based upon the facts as that defendant perceived them." Barker App. 104.-05. To the extent defense counsel was of the view. as appear" from the third sentence of his irorped Instruction. that a good faith mistake of law negatives the specific intent roolliril for the crim,. this I, not ,ound. Se" See. lIE of this opinion and Siec. IA of our opinion In U".N. v. Ehrilchman. lapiued today: United States v. Guest. 383 U.S. 745 (lO4n) : Screws v. I'Wlfel States. 325 V.S. 91 (1045); United States v. Clasie, 313 U.S. 299 (1941). 455 

the operation might have been illegal for a "normal citizen" (Tr. 2170). Barker and Martinez did not consider themselves "normal" because of their putative status as CIA-White House operatives. Their mistake as to who or what the law authorized or required cannot be repackaged as a mistake of "fact" that lunt had been (July authorized. It can lie assumed for present purposes that defendants mistakenly believed Ihey were entering Dr. Fielding's office in order to get Information on soine other person who was a "traitor." However, their actions taken pursuant to that mis-taken belief dl not conform with the law's requirements. The fundamental right to be free from warrantless physical searches has been clear since Boyd v.        

> United ,'ttes "recognized that such cases

as Entick r. ('arrington so intensely affected the framers that those cases have long been taken "as sufficiently ex-]Ianatory of what was ineant by unreasonable searches and seizures.' " Even when the Executive acts to avert foreign security dangers, no Federal judge, 

indeed no J)epartinent of Justice submission, has ever suggested that action otherwise clearly prohibited by the Fourth Amendment would be valid in the absence of explicit authorization by the President or Attorney General. No generally delegable power to authorize such searches is reconcilable with the requirements of the Fourth Amendment.," 

)nt the separate issue of whether physical seareles can properly lie included in a foreign secri ty exception to the warrant reqlui-rements, the Special lro)se-'utor says No, while tie Attorney generall lIts filed a short memoran1(1i sayitig Yes. It specifically authorized by the Presi(lent or the Attorney General." Tihe fact that diefendilaints do not assert a Ielief that the President or Attorney General authorized their violation oif I)r. Fielding's fundamental right to be free of war-rnnth'ss government forays Into his office takes this ease outside the mistake of faet def(ens . for whatever defendants' other beliefs as to the facts, they would not. If true. establish exculpation. In an earlier case involving these same defendants, and roughly the same defense as that advanced here, Judge Wilkey rejected the argument that "alm error as to the legality of a particular activity, even if based uip) the assurances of agovernmental official" can le treated iss a mistake of fact. lie recognized the tn-portance of the ismu,, for a uiistake of fact defense would Jitstify conduct when-ever the mistake was honest whether reasonable or not, while the mistake of law defense. If held applicable. Justifies conduct only if the mistake is reason-able. United states v. Barker, (dissent) 168 U.S.App.D.C. 312, 514 F.2d 208, 264-68 & n.76 (1975). I subsequently consider whether the mistake of law de-fense should be expanded to reach this case. But certainly this should not be done behind the screen that what Is involved is a mistake of fact. Defendants cannot avoid the limitations that have historically shaped exculpation because of legal mistake. by characterizing as factual error their belief that a general-Ized auro of executive branch authorization warranted their nighttime intrusion. 

V. Mistake of Law-Generally 

Viewed as a mistake of law, the defense raised by defendants requires us to confront a fundamental tension in our criminal law. The criminal law relies in general on the contempt of culpability or blameworthiness as a prerequisite to guilt. expre4sed as a requirement of men's rea." The Supreme Court has.                                                   

> '14 liUS. 616 (18M6.
> 17 03~ Eng. Rep. 807 (1765). Lord Camden upheld damages against Lord Haifax. the Secretary of State who Issued the general warrant to seize papers In acame of seditious libel, holding this had never been authorized by acourt, other than Star Chamber, and was not avalid Justification for atrespass.
> '116i

11.5. at 627. SPee discussion in the companion opinion of United States v. Ehrllchman at See. 1111,                                                                                                                                

> and the District Court's reliance on the defendant's failure to allege Presidential or Attorney General authorization, 376 F. Supp. at 34. mThe fact that the Attorney General has recently-and so far as we are aware for the first time-made the claim that there is a "national security" exception that would permit phical Intruilon in acitizen's home or office on specific approval of the President or Attorney General. even in the absence of awarrant, does not mean that the law on thin pniFthon is nnw to be regarded as clouded with doubt so as to remove such actions from the scope of sectlon 241.
> "HIt. Packer, the Limits of the Criminal Sanction 112-21 (1968). explain" thie uie of culpability as an "appropriate criterion for limiting the reach of state Intervention". "transcendling a] calculus of crime preventing," But see J. Hall. General Prineplesi of

Criminal Law 77-83 (2d ed. 1960). concluding that even in the earliest cases mens rea was concerned with the intentional doing of a wrongful act and not a general notion of moral hlImeworthiness; Spney. " 'When Empty Terrors Overawe'-Our Criminal Law Defenses." 19 Wayne L. Rev. 947. 969 (1978). coneptuallxing criminal law as imposing a positive duty upon individuals to refrain from antisocial conduct. 456 

however, rejected Blackstone's formulation that a "vicious will" Is necessary to constitute a crime, see Lambert v. California, 3;55 U.S. 225, 228 (1957), and as a society we have stopped short of requiring a subjective behavioral assess-ment of each offender's individual stock of knowledge about the law and its applicability.' Instead, "the rule that 'Ignorance of the law will not excuse' . . . 

is deep in our law." Lambert v. California, 355 U.S. at 228, quoting Shelvin-

Carpenter Co. v. Minnesota, 218 U.S. 57, 68 (1910). The Supreme Court has generally refused to recognize a defense of Ignoraice of, or mistake as to, the requirements of the law violated, even -when the mistake refutes any subjective moral blameworthiness in the offender. Sce, e.g., United States v. Park, 421 U.S. 658 (1975) ; Unitcd States v. International Minerals d Chemical Corp., 402 U.S. 558, 563 (1971). United States v. Freed, 401 U.S. 601 (1971) ; United States v. Dottericeich, 320 U.S. 277, 284 (1943)." Similarly, the A.L.l.'s Model Penal Code § 2.02(9) defines the requirements of culpability so that "neither knowl-edge nor recklessness or r,.gligence as to whether conduct constitutes an offense or as to the existence, meaning or application of the law determining the ele-ments of an offense Is an element of such offense unless the definition of the of-fense or the Code so provides." I

The general principle that rejects the defense of ignorance of the require-ments of the criminal law, or of mistake as to those requirements, is not a casual or happenstance feature of our legal landscape. It formed a part of English and canon law for centuries and all the time with recognition that It diverged from an approach of subjective blameworthiness.' Its continuing vitality steins from preserving a community balance, put by Holmes as a recognition that "Justice to the Individual is rightly outweighed by the larger interests on the other side of the scales." " Great minds like Holmes and Austin have struggled with the tension between individual injustice and society's need and have concluded that recognition of the mistake of law defense would encourage Ignorance rather than a determination to know the law. and would interfere with the enforce-ment of law, because the claim would be so easy to assert and hard to disprove." In some aspect the doctrine may be viewed as a doctrine of negligence, hold-Ing Individuals to minimal conditions of responsibility and making acting with-out legal knowledge blameworthy for the failure to obtain that knowledge. MHall suggests in addition that the rationale can be expressed in terms of ethical policy-that the criminal law represents certain moral principles and that to recognize ignorance or mistake of law as a defense would contradict those values. a

Still, it must in the last analysis be recognized that at its core, the basic mistake of law doctrine Imposes liability even though defendant acted in good faith and made a "reasonable" mistake. Otherwise. criminal statutes would he in suspense on any point not authoritatively settled." In a particular case adherence to a             

> "But see Hall ind Seligman. "Mistake of Law and Mes& Rea," 8 IT.

hi. L. Rev. 641 (1041). (Hereinafter cited as Hall and Seilgman). Of course, totally subjective assessments of An acsen4l's state of mind can never be fully realized. For example, a finding of the sub-Jective intent required for a first degree murder conviction may be and frequently is based on objective inferences from evidence other than direct evidence of the state of mind. "Only where scienter is "historically retired", as in embezzlement onr larceny (see Morissette v. United States, 842 U.S. 246, (1951). discussed in U.S. v. Freed 401 U.S. at 6T07 n .13), or where the circumstances requiring the law's application do not "alert the doer to the consequences of his deed" (Lambert, 355 U.S. at 228) has ignorance of the law been reeognizpd by the Supreme Court as an excuse.    

> 1( P.O.T). 1962).

See also S. 1, supra note 11. 1 303(d)(1) "Existence of Offence-Proof of knowledge or other state of mind is not required with respect to : (A) the fact that par-ticular conduct constitutes an offense or Is required by or violates a statute or a regulation. rule, or order issued pursuant thereto: (1) the fact that particular conduct Is described In s section of this t[tle ; or (C) the existence, meaning, or application of the law deter-mining the elements of an offense. This careful specification of the elements of an offense    

> iq consistent with

"[tlhe modern practice In drafting penal legislation . . . to specify defenses when intended." United States v. Moore, 158 U.S. App. D.C. 375, 413. 486 F. 2d 

1119. 1177. cert. denied 414 U.S. 980 (1973).     

> FPee 11ali &Seligman's

summary. supra at 643--46. 

0 Holmes. The Common Law 48 (1881). 21 As to the doctrinal support for their positions, an excellent summary Is presented in   

> Hall &

lSliman. aupra at 446-451. 

Hart, "The Aims of the Criminal Law," 23 Law and Contemporary Problems 401, 413 

> (Il.q).

'*"The criminal law represents an objective ethic which must sometimes oppose ndi-!'Idual convictions of right. Accordingly, it will not permit a defendant to plead. in effect. that although he knew what the facts were, his moral Judgment was different from that ,¢eresrentd in the penal law." Hall, "Ignorance and Mistake in Criminal Law," 33 lad.                                                                                

> LJ. 1, 21 (1957). quoted in Reprt of the Senate Committee on the Judiciary, Criminal
> .Ji-,lee Codiflcation. Revision and Reform Act of 1974. Vol. 11, p. 96. of It would fairly be argued that no liability attaches for e.g., action takn tnder a
> "re, qnnable", though erroneous, forecast of how far the courts might go in confining astntute through the doctrine of strict construction. Litigation could come to depend not on what the statute meant, but the reasonableness of alegal view of its meaning.

457 

generally formuLhted rule may seem to work injustice, but the Jurists ponder-ing the genial doctrine have both deemed such individual hardships outweighed by the common good, and have taken into account that certain features of the overall system of criminal justice permit amelioration and relief.' These flex-ible opportunities for mitigating the law's impact-through prosecutorial discre-tion, 1 Judicial sentencing, and executive clemency-avoid the necessity of bend-ing and stretching the law, at the price of undermining its general applicability. Every mature system of Justice must cope with the tension between rule and discretion. Rules without exceptions may grind so harsh as to be intolerable, but exceptions and qualiflcations Inflict a cost in administration and loss of control. The balance struck by the doctrine with which we are now concerned provides for certain rigorously limited exceptions (inapplicable to defendants' claim) but otherwise leaves amelioration of harsh results to other parts of the system of justice. In my view, history has shaped a rule that works, and we should be slow to tinker. Consequently, defendants here must be held to a responsibility to con-form their conduct to the law's requirements. To hold otherwise would be to ease the path of the minority of government officials who (,hoose. without regard to the law's requirements, to do things their way, and to provide absolution at large for private adventurers recruited by them. 

D. Exceptions to the Mistakes of Law Doctrine 

I do not discount defendants' claims that their background, and particularly their previous relations with the CIA ' and hunt explains their good faith-reliance on hfunt's apparent authority and their consequent failure to Inquire about the legality of the activities they were to undertake on his request." I feel compassion for men who were simultaneously offenders and victims, and so did the trial Judge when It caine to sentencing. But testing their special circum-stances against analogies they rely on to project a mistake of law defense, leads me to reject their claim to lie relieved of personal accountability for their acts. 

1. Claim of (ood Faith Relianec on an Official's Authority 

Appellants invoke the acceptance of good faith reliance defei,4es in the 'Model Penal Code. However, the American 1Lw Institute .arefully limited the sections cited to p ers, us responing to a call for aid from a police officer rinking an unlaw-ful arrest," and to olbeving unlawful military orders,' and specifically rejected   

> 3L if

the social harm in a particular case Is slight and the ignorance of the law on the part of the offender is fairly obvious, the state may wisely refrain from prosecution in his caso. In certain other cases ignorance of law may be considered t1' the court in mitigation of iminishment, or may be made the basis of an application for executive clemency. But if suchi ignorance were available as a defense in every criminal case, this would be a constant source of confusion to juries, and it would tend to encourage the ignorance at a point whore it is peculiarly important to the state knowledge should be as widespread as is reasonably is"ibl." R. Perkins, Criminal Law 925 (2d ed. 1969). (footnotes omitted).  

> "'

The Justice Department decision against prosecuting Richard Helms may be a sound r-xianple of prosecutorial discretion shielding against the cut of the law. It should be noted that unlike the defendants in this ease, Helms arguably acted in obedience to a duty Imposed by statute, and thus might have come within the compass of a mistake of law defense grounded in the actor's being under a duty to act. 13However, the CIA's authority does not extend to domestic intelligence activity. 50 U.S.C. I 403(d) (3) (1970). 

3" Although Barkei and Martinet are American citizens, they are in a sense arguing that they could not be expected to make the right judgments about the requirements of Ameri-can law because they were accustomed to Cuba's more authoritarian culture. see Ilazelon, J. concurring in United States v. Barker. 514 F. 2d at 235 n. 38. However under American Jurisprudence an allen or naturalized citizen status does not excuse compliance with the criminal law. Cf. United States v. De A Garza, 149 U.S. App. D.C. 200, 462 F. 2d 304 (1972). 

"R 'e e.r,. Model Penal Code I 3.07(4) (P.O.D. 1962) (4) Use of Force by Pritate Person Assisting an Unlawful Arrest. 

(a) A private person who is summoned by a peace officer to assist In effecting an unlAw-

ful arrest, is Justified In usIng any force which lie would be Justified in using if the arrest were lawfil. provided that he does'not believe the arrest Is unlawful. 

(b) A private person who assists another private person In effecting an unlawful arrest, or who, not being summoned, assists a peace oMcer in effecting an unlawful arrest, is jus ti. 

fled in uming any force which he would be Justified in using if the arrest were lawful, Iro-vilded that (I) he believes the arrest Is lawful, and (11) the arrest would be lawful if the facts, were as he believes them to be. 

6 R4ce Model Penal Code 1 2.10 (P.O.D. 1962). ;See aieo Williams Criminal Law 1 105, 296 -301 ; United States v. Calley 22 U.S.M.C.A. 534 (1973). 458 

the defense for other mistake of law contexts." In both Instances, the A.L.I. recog-nizes limited curtailment of the doctrine excluding a mistake of law defense on the ground that the actor is under a duty to act -- to help a police officer in distress to make an arrest when called upon, or to obey military orders. In each case, society has no alternative means available to protect its interest short of imposing a duty to aot without a correlative duty to inquire about the legality of the act. Punishing an individual for failure to inquire as to the lawful basis for the officer's request would frustrate the effective functioning of the duly constituted police (and military) force and in its operation on the individual would compel a choice between the whirlpool and the rock.' There is no similar incapacity of the government to act to protect is ends when a citizen takes action when he is under no duty to do so. Tius under the lodel Penal Code, a citizen who volunteers to assist another citizen, or volunteers to assist a police officer in making an unlawful arrest, cannot avail himself of the defense-available to a person responding to an officer's call-that he partic-ipated without making an inquiry as to whether the. arrest was lawful. The volunteer Is exculpated only If lie believed that the arrest was lawful and be-lieved in the "existence of facts which, if they existed, would render the arrest valid." "' Thus, even if private citizen intervention appears socially desirable in a particular case, the citizen's scope of action and protection in the event of mis-takes are narrow, because overall forceful citizen enforcement of the law is sus-cept ible of abuse ,' a ld mischief. Barker and Martinez were under no tension of conflicting duties comparable to that experienced by a soldier or citizen responding to orders. They had and claiin no obligation to aid Hunt. Nor did they have a belief of fact rendering their voluntary assistance lawful within § 3.07(4), supra note 33. Nor is there a ('onilwlling social interest to be served in allowing private citizens to undertake extra legal activities, acting simply on the word of a government official. The pouriopses of the law In rejecting su(h a defense are underscored by the very kinds 

of extri-governmental, outside-normal-cliannels conduct that Barker and Mar-tinvz engaged in here. Government officials who cllin to be seeking to imlplement the ends of government by bypassing the agencies and personnel norinally re-sponsilble and accountable to the public transmit a danger signal. Barker and Martinez acted to help IHunt on his explanation that lie sought their recruitment because the FBI's "hands were tied by Supreme Court decisions and the Central Intelligence Agency didn't have Jurisdiction in certain matters." a There Is rea-son for the law to carve out limited exceptions to the doctrine negating defenses rooted in mistake of law. but the pertinent reasons have minimal weight, and face countervailing policies, when they are invoked for situations that on their face tire outside the basic channels of law and governinent-In this case, requests for surrepti1ous or, if necessary, forcible entry and clandestine -files search. These are plainly crimes, malum in -e, unless there is legal authority. Citizens may take action in such circumstances out of emotions and motives that they deemn lofty, but they must take the risk that their trust was misplaced, and that ,"When f3.07(4) does not specifically apply, 8.09(1) withdraws any Justification defense to the use of improper force where the actor s 'error is due to ignorance or mistake  

> 111

to the provisions of the Code, any other provision of the criminal law or the law govern. ing the legality of an arrest or search." The Commentary explained that provision as dealing w Ith a "body of -law [Iwhichl Ist not stated In the Code and may not appear in t he form of t enal la w at all. It seems clear, however, that the policy which holds mistake of penal law to hr Immaterial applies with no less force to the law of arrest or search." A.L.I. Model 

Penal Code 1 3.09 (1) comment referring to j 8.04 (1) comment (Tent. Draft. No. 8, 1958),        

> at 1,. 'An analogous defense under proposed

S. 1 in 541 (Exercise of Public Authority), which Justifies conduct by private Individuals done at the direction of a public servant where the conduct was required or authorized by law. Because their conduct was neither required nor authorized, Barker and Martinez fall outside the scope of this proposed exception. MA similar rationale underlies the exception for reliance on government authority when acting under a public duty. See Model Penal Code 1 8.03 (P.O.D. 1902).                                     

> 0lU'ven under circumstances of conflicting obligations, the reasonableness of asoldier's obedience to an unlawful order is tested against the objective standard provided by "a man
> (f ordinary sense and understanding." 22 U.S.C.M.A. tupra, at 542-43. See also footnote
> 31R

supra.     

> 40A.L.I. Model Penal Code,

1 3.07(4)(b), see note 83 aupra; Comment (Tent. Draft No. S. p. 615 (1959). Cf. Proposed H. 1 1 544(b) (similar provrslon for recognizing defenses based on Justifiable conduct predicated on a mistake about the factual situation)S.                                                          

> It See, e.g., U.8. .Hillsman 522 F. 2d 4M.4, (7th Cir. 1975), holding that defendant's attempted citisen's arrest of aseeing felon was improper under Indiana law because validity of such an arrest rests on whether a felony (a question of fact and of law) had In fact been committed by the arrestee, and no felony had in fact been committed. ,2 Barker, Tr. 2197.

459 

they have no absolution when there was no authority for the request and their response. If they are later to avoid the consequences of criminal responsibility, it must be as a matter of discretion. To make the defense a matter of right would enhance the resources available to individual officials bent on extra-legal govern-ment behavior. The purpose of the criminal law is to serve and not to distort the fundamental values of the society. 2. Erception for Offlial Misstatements of Law 

Although defendants relied on the analogy to a police officer's request for assist-ance, Judge Merhige votes to reverse on the ground that appellants could claim us a defense that a citizen has a right to take action In reliance on a government official's assurance that such action is permissible. The Model Penal Code has addressed itself to that broad problem, and has approved a defense that is nar-rowly confined in order to protect social interests." Its provision yields no excuse for defendants' conduct. Section 2.04(3) of the Code provides a carefully and properly drawn recognition of a defense based on reasonable reliance on a stat-ute, Judicial decision, administrative order or "an official interpretation of the public officer or body charged by law with responsibility for the Interpretation, administration or enforcement of the law defining the offense." Mainly directed to the mala prohibita offenses, the categories protected "involve situations whore 

the act charged is consistent with entire law-abidingness of the actor, where time possibility of collusion is minimal . . ." "Tile section contemplates both accountability and responsible action on the part of the government official giving advice about the law. But defendants do not claim they received any advice, either express or implied, from Ehrllchnman, and llunt had only an ad hoe, undefined position in the White House.' He had no on-line enforcement or interpretative powers or respoistbiliites. His undifferen-tiated power steinnied solely from membership In a large White H1ouse bureauc-racy."' Tile ptential for official abuse of power would be greatly magnified if such a government official can recruit assistance from the general uIblic, con-stralned neither by accountability guidelines guiding agency action under statu-torily mandated powers, nor by the recruited citizen who, under the defendailts' formulation, would be under no duty to inquire about the legality of the official's req uest."' To stretch the official misstatement of law exception for the facts of this case is to undercut the entire rationale for its recognition as an exception. The Model Penal Code hedges in the defense to permit reliance only on an "official interpre-tation of the public officer . . . charged by law with responsibility for the inter-pretation, administration or enforcement of the taw defining the offense." (empha-sis added). Certainly H1unt cannot sensibly be described as having been charged by law with responsibility for Interpreting or enforcing either 1 241, or the Constitution from which the violations of 5 241 in this case sprang. Nor can it Ie said in any meaningful sense that he had the power to provide an official interpretation of the law. These restrictions on the applicability of the official statement exception (lid not arise haphazardly; they were deliberately drafted to allow, and indeed to promote, good faith reliance on official pronouncements with objective indicia of reliability-those made by officials specifically charged with interpreting or enforcing the specific law defining the specific offense charged against the defendant. A defense so confined has values for the law: It avoids punishing those who rely on a crystallized position taken by the officer or body charged by statute with interpreting the law in a particular area.' The  

> 43A

similar approach appears In 1 552 of 8. 1, supra note 11.                           

> "Model Penal Code, Tentative Draft #4 Commentary at 138 (1955). "The Room 16 unit did not even have an Executive Order formally creating it or endow-
> lim it with any powers.

0/. the classified Executive Order used to create the National Seci-                                          

> rity Agency (Nov. 4, 1952. U.S. Govt. Org. Manual 185-86 (1969-70?), discussed in Walden. "'The CIA: AStudy In the Arrogation of Administrative Powers' 39 Geo. Wash.
> L. Her. 66. 67 (1970). "0 The way that bureaucracy acquires power and handles its conflicts with agency per-sonnel and policy

is examined at length in Thomas, 'Presidential Advice and Information: Policy and Program Formulation. 35 L w and Contemporary Problems 540" (1970).                                                      

> I? The potentially broad range of Illegal activities that agovernment official might request nprivate citizen to do. would make it Impossible to rely on the educational value that nor-mally inheres when mistake of law is recognized as an excuse in one came that serves to 4-fine the law for similarly circumstanced offenders in the future.

See. e.g., Fletcher. "The Individualization of Excusing Condition.," 4? So. Cal. I. Rev. 1269. .0OS (1974).  

> 1"4

Cf. National Automatic Laundry and Cleaning Council v. Shultz, 148 U.S. App. D.C.      

> 274. 287-289. 443 F. 2d 689, 702-04 (1971).

460 

officer's position in a channel of authority is readily identifiable; any mistakes he makes can be remedied by readily perceived and structured avenues of relief. There is no opening the door to Justification for serious offenses based on unre-corded discourse from someone who has an undefined but high-sounding berth in the government. The "official interpretation" defense thus structured is a functional analogue of the defenses of reliance on a statute, Judicial decision or administrative order. It is Justified by its twin underlying assumptions that the official is one to whom authority has been delegated to make pronouncements in a field of law, and that the authority can be held accountable by explicitly grounding it in the hands of an identifiable public official or agency. So grounded, the interest of both private citizens and government is served by protecting actions taken in reliance on that interpretative authority. But none of these safeguards of regularity is present in this case. A staff man or even a lower echelon official of the White House may be taken as a man of presumptive standing and even influence, but not seriously as a source of official interpretation of law, much less of such matters as the validity of a stealthy breaking and entering. Even cases postulating a national security exception for wiretaps have never suggested more than that the President or the Attorney General could have authority to evaluate and authorize an exception. No claim of Presidential or Attorney General authorization has been made in this case. The official misstatement of law defense embodies a fundamental require-ment that the erroneous interpretation be made by an official in fact pos sessing the power to make a binding interpretation; it is wholly inapplicable to a case like this, of a claim of reliance on a government official in an area in which he has no power to interpret. And it is blatant incongruity to stretch an escape clause for mistakes of law arising in the innately public business of official interpretations of law to Immunize a secret conference for planning a stealthy entry into a private home or office. 

3. The Inapplicability of Other Exceptions 

While a mistake of law may negative a specific element of certain crimes" or may be accepted where the mistake pertains to a violation of purely civil law as contrasted with the requirements of the criminal law," none of these carefully wrought exceptions have application to the case at bar. Defendants' mistake of law did not pertain to some rule irrelevant to or remote from the criminal law. Nor does section 241 recognize a mistake of law defense or require a specific intent like the statute at issue in People v. We iss, 276 N.Y. 3S4, 12 N.E.2d 514 (1938), punishing a "willful" seizure of a person with "intent to [act], without authority of law." 

E. The "Specifio Intent" Rcquircment of the Civil Rights Offenses 

This brings me to the question whether the civil rights offenses involved here are of such a character, either in terns of required intent or affirmative defense, as to make available an extension of criminal defenses to include mistake of law. I conclude, on the contrary, that this consideration reinforces the rejection of the proffered defense. The court is dealing here with violations of civil rights. We ull agree that "the law is clear that I)r. Fielding's Fourth Amendment rights were breached when the defendants broke into and searched his office withoutt the requisite Judicial authorization" and that they acted with "a purpose to invade constitu-tionally protected interests." (Ehrlichrnan slip at 32). Unless we are willing to undercut criminal enforcement of the civil rights offenses, it is entirely imper-4"S'ee e.g. Mistake 5 521 in S. 1 : Model Penal Code| 2.04 (P.O.D. 1962). The possibility                                                                                      

> Of adefinition of particular crimes to permit exculpation by mistake of law does not contra-'llct the general rule denying exculpation. ",The prevailing general rule for criminal responsibility is that, unless the legislature Indicates its intention to make it so. Ignorance 4)r mistake of law is no defense." Report of the Senate Committee on the Judiciary, Crini-til Justice Codiflcatton) Revision and Reform Act of 1974. Vol. II, p. 94. 9Sce e.g., Williams, Criminal Law :The General Part. 117, Fletcher. "The IntlIrid aliza -tion( of Excusing Conditions. 47 8o. Cal.

L. Rev. 1269 (1974) at 1272. Williams suggests that n: mistake as to purely "civil" law In exculpatory while a mistake as to the criminali" law                                 

> i.r not. see 0. Williams, supra If 107-117. p. 804-451. Hart, eupra at 431 n. 70 Pxplain.
> .orsmette v. United States. 342 U.S. 246 (1951), am a"claim of right" civil law mistake.

461 

missible to stretch doctrines of mistake of law to reach the result of excusing that violation of Fourth Amendment rights. The majority excuses defendants' conduct on their contention of mistaken reliance on official lawlessness-even though conspiracy for illegal government purposes with government officials is the gravamen of the offenses charged. What the reversals accomplish is an erosion of pertinent Supreme Court rulings rejecting contentions based on -spe-cific Intent." Conviction under Section 241 requires that the offender acted with a "specific intent" m "to injure, oppress, threaten or intimidate any citizen in the free exer-cise or enjoyment of any right or privilege secured to him by the Constitution or laws of the United States . . ." This does not mean that he must have acted with subjective awareness that his action was unlawful; nor need the defendant have thought in constitutional terms while acting. See, e.g., Screce v. United 

States, 325 U.S. 91, 104-07 (1945). It is enough that the constitutional right is clearly defined and that the conspirators intend to Invade Interests protected by the Constitution.6 1In essence, defendants Barker and Martinez claim that the destructive social impact wrought by their invasion of another's civil rights is exonerated by the law so long as an individual is acting at the request of a government official and on his Implication that he has legal authority. The price to society of tolerat-ing reliance on the very official misconduct 1 241 was directed against, forces us to reject defendants' argument.' As the Supreme Court made clear in Screws," the scope and significance of the all-important civil rights criminal statutes are not to be cabined or cut down, either by expanding scienter requirements to include knowledge of law or by enlarging defenses based on ignorance or mistake of law. 

A private citizen must start with a beginning point In his understanding of what 

the law requires. Breaking and entering a home or office is ,nalum in ac-a gross and elementary crime when done for personal reasons, a gross and elementary violation of civil rights when done with the extra capability provided by a gov-ernment position. Defendants were charged and convicted of violating a clearly defined constitutional right." They were not acting in an official law enforcement capacity. Of. Bivens v. Six Unknown Named Agents of Federal Bvireaus of Nar-

cotics, 456 F.2d 1339 (2d Cir. 1972).56 Their defense instead reduces to an arguable but interested speculation that their otherwise unlawful behavior would be vindi-cated by a foreign security exemption to the Fourth Aiendinent's protections. In regard to subjective "good faith," they are indistinguishalde from any other crlim-Inal defendant who deliberately breaks the law in the mistaken exlswCtatifn that he can assert a constitiitioiial defense at trial or one who is civilly dislpedlet-nt Is-cause his framework for moral action does not coincide wilh his soelety's legal 

1w, See, e.g., United States v. Guest 883 U.S. 745. 753-54 (1966). 61 Als our companion opinion in united States v. Ehrlichman illustrates, Dr. IF'eldhig's right to be free o a warrantless search was clear at the time of the break-in. 021, 'e United States v. Konovsky. 202 F. 24 721. 730-31 (7th Cir. 1953) "If a police officer acts intentionally under color of his office to subject a citizen to deprivation of his constitutional rights. he cannot Justify his action in that respect bv 

Orders from his superiors . . . [AJny instruction to the jury must carefully Ioint uut the distinction between the duty of an officer to allow (sic) his superior's Instrsctions In the performance of his duty and the equal duty not to aid and abet in the deprivation of citizens' ri hts."     

> 1-325 U.8. 91

(1945). " See part II of this opinion. ' The Bivena court balanced the need to protect agents' lives in the course of thlr duties with the citizens' constitutional rights and held that "it is a defense to allee, and prove 

pod faith and reasonable belief in the validity of the arrest and search" to n darsiss. at-ion lased on unconstitutional search and seizure. 456 F. 2d at 1848. Although it is not clear that recognized civil defenses should be automatically applied to the criminal law context 

i nce e.g. O'Shea v. Littleton. 414 U.S. 488. 503 (1974): Imbler v. Pachtman, 96 S. Ct. 9S4 (1976)) the defense recognized in Bivens does not in any case aid defendants hore. The Ifirens defense Is applicable in an official law enforcement context where the eomlex law of probable cause must be applied to widely differing congeries of facts;: by contrast, the law governing search and seizure without a warrant or Presidential/Attorny GOneral 'iiproval is clear and plainly applied to prohibit the conduct Barker and Martlnez en gged 

In. See also Wood v. Strickland. 420 U.S. 308, 822 (1975) (on remand. Strickland v. I ilow, 

519 F. 2d 744 (8th Cir. 1975) holding a school board member in a 42 U.S.C. I 19S3 (1970) action to a standard of conduct based "on knowledge of the basic, unanestln,ae c,,institu. tionni rights of his charges." Barker and Martinez had a similar responsibility to -know the law. 82-620 77--30 462 

framework." Such persons frequently act on a high plane of patriotism, as they view it, but that does not allow them to proceed in ignorance or disregard of the requirements of law." Ill. CONCLUSION I do not propose to consider whether appellants were unreasonable in accepting a particular view of the law. In the first place, Harker and Martinez do not urge as justification that they had a specific view of the law, but rather that they are entitled to absolution because they relied on a government employee's credentials and his assurance, by implication, that their action was lawful. Even so, one might well raise the question as to how appellants could reasonably believe that what they were doing was lawful when they were told they were called in because the action would have been unlawful for the F.B.I. The ultimate point is that appellants' mistake of law, whether or not it is classified as reasonable, does not negative legal responsibiltiy, but at best provides a reason for clemency on the ground that the strict rules of law bind too tight for the overall public good. Any such clemency Is not to be obtained by tinkering with the rules of responsibility but must be provided by those elements of the system of justice that are authorized by law to adjust for hardship and to provide amelioration. We should refuse to cut away and weaken the core standards for behavior provided by the criminal law." Softening the standards of conduct rather than ameliorating their application serves only to undermine the be-havioral incentives the law was enacted to provide. It opens, and encourages citizens to find, paths of avoidance instead of rewarding the seeking of com-pllance with the law's requirements. The criminal law cannot "vary legal norms with the hIdividual's capacity to meet the standards they prescribe, absent adisability that is both gross and verifiable, such as the mental disease or defect that may establish irresponsibility. The most that it Is feasible to do with lesser disabilities Is to accord them proper weight In sentencing."" The sentence performed its proper function here. Our system is structured to provide intervention points that serve to mitigate the inequitable Impact of gen-eral haws while avoiding the massive step of reformulating the law's requirements to meet the special facts of one hard case. Prosecutors can choose not to prosecute, for they are expected to use their "good sense... conscience and circumspection" to ameliorate the hardship of rules of law.40 Juries can choose not to convict if they feel conviction Is unjustified, even though they are not Instructed that they possess such dispensing power.' In this case, Barker and Martinez were allowed to testify at length about the Teasons motivating their involvement in the Fielding 

" See e.g., United States v. Cullen, 454 F. 2d 380, 892 (7th Cir. 1971) ("proof of motive, 

KOO( or iad. hast no relevance to (proving, requisite intent 1") ,United States v. Mallnowski, 472 F. 2(d 850. 856 (8d Cir.). oeril. donied, 411 U.S. 970 (I973i ("We agree with the district eourt that 'whatever motive may have led him to do the act is not relevant to the question of the violation of the Statute. Were the state of the law otherwise a defendant's trans. gressions would go unpunished so long as he proved a sincere belief In the impropriety of the stOntutory goal") ; United States v. Moylan, 417 F. 2d 1002, 1009 (4th Cir. 1909) cert.   

> denied 39"T

U.. 910 (1970). It has been suggested, but not as yet implemented, that defend. ants in test cases should be allowed to assert their good faith belief in the unconstitutional. ity of a law as a mistake of law defense. Bee Dworkin, "On Not Prosecuting Civil Disobedi. eone." 10 N.Y. Rec. of Book* 14 (June 6, 1968). One commentator dealing with assesxing criminal responsibility of the political offender concludes, however that considering motive as a factor In mitigation of sentence rather than as a exculpating excuse would be the "moat pragmatic proposal" for dealing with such offenders. Note. Criminal Responsibility and the Political Offender. 24 American U. L. Rev. 797, 833 (1975). 67 Harker and Martinez contend, as-a separate point, that they lacked specificc intent" to violate a federal right of Dr. Fielding, because the warrantless entry and search of his offle were only incidental to their primary purpose of photographing Daniel Ellsberg's medical file. an objective they characterize as at best a state offense outside the reach of section 241. The Supreme Court's most recent pronouncement on the requirements of sec-                                                                                                            

> tion 241 in Anderson v. United States 417 U.S. 211 (1974), makes clear that "if one of [the purposes of the conspiracyJ-w;hether primary or secondary-be the violation of federal aw. the conspiracy is unlawful under federal law."
> 'My rejection of the defendants' mistake of law defense also leads me to reject defend. ants' contention that failure to present evidence on their claimed defense to the grand Jury requires dismissal of the indictment. Nor Is an indictment subject to dismissal because of challengess to the competency or sufficiency of the evidence before the grand jury. See United ,tctes v. Calandra, 414 U.S. 888 (1974) ;Costello v. United States. 850 U.S. 359. 363-14 (1056).
> 9' A.L,.. Model Penal Code

1 209, Comment (Tent. Draft No. 10. 1960). at 6.                                    

> a' U.S. v. Dotterweich 320 US. 27, 285 (1948), quoted in part is United States Y. Park, 421 U.S. 658, 669-70 (16715).
> 61 See United States v. Dougherty, 154 U.S. App. D.C. 76, 473 F. 2d 1113 (1972).

463 

operation. This was an exercise of discretion by the Judge that gave elbow room to both defendants and Jury." In sentencing Barker and Martinez after they were convicted, to only three years probation, the trial Judge made a subjective evaluation of the defendants' conduct in light of the goals of the criminal law." Barker and Martinez's patriotic motives, good Intentions, and prior experience with the CIA and Hunt must all have Influenced with sentence imposed" The trial judge exercised hlls sentencing power to distinguish, in terms of degree of moral guilt, between appellants Barker and Martinez and codefendant Ehrlichman. But sympathy for defendants, or the possibility that their mistake might be consdered "reasonable" given their unique circumstances, must not override a pragmatic view of what the law requires of la'rsons taking this kind of action. 1 come back-again and again, in my mind-to the stark tact that we are dealing with a breaking and entering in the dead of night, both surreptitious and forcible, and a violation of civil rights statutes. This is simply light years away from the kinds of situations where the law has gingerly carved out exceptions permitting reasonable mistake of law as a de-fense--cases like entering a business transaction on the erroneous advice of ahigh responsible official or district attorney, or like responding to ani urgent call for aid from a police officer. I dissent. ,2 While not strictly congruent with the law underlying the instructions later given to the Jury- it did not Involve the judge In an afrmative mis-statement of the law. The extra lati-tuule in terms of what may be presented to the Jury may be viewed as a historic reponance In practice from the days when Juries had the power to set punishment as well as to con. vict. and evidence was admissible at trial in mitigation of punishment. Williams. Criminal    

> Law supra at

291. 

6i am well aware that there are differences between probation and acquittal-the Judg-ment of leniency being made by a Judge and not a Jury and a felony conviction having possible collateral effects in such matters as voting and employment. But if the situation ,1,),,s not prompt a failure to prosecute, the possibility of suspension and Imposition of sen-tence and probation remains an Important amelioration that avoids a breach In the law's resolution of interests.     

> *" Emtablishment and vindication

of the law need not be accomplished by a heavy penalty.                                                     

> Fec e.g., Hall and-Seligman, supra at 650; Note, Political Offenders, owpra at 828-R82. Moreover, the trial Judge took account of sentence served for the Watergate break-in. i.',nlencing Tr. p. 10). It is not uncommon for trial Judges to provide for concurrent service
> ,i sentence on unrelated crimes; here, the confinement on the prior sentence had already terminated.

# FBI OVERSIGHT Attorney General's Guidelines for FBI Activities and Additional Legislative Proposals THURSDAY, JUNE 10, 1976 HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES, SUBCOMM7ME ON CIVIL AND CONSTITUTIONAL RxuirTs, COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY, 

Washington, D.C. 

The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 9:30 a.m., in room 2226, Rayburn House Office Building, lion. Don 1Edwards [chairman of the subcommittee] presiding. Present: Representatives Edwards and Butler. Also present: Alan A. Parker, counsel; Thomas P. Breen, assistant colinsel; and Roscoe 1. Starek II, associate counsel. Mr. EDwAnDs. The subcommittee will come to order. Good morning. Today we continue our hearings designed to provide this subcommittee with a wide range of views as to how the Congress should set the policy for the Federal Bureau of Investigation. Our particular concern at this time is the domestic intelligence function of the FBI. Our witness today is William K. Lambie, Jr., who is the associate executive director of Americans for Effective LAw Enforcement. Mr. Lambie is a lawyer who received his law degree at Vanderbilt and is admitted to the bar of the State of Tennessee and the Supreme Court of the United States. lie was formerly a special agent with the FBI and has been involved in law enforcement and national security studies for many years. We might have some interniptions, Mr. Lambie, because the House is going into session 2 hours early today, but you will forgive us if we leave from time to time. We are delighted to have you here and, without objection, your full statement will be made a part of the record. [The prepared statement of William K. Lambie, Jr., follows:]                 

> STATEMENT OF WILLIAM K. LAMRIr, JR., ASSOCIATE EXECUTIVE DruErOR OF AMERICAN'8 FOB EFEcTIVE LAW ENFORCEMENT, INC., EVANSTON, ILL.

My name Is William K. Lamble, Jr. I reside at 728 Hil de Avenue, Glen Ellyn, Illinois, 60187. 1 am Aisociate Executive Director of Americans for Effective Law Enforcement, Suite 960, State National Bank Plaza, Evanston, Illinnis, 60201. I am an attorney, holding a J.D. degree from Vanderbilt University and am a member of the bar of the State of Tennessee, and of the bar of the Supreme Court of the United States and the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit. (465) 466 

My law enforcement background consists of over three years of service as aspecial agent of the Federal Bureau of Investigation during which time I worked on both criminal cases and security cases. From 1U59 until 1972, 1 served as Research Director and Administrative Director of the American Security Council and was responsible for the administration of the nation's largest pri-vately held library on national security matters. I have been associated with Americans for Effective law Enforcement since 1972. Americans for Effective Law Enforcement, Inc. (AELE) is a national, not-for-profit citizen's organization incorlorated under the laws of the State of Illinois in 1966. The purpose of AELE i to provide responsible support fo proper law enforce-ment. AEIN is not a "police, right or wrong" organization. We do not support abusive or unprofessional police practices of any sort; rather, we call for abalance which takes into consideration the rights of the law-abiding and of the innocent victims of criminal acts as well as the rights of the criminal accused. Let mne state at the very outset that speaking as a single former agent of the Fill, I have no apologies to make to anyone for any activity iII which Imay have been involved while a special agent (if the FBi or for any activity In which the Bureau may have len involved at any time. I doubt that anyone has had the time or diligence to read the many thousands of words puhllshed in the news media or in releases or "leaks" to the news media alout the FBI, but relying on what I have read, I see almost nothing for which to apologize. It seems to me that the Bureau has fully understood its mission and that it has fulfilled that mission faithfully to the best of its ability, and, almost without exception, in the Ibst interests of the nation. The mere fact that we can discuss this issue in this forum Is some testimony to that fact. 

I have spoken to many former FBI agents about this subject and while we may disagree on many things-Including things I may say here later-none have disagreed with the feeling I have stated thus far. I might add that more than 

6.000 former agents may form a body of opinion that ought to Ie heard In this forum through the Society of Former Special Agents of the Fill. 

The question of Congressional oversight of the FBI's activities has certainly received the full attention of the congress s In recent months and years. That fact, in and of itself constitutes one of the first problems that the Congress imist solve. I do not recall that I have ever heard Director Kelley address himself to the subJect in any way other than to approve reasonable congressionall over-sight of the FBI but It seems perfectly clear that "oversight" by a dozen com-peting and contending committees or suliwomnmittees of either the 11w14 ter Senate not only eliminates the most liberal standard of "reasonableness" but also taxes the Bureau's capacity to respond with any degree of real depth or meaning. So it is that one of the very first tasks of the Congress, If it wishes to further oversee the activities of the FBI, should be to vest oversight jurisdiction either in a single joint Senate/louse Committee or at the outside, a single committee or subcommittee in each the Senate and tihe House. The reason for this is. of course, a practical one. The Director of the Fill as well as other senior Fil officials who have historically been willing to cooperate with reasonable requests from the various committees of this Congress, perform critical duties that do not allow them a great deal of time to spend on days of largely redundant responses to a multiplicity of Congressional inquiry, some of which has been clearly and obviously intended only to achieve publicity for the Congressional personalities conducting the hearings. I hasten to add that I do not Include the Senate or House Judiciary Commit-te or any of their subcommittees in that statement. Indeed, it seems reasonable to me--a mere tax-paying observer of Congress in this case-that the function of FBI oversight properly lies either with the Appropriation Committee (where It has historically been, even though there has been disagreement on its effect. tlveness) or with the Judiciary Committee. It does no appear to me that any of the current subcommittees of House or Senate Judiciary has any special Jurisdiction that would produce a natural "home" for FBI oversight functions and jIrhaps new Smbconmnittot's could be created-hopefully without Increa-ed sta ffng requirements. If anything is clear based on the mas."e of paper now emerging from ,.enate nd House Committees, the ('Ont,-oller General, the General Accounting Office 467 

and from the Justice Department itself, some means must be found to educate those exercising oversight authority in some of the practical realities of law enforcement activities and especially in the much more rarified area of counter-Intelligence activity or domestic security work. It is now difficult to tell whether the present utter absence of understanding is deliberate or simply springs from ignorance, but It is painfully obvious to anyone with law enforcement experience that its absence is a fact. This Subcommlttee has Indicated a special interest in the FBI's activity with rspect to its functions in the domestic security field, a relatively small part of the FBI's overall functions. It must be noted that the "donlestic security" func-tion of the Bureau Is an intelligence gathering and preventive function as oplosed to the FBI's traditional role as a law enforcement agency. Rarely is it tile goal of a domestic security Investigation to discover the commission of a crime, to gather admissible evidence or to seek prosecution. It should not be. It Is an utter distortion of the function to relate it to the more traditional law enforce-nient mode. Indeed, It i almost too basic to bear repe-ating but, in the national security context, once the activity rises to the level of a crime having been com-mitted, the Investigative agency charged with the security mission will have already failed miserably In that mission. It should be noted at this Juncture that this mission-the preventive and intelligence gathering function as related to d(lltstic security-is by no ineans an exclusive federal function. Not too many years ago It was thought to be the sole prerogative of the FBI, but this is certainly no longer the case--nor should It he. The treniendous upsurge in various forms of terrorist aets within the post few years ha presented local law enforcement departments with apressing need to acquire much more knowledge of the highly volatile activities of an entire spectrum of criminals whose motivation is "political" rather than for profit. When a bomb explodes in a New York restaurant or airport. when a corlwate executive Is kidnapped for ransom or when a bank is robld, the character of the act Is inot altered by Its having been committed in the name of. or to raise funds for a cause ardently believed by the subjects to be "political". It is certainly irrelevant to the victhns and it is equally irrelevant to the local ilice officer who Is most likely to be first on the scene (and who, may well face tie danger of having to colw with the violence of an ezcaj)ing perpetrator. Yet In tile January 24, 1975, bombing of Fraunces Tavern in New York's finan-clid! district, the New York City Police Department was seriously hampered in Its Investigation because, out of some sadly warle sense of political Ixp-diency. New York Mayor John V. Lindsay had earlier ordered the Departmnent's Bureau of 1p(Nial Investigations to destroy their excellent intelligence files on organlza-iPns deemed to be "political." Among the files destroyed were time results of years of background data collected on Puerto Rican Nationalist and terrorist move-ments in the City. It is possible to speculate that had the N.Y.P.D. had been more agwreqsIve In their coverage of such groups rather than less so, the bombing might have been thwarted. As it Is, the bombing has not even been solved. Perhaps the use of informants or the keeping of Intelligence files on such groups has a "chilling effect" upon them. I for one am perfectly willing to trade timot "chill" for tile lives of the four wholly innocent victims of that terrorist bombing. I might add parenthetically, that I have failed to notice any perceptible "chilling effect" on extremist groups. There are so many areas of debate with respect to FBI activities In the seu-rity field that it is difficult to limit the scope and breadth of discussion much less to try to make specific recommendations for tightly drawn. definitive legislation. We must begin with tile premise that the FBI was formed as a law enforce. ment body and that its Jurisdiction has been generally proscribed by the Iumnds of the laws that it enforces. Among these laws--in the field of domestic securityy or national security are those prohibiting espionage, sabotage and seli. tion. This brings us Instantly to the first barrier since no effective counter-espionage agency in the world acts like a law enforcement agency. The law en-forcement mode Is to gather evidence of the commlsqlon of a crime to the end th-it it will be presented in court against those charged with the offense in an -ffort to prove them guilty beyond a reasonable doubt. The only pos,4ible juwtifi-cation for nny such approach In the classic espionage ease is for the propnganda aluei of the trial Itself. In short, no competent chief of a "counter-espionage" force seeks prosecutions. This Is a world-wide fact of lif(, and everyone In this room knows it. 468 

The proper mission of counter-intelligence efforts is the gathering of Intelil-gence and the neutralization of the enemy's isnelligience mission. The agency charged with this mission therefore need not--indeed should not-be con-cerned with the admissibility of evidence or wltl. any of the other constitutional safeguards that we apply when we deal with our own citizens in the traditional law enforcement mode. 

Some have suggested that there ought to be a separate agency to handle domestic Intelligence or national security matters. I would respectfully suggest that many of those who have made that suggestion have done so in a context that would destroy our national capacity to legitimately defend ourselves rather than from the standpoint of improving a necessary national function that may now suffer from overzealous, self-imposed restraints. I do not agree that a separate new agency is needed or particularly desirable. I tirmly believe that the FBI can do an effective job in the national security field. I believe that the Bureau ought to be allowed-more properly, encouraged-to do that job better, using every device and technique appropriate to the task. At this point, it seems inevitable that someone with raised eyebrows will ask, "You inean that you believe that the end Justifies the means?" When we are dealing with the security of the nation within the dimension of International intelligence, the only reasonable answer is, "Of course !" The establishment of a new Senate Intelligence Oversight Committee, empow-ered to politicize our intelligence gathering and counter-intelligence capacity may do wonders for the political career or some otherwise undistinguished member of the Senate, but will, with more certainty, do real damage to the matlon's safety. This activity, whether carried out by the FBI or by some new organization 

created as an American counterpart of the British Secret Service, has a clear constitutional mandate based upon the exclusive duties of the Executive Branch to conduct the foreign affairs of the United States, to preserve and protect its constitution and to guarantee a republican form of government. Under the doctrine of separation of powers, the Congress has limited authority to thwart thie Executive in guarding the nation against the threat of hostile forcign forces. "Oversight" of an agency of the Executive Branch In this constitutionally restrileted area may thus make for good news media copy, or as It has in recent mouths, a deafening roar of wholly political drum-beating, but it cannot alter the fundamental Jurisdiction over, and responsibility for, the nation's basic ,fii rity. The area of responsibility for countering threats to our national security posed by revolutionary or terrorist groups of a wholly domestic nature, despite self-proclaimed allegiance to some foreign nations or ideologies is, admittedly, not so clearly mandated. However, I am convinced for example that the voluminous report of the Comptroller General and the Gereral Accounting Of-fice proves conclusively only that accountants, even those wvho may have law degrees, should never be taken seriously when they begin using words instead of numbers. Their rationale applied to FBI Jurisdiction in the domestic security field Is little more than an exercise in bureaucratic nit-picking that may do Justice to the craft but does little more. Suffice It to say for the purposes of this state-ment that I wholly disagree with the GAO'n conclusion that the succession of Executive Orders unde-r which the FBI now claims Jurisdiction are not sufficient to confer that Jurisdiction. As the report notes, there are also a number of criminal statutes. notably IS U.S.C. 2383, 18 U.S.C. 2384, 18 U.S.C. 2385 and others cited and reported under which the FBI has investigative Jurisdiction in domestic security matters. Should the Congress desire to define some other area of Jurisdiction it could certainly do so by writing another criminal statute. Iquestion both the need and the wisdom of such an act. I respectfully suggest that a restriction imposed by Congress upon FBI activities that are properly the sub.eet of Executive Orders takes the Congress onto shaky constitutional ground. In a release dated May 25, 1976, the American business community, speaking through its professional corporate security executives, recommended an amend-ment to the Smith Act (18 U.S.C. 2385) that would strengthen the hand of the FBI in the domestic security field. The American Society for Industrial Security has acted rormnally through its Board of Directors to, urge the Congress to remove from the act the court-interpreted requirement for an overt act in order to gain a conviction. It must be pointed out, however, that such an amendment probably would not change FBI Jurisdiction with respect to intelligence gathering. I do not sugge st that the Executive may act unchecked in the doniestic intel-ligence field. Our system of checks and balances, at least in theory, leaves no 469 

function of any separate Branch unchecked. I do suggest, however, that the most appropriate application of that balance may be found in the Courts or, if in the Congress, in the Committee on Appropriations where the oversight respon-sibility has rested all along. I would suggest further that the alleged need for "oversight" of the FBI (and for that matter the CIA and other agencies as well) has been magnified out of all reasonable proportion by the near paranoid reaction of some to the shame-ful tragedy of Watergate and the wholly irresponsible craving for the political glow reflected from the lights needed to produce color television. The latter reaction, I would add, has been far more prevalent on the other side of Capitol Hill than on this side. It was the Duke of Wellington who once said that the whole business of life was to know what was going on on the other side of the hill. Every police officer, every soldier and indeed, every politician knows that this Is trae and that preven-tion and counter-action depend on knowledge-the gathering and maintaining of data of all varieties--in short, intelligence. No one doubts that terrorism is on the rise in the United States. Last year saw nearly three times the number of deaths from bombings (09) as in any prior year and 1976 opened with 11 fatalities in the bomb blast at LaGuardia Airport. The terrorist directs his activities spectlcally at the structure of government. The victims of the terrorist usually are completely Incidental to him. There are, to be sure, cases in which individual victims are selected because of who 

they are, but in the majority of instances, the victims of terrorism are not sought out by the perpetrator, although they may be selected as targets solely because of what they represent, as in cases of ambush attacks upon law enforcement officers. The thrust of terrorism is directed at some abstraction; government, the "estab-lishment", law enforcement, "environment polluters", and the like. The terrorist sets about his business with the single-minded objective of bringing his target to its knees through the use of terror and violence. David Abrahamsen, M.D., an expert on violence, lawlessness, and terrorism, told U.S. News and World Report in 1974: I believe it Is quite clear that we are now getting a kind of terrorism that is familiar to Europeans but not to Americans. By that I mean terrorism that is well organized and planned, and has definite long-term aims. I also believe that this terrorism is going to continue and peraps grow among a segment of young people who see no other approach to lroblemis such as poverty and, accordingly, become desperate and extremely disturbed-perhaps almost deranged in some cases. Asked if the aim of terrorists was to make law enforcement officials and au-thorlty in general look Impotent, Dr. Abrahazusen replied: Yes. If terrorists can disable authority, it makes authority invalid and encourages the feeling that nobody can stop their terrorism. Yet, It is also true that terrorists are possessed of an idealism thAt is I'topian and unrealistic, and borders on the irrational.' This notion of the "idealism" of the modern terrroist is sometinws called uipon to Justify his lethal activities. David EIlsberg, for example, testified at a sen-tencing hearing for Karl Armstrong, who had phadt-d guilty to the bowbinvi of the mathenmtics building at the University of Wisconsin in which a thirty-one year-ol(l graduate student was blown to bits. Ellsberg told the judge that it would be wrong to piinlsh Armstrong for setting the boril.1 Many take a "so what?" attitude toward the work of the terrorist bomber. and tell us that tile loss of a few lives 11 simply the price we must pay in order to vindicate others' conceptions of constitutional rights and the right to privacy. Consider, for example, the position of Professor Vern Countryman of Iarvard University Law School. In a two-day conference sponsored by the Commiftt e for Public Justice at Princeton University in October. 1971, Countryman inanl Frank 

G. Carrington, AExE's Executive Director, engaged In a strange colloiuy, one that brings what. we have called the "Total Privacy Mentality" sharply into focus. The following conversation concerned the right of the FBI to use infiltra-tion techniques to prevent or solve bombings, specifically bombing by the Ku .'%lix Klan of several school buses in Pontiac, Mich. Countrymen: Well. my Judgment would be that if the only way to detect that bombing is to have the FBI infiltrating political organizations, I would rather the bombing go undetected. Carrington: No matter whether somebody was killed?  

> I

"Political Terror In 1.S. What ,t?". U.N. News and World Report, March 4, 1975. "Peace Activists Defend Bomber", Neow York Timee, October 25, 1978. 470 

Countryman: Yes. Yes, there are worse things than having people killed, When you have got the entire population intimidated, that may be worse. We put some limits on law enforcement in the interests of preserving a free aid open society or at least we try to, and every time we do that-things like the privilege against self-incrimination, things like the Fourth Amendment--every time we do that, that involves a judgment that even though some crimes and some crimes in-volving the loss of life will go undetected, it is better in the long run to have a society where there is some protection from police surveillance. Carrington: I'm not really that sure that the family of Robert Fassnacht, who was blown up at Wisconsli, or the families of tie kids that were killed in the Birmingham church bombing would agree with that. Countryman: I'm sure that the families of the victims would not agree in anxy of the instances that I've mentioned but I don't believe that most of us would say that for that reason we should repeal the Fourth and Fifth Amendments. This comes very close to expressing the l.sition of advocates of the "Total lrIvacy Concept". While they mtay not be quite so rash as to come right out alld 

say that death or injury at the hands of the terrorist is actually irrclc ,ant, their 

efforts in the name of privacy-which will render the pollee basically impotent to prevent terroristic crime and to act effectively against the terrorlst--live almost the same effect as the apologists on the grounds of idealism. Those who are so concerned with the motivation and "ide dlism" of the terror-1st might consider the Imipact of his activities on his victims. one such victim was three-year-old Jodi Della lFeniina, injured by a terrorist bomiib in New York in 1971. Her father descrilel the attack and his reaction to it: I amn writing this column at 4 a.m. while sitting in a waiting room tit New York Hospital. Inside, about 50 feet away, my three-year-old daughter, Jodi, Is sleeping in a crib with both of her hands tied to her sides to keep her from touching the 100 stitches she has in her face. You see, Jodi, made aterrible nilstake a few hours ago. Almost a fatal mistake. Sihe trusted the world of grownups. Like at million other three-year-olds all over the world, she took her mother's hand and walked with her to go out and play In the park. They walked past a building where a young militant had Just placed a 15-Inch 1llW 

bomb. I guess It was bad timing on Jodi's lu4rt becwu'e she passed the build-       

> iig at the same time the bomb went off.

The blast sent a rain of jagged glass Into her tiny face. Now we all know that the militant didn't set out to Injure Jodi. No. What he was looking for was "'Justice." My little girl just got in his way and I'm sure that some people will tell you that Jodi being a three-year-old member of the establish-ment was at fault. Because when a man is looking for "Justice" or looking to right the wrongs of the world with a bomb it's your fault if you get in his way. The Mark Rudds of this world will tell you that the man who placed the bomb that went off in Todi's face was merely defending himself from society, merely choosing his way to be heard and listened to. The Angela I)avises of the world might tell you that three-year-old Jodi is Just paying "dues" for several hundred years of oppression. The Eldrldge Cleavers of this world might tell you that Jodi Is only an early casualty of the war that's coming between the races. As I said before, there are a lot of people who can give you a lot of good reasons, they say, for throwing bombs, and killing cops, and burning, and rioting, and looting and hating. Just before I sat down to write this I walked into Jodi's room to check and see If she was asleep. I guess I made a little too much noise and I woke her. She smiled with her ripped up lips and said, "Daddy, I ran and I fell." You see. Jodi being only three doesn't know what a bomb Is or what it does. She still thinks she fell and cut herself. For a second. I wanted to explain to her what had happened and then I realized how ridiculous it was and so I did something I haven't done since I was a little kid. I cried. Hiow (o you tell a kid that a man took dynamite and buckshot and made a bomb that blew tip and ripped your fuce? He did it In the name of "Justice" and "freedom". flow do you explain? 

Maybe the Mark Rudds or Angela Davise or Eldridge Cleavers of this world can explain to Jod why her face, had to be ruined this morning in the name of "Justice." Because, God knows, I can't.' 'Jerry Della Femina, "The Bombing", Marketing/Communications, October, 1971. 471 

This is a very eloquent description of the suffering terroristic acts produce and each of the victims of similar attacks can tell similar stories. Those who wish to pass off terrorism as some sort of inevitable social phenomenon must close their eyes to the suffering of Jodi Della Femina' and countless others like her. Let's not deceive ourselves or others that this is not the proper backdrop against which to judge the FBI's role in domestic security investigations. In terms of the threat presented to the nation, the distinctions between foreign in-telligence efforts and domestic terrorism seems wholly artificial and arbitrary. The British and many other counter-intelligence forces have always recognized that successful counter-intelligence has two functioning parts, one defensive and one offensive. For a brief period at the end of the 1960's the FBI operated in both modes, using-although in somewhat unsophisticated ways--its own coun-ter-intelligence program (COINTELPRO) as an offensive arm. It has been this activity, together with certain "defensive" intelligence gather-ing techniques that has brought about the vast bulk of criticism of the FBI. The remainder of that criticism seems to stem from the undeniable fact that the FBI has, in the past, responded to the best of its ability to requests for investigative action originating in the office of the President of the United States. In obvious response to the criticism, the Attorney General has prepared and issued guidelines under which FBI activities In these highly sensitive areas are to be governed. It is my understanding that additional sets of guidelines are being prepared to cover other aspects of FBI investigative jurisdiction. The guidelines were not hastily prepared to meet some artificial deadline but, rather, were prepared after a great deal of serious consultation and in an effort to try to put together standards that would not impair FBI efficiency yet would allay the fears of FBI critics. It may well be an accurate measure of these guidelines to note that I find them much too restrictive while my friends in the Civil Liberties Union find them far too permissive. Legislation by definition, restricts flexibility and the exercise of discretion, qualities that seem to me to be vital to the proper approach to domestic security investigations. The FBI's jurisdiction with respect to investigating violations of criminal statutes is, I believe, already delineated. With respect to the Bureau's jurisdiction in the field of foreign counter-intelligence, we are dealing in an area that is, I submit, the exclusive prerogative of the Executive and within which, therefore, the powers of the Congress are limited. The only remaining areas, therefore, are those covered in the Attorney General's guidelines which may not fully suit any of us but which may be the best compromise we can achieve. The FBI as a part of the I)epartment of Justice is responsible to the Attorney General and, through him, to the President. It has been asserted that Presidents have misused the Bureau. If, by "oversight" Congress seeks to change that line of authority so that the FBI is responsible to the Legislative Branch rather than to the Executive. it will simply multiply the potential for abuse by a factor of precisely 533. The most fundamental of all civil and constitutional rights involves the right not to be murdered or maimed in the name of some abstract "political" cause. For those who adopt the "Total Privacy" concept of Professor Country-man, no amount of restriction upon FBI domestic intelligence activity will be regarded as excessive. We at AELE simply do not accept or agree with that philosophy. We believe that the more valid concern of the Congress ought to be for the i)tential victims of future acts of terrorism and violence that might be prevented by the use of Fill Intelligence gathering techniques most appropriate to meet that threat. I hope you will forgive a final, personal note. I first met Clarence Kelley when I reportt-d as a new FBI agent to the Bureau's Kansas City Office in 19N). lie was then a supervisor in that office and because, t&ver, then, he made a lasting impression upon me. I followed his career in the Fill and inter as Chief of Police in Kansas City. During those years I was gratified to note that he gained a national reputation for integrity and innovation. When I heard a rumor that he was being considered for the position of Director of the FBI. I wrote to the President urging his appointment because I believed hin to be uniquely quall-fliel for that very demanding Job. I still do although I have not necessarily agreed with everything lie has said or (lone as Director. Ile has been his own man, much to his credit. It Is my deep feeling-1nd Ihave no special knowledge-that he desires nothing more than to let the FBI 472                                                   

> get back to its Job and that he Is willing to take whatever reasonable steps that may be needed to get back to devoting his full time to directing the Bureau. This subcommittee could perform no more useful service to the Nation than to allow him and the FBI to get back to their jobs.

Mr. EDWARDS. Unless my colleague from Virginia has an opening statement-Mr. BtmaRr. No, Mr. Chairman. Mr. EDWARDS. Then you may proceed. TESTIMONY OF WILLIAM K. LAMBIE, JR., ASSOCIATE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, AMERICANS FOR EFFECTIVE LAW ENFORCEMENT, INC. Mr. LA MBIE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman and ladies and gentlemen, I am glad to be here and am glad to have an opportunity to express a viewpoint, that I would add, is not just my own but rather is the position of Americans for Eirective Law Enforcement as an organization. As you noted, you have my prepared statement. I will, if you have no objection, hit a few high spots in that or, if you would rather, we can go right into some questions and answers. But I would point out at the very beginning that Americans for Effective Law Enforcement is an organization that has been in existence for 10 years. It is a pri-vately supported not-for-profit corporation, based in Evanston, Ill. It was founded by a group of Illinois attorneys: Fred Inball, who is a professor of law at Northwestern University; Richard Ogilvie, who was, at the time of founding, president of the Cook County Board a-, 

later Governor of Illinois; Mr. James R. Thompson, who was then c-. the Northwestern law faculty and is now a candidate for Governor of Illinois and a former U.S. attorney for the northern district; Harold Smith, who was the head of the Chicago Crime Commission; and Orlando W. Wilson, then superintendent of the Chicago Police Department. It was their feeling, 10 years ago, that the balance in the criminal justice system had swung so far to the side of protecting,, the rights of the accused criminal, that the innocent victims of crime and the law-abiding public's rights had been forgotten. It is our purpose, as an organization, to try to restore some semblance of balance. That has taken us into-support of what we believe are proper and professionall law enforcement practices and techniques; hence, our interest in this area, and our interest generally in the criminal justice system. Again, I would emphasize that interest is expressed from the point of view of the crime victim and of the law-abiding public. It is our feeling that the mission of the FBI as been adequately and sharply defined in legislation presently on the books, in Execi-tive orders, and in over 40 years of practice, that has been for the most p art highly professional and highly effective. I think that the Bureau ias performed its mission quite well and in the best interest of the Nation for the most pait. Certainly I think that the mission has been performed in good faith on the part of all the agents of the FBI. I iht add that over recent history there has been a certain amount of pub icity given to the views of a few dissident former special 473 agents of the FBI, but there are over 6,000 former special agents, who are associated in the Society of Former Special Agents, and I think that that body of opinion, particularly in this area of concern, might be one that merits some consideration. I understand that the society has expressed a willingness to take a position in this area. I hope that tile subcommittee will consider hearing their point of view. I do not recall ever hearing Director Kelley suggest that he is not willing to accept, live with, and cooperate with reasonable oversight of the FBI by some committee or committees of the Congress. From apurely practical point of view, I think the first mission in the over-sight field should be to define the jurisdiction for oversight. There are now perhaps a dozen committees or subcommittees on both sides of the Hill competing and contending to some extent for jurisdiction in the oversight area both with respect to the FBI and perhaps the CIA and other intelligence and counterintelligence agencies. The Bureau is not typical of Government organizations in the sense that it has a cadre of individuals, who are almost professional wit-nesses. I know that the demands on the Director and on a number of other senior Bureau officials have been tremendous in the area of re-s)oniling to requests to appear before various committees here. I think that the Bureau has tried to do this responsively, and I think the liireau has tried to do it diligently; but it has been quite a strain. I think that much of the testimony has been redundant. Therefore, I would ho)e that at the outset there is some defining of jurisdiction. I think if what I read is corict, that a joint Senate-House special committee has been rule( out; 1but I wouldl hope that at some point jurisdiction for oversight could boil down to a single committee here in the Hosel and in tile Senate, or a subcommittee. I think, as I have indicated, that the most natural place for jurisdiction in this area is either in the Judiciary or a subconmittee of the Judiciary on either side of tl lill or in Ap)prol)riations, where oversight historically has Ibeen vested whether or mot we agree it was (lone well. 'he system of checks an d balances vith respect to congressional control or oversight of tie executive functions provides perhaps the most effective check in the power of the Committee on Appropriations; tlat is, the founding power. I think that most executive agencies are n)re responsive to that than to many other areas of oversight. At any rate, I think that we can talk about either a committee or a subcom-mittee of the Judiciary Committee or the Appropriations Committee fiomn the stand(Ipoint of jurisdiction. I would certainly hope that at some point tihe various committees here on tie Hill could get together an(l decide, now that there is going to ho an oversight committee-and I think that is a foregone conclu-siom -certainly decide on where that jurisdiction will lie. In the domestic security field-and I know that you are addressing yourselves primarily to thlat isue--I would point out that that is arelatively small part of the FBI function. I think that the Bureau estiates perhaps 20 percent of its total function is involved in (lo- 

> IIestic

security arems, and that is divided into both foreign and do-,nestic intelligence matters. Skipping nearly to the end of my repairi (l testimony, I would point out that I think that thle distinction between foreign intelligence or counterintelligence operations amid (lwesticsuitor(niticnel 474 ligence operations is somewhat artificial and aribitrary. I would go to the Supreme Court decision in the United States v. U.S. District 

Court-that is, the Keith case-a decision with which I disagree profoundly insofar as it creates the distinction between "foreign in-telligence" and "domestic intelligence" organizations. I think that the distinction is, in fact, artificial and arbitrary and loses sight of the practical realities of the law enforcement or counter-intelligence agencies that must cope with the problem. I say that be-cause while dealing in the foreign area, the threat is one of sabotage or espionare conducted by a foreign nation or agents. Those matters are define! by statute. The. threat on the domestic side is one of terrorism, violence, or the potential for terrorisni and violence. These are crimes in every juris-diction: State, local and Federal. The character of the individuals who may commit these crimes is not changed very much by the fact that they may be subservient to or answerable to a foreign 1 ideology or a domue .tic ideology. Again Ithink that is an artificial distinction. It, is my very strong feeling that the mission of the FBI and, Mr. Chairman, to a very large extent the local l)olice authorities as well in the domestic intelligence field is a mission of prevention, counter-action, the gathering of knowledge, the gathering of information upon which an informed decision or informed action can take place if the 

MNI arises. lecie. I do not really believe that the traditional law en-forcement. node should be. applied in the intelligence-gathering field, whetlHler that is a domest ic intelligence area mr a foreign intelligence 

MNru. I don't believe that it is the, fundamental or basic mission of time. FBI or any other law enforcement l)ody to gather admnissable evidence to )rovved to lwo'(elition on tile basis of a criminal act having been (,101flitte(l or )otentially leing in the oflinfi. When that hapl)ens in tie foreign intelligrence area. I think a trial is lars-rely for propaganmla lltrl)oses. Wien it hlal)pemls in tire dolestie intelligence area, I think the[, ulissioni of tll(, fj.ryq* itself ia-S already failed because, prevention Ilars Imot hlavlippee. I w()Ilql cite tile mirost recent series of 1)oI)i11s in downtown Chi-V': ,..,o cUcTlrrinu: within tlhe paSt few days in wich a number of people wN(,'I inired. Tie ('icaro police an( certainly the Bureau failed in-thi'i' intlligence-gathering i.isSion si , lpl l.v" virtue of those lm~oml-in,,s having taken place. I know it. has been pointedd out, and I think it vas the General Accounting Office who did so in a rather voluninous report. that the preventive mission has failed becanse terrorism and acts of violence have not abated: and. indeed, have increased over ti past few years. But T am not sure that is a proper measurement of success or failure l)eCause in any area of deterrence, it is impossible to measure ..,access or fail ire because it is impossille to Drjove a negative. It is impossible to compile statistics on crimes that (o not occur. We don't. know what maiglht have occurred in tl,,, realm of domristie violence attribi ta le to political causes hald not there been an active. working crnterintelligence or intelligenee-gath ring mission per-formed bv th,, FBI or 1w local police. I think it, may be a matter of coincidence, Imt I think it is appropriate to point out that in the city of ('icago during the nany years when violence was increasing 475 on a considerable scale in many urban areas across the Nation, that Chicago was relatively peaceful. There were few bombings or few acts of politically ins piredviolence in Chicago after the word got out that the Chicago Police departmentt had a very smoothly functioning and very active countersubversive unit in the department. It was known locally as the Red Squad by man of its detractors. But it was nonetheless an extremely effective body. It was only after a series of Federal suits were filed in the Federal District Court in Chicago to enjoin that unit from intelligence-gathering activities that we have now two series of bombings. As Isay, that may be a matter of coincidence, but I think that it possibly is not. There has been talk-and I tend to share this view to some extent-talk about the chilling effect of intelligence-gathering activities. Ifind it very difficult to distinguish between-and I suppose it depends ii what side of the question one is arguing-to distinguish between "chilling effect" and "deterrence." None of us want to suppress opin-ions, views, positions, and legitimate political activity. The widest -spectrum of opinion is usually the spectrum that provides ultimately, Mr. Chairman, wisdom. And no one wants to see that spectrum stop short of acts of violence, terrorism, and of revolution itself. Now I don't presune to sit here and suggest to you that revolution is imminent. It is not. Good ]leavens, we are in an election year in which the process is once again proving its viability. I think we have come very close, however, to serious domestic problems in the realm of violence and terrorism: anl T would not be surprised to see acts of terrorism continue to escalate, but I think we are a long way from facing an immediate threat of domestic revoliftionary activity. That does not change the fact that the FIl must gather intelligence data: that it must acquire all of the knowledge that it can acquire;-that it must be prepared to offer the executive ranch choices in tile decisionmaking area based on the most informative knowledge and the most complete knowledge that, can be obtained. I think that the guidelines, that tile Attorney General has set down most recently. which have not been lashed together simply to satisfy any pmrtivllar committee of Congress or to satisfy the news media or I ulblic opinion but rather, I think, have been put toge, ther after many. many hours of cOiSultation Ntween the Akttornev General and1 the Bureau andl the people here on the lill and others, represent al)ot as well-defined aset. of guiidelines as call b)e defined for the FBI in the (lomestic intelligence area. It may be a measure of the success or the workmanship in those giidelines, Mr. Chairman. to note that T find them much too restric-tive while my friends in the Civil Liberties Union find them much too plrmnissive. Perliaps that is a good example of a good compromise that has worked. I think they are guidelines that the Bureau feels it can work with. I would hope that they were guidelines Ili-ft "Members of the Hllouse and the Senate feel they can share. I don't think that new legislation is mieessary to define the miss ion of the FBI. I think that in most instances the least legislation we can have, perhaps is the best. I would hope that all of you here on the 1ill will allow tle FBI to get back to its fundamental job of enforc-ing the laws, gathering intelligence, performing the mi-ion that, I think, has heen defined, and doing what they are chartered to do. 476 Mr. EDWAIS. Thank you very much. The gentleman from Virginia. Mr. Bu Triri. Thank you very much. I think that is a very fine statement. Certainly, your conclusion is one that merits careful consideration. Since you have raised the question about the guidelines and have suggested that you find them much too restrictive, I ask you, would you like to specify the areas in which you find them too restric-tive? Mr. LAMBIE. Well, I certainly would, sir. I think that a hallmark of the Bureau's performance and part of the Bureau's success through-out its history, Mr. Butler, has been the initiative and discretion al-lowed the individual agents in handling cases assigned to them, in opening new cases and conducting investigations. And I think that initiative and that discussionprobably works best when it is allowed to operate within the bounds of rules and regulations to be sure, but within an area of freedom of inquiry. The typical way in which a domestic intelligence case is opened in the i'BI is through information coming through an agent from an informant or perhaps just an average citizen. The agent writes amemorandum that goes into the file, and the case is opened either under the name of an organization or under the name of an individual, and then the investigation goes forward. Now the guidelines tend to restrict the opening of new investigations to threats of violence or potential violence, which is all right. That is still the basic threat. But in the preliminary stages it is difficult to know whether or not an organization poses a threat of violence or potential violence. It is very difficult to know in many cases what the organization is. Part of the lawsuit in the Chicago police case, has to do with the fact that the Chicago police have informants or undercover agents in organizations that have been described as "neighborhood civic groups." That is a perfectly just and justifiable description of some of the groups. But you cannot determine that, Mr. Butler, until you have conducted an investigation. You cannot determine that a group is indeed just a political group and that it has purely-political motiva-tions without an investigation. If you have been previously told by an informant that. the group poses a threat. of violence and'is just--oh, for want of a better word-that it is a "far-out" organization. Iet us say that is the only information you have. Well, you must 

be able at least to do enough investigation to determine what that group is. Mr. BUTA:Ii. H~ow do you interpret the g ileline as affecting the discretion of the individual agent ini a situation ? Pick a sit nation that you think Mr. L,.!Ir:. OK. If I read tle guilelines correctly. the gidelines suggest or say that, Y,o won't open a case until the information that you receive initially indicates that tl group poses a threat of violence or some imminent or present (langer. You are then in the preliminary investigation stage. If the preliminary investigation fields facts that confirm the initial assiimption, you can go into a full-field investiga-tion. 

I just think vo eight to 1w able to open and close a case on the vague4t information. 477 Mr. BTLMER. You were talking about opening rather than closing a case, were you not I

Mr. LAMBIE. Opening a case, yes. I don't think anybody is harmed by this; if you assume that you go forward with an inquiry and that you find out what is going on and close the case if it merits being closed. I don't think that putting a few memorandums in the files harms anyone's right to privacy or anyone's right to political freedom. Mr. BUTLER. Do you think that, Ir. Lambie, absent this authority, that perhaps some situations are being allowed to develop that could be headed off if the FBI had ready discretion? Is that what you are saying? *.r. LAMIUE. Oh, I suspect that situations, that pose a real threat of violence, will come to light under the guidelines ultimately. You know. the guidelines seem sufficiently broad to allow for in-vestigation of a really serious threat. I think that the difficulty may 

be that the investigation may begin later than it ought to, and may not identify all iw, potential perl)etrators of violence because of the guidelines. Mr. BUTLTER. Well now (1o you have any specific suggestions as to changes you would make in the guidelines in this area, or have you gotten that far in yomr analysis? Mr. LANTMRIE. Well, I would tenr them up and throw them in the wastebasket and reverf tll(,n to the FlI's Manual of Rules and Regula-tions. 'M.r. Br-rtEn. All rihlit. I thank you. 

Mr. EDWARDS. Mr. Lambie, we appreciate your statements. Quite a number of people within the FBI would agree with your views. Some people will not. And the Attorney General Mr. LAMBIE. Certainly. Mr. EDWARDS [continuing ]. Might have disagreed with you because you (lid not expre s great shock with the COINTEL program. Mr. LAMBi. Not at all. Not at all. Just to give you some indication of my feelings about COINTEL, in preparing a study of the FBI, in 1972, for Amerians for EfTective Law Enforcement, we had been very critical of the FBI for not having engaged in active counterintelli-gence measures. After we had completely written the study and it had almost grone to press, the COINTEL program was made public. I must sv its existence was extremely well guarded because I certainly was not aware of its existence. We had to go back and scrub a number of pages of the book and say we weren't going to criticize the FBI on this basis because they had in fact been doing something. I think much of the program or parts of the program were con-ducted quite well. I think that, a counterintelligence mission includes, if you will, a Department of Dirty Tricks. I think it is quite proper. I think it is the name of the game. I do not condone some of the things that occurred as part of that program, but the program itself is one that I quite agree with. Mr. EDWARDS. Well you certainly don't condone what they (lid to Dr. Martin Luther King? Mr. LAM1TE. Not at all. Mr. EDWAMW. Well how about radicals on campuses where they would write anonymous letters, false anonymous letters stating they   

> 82-l29 --7 7-31

478 were having extramarital affairs and they were just trying to disrupt the employment of people that certain agents thought were inappro-priatel employedI Mr. LMBIE. If we could assume that the definition has been done properly in the first instance, if we define the organization or the indi-vidual properly, I have no quarrel with doing something like that. Idon't mind that kind of dirty trick. I will be honest about it. I think that the situation that occurred too often was one of misplaced defini-tion rather than that some of the things that happened were bad. I don't mind, for instance, a counterintelligence effort intended to sow dissent or dissension in a group; if the group has been properly defined. I don't mind the notion that you reduce the potential of an organization to do harm by causing that organization to burn up its energies fighting among its own members. I think that is a useful function. Think that is a proper function. I think it is better to do that than to wait until crimes have been committed, until people have been victimized, and then proceed in a law enforcement mode to try to jail people. Mr. EDWAMS. The GAO report you mentioned, Mr. Lambie, ex-amined to a certain extent, or at least made us aware of 19,700 open files on domestic intelligence in 10 field offices of the FBI, but they found practically no crimes. I think three or four cases of local crimes went to trial but not cases of Federal crimes. Do you think they should have 19,700 open cases in 10 field offices on American citizens where there is no probable cause of a violation of any criminal law? Mr. LAMRIE. I find no objection to that whatsoever as I indicated earlier. I think that proceeding to gather intelligence data through alaw enforcement mode is just not the way you do it. I think that the field of intelligence and counterintelligence activity simply is not a traditional law enforcement kind of field. The British, I think, have defined the mission perhaps more accurately by having three separate organizations that operate in the intelligence and counterintelligence agency. And I never an sure which is which, whether it is MI-5 or MI-, Mr. Chairman, but, as you know, there is one agency charged with the gathering of foreign intelligence-it is like the CIA-fand there is a second category, a second agency charged with the counter-intelligence mission, and there is a third agency, which is part of the police function. It conducts law enforcement mode counterintelligence investigations leading up to prosecutions. Maybe that is a good division of authority. Certainly in the counter-intelligence field the British have never ben-nor has any other iia-tion of the world I think-been very touchy about proceeding in anon-law-enforcement mode in the counterintelligence area. It has never been the mission of counterintelligence agents to gather admissible evidence leading to prosecutions; it is their mission to gather intelli-gence, to gather data, to gather knowledge against, the potential of future harm-however we may define that. Now we may argue very much about the definition, but the mission itself is not a Iaw enforcement mission; it is an intellligence-gatering mission. And I find no problem whatsoever with the more opening of a file or the conduct of an investigation. I don't think anybody has ever defined the intelligence-gathering mission from the subject's point of view any more precisely than the mayor of the city of Chicago. 479 This occurred a number of years ago during the time that the Senate was conducting hearings on an Army intelligence unit operating in the Chicago area, and operafin quite badI, I might addL But one of the allegations that was made during the Senate hearings was an allega-tion that the Army intelligence unit had covered a political gathering at the Adlai Stevenson farm at Libertyville, Ill., at which a number of prominent members of the Democratic Party, including the mayor of Chicago, were present. The mayor, as you know, meets with the press every day. On the morning after that disclosure, one of the members of the press asked the mayor how he felt about having been the subject of an Army intelligence-gathering mission. The mayor looked back at him and said, "Wll, you know when you are in public life you expect that everyone looks at everything you do every day; that is part of being in public life." And then he added-I"And I think that this is the essence of what we are talking about"-and he said, "If you haven't done anything wrong, you don't have anything to worry about." Mr. EDWARDS. Does your organization, or do you, maintain a liaison with the FBII Mr. LAxBi.. Very informally. We have--well, part of what we do as an organization is to compile data, to write briefs, and to conduct workshops in the area of civil liability matters as they affect law en-forcement. We do have an informal relationship with the Bureau in that area. We have had some of the Bureau peo at our civil liability workshops and we work with the office of the legal counsel in the civil liability area. Mr. EDWARDS. IHave you discussed the subject of domestic intel-ligence with existing F'BI officials? Mr. LAMBIR. No. 

Mr. EnWARD8. Now, Mr. Lambie, you said that if an informant would report to an agent that there is a "far out" organization that. might be capable of violence, that an investigation should be opened on, we will say, an organization or person. Rhat would this investiga-tion consist of? What means or what avenues of inquiry should be pursued by the agent? Mr. TjAMBm. Obviously, if we are talking about an organization, 

you identify the people who are associated with it. Mr. EDWARDR. flow do you do that? Mr. 1AA3iBI. Pardon me? Mr. EDWAIMS. hlow would you identify them.? Mr. lTMIm.. Probably the least intrusive method of finding out about an organization is through informant coverage. I know that there has been a great deal of opposition to the use of informants, but if the informant is in fact a typical individual, a typical informant operating covertly, it is probably the least intrusive method-if lie is not an agent provocateur. I think there have been very, very few in-stances of that, although there have been informants who have gone off on their own, to be sure--but if what you are dealing with is simply an undercover person operating covertly within an organization, that is probably the best means of acquiring information about who is in  

> ti

organization, its purlmses, its goa s, what it is really out to do. And this can be (lone in a manner that does intrude into the activities of the organization or does not change the purposes or goals of the organization. '480 So if it is an intelligence-gathering mission, I think that informant coverage is the least intrusive Mletod of giatheling that, kind of infor-mation. I think that is the best way to go about it. Mr. EDWARDS. Suppose there is no informant? Mr. LAMBIE. Well then you have to go out and interview people, knock on doors, talk to neighbors, go through the basic investigative mode, which is almost always unproductive. I don't know any sub-stitute for going that route. As I say, it is not the most productive way to do it. I don't think that there are going to he very many in-stances in which you have to go that route. I think you can probably be patient enough to go the informant, route in miost cases or to simply, collect public data, collect leaflets, collect pamphlets, writings, or what have you. One of the things I don't like about the guidelines is taiet it imposes9 time limitations on the scope of the investigation. I think that if you seriously believe that you should have an investigation, you ought to be patient enough to do it pro perly and to (1o it without the imposition of a time limitation. TIknow thle reason for a time limitation is to pro-tect the organization that has been found to be innocent in its activities' and to close the case, which is all well and good; but the imposition of a time limitation can be, I think, (let rimental in some instances. Mr. EDWARDS. Well, say that the organization is named the Young Radical League andl there. is i1 informant--just the original inform-ant-and yu got no further information. Now he understands it is a far-out organization capable of violence. How would the agent go 

into the neighborhood? Would it be as an FBI agent or under sub-terfugeI Mr. LAM3IIE. If he went l)es)nally and l)hlysically into a neighbor-hood-type investigation, he would l)robably go as an FBI agent. One of'the'areas in which we have been somewhat critical of the Bureau, has been the Bureau's reluctance to allow agents to operate in an under-ground capacity; that. is to say, as underground agents as is (lone by police departments and other governmentt agencies. The Treasury Do-

partment does it for instance. The Bureau traditionally has not per-mitted the agents to operate in an underground capacity -for one rea-son or another, best. known to them. T think that that would be a useful way of going about it. Again Ithink it is less intrusive than going out into a neighborhood with the credentials and the badge and knocking on doors and saying "I am 

investigating so-and-so on such-and-such." Mr. EDWARDS. Would the subject's employer be interviewed? Mr. LAMM!?,. Very likely. Mr. EDWARDS. ByV an PAT agent? Mr. I,.MBim. Ve y likely. Mr. EDwmw)n. Wfhat kind of (puestions would be a asked ?

Mr. . I would not ay "very likely" on that. I think it would depend very lnrgely on the Circumstances anti on the facts. I think that we make a serious error if we assume that the initial stages of an investigation are designed to disrupt the life of the individual who is being investigated, Mr. Chairman, in terms of his neighbors, in terms of his employment or in any other way. The purpose of an investigation is to acquire knowledge and data and information. If you go to the employer as an agent, you are going 481 to make it a very routine-sounding inquiry. You are going to conduct an interview that sounds like an applicant type of investigation. It may not be very productive and all you may really be seeking is to discover how long he has worked at that particular job, what the work is, where he lives, his past address, his past employment, and very routine kinds of stuff. You are not going to go to the employer and 

tell him about Joe Smith being a member of the Young Radicals. Mr. EDWARDS. Thank you. Mr. Parker? Mr. PARKER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Lambie, you state that the Americans for Effective Law En-forcement, Inc., is a national not-for-profit citizens organization. Do you have mostly individual citizens as members of that organization or do you have organizational members? Mr. LAMBIE. Our support is the typical not-for-profit mode in that it comes from foundations corporations, and individual citizens. We have about 23,000 individual members. We also receive financial sup-port from a number of foundations and corporations. We do not accept an kind of Government funding. Our Board will not let us. Mr. PARK. ,1. There are some, I would suspect, in our, society who mi ght say that yours is essentially a"faroutorgamization." V. mm. T'hat is very possible. Mr. PARKFR. And if you want to take that as an example-Mr. LAMBrE. I do not accept that, but it is possible. Mr. PARKER [continuing]. And say that, the thought and trend in America changes and we decide there is somehow a threat. to democracy contained in groups who get together and are strongly in favor of law enforcement and where the membership is nade up of, let us say, ex law enforcement people--who might have a propensity for violence if 'hey think there is something wrong going on in swietv--and I take it you would not be bothered if the FBI were 'investigating your organization ?Mr. LAMBIE. Not at all. Mr. PARKER. Looking at counterintelligence and dirty tricks or those types of things, which you indicated you condone in the COINTEL program activities, if there were letters sent, anonymous letters sent to your bank or some potential employer or solnc other member of your organization, or if they were intending to disrupt the Board within your organization, I take it you would think that was all right also? Mr. LAMBMr. If I thought 'I had it coming. Now that is a very sub-ective point of view. But we are dealing in a very subjective area that think is almost incapable of tightly (irawn 'definitions. At some pr;nt-iand I think this is true of law enforcement generally and it is also true, I might add, of every other function of G(overnmnt-at sonic point we have to be able to trust, the pcol)le who enforce the laws, who write our laws, who administer our laws. The purpose of what I gather to be oversight, Mr. Parker. is to measure that trust from as much of an objective point of view as can !e brought to bear. But there will still be highly subjective decisions made by individual agents, individual police oflfiers in any law enforcement system. Any of ts may dis.:i: r, with an v of those decisions. That iq all well and good. hiut 1 do not think thait we *hould write some sort of legisla-ti,,n that prohibits those decisions being made. 482 Mr. PAW R. This morning you have indicated that 7ou think that groups need to be properly defined. And on more than one occasion this morning you talked about definition. Who is it that would make these definitions I

Mr. LAxuriz. That again, within bounds, probably is a subjective rather than an objective decisionmaking process. I think that it is adecisionmaking process that in the FBI occurs, Mr. Parker, probably at the level of the supervisor in a field office. The agent certainly makes a decision if it is reported to him by a citizen or by an informant or in some other way that xyz organization has been involved in such-and-such activity, whatever it might be. The first decision, as is true in every other form of law enforcement, is made by the agent who first receives the information. That is a sub-jective decision. Then it goes to a supervisor and lie makes a subjective decision whether or not to open a case or whether or not to go forward. The special agent in charge probably has to make a subjective deci-sion based on the knowledge he acquires from the agent or from the supervisor. And you have a whole series of decisions that are made within very broadguidelines, but they are all subjective as to whether, for instance, a group is a potentially revolutionary organization ? Is it, rnaybe,-an organization that has the potential for producing violence ?Perhaps that is the broadest or most restrictive kind o definition you could put on it. You know, I do not think that you can w:ite a set of guidelines to define organizations that might be investigated simply for the purpose of gathering intelligence data. Now if you are going ahead with an investigation that is based on the commission of a crime, then you have the statute, you have the ele-ments of the statute, you do have a definition there, and you have the bounds of the rules of evidence and admissibility. All o your guide-lines are very tightly drawn. But in the purely intelligence-gat inring area, you see, you have a much broader scope of discretion and judg-ment and evaluation. I would hate to see very many limitations placed on it, because all you lose is knowledge. Mr. PARKER. There are those who would say we have criminal laws with respect to subversion and espionag- that do give us guidelines in this area as well, and that outside of that we should not be engaging in any intelligence-gathering matters, or any intelligence gathering of any nature. What would you base the intelligence gathering on ? What is the jurisdiction, the policy, the authority for the FBI to do that in the first instance? Mr. TLAmBr.. I think the Executive orders that have come down are adequate in terms of jurisdiction. I say that because the Executive orders, that began in 1988 and have been added to, are very broad and allow the kind of discretion, the kind of intelligence-gathering activity that r am talking about. I would hate to see any definition that restricts the Bureau from gathering data and keepingofiles on any organization. Why not ? The more you have, the better informed you are and the better decision you wind up making if you have to make a decision ultimately. I do not accept the position that there is essential harm in the gathering of intelligence data and the maintaining of intelligence data. I recognize the potential for harm, goodness knows, but that assumes a fundamental change in the character of our Government and in the character of our Nation, which I do not foresee. 483 Mr. PARHKM We have seen, I think, examples over the last 2 years in terms of the revelations that are both occurring in the House and in the Senate, Mr. Lambie, as to the harm that can occur from un-limited intelligence gathering. And you admit you see the potential for harm, but what would you do to prevent that kind of harm? Mr. IAMBIE. I have read a lot about allegations of abuse. In all honesty, with a few notable exceptions, I do not see that much harm has occurred. We talked about the situation with respect to Dr. King. And I think that was an area where very little harm occurred. It was wrong, goodness knows, but he was not deterred certainly in his mis-sion nor was the organization deterred-wrong though that activity may have been. Cite some specific harms and will answer. Mr. PARKER. The Attorney General has recently embarked on aprogram in which the Attorney General's office is notifying those individuals, who are subjects of COINTEL investigations, who have been or were subject of some kind of harm, that would be determined by a panel over in the Attorney General's office. So they obviously have seen circumstances or instances in which there is harm. Mr. LAxina. They may have. I am not familiar with any of the specific examples. Mr. PARKER. Are there no limitations you would place on the domes-tic intelligence-gathering activities of the FBI? You used the phrase in your statement that you would "allow them to use every device and ted unique appropriate to the task." Mr. LAMBIE. That is right. Mr. PARKER. I assume you were talking about legal devices or tech-niq ies appropriate to the task, or are you notI 

1fr. LAMM.E. Yes, except that I would revert to a constitutional argument in this sense, Mr. Parker, in which I suggest to you that, for instance, the use of a wiretap without a warrant is deemed to be illegal under Federal statutes and under State statutes in many in-stances, yet the courts have upheld the use of warrantless wiretaps in foreign intelligence cases, most recently in the United Statee v. Ivanov 

in the Supreme Court. It implies, Mr. Parker, in all the decisions, that the executive branch may use warrantless wiretaps in the foreign intelligence-gathering field because of certain constitutional preroga-tives; the exclusivity of the executive branch in the conduct of foreign affairs, for instance, is one. Now I think the warrantless wiretap, the Federal Communications Act notwithstanding, is a legal act. If you accept that definition of "lpral," then, yes, I would say every legal tactic can be used. Mr. PARKER. One last question. You stated in your statement that from 1959 until 1972 you served as research director and administra-tive director of the Xmerican Security Council and that you admin-istered the Nation's largest privately field library on national security matters. Is that group and library still in existence? Mr. LAMBi. As far as I know, it is. Mr. PARKER. What would a library on national security matters contain ?%fr. LA [rE. In that particular situation, the national security mat-ters dealt with foreign policy matters, national defense matters, the entire spectrum of national security, and it isipublic data. Mr. PARKER. I take it there was no classified data in the libraryI 484 

Mr. LAMnImI. No. Mr. PARKER. I have no further questions. Mr. EDWARDS. Mr. Starek? Mr. STAREr. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Lambie, I believe that during your statement this morning you noted that any counterintelligence-gathering function of the FBI should include a group which would carry out dirty tricks; a dirty tricks department as I think you referred to it. I wonder if you could elaborate a little bit on that and explain to the subcommittee how-if we had the kind of dirty tricks that were carried out against some of the citizens of this country during the COINTEL program-how we would insure that would not occur? In particular, use the Martin Luther King case as an example; that is, how we could insure those actions could not occur in the future if the F1I were to have such adepartment? Mr. LAMBIE. You cannot insure that it would not occur in the future. Obviously, I accept the possibility of abuse. Certainly it could occur. hopefully there might be a remely for that abuse. I noticed recently that, someone introduced legislation that would allow a right of action against Federal employees, a civil right of action which amounts to the same cause of action that exists in section 1983 of the Civil Rights 

Act, as that which applies to local police officers. I would have no prob-lem with that. I would broaden the civil remedies available to a citizen who may have been damaged by police action. I think that the citizen should have more access to the courts in terms of civil remedies. But saying that, still presumes that there will be or could be the possibility for abuse, but not necessarily that tlere will be. But no matter how you write a set of definitions, no matter how narrowly you limit activity of any Government agency or any other arency, the potential for abuse still exists. You cannot change that simply by writing legislation. As I said before, you wind up having to look at the FBI as a group of well-trained and very profemsioral people, who have operated with a great tradition of protecting the rights and liberties of our citizens for a long time now. And you have to trust somebody at some point. Obviously it can go wrong. It can go haywire. T simplv don't foresee thati happening in our system as it exists today though.'   

> Yr. STREK.

With respect, to the dirty "tricks department, Mr. LTambie, how would agents involved in this work decide which groups wer"T deserving of dirty tricks and which groups were not? I believe 

VA ,I ier you said-

.Mfr. LAIMRI. I don't, think that the agent, would niake that kind of decision. I think that when you got into the kind of progr, you tire talking about with the COINTEI, program. the decision has already been made by virtue- of th, organization havinar been tie siubicct of an intense ive ongoing investigation for some time. That definition wodd al:vii lv have been made not by an agent. but by tfle Bureau,. by the I,prot)rinte Bureau officials. I think an agnt would unqu stionhlv be severely discipline,! if he got into that kcind of fri-whclin:: activity on his own initiative. I certainly wouldn't eond(ne th!,t, but that ic a nutter of internal discipline. Mr. STARIYK. All right, agents then. how wold tile B,,reau, officials 485 make the decision? I am curious as to how, under this authority, about how we would select out groups which were deserving-of dirty tricks? Mfr. LAMBIZ. I think you would select out groups based on the same parameters, whatever those parameters might be, that caused you to open the investigation and continue the investigation in the first place. You find the group as a revolutionary group, for instance, as a group that seeks to deprive individuals of their civil rights, as a group that has potential for terrorism or violence. So whatever causes you to maintain the investigation in the first instance, is probably the same definition you would use in terms of getting into the dirty tricks area. Maybe the dirty tricks just consist of cutting holes in the Klan's sheets, but what the heck? Why not (1o it? Mr. STAREK. Then you do not think that, the doinestic security guide-lines which provide timetables for closing investigations would be helpful in determining which groups need di'ty tricks? Mr. LAMBIE. They might very well )e help fid, but probablyy not in terms of any counterintelligence activity, but certainly in terms of the organizations that prove out to be legitinmate and lroper organiza-tions.-L. difficulty is that the guidelines are probably reduindant thRebecause the Bureau itself (toes not want to maintain' a whole lot of open and active investigations of organizations that don't lead them anywhere. I don t know an agent in the Bureau who (loes not already hav-e too many cases assigned to him. I think it is a misconception to charge that the Bureau wants to mlaintain oenL cases,, in situations in which the need or the feeling is that you should not have an open case. I think the Bureau is anxious to close cases. I think the Bureau has closed cases. And the imposition of the time deadline, once a de-cision has been mnade to go forward with an investigation, probably is artificial in ternis of lhow long the investigation ought to continue. Mr. S1AREK. With respect to terrorist activities, and I am referring to bombings in particular, it seems that the evidence that we have shows that the Bureau lies really not been able to do an effective job in preventing these activities. A'nd I wonder how the tridelines---Mr. L.MIII. I (lon't know where that evidence coies from. As I said earlier, termrist activities Iave occurred for sure. and are occurring, and are occurring on an escalating basis: but. I don't think we can very accurately suggest that there has been no deterrence or preven-tion. lie Bureau has been able to prevent some things from occurring. I (lon't know how many things you have to prevent or deter to con-stitute a deterremle. My'feeling would I, if von leter a single l)ombing that might kill people'. then you have performed an effective jot) of deterrence. Nfr. S'rAni.;x. All rizht. T agree with that, hIt what I am getting' at is---whether or not tluire has been an effective job in the past-as to.- -

Mr. .nvAm. How do we measure that ? How can you compile statis-ties o!t crimes that don't happen ? That is the question. Mr. STARU. Well, I think one of the ways is to count how many bombs the FlI finds that did not. go off, bu't I don't want to debate that. What I am curious about is how do vou see the domestic security giiidelinces limiting the Bureau's capabilitv of vonltining to provide 

it deterrent activity against terrorist activities? 486 Mr. LAMBIE. They may not. If we can assume that you can man-tain an investigation over a long enough period of time to get the kind of coverage you need, the guidelines may not. I am not that unhappy with the guidelines. I would prefer to see, as I say, the guidelines torn up and revert to the Manual of Rules and Regulations; but I think that the FBI has indicated it can live with the guidelines. And so in that sense I am not all that unhappy with them. Mr. STAREK. I have- one final question. I was somewhat confused during your testimony as to where you would envision the most effec-tive congressional oversight for the Bureau. I think you indicated in your statement that either the Appropriations Committee or the Judi-ciary Committee should probably have that oversight function. Then at another point you said- -Mr. LAMBME. I have a strong faith in the power of the purse. I don't mean to take it out of the Judiciary but, as I say, I have a strong faith in the power of the purse. Mr. STARm. But at another point, as I recall, you were advocating one oversight committee holding the jurisdiction. I wondered if yol meant, Mr. Lambie, one committee within each House of the Congress or if you think just one committee-Mr. LArnj. My personal preference would be a joint Senate/Ilouse committee. I think that has been pretty well ruled out. And in the absence of that kind of a function, I would prefer to see just a single committee or subcommittee in the House and in the Senate. MY reasons for that are purely practical; and that is to really allow the ]1lreau to have the Director and senior Bureau officials, Mr. Starek, to be able to respond meaningfully and in depth to a single body rather than to be up here on the Hill every other week in testimony that is largely redundant, and before a great many committees or subcommittees. I

think that there has been too much of that already. Mr. STAREK. Thank you Mr Lambie. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. EDWARDS. Mr. Lambie, i have just a couple of more questions. Do you think the Ku Klux Klan should be under surveillance? Mr. LAMM. Absolutely. Mr. EDWARDS. At the present time? Mr. LAMBIE. Absolutely. I think it is a pretty miniscule organiza-tion and they probably cannot mount much of a'threat in many areas, but I absolutely believe that they should be under surveillance. Mr. EDWARDS. Do you think there should-by the FBI COINTEL program-there should be disruptions going on within the Ku Klux lan? Mr. LAMBIE. Yes, sir. Mr. EDWARW. How about the Black Panthers? Mr. LA 4 fnir. There are a lot of organizational problems with the various Klan groups there, as you kiow, and I would exacerbate those with evi, .y chance I got. 

fr. EDWARDS. How about within the Black Panther part? Mr. LAMMTE. I think the Panthers have gone largely political now. If we take somethine like the Black Revolutionary Army, or whatever that is these. days, the violence-prone groups, I would accept exactly the same definition, yes. Mr. EDWARDS. TTow about thp American Communist Party? Mr. LAMBIE. Yes. 487 Mr. EDWARDS. Do you think, they should be-I mean, they are alegal political party and they run candidates, but do you still think the FBI should infiltrate and disrupt it? Mr. LAxRT . Absolutely. Mr. EDwDs. How about the Socialist Party? Mr. LA&nuz. The Socialist Party-Socialist Democratic Federation? No; the Socialist Party has certainly never advocated violence or revolution. Mr. EDWARDS. How about Jesse Jackson's PUSH in Chicago? Mr. LAMBIE. No. Mr. EDWARDS. But who makes that judgment? Mr. LAMBIE. Let me say this. Regarding about finding out what PUSH is about and what they do, I don't think there is anything vrong with having a file on PUSH. I think PUSH is a legitimate political social action organization. I don't think the organization or Reverend Jackson or anyone else is damaged by the Bureau having that much in its files, which will reflect precisely that. Now counterintelligence activity? I No; of course not. Mr. EDWARDS. But if a supervisor in the Bureau and maybe Mr. Kelley came to the conclusion that PUSH was a dangerous organiza-tion and might someday result in some violence, then you would ap-prove of infiltration and disruption? Mr. LAMMIE. Well, now we are speculating on somebody in the Burea,. making a really bad decision on bad facts. That can happen, sure. But as I said before, you can't make any legislation that is rea-sonable in my view, that can prevent bad judgment. You can write legislation that simply forbids a whole range of activity, but I think that the Nation is the'loser rather than anything else, if you do indeed do that. I think that goes much too far. Mr. EDWARDS. Any further questions? Mr. PARKER. No. Mr. STARED. No. Mr. EDWARDS. Mr. Lambie, we thank you very much for coming to Washington and testifying. We have had a very interesting time. Thiank you. [Whereupon, at 11 a.m. the subcommittee recessed subject to the call of the Chair.] FBI OVERSIGHT Freedom of Information Act Compliance by the FBI and Plan To Eliminate Backlog THURSDAY, JULY 29, 1976 

HOUSE OFr REP1 ESENrTiVbS: SUBCO-MA[T'rO ON CIviLANI ('xS'rrrvroN-b R"o'urs. ( iMM i'o: N Tile ,JTDIIARY, 

Wash ngto, D.C. 

The subcommittee inet, p)iI-stifalt to notice at 9:35 a.m. in room 2237, 

fRayburn House Office Bluilding, IHon. I)on Idwards [chairman of the subcommittee] presiding. Present: Representatives Edwards, I)rinan, Dodd, and Butler. Also present: Alan A. Parker, counsel; Thomas P. Breen, assistant counsel; and Rocoe B. Starek III, associate counsel. Mr. EDWARDS. The subcommittee will come to order. Today we will hear from representatives of the Federal Bureau of Investigation regarding their eomplianev with the Freedom of In -formation Act and the P r t. A continuing concern of this suboli,,iittee, which has legislative and oversight juris(ictiojn over tle FBI. is to iinderst and how the Bureau is allocating its total resources, 0 the iunwerous res)onsibili-ties imposed on the Bureau 1b, statute. Along with that basic ('onr1(,r is added our growing concern that requests under these two acts are not lw(iv owoveSsed in a coml)lee' and timely fashion. Today we will have the benefif of te,,4iinonv from FBI personnel who deal with the requests on a dai*N basis. We trust that we will be 

better informed as to how eawli request is 1)wOv(essed. and the levels of (leisionlnaking required by those, requests, as well as some information on the costs and problemss encontered by the FBI. Our witnesses tolav are James M. Powers, Section Chief of the 

Freedom of Information-Priva.v Act Section of the FBI. Mr. Power.z i, accomnpanlied by Rilia d ('. TItnnis. .r.. I:Unit Clief of the Privacy Act nlit of t lie Freedtom of Inforni'tion-Privaev Act. Section, and bv .Iani (! IN'. Awe. mllit (i ef ()r the R('e(),'ds, S and Training Unit. Getntlemen. we velcoine you. 'Mr. Powers, yo u may l)iro'ec(. 

> (4S9)

490 TESTIMONY OF ;AMES M. POWERS, SECTION CHIEF, FREEDOM OF 

INFORMATION-PRIVACY ACT SECTION, FEDERAL BUREAU OF 

INVESTIGATION, ACCOMPANIED BY RICHARD C. DENNIS, JR., UNIT CHIEF, PRIVACY ACT UNIT, FREEDOM OF INFORMATION-PRIVACY ACT SECTION, FBI, AND JAMES W. AWE, UNIT CHIEF, RECORDS, SYSTEMS, AND TRAINING UNIT, FBI Mr. PowFns. Thank you, Chairman Edwards, Mr. Butler, and counsel. I am here today specifically at your invitation, as contained in your letter of June 30, to discuss the impact of the FOIPA on the operations of the FBI, as well as explore any alternatives by which we might reduce our backlog of FOIPA requests presently pending at the Bureau. With the intention of being as responsive as we possibly can, Ihave brought with me today Mr. Dennis and Mr. Awe so that we might be in a position to respond to any questimis you might have in this arva. Although I have a prepared statement, 'witl your permission Iwould just as leave enter it into the record and just summarize very briefly, if I may, some of the high points in the statement. And then we can go from there. MSir. EDWARDS. The full statement will be made a part of the record. And you may proceed. Mr. Powns. In 1974, the FBI received 447 requests lindler the FOIA. In 1975, calendar year 1975, we received 13,875 requests. To date this year-and this is as of the 23d of t liis montlh-we have received 10,836 requests. For 1974, we averaged a little less than 2 per day; in 1975, an average of about 55 a (lay; and so far this year we are running at an average of about 73 a day. The previous high that we had ever had in the FOIPA section had been in August of 1975 when we received 2,095 requests. In June of this year, we received 3,357 in that 1 month. In 1 week, We received 1,355. I refer you to exhibit A in my statement, which sets forth in detail the number of requests received by week since January of this year, along with attendant. correspondence. While the latter are not included as requests, they do have a great bearing on our work in the section. In recognition of the increased workload-and I imagine what you gentlemen are specifically interested in is the extent to which we have made a good faith effort to keep pace with this volume, we have di-verted stibstantial resources. From an increase of 8 to 16 personnel in 197-4, we went up to 153 in 1975, and at the present time, we are at 194. And we have approval-this is the approval of Director Kelley-for a further anticipated increase of up to 220. Exhibit B, which is attached to the statement, gives a breakdown by month of how the complement has increased, and corresponding workload. Mr. Im..'. Mr. Chairman. Mr. ED ARDS. Yes. Mr. DRINA'N. May I ask you. what would be the figure that you peo-ple have calculated as to how many you will need on a permanent basis? I don't t think the number of requests is going to continue at the 491 same level. It might even escalate. But how many in the ideal would you need to keep ahead of it? Mr. PowERs. I have no idea, Congressman Drinan. Mr. DRINAN. Shouldn't you have some idea? I think if you come to Congress with a request for personnel you ought to know that. Mr. PowERs. There are too many uncontrollable factors in handling the requests. I could give you a rough basis on what it would take to process an average request, but there are so many other factors that come in litigation cases that no matter what computations we have made, it puts them out of whack. So that poses a difficult question. Then there is the volume of requests that may come in. If you will look at that exhibit, you will see that we are running about 55 a day pretty constantly with the exception of those 2 weeks in Juine. There was no reason that we could find to account for an influx of that nature. And I have no idea of the volume of personnel that we would have to have to deal with a situation such as that. Mr. DRINAN. Assuming that 55 a day kept coming in, how many would you need for that? Mr. POWERs. At the rate of 55 a day we were just about holding our own and working into the backlog. We were reducing the backlog in that manner. Mfr. DRINAN. But not by very much, though. There are still months and months of backlog. Mr. POWFmIS. Sure. Mr. I)RINAN. My point is, assuming that the 55 continues, and you get rid of the backlog, 6,000 or whatever it is, will the 220 people you request be able to keep up and clean up the backlog? Mr. PowERs. Yes; if there is no backlog. Mr. DRINAN. Thank you. M[r. PowRs. I was talking about personnel and the number assigned exclusively in the FOIPA section. This has not taken into account aminber of other personnel in the Bureau who are affect(A in peripheral fashion because of the work required by out- FOIPA actions. The num-ber of personnel we have assigned exclusively at FBI headquarters riglt now to handle FOIPA matters is greater than that in 47 of our field offices, and in 6 of our13 headquarters divisions. I point that out just to show the effort that we feel that we have. made in an attempt to keep up with the influx of requests. I am not going into the personnel assigned. Certainly, I don't want to minimize the value and efficiency of those assigned. It is in the state-ment. They have been drawn from all walks in the Bureau. They are adedicated group, and-they have a firm commitment to comply with the FOIPA in the best manner that they can. I will not go into the question of costs. Originally estimated at $100,000 a year for 5 fiscal years following the implementation of the amendments for all executive agencies, our first fiscal year coot was about $160,000. and it is projected at $3,427,000 for fiscal Year 1977. 

In short, I think we have made a sincere good faith effort to try and comply with the act and the proper allocation of personnel to the act, and to our primary function, the conduct of investigations. Set forth in mny statement is a brief r6sum' of some of the conflicts as we in the F1 perceive them between the Privacy Act and the FOIA. It is these conflicts that cause us the problem in processing the records for release. 492 Basically, the Privacy Act permits you to obtain information about yourself. Basically, the FOIA permits you to obtain information about someone else or an ev=nt. Although criminal files are exempt under the Privacy Act, the Department of Justice in its discretion has pronounced that although exempt under the Privacy Act investigatory records will be processed under the FOIA. This insures an individual that he will have the most liberal access to records under both acts. But because of caveats in the FOIA as to investigatory records. the. may be released only to a certain extent, that is. for example, one that would constitute an unwarranted invasion of privacy. This causes us difficulty in processing our records in determining what may or may' not be an invasion of privacy and what may or may not be an unwar-ranted invasion of privacy. There are a number of other factors set forth in the statement that compound our backlog and delinquency, and I don't mean to minimize them by just alluding to theem briefly. They are set forth in the state-uwent.\ kpl)(-als, lit iyat ion, lVa-/qh?? v. Ro.,?n tylpe inventories, et cetera. Affording preferential treatment to a case in a court.-ordered accel-erated deadline compounds our backlog. And rather than having an 

analyst, working on one case and finishing that case because of a court-ordered deadline, we may be required to I)ut 5 or 6 people to work on oive case, or 15 or 16 people to work on tie cse. And we have had one case where for a period of 3 months Nwe had ovor half of tile entire complement of the FOIPA section working on one request. This <oill-pounds the backlog and delays other reqtsts. It is not the ntiost effi-(lent. way to do it. But it is something, that has a ,1rasti, effect on ouir orderly processing of requests. On my last, page of.the statement T said that there are no easX solu-lions to the problem. I come here in a very candid manner. nnd with a desire and attitude and hope that we ean discusss "ind answer any questions that you nav have in this area. We regret in the FBI- 'nd 

speak not only for myself but all those in the section- . believe the entire FBI regrets the delay being calse(d the requestors. It is not intentional. It loses us friends. We are not in a position to llandle then 

in a niost. expeditious manner. Blnt at the present time. given the task we have at hand, and despite our effort, we are behind. TFlint is about all I have to say. And I refer back to iiIy sl ateiient. And I will be happy to answer. Mr. )ennis. Mr. Awe. and' ii:,sel f. any questions that you infv have in this area. Thanik yon. Fi'be, !,iepa, el stat ei ieiit of .iamne,- M. l<owei's fo>llow.,'.:"     

> STAI' EMENT OF JAMES

M. PMowVf 1., SECTION' CIIEF. FREEDOM OF INFORMATION-            

> PlRIVACY ACTR SE('TI)N, RECORDS MANAGEMENT DIVISION. FEDERAL BIUREAI' oF
> INVE STIGA TION
> I

havye liwen asked to appe:ir here today to provide infrn iti,,n on tile nll,,,.a-ti tt (,f total F ll resoirces witi resij''t to Freel,,n if Iiifrimition/i'r 'i-v \,'. F(l~'.TI'A ml:iitters'. Yel atso riim-,ted ifiiriinmt il as li I the impact' (,f F4 fi PA 'oil Fill p rilt iolls 1i7Ai wit:i action might fli taken ti) ri'l'i i, ir hn,.k--li 4if Fi0)II A req , ,wezt,. In conn t it 11 bii wilh ivir Iiii('tres lt tiis ii matter, you nitty                                                        

> iss.;iI 'ire1 ftheFit' l~l '* o'n jdi'tw' e'x ,j+'rmtl tjoni
> norfpre iiiii ing ti, sji iii,. siilist uti .iflirnin ,l, n.tin teie FIll hI ,4 t a ken
> I') I'onll*%. to the llx illim extoll, i3),i4lldo, with 1'fill' \re(Iiests. an a\warjleMS
> of the flitgiitwle or tie ilden euinrrouutin, the FIll in thils nrer is., Iljevo. essential.

493 Congress when It wrote the latest version of the FOIA, which went into effect February 19, 1975, did not provide any agency with additional funds for Implementation. In House ReportONo. 93-876 captioned, "Amnending Section 552 of Title 5. 

United States Code;,'Known as the Freedom of Information Act" and dated March 5, 1974 (to accompany tI.R. 12471) the House Committee on Government Operations estimated the total cost of the FOIA amendments for all Federil agencies to be $50,090 in fiscal year 1964 and $100,000 for eali of the succeeding live fiscal years. This llHouse Report further stated that "this legislation merely revised Government procedures under tie FOJA but does not create costly new administrative functions. Thus activities required by this Bill shoul be carried out by Federal agencies with existing staff so that significant amounts of addi-tit-nal funds will not be required." In actuality, however, the impact of lhe FOIPA on the FBI has been fornii-          

> dable necessitating asubstantial diversion of our resources in terms of personnel

and finances at tie expense of other vital sorv'ices. lDuring the year 1975 the FBI received 13,875 requests for access to Fi1 rev-ord.z under either the FOIA or Privacy Act of 1974. This conistitute(l an average (if 55 requests every wor(k lay. During tlhe month 'if August. 1975, 2.095 request ;were recei v( wiiii was the high foir any one nioiuth (luring 1975. As of ,Janu-ary 2, 1976. we had a backlog oif 6,116 requests. Of these 6,176 requests, 1,0(1 were actually being process( and were in various stage of completion. There has been no d(eclin( in the volume of requests in tlis calendnar year. To the con-trary the volume is running at a pace greater than 1975. An average (if 43 per work day were received (luring the nionth of January, 1976: 71 per work day during the month of February, 1976; ,54 per work day (luring the month of March, 1976: 51 per work (day di ring Ihe wnith of April. 1 M9 64 ler wrk day (doritnt tie rriutih of 'May, 1976: and 153 per work (lay (luring the month of June, 1976. During tile month of Junle, a total of 3,357 request.' were received which marks the high water imark to date. of F)IPA requests made of the FBI during any one single, month. A list setting forth volume of FOTPA requests and jitterulant cor-respon(lence received on a weekly basis during 1976 Is attached to this statement a Exhibit A. Tie backlog of 6.176 as (of the start tof the year increased to a high of 6.72 during tie latter part of March. 1976. Although this figure wiis reduwe(l to slightly under 6,0()0 by the beginning of May, 1976, lrimarilhy he-iuse of tih massive Influx of requests in June of 1976. it rose to 8,43-5 as (of July 22. 1976. By way of comparison (luring all of 1974 only 447 requests under the Freedom of Inforination Act were received for an average of l(s than 2 per work (lay. There are a number of uncontrollable factors which precild:! at this point an estimation of future receipts of FOIPA requests. As indicated by the figures men-tioned and exhi )t attached, the monthly recelpt of requests and backlog delin-quency, instead )f decreasing as might lie expected, continues to grow. 

I)u ring 1974. in anticipation of the Increased workload In FOIPA matter.s, the nur ber of FBI employees assigned to the processing of reqlests for records was Increased from F to 16 employees. Periodic increases (luring 1975 and 1976 in an effort to kteep pace with the volum(e of requests have resulted In fin approved complement of 194 in the FOII'A Section with a further approved anticipated in-crease up to 220. Of the approved complement 24 legal-trained Special Agents and 158 clerical employe(.s as of this (late are actually on board. A more detailed explanation of coinplemnent inreases Is attah(d as Exhibit B to this statement. 'i'iese figures do not include other personnel assigned excl,.,ively to FOI PA related matters by other HIeadfiuartrs (livisioin' or field offices nor does it take into aecimit personnel who si l a substantial portion of their time on FOIPA matters as an Indirect result of requests for (locumnents under the FOTA or the Privacy Act. The uniuler 4if l'ole misigned exclusively to FOIPA matters at Bureau Ileadquarters is esp cially ineaningful when you realize this figure ex-cee(ls the number assigned t) 47 of our 59 field divisions and 6 of 13 Headquarters (ilsions Inetuding tho-e two divisions which are responsible for the supervisory overview of till criminal Investigatons conducted by the FBI. tPrsuinol assigned have been of the highest caliber and chosen from the most ,,xii.rienced and productive. Reassignments were made based on the FIl's need to comply with the FOTPIA, and the relative injirtan(e of their last assignments 

\\ a, rwt ilowod to render them unavailable. While most SeclialI Agents assigned 

Isi F0IIPA ,k itters at Bureau Headquarters would prefer field assignments, more rulective of career interests, they have pledged themselves to implementation of the ints-nt of Congress In their present assignment. 82 -629- -77--32 494 

The average experience of the Special Agents assigned to the FOIPA Section is 13 years. They include former Supervisors of squads handling Organized Crime in Baltimore, White Collar Crime in Detroit, Civil Rights In Boston and Chicago, Counter-Intelllgence (foreign) In New York, the Night Supervisor In Washington, D.C., and the Assistant Special Agent in Charge in Chicago. Most divisions at Headquarters contributed men, including men from the three Investigative Divi-sions, an experienced Document Examiner from the Laboratory, and members of both the Inspection Staff and the Office of Planning and Evaluation. Individually and as a group they possess sufficient experience to understand their task, yet their relative youth and ability make them innovative managers with a firm commitment to the successful implementation of the FOIPA. We share with the members of this Subcommittee a concern that both the letter and the spirit of the FOIPA be served without compromising the ability of the FBI to fulfill its primary mission. We have found our assignment a unique challenge and con-tinue to so regard it. The Research Analysts have from 2 to 34 years of experience, again with an average of 13 years. They constitute an experienced and productive group. Highly motivated personnel to start with, they have had responsibility placed upon them considerably beyond that normally expected of our clerical employees. Although the backlog of requests and our inability to comply with the deadlines imposed presents a morale problem to personnel whose character and background have instilled in them a "can do" attitude, they have not despaired, and remain con-vinced that solutions will be found, that perseverance will enable us to cope with our problem. Actual costs incurred and those -anticipated by the FBI in implementing the FOIPA are in stark contrast to the initial estimate of the House Committee on Government Operations for all Federal agencies previously cited. Actual cost Incurred by the FBI In processing requests soared from $160,000 in fiscal year 1974 to $462,000 in fiscal year 1975 to an estimated $2,675,000 for fiscal year 1976 and a projected $3,427,000 in fiscal year 1977. Salaries alone for full-time personnel processing the FOIA request for the files concerning the investigation of Julius and Ethel Rosenberg totaled more than $215,000 during the period August 18, 1975, through November 15, 1975, the court ordered deadline date. This did not include the cost of numerous additional per-sonnel who had to furnish part-time support for this processing in addition to their normal duties. The deadline imposed in the Rosenberg case was met at an enormous cost to the FBI and the public at large in terms of money spent and delay caused other requesters. It is interesting to note that while the deadline was met and the documents ready for release in the Rosenberg case on Novem-ber 15, 1975, they were not picked up by the requester until February 4, 1976. ThIs matter is still in litigation and continues to occupy the full-time services of a substantial number of personnel with attendant cost. In suimmary we have made a good faith effort to strike a proper balance be-tween allocation of sufficient personnel (1) to permit reasonable compliance with the FOIA and Privacy Act given the volume involved and (2) to permit us to perform our primary function, the conduct of official investigations. At this point I would like to furnish a brief explanation of the relationship between the Freedom of Information Act and the Privacy Act because of the theoretical conflict between these two laws. Both Acts authorize access to Gov-erinent records by individuals. The Privacy Act is directed at providing an individual with information about himself. It (toes not provide a vehicle whereby an individual can gain access to information about another Individual. The FOTA, on the other hand, can be utilized to seek access to information about oneself or another party. The laws also differ greatly concerning the degree of access allowed to Govern-ment records. Under the Privacy Act criminal files are essentially exempt in their entirety if the agency )romulgates the necessary regulations. Under the FOIA criminal tiles must be processed document-by-document and withholding of in-formation must be similarly justified. Therefore, two separate avenues are open to a potential requester, offering varying degrees of access dependent on the rintureof the files being sought. The Department of Justice has taken a position based on the limited legislative history of the Privacy Act that any request for records by an Individual about himself is to I)e handled under the Privacy Act. If the records are exempt under the Privacy Act the FBI will process the requested documents under the FOIA as a matter of administrative discretion. By means of this procedure an Individ-ual obtains the most liberal access afforded by both laws. 495 

Although the Privacy Act Ia ainfd at allowing an individual access to Informa-tion about himself, It also strictly limits dimsemination of information about 

Itidividuls to it third party. Initial versions of the Privacy Act would have re-quired that Government agencies secure the permission of individuals mentioned 

Ili flit, flies before information about much Individuais could be released under the 

FOIA. As it Ittands now if a document iW required to be released under tile FOIA, 

the Privacy Act does not, prohillit the dilscmoure. However, If a release would   

> (,on0 ittito

an iinwarranted invasion (if privacy of a iprticular Individual, release Is not rlirulrd, and disclosuro is lprohlihlted by the Privacy Act. Additionally, dis-

clostiro under tho FOIA itiy violate the very principle front which the Privacy 

Act witS slpwned, the almse( of individual privacy by accessing personal Informa-tion collected In (overnment files. ''o reiterate, tleo F)IA dictates Ihat docun nts inny be released, though min-(',rnlnig another Individul, unless tlie inva slon of privacy iF unwarranted. Such a judgii,,nt, is extrelliely difficult for an Individiul reviewing a tile to make. Imv 

his's one know If an invasion of privacy will occur? How does one know If it is 

warranted? Judicial interpretation of fhils question requires that balance be 

t ruic between the public's right to know and the Individual's right to privacy. 

Huch hilancing requires the wisdom of Solomon and the legal acuity of Hrandels. It is not a process which lends Itself to an immediate response. I iiimst point out 

illso that prior to the passage of the Privacy Act, where this question existed one 

could Iook to the legislative history or tile FOIA which suggests close questions sliill always lie decided In favor of disclosure. With the advent of the, Privacy 

Act and tit I)lliy against tdisseuiination, one cannot longer Ilen always toward 

'ihe typlenl F i'OlPA request. is one received from nn Individual desiring doun-iniint regnr(llng hli mslf fromn al Fill fltle conpileil d uritig a iteceirity or crhiinal-

Tih request will N, backlogged aplroxImately 9 months, and will require an 

nverawe of 5o  days to coinpIlete when it is reached In chronological order for 

linnilling. Fncl ora nfftw<ling flit llro'evmmlig of it typllcil retlesmt Include: 

(1 ) lurtlher corresiontdnce with i a requ,,sler for necessary identifying in.  

> foiiiinlo

clariflcat loi of request.   

> (2) Sitrching retired.

(:) Accelerated processing iecessItated by court Il10,l1 de11 iflines. 

4 'l' ' in,! setiml Ivlty of IIInforliitloi germutanie to ilie request. 

15 ) Admilnlsrative appeals.         

> t1) lltigallm. Iniluiding peipration of nillhdavits and inventories showing

(10 it Iled Juml I Ihcn iol for maiterin I withheh.  

> (C'mirl

orders requilrinig prefercl lal tr iiieiit of it parthcular request lhnve It ,Iriislc efTe't Oil I iit or(hrly pro-tcssig of other routinen" reuittsts. The  

> vontillfi

jIoseIlHpld dc1tdllne ili tlie Iosenirg enfl n4esmitatel asmi4gliienvit of over pl' MIii' (l m'lemi il (of fle l" )I 'A Sec't to this ono1 r'(Iiuent. Other   

> ,oi'i I

ordhirs ,'hh, tit Its Ihil l'ifltilly dcvitslatlig 1as the Io isell erg caSe, 

euvitulat I vely ha 1e the .l leif et,t At flit% presmillfiliPt we aire working on 2() requplst alilch liao e been afforded lrefreiijll proesslig by tlie , courts. Mix ff tlieuni reilutre 'ompllletion by the eld of Atiist, 10711. ()iii such ititter, wilchi required conildetlh n by July 25,  

> 11916. Ii,,cemsiliit,,l

lie ftil.t lim mervics Of IS peol e for nm,,-t it monthly and 

IIinitiltid I overt liio nd weekend work R well. 

Atnol her rourt ordered dellluse ells' hits required the full.tlne services of 11 i',Ide sine April 1976 a ilie Ntill going oni. 

lhvery tle preferenlal handling of a request Is necessary the backlog of regular requests Increases geometrically, the delay In handling the backlogged    

> li'41til lt |it'

itn I li i iil1e 14341, nll t hills Iit itself cases more re(luIn sterm tn Inxill ute lit11a Iilo. lhrereby .oinng full cl rcle. Some of oir requests eniConupalsa doeii'1ils of s1'h volliillous lnItire that Ilhre Is no end Ili sight. while others 

nre replete willh prnin lir litigatln sin1", we fire ri-4i-lrid by law to nlotify nre itui 'er of the appeals iprcexlires with every release of material wherein 

410, hlloFm r exclt'is hnv,, h4,'4ii 111a44. whhih Il nimerous il itaiesf ins led to 

itli|ilm'ii alnd litI glitiuil wIlln a request prior it) Ilti c<,illtlon of pro tessing 

ttI'o dolllluunll mpert Ient to It hn reti'iest. .\ hnitIluu| l ra l l| l'Ills oo'll luilll l41 work of 1erstinel itssigneil to pI rCess.          

> 1l1g r,,,lllests NiJl1441 11:111ty Of li1 5l41 kIII

okoi Iii order i,, re5lxWi11 Ii tie 1 lliest        

> %ii lu1l1l1l1lly rech' dimui t

li, rellt'ti Iili Ilit v'ours , of the aple it l. li other 496 

words all records involved must again he brought together by FBI personnel for examination by a Department of Justice Appeals Unit attorney who reviews in detail the handling of the request. In addition, the Individual Agent or Re-search Analyst who processed the request must be available to discuss !n detail with the I)epartment of Justice attorney the nature of the records involved and the legal grounds for each exemption from disclosure which was asserted. Litigation diverts FOIPA personnel to a.sisqt Department of Justice attorneys in the defense of these lawsuits. Preparation of factual affidavits used In answer-ing interrogatories, requesting stays of proceedings pursuant to Title 5, United States Code, Seetion (a) (6) (C), and defending the application of the exemptions are examples of the type of work engaged In by FOIPA personnel when litiga-tion arises. Litigation to date has centered on two major issues: (1) The time within which any compliance with or denial of a request must lie made and whether the FBI is operating under exceptional circumstances and exercising due diligence to qualify it for a stay of proce(dllngs in the litigation pursuant to Title 5, United States Code. Section (a) (6) (C). (2) The application of the exemptions to the documents in question. Recently in the case of Open America, et at. v. The Watergate Special ProRecu-tion Force et al.,-F.2nd--, (D.C. Cir, 1976), number 76-1371, decided 7 July, 1976, this court recognized the exceptional circumstances under wh!ch the FBI is operating and that it is exercising due diligence with -respect to requests recri ve(l. Certainly the aspect of litigation under the FOIA which presents the most time consuming effort on the part of the FBI is the preparation of detailed affidavits demonstrating the proper application of the FOIA to the documents in question. The landmark (leclsion In this area is Vaughn v. Ro.en. 484 F.2d 280 (D.C. Cir., 1973), -cert. denied, 415 U.S. 977 (1974). See alRo Vaughn v. Rosen., 533 F.2d 

1106 (D.('. Cir., 1975). This decision set forth and clarified the burden placed on the Government In defending these suits. The statutory mandate that the government t has the burden (if proof together with our adversary system of adjitdication requires the agency to conie forward with sufficient information concerniig the (locmients so that the plaintiff may Intelligibly argue the appli-et ioni of the exemption. ThS: Is done by way (if affidavit and Is l being referred to ,s a 1'aug/hn showing or detaileil refusal Justification. The Vaughn showing necessitates (lescribing the document or portion thereof withheld without revealing that which Is properly withheld. At best, this is a(liffi(l11t task and Incredibly time consuming. An example of time court order which Vaughn and its progeny have spawned is that which wns issued in the United States D!strict Court, District of ('-

h'uai)a. in .411(n Wcinstein r. Edward II. Lc,'i, (Civil Action No. '20279--72) , on 2 AprIl, 1976. The court required specific factual and evidentiary material ade-(luately descrllin, In non- vonclusory terms the nature of the deletions anrd the reasons therefore. Attached a.s Exhibit C to this statement are five examples of the 540 prepared. from thme Vatughn Inventory in this case. This order has been adopted lby other Judge, In the District of Columbia. lllutrative of the Vaughn requirement Is the case of The, Foutnding Church of 

Seientologty of Washin.ton, D.0. Inc. v. Edward H. Levi, t al., (U.S.D.C., I).C.). 

Civil Actlon No. 7.5-1577. Of the 324 documents identified to plaintiff's request the FBI released 244. Of thp 80 documents not released. 33 were docuIments pre-pared for the purpose- if litigation. Thirteen others were other agency docn-nients and referred to those, agencies for direct response to plaintiff. The FBI plr'lpred an a ffidavlt detailing the aplication of the exemptions used which the court ultimately felt contained t)o general a description of the exempted material. 'he affidavit included as an exhi tit a copy of the documents released Ip,,rs wit to the req est. The court held In an order issue d 10 June, 1976. that "Althoiigh defendants have (lisclose(l a large number of documents . . . the In. dex . . . and the affidavit . .. (o not conport with the requirement for a detailed description of withheld material and of refusal justification." (citation omitted) The court ordered that the FBI describe in detailed, non-concluirory terms, the doeumnents withheld from plaintiff In whole or in part, specifically Jtutifying each exeruption. The approach seenis to lie a mathematical Ju.stiflcation-a line-497 

by-line, deletion-by-deletion justification. The demands of the court to Justify each and every deletion are extremely time consuming and require delicate handling, describing what has been withheld without disclosing that which must be protected. The preparation of these Vaughn, showings requires a sig-nificant amount of time which would otherwise be spent in the processing of other requests. Setting aside the difficulties caused by the sheer volume of requests, the stagger-ing quantity of records encompassed by certain requests, appeals and Litigation, why can't requests be expedited by the FBI and the backlog reduced? Any answer to that question can only begin by posing additional questions with which each of us assigned to FOIPA matters in the FBI must answer on adaily basis: What Is Privacy? Is a particular release an unwarranted invasion of privacy? Do the circumstances underlying receipt of a particular piece of information  

> imply

confidentiality? Even if the circumstances imply confidentiality, can portions of the information 

be released without revealing the identity of the source? To what extent may related enforcement proceedings, if any, be compromised by release of this information? If any exemptions are relied upon to withhold material in the eirmumstances suggested, can the Government demonstrate without revealing the material it seeks to protect, that the exemption is Justified if judicial review is Invoked? This list of perplexing problems is by no means exhaustive of the myriad of Issues concerning thousands of requests involving literally millions of pages; decisions are time consuming and require meticulous examination of material on a line-by-line basis. Extreme situations where a gross invasion of privacy is apparent or the material is totally innocuous are the exceptions. Reasonable dis-agreement not only among agencies, but within the FBI itself is common place 

wit Ih regard to the vast majority of these daily decisions. May I cite just a few examples without identifying the requesters-or subjects isy name to illustrate the problem. Case 1. A child Is kidnaped, but almost miraculously found safe in the room where the subject had placed her. The kidnaper was ultimately arrested and successfully prosecuted. Now only a few years later, the kidnapper, eligible for parole next year, requests the investigatory file. The child's description of her terror and the events which occurred during the kidnaping clearly relate to the 

> sulbIiet.

Dlmos the victim enjoy a right of privacy regarding her interview? Are the facts concerning the kidnaper and his victim so inextricably Intertwined as 1o preclude reasonable segregation and release? Presumptively, should the FBI assume that publicity attendant to the In-vestigation and/or the trial itself remove forever any right of privacy by the victim ?At the visceral level, does one rebl, at the thought of making available to achild-kidnaper the victim's description of her terror. Case 2. A request Is received and following a check of indices, the FBI deter-mines that no record exists for the requester. A few months later a second request is sublnmitted by the same requester. Indices are rechecked and it is discovered that during the intervening period Tequester has been the subject of an in-vestigation involving contact with a suspected foreign espionage network. The investigation of the requester has been closed upon the determination that no law had been violated. The dilemma is readily apparent. What response does the FBI tuow intke to the refluester? Use of exemption (b) (1), indicating the docu-

ments are withhold as classified. (b) (7) (A), that release might endanger an ,nrgoing elnfureenent proceeding or (b) (7) (E A. that release would jeopardize an Invest ig, tlvi' technique, will enable the requester to logically deduce the thorough-nes of the FBI's investigation eonerning the suspected espionage network. What logical response can the FBI lawfully make to this reque.st without 

.e ',a rdizi ng national security? ('aCns 3. The leader of a group subject to Investigation shinuilts a request for hik r',c4 . 'plon rev'iept (of the leased i 'liuneits. tle rnIi .st er k; nuide ;lart, 1,Ni 498 

virtue of the exemptions cited and records released that certain members of the groups are probably Informants. This leader Instructs each member of the group to submit FOIPA requests and insists that he be allowed to examine the responses given. In order to avoid compromising the identity of the confidential source, and possibly his/her physical safety, should the FBI 'be permitted to establish na-tional records concerning the Informant, with his consent, in order to allay suspicion and avoid physical harm? If the Government must respond accurately and the informant Is Injured or indeed killed because of failure to protect or human error, is the Government prepared to assume liability? Case 4. Requester, a member of the news media seeks the Investigatory record of a living elected member of a legislative body, who has plead guilty to an offense directly related to the conduct of his election campaign. Should the FBI treat this request concernlng the criminal Investigation of aliving third party as an obvious invasion of the legislator's privacy? Does the fact that the legislator plead guilty in open court waive any or all privacy aspects of the case? Would It be reasonable to say personall privacy" Is protected, but private con-duct directly related to public office Is not protected by an exemption using the lan guage "... unwarranted invasion of personal privacy?" Case 5. A third-party requester asks for information concerning deceased per-

sons of public prominence, from the world of sports, the theater, the business world, a former President of the United States, a famous civil rights leader. Should the FBI recognize a right to privacy in the heirs, such as a spouse and children? Does public prominence justify release of derogatory information even though the prominence of an individtml is unrelated to a law enforcement investigation? Js requester's motivation, a relevant consideration if privacy Is no longer to be considered because the subject of the request is deceased? Are the heirs to be without any rights? What exemption is applicable for exer-ising a sense of decency and good taste on behalf of deceased persons concerning whom records are requeted? ,It is incredibly difficult as the two Acts are now written to promulgate uni-versal rules to govern all matters dealing with sensitive records. The one alter-native which the FBI rejects outright that could expedite FOIPA requests is to compromise legitimate interests of the Government in succ.ssful law enforce-ment or the privacy of third parties by less than careful analysis of any re-quested records.  

> -

It is obvious that I have no easy solutions to propose. Indeed, as our record of good faith efforts to comply demonstrates, we would have adopted any such solu-tions over the past year and a half, if they existed. What I can promise, however, for myself and on behalf of the FBI, Is a com-plete willingness to discuss our problem with candor, and to explore with the Congress and Its staff, any new approaches showing even the slightest promise of offering a partial solution or some relief to our backlog and to the requesters who must endure seemingly interminable delays. This is not a now attitude on our part, although we are grateful to this Sub-committee for its Invitation to air it publicly. Nor is our sensitivity to the predicament of our requesters now. Delay costs us potential friends and places us in an nitenalle position. We have not lo.t the "can do" attitude which I mentioned before, but frankly, at the moment we are at a logs as to what further action we might take, given the task at band. This concludes my statement. I will be happy to respond to any questions. 499 VOLUME OF FOIPA REQUESTS AND ATTENDANT CORRESPONDENCE 

Incoming 

Incoming correspond-

Date requests ence Total 

Jan. 5 to 9 1976 --------------------------------------------- 224 213 437 Jan. 1 to 16, 1976---------------- .----------------------- 200 215 415 Jan. 19 to 23, 1976 ............................................... 233 262 495 Jan. 26 to 30, 1976 ................................................ 229 197 426 Feb. 2 to 6 1976 413 223 636 

Feb. 9 to I3 1976 ------------------------------------------ - 344 218 562 

Feb. 17 to 27, 1976 ............................................... 201 136 337 

Feb. 23 to 27, 1976-------------------------................. -85 290 675 

Mar. Ito 5 1976 264 249 513 

Mar. 8 to 12, 19W76 ::" .. 239 241 480 Mar. 15 to 19, 1976 ........................................... 298 218 516 Mar. 22 to 26, 1976 ................................................ 291 360 651 

Mar. 29 to Apr. 2, 1976 ........................................... 265 227 492 Apr 5 to 9 197- .................................................. 244 213 457 Apr: 12 to 1 1976 ............................................... 255 229 484 

Apr. 19 to 2. 1976 ................................................ 245 225 470 

Apt. 26 to 30, 1976 ................................................ 268 219 487 May 3 7 - --19763 ............... ..... 298 163 461 

May 10 to 14, A'76---------- -------------------------------- 37 3 1Ma 1 t1 , 97 . .. .... .................................... 378 232 610 

May 17 to 21, 1976 ................................................ 271 201 472 

May 24 to 28 1976 -------------------------------------------- 334 284 618 June lto4 976-------------------................... - 204 206 410 

June 7 to 1i, 1976 ................................................. 268 263 531 June 14 to 18, 1976 ................................................ 1,355 256 1.611 

June 21 to 25 1976 ................................................ 1,194 250 1,444 

June 28 to July 2, 1976 ............................................ 539 221 760 

July 6 to 9, 1976 .................................................. 328 213 541 

July 12 to 16, 1976 ................................................ 383 271 654 

FOIPA SECTION COMPLEMENT Special Research Stenographers Clerical agents analysts secretaries support Total October 1973 '----------............... 3 3 1 1 8

August 1974 ......................... 5 7 2 2 16 February 1975 8. -------------------- 5 17 2 3 27 

May 1975 4 ....-. ...--------------- 12 55 16 18 101 

June 1975 A --------------- 12 55 27 18 112 

August 1975 '------------------....... -19 70 30 31 150 September 1975 7--------------------- 22 73 33 35 163 January 1976 ..------------------ 25 90 38 37 190 July 1976 --------------------------- 25 90 38 41 194 September 1976 to ..................... 28 114 38 40 220  

> I

Unit in external affairs division. 

3 Unit in legal counsel divisio,:: 2 special agents to prepare for amendments. 

I Ten research anatl sts rqady foi anticipated Increased workload. 4 Section in record management division; 7 special agents and 38 research analysts to staff|l] teams;1l secretary and 13 stenographers already added. 

Ten more stenographers and a senographic supervisor. * Reorganized as inits within section; 7special agents and 15 researh analysts for project re guests.  

> 7

Privacy unit toitudy and prepare for possible further expansion; 3 special agents, 3 res'd.rch analysts.  

> 5

Privacy unit expansion completed; 3 special agents, 17 research analysts. * Present status. 

I' Planned immediate expansion; 3 special agents, 24 research analysts. 

VAUGHN V. ROSEN INVENTORY 

(Secrtion 2 Serial 82 dated 12-10-48 Consisting of 2 pagcs with the relca.Rc of 

Z pages) 

Teletype front Milwaukee to Dlrector, FBI furnishing information from records of Northwestern Mutual LIfe Insurance Company, Milwaukee, Wiscon-sin, on Thomas Francis Grady. Excision made on page 1 consisted of information of-a personal nature and not pertinent to Investigation. Excision on page 1 exempted under (b) (1) (C). The deletions made from this document were of a purely personal nature 500 

concerning background and reference information provided by Thomas Francis Grady to the Northwestern Mutual Life Insurance Company in an application for an agent's contract. The release of this material woil4 constitute an invasion of the privacy of Mr. Grady and of those listed on the application as references, and further, would have no bearing upon this matter. The two pages as released are attached. DIRECTOR, FBI, AND SACS, Philadelphia and New York Jay David Whittaker Chambers, was, perjury, espionage R. retel Philadelphia to Milwaukee and Cleveland instant date one twelve p.m. Records Northwestern Mutual Life Insurance Company, Milwaukee, Wis., show one Thonms Francis Grady made application for agents contract December nine, nineteen thirty, giving address. Perry, Secretary, Northwestern, received letter this p.m. from Martin, making further suggestions as to sources of specimens. As a result, this office has obtained four additional typewriter specimens, all from claim file of Thomas L. Fansler. Two are letters from Martin in August, nineteen twenty nine, one a change of beneficiary from Fansler in August, nineteen twenty nine, and the fourth a letter from Priscilla Hiss dated at Washington, D.C., June Eight, nineteen Forty, advising company that timothy lHob.on i.4 a party in interest under one of the policies of Thomas L. Fansler, at that time deceased. Originals forwarded AMSD laboratory today, photostatic copies to Philadelphia AMSD. JIonl xsoN.    

> iS' etion 3

S rial 173 ,loted 12.-9-.8 conmxi8ting of I ,loculmtid) 

Memo from Fletcher to Ladd regarding Ward Pigman and brother George Pigniar. Excision on page 1 exempted under (b) (7) (C). The material excised from this document concerned travel and other activities of George Pigman whli(h was of a personal nature and the release of which wmild be an unwarranted invasion of his privacy. Il1 travel and the activities mentioned had no relationshill) to any contact with Cthambers. and can be de-scrilbee as unrelated personal background data. The one page :. relhavd is ittnl('hed. OFFICE MNEMORANDUM U.S. GOVERNMENT,   

> December 9, 19,J8.

To: Mr. D. M. Ladd. From: 11. B. Fletcher. Subject : Jay David Whittaker Chambers, with aliases, perjury, espionage-R. You will recall that Whittaker Chambers stated that one Ward Pligian and his brother, George Pigman were contacts of his during 1936 and 1937, and that they were both employed by the Bureau of Standards in Washington, D.C. Chambers stated that Ward Pigman gave him material from the Bureau of Standards. He advised that his attempts to cultivate George Pigman for the purrwfmes of secur-ing nmterial from him were unsuccessful. Bureau files contain no information concerning Ward Pigman. The following information is available in the files of the Bureau regarding George L. Pigrnan: A preliminary inquiry was conducted by the Washington Field Office in Octo-1he-r, 19TR to determine if a full field loyalty investigation should be conducted. Insufficient derogatory Information was found and therefore no further investi-gation was made. George Pigmnan is presently employed as Chief of the Structural Section, Ex-perimental Section, Civil Aeronautics Administration, Indianapl)is, Indiana. Tnstructions have been issued to the Field to Immediately interview George Pig-man In Indianapolis. and his brother. Ward. who is working and residing In Appleton, Wisconsin. 

> AMON

The foregoing is for your information. 

(Seretion 5 Serial .315 dated 12-20-48 con.xixtinq of I page) 

Memo from FBI Director to Wnastingtoin Field dis(.lsing information from aforeign source. 501 

Document denied in total under (b) (7) (D). The material from which this document was prepared was received from aforeign government. Information furnished in this manner must be treated with the utmost confidentiality and is provided the United States under an implied as-surance of non-disclosure. To compel release of information furnished by a for-eign government would place in jeopardy the orderly exchange of Information be-tween the United States and other foreign countries. It should be noted that this government was contacted in during 1975, regarding possible release of informa-tion it provided during the investigation of Julius and Ethel Rosenberg, et al. At that time the Bureau was advised that government requested non-disclosure of information provided in that matter as wvell as in all other cases in which it fur-nished Information. 

actionn 19 Serial 939 dated 1-3-49 consisting of 6 pages) 

Report fron FBI, Charlotte relported by SA J. Hugh Smith reflecting investiga-tion concerning John Koral. Excision made on pages 4 and 0 exempted (b) (7) (C) and (b) (7) (D). The information excised from this document concerned the identity and back-ground data regarding the individual who provided his knowledge of John Koral. This person specifically requested his identity be protected for fear of bodily harm to members of' his family. In addition, information regarding the identify and remarks of persons attesting to the good name of the informant was protected for reasons of personal privacy. The 6 pages as released are attached.       

> FEDERAL. IUEAU OF INVESTIGATION
> SYNOPSIS OF FACrs

Informant rep rted that in 1944, while stationed at * * * John Koral, member of * * * related his-iuncle, also named John Koral, made trips during 1937 and 1938 from Washington, D.('., to New York City for Alger liKs. Koral was paid 

$3X) to $500 for tie trips and received secret papers from an unknown individual on the streets of Washington to take to Hiss who stayed at the Koral home in New York City while the trips were being made. Description of soldier, Koral set out. Description of uncle, Kora, unknown to informant. Inforinant 1s native * * * and presently resides at * * 0. Reported to have goo l reputation and to be reliable. Former SA Roy L. Morgan, Greensboro, N.C.. advims unable to supldy typewriting specimens from Hiss, lie has never corresponled with Hiss and was in his home only on one occasion in 1934. No typewriter s'e.m itt that time. Charlottte letter to Bureau dated 12-17-18. New York teletype to ('harh'tte. 

1 2V--21... ('lmriotte teletype to Bureau and New York, 12-31-48. Washington Field teletylpe to Charlotte 12-29-4,R. Charlotte teletype to Bureau. New Yotrk, and Washington FielId, 12-31-8. 

> I). MAILS

The following investigation is l)reicated upon information furnished to S, Stanley (. Settle. at tile United States Attorney's Office,. Asheville, N.C.. lvecemmher 10. 19 1., by Confidential Informant T-1. TIhe Informant advised that while' lie was In the * * statimed * a;.1 :I         

> member of the **"John Koral

was a * * *. According to the information f)r-tllt~mbd Koral Is a nephew of JPdin Koral. In 1944 while both were ,tationed at **. K)ral related to tho inforamait II 

conflden.et, that his uncle. .Jo)hmn Koral. made .everal trips to Wa,,hing1on. D.(. 

for Alger Iflss, presently a 4ubjeet of an Investigation being conducted by the llouse Un-Amrican Affairs Committoe. The.-e trips were made by Koral's mncle for th, purpose of receiving froni an unknown person in Washington. D.C.. top seret tIpers front th( State Dlepartnent anl carry same to Hiss who was staving in New Yorl City. A, payment for th(, se trili.p. Korn l's iiniele was paid q300 fo $10f for each trip. Three trip,; were made |In 1931 and one trip w', mnnde In 19.1A. Tt1ese paPtrs were, obtoinetd from the unknown hierzon on a stretft corner in Wnhington. D V.. While these trips were inad, by the former soildler's 502 uncle, Hiss stayed at the residence of Koral which was at that time in New York City. The present address of Koral, according to the informant, is 36 Arthur Street, lempstead, N.Y. The Informant stated that since the House Un-American Affairs Committee investigation began on this subject, lie made several trips to the Charlotte ()fice, of the FBI to report the information In his possession, but he never con-tacted the FBI for reason he was afraid of what might happen should Koral discover the source of the information. The foregoing was furnished to the Bureau and the New York Office by letter dated December 17, 1948. 

By teletype dated December 29, 1948, the Charlotte Office was requested by the New York Office to interview the informant again for a detailed description of John Koral and that the reliability of the informant be determined. 

At Jfcndcrsonville,North Carolina 

Confidential Informant T-1 advised lie never saw the uncle, John Koral, and the nephew never described his uncle. Following Is a description of the nephew, John Koral, as furnished by the informant: Name, John Koral; military rank-IIFC; Residence-36 Arthur Street, hlemp-stead, N.Y.; Race-white; sex--male; age-31 (1944) : height-5'34" ; weight-175 pounds: build-heavy (fat) ; hair-dark brown (thin in front) ; eyes-dark brown; complexion-dark (rough) ; peculiarities-square jaws-thin tight lips; civilian occupa tion---tailor. The informant added that in 1944 at Fort Jackson, S.C., he was assisting Johli Koral In cleaning up the * * *during a period when most of the men of the outflt were on furlough an(- the two were discussing the disease, polio. The Informant nientioned that lits sister had two small children and should they take the diseas- lie (1d not know how the family could exist financially. Koral mentioned that his uncle, John Koral, had had some tough luck in that lie had incurred large bills because of a sick child and that if it had not been for Alger 11-s hp didn't know what his uncle would have done. Koral continued by saying that Tiss, a high government official, had paid Ids uncle from $300 to $5)0 per trip to bring important papers from Washington. D.C.. to New York City. The informant stated he then asked Koral several questions and from the answers obtained the Information previously set forth In this report, According to the Informant the nephew Koral's family was residing with the uncle, John Koral. at this time. Ile added that the soldier Koral always seemed to ihe able to obtain fairly large sums of money from his family by sending awlire to the family requesting that spending money be sent to him. The informant said KORAL, never appeared to be the type to brag and that following the conversation requested the informant not to mention what had been said for It might get his uncle in trouble. The informant added that at the time of the conversation he had no idea who Alger Hiss was and only re-cently through reading the daily papers did he realize the identity of Hiss. 

A t Grecnsboro. North Carolina Former SA Roy L. Morgan advised he was well acquainted with Alger Hiss in 1934 when both were employed as attorneys for the Agriculture Adjustment Administration but was unable to supply typewriting specimens from Hiss. .r. Morgan stated that he has never corresponded with Hiss. He recalls being in Illss's home only on one occasion in 1934. Mr. Morgan does not recall seeing a typewriter at the time of his visit to Hiss's home. He Identified Robert M. McConnaughey, Security and Exchange Commission, Lee Pressman, Nat Witt, .erme Frank. Francis X. Shea, John Abt. Abe Fortas. Mrs. Fuller relative of Senator Burns, and Gertnde Samuelson, secretary of Jerome Frank. am associ-ates of Hissqq. All the nbove-named were with the Agriculture Adjustment Admin-istration In 1934. Morgan further advised that Justice Frankfurter, Supreme (Cmurt. Chester Davis. Sr., Federal Reserve Bank St. huls, Mo., Chester Davis. Jr.. Winston.Salem. N.C.. and Ed Stettinius, Charlottesville. Va., were all closely acquainted with Hiss. Morgan believed that Stettnlus. Frankfurter. Jerome Frank. Chester Davis. Sr., and McConnaughey were most likely to have personal correspondence from Hiss. Mr. Morgan advised that Hiss, Frank, Pressman. Witt, Fortes, Shea and Aht formed a clique in the Agriculture Adjustment Bureau which was very 503 

liberal and adhered closely to Wallace's liberal policy. Of this clique, Morgan believed Pressman and possibly Witt were definitely Communists but others only liberals. Morgan advised that Pressman, McConnaughey, and Shea were classmates of Hiss at Harvard. Hiss was described by Morgan as being con-sidered in 1934 as absolutely sincere, honest, intelligent, and of high integrity and character with a tremendous capacity for work. He was classified as an idealist with liberal tendencies such as belief in socialized medicine, govern-ment control of some industries, and a follower of Roo3evelt's policies. Mr. Morgan believed that Gertrude Samuelson, former secretary of Jerome Frank, could supply additional information as to clique in the Agriculture Adjustment Administration, but believed that background information should be secured before interviewing her. The addresses of all parties not supplied are either known to the Bureau or can be secured from the files of the Agriculture Adjustment Administration of the Department of Agriculture. CONFIDENTIAL INFORMANTS 

('on idcntial ibforniant T--1 

(Section 22 Serial 1112 dated 1-7-49 consisting of 2 pages) 

Memo from L. Whitson to 11. 13. Fletcher reporting interview of Whittaker 

Chambers by agents of Washington Field. Excisions made on page 1 and 2 exempted under (b) (7) (C) and (b) (7) (D). In addition these excisions are exempted under (b) (1). An excision was also made regarding the identity of a third party not in-volved in this investigation. The release of this individual's identity would con-stitute an Invasion of his personal privacy shite It infers the individual was con-ne.ted with espionage activity. Paragraphs 1 and 2 on page 1 and the last 3 words on line 1 in the last paragraph on page 2 of Section 22, Serial 1112 are claimed by the defendants as exempt under 5 United States Code, Section 552(b) (1). The document was classified "Top Secret" on 4/19/76 pursuant to Executive Order 11652 and it bears the classifying offer's number 4417 which identifies the official respon-sible for it. It is considered exempt from automatic declassification under Section 5(b) (2) of the Executive Or'der as the claimed exempt portions contain information furnished by another "onernient agency which has so classified this information. With the deletion of the claimed exempt portion the remainder of the document would not be classified. Two pages as released are attached. OFFICE M2NEMORANDUM U.S. Govr;~MENT, January 7, 1949. To: Mr. 11. B. Fletcher. From: L. Whitson. Whittaker Chambers was interviewed on December 31, 1948, by agents of the Washington Field Office, at which time in speaking of Laurence Duggan, Chambers recalled that about 1937 J. Peters had told him that Frederick V. Field was operating an apparatus In New York which included Joseph Barnes, formerly of the New York Herald Tribune, now co-owner of the New York Star. This apparatus, according to Chambers, may have included Barnes' brother, Howard Barnes, although Chambers was not certain of this. Chambers mentioned that Frederick Vanderbilt Field and Barnes had swapped wives. He mentioned this only as a matter of Interest. Chambers stated that this group used an apartment donated for the purpose by the mother of Frederick Vanderbilt Field, which apartment was located on Central Park West in New York City. Chambers advised that he became aware that Duggan and Field had been classmates, probably at Princeton University (Harvard, according to Duggan) and J. Peters Introduced Chambers to Field for the purpose of recruiting Duggan. Chambers stated that Field proceeded to Washington, D.C. to see Duggan and Duggan had brushed him oft indicating to Field he was already active In an apparatus. This is what led Chambers to feel that Duggan was part of or associated with the apparatus of Hedi (Maswing) Gomperz. 504 In connection with Joseph Barnes, Paul Massing has * * * as a person whom he suspects of being possibly engaged In Soviet espionage. Paul Massing said that he has no basis for this suspicion other than a feeling. Paul Massing said that while Barnes was the Herald Tribune correspondent in Moscow he had seen Barnes play tennis on the NKVI) tennis courts. * * * reflect Barnes a Harvard graduate, was born in Montclair, New Jersey, on July 26, 1907. Ile is married to the former wife of Frederick Vanderbilt Field. Barnes went to Moscow during the 1930's as a foreign correspondent of the Herald Tribune and remained until 1931). lie then became the foreign editor of the Herald Tribune. In September, 191, he became the'deputy director of the overseas branch of OWN. Ile accompanied Wendell Wilke on his trip to Russia in 1942. Barnes has written for the magazine "New Masses". Ile has also been named as pro-Soviet by a number of persons. Ile testified on one occasion before the Civil Service Commission stating that he had never been a member of the (ommunist Party. At the same tinie le testified that lie did not believe the Spanish Loyalist forces were controlled by Communists. RECOM MENDATION In view of the new information developed from * * it is recommended that Barnes be interviewed along the lines being pursued in other Interviews in the IIlss-Chambers case, Mr. EIDWAm)S. On l~age 10 y-oil say: I'lie typical freedom of information request that one receives from an individual (h sirinig a document regarding himself from an FBI file cOmipilhd dii ring asevurty or criminal type lInvestigation. What, percent of the 50 to 70 requests you get. a day are people requir-ing their own1 re Cord, asking for their own records? 

M[r. P wf"Its. The ovcrwlelnming l rmijority. 

Mr. Elwims. Ninet I)ercnt, would you say? MIr. Plow]-,ts. I would siy that 9(0 recent of the re nests that come in nierao about il ,1re P'rivacy Act requests front an i mdividlal for illfornmtiom about I]Ii II l 'l f. 

Mrm. EoAimARS. Whe i' oneC comes i11 (10 youl 1inI11('(ifltClY ch' eck yourl 

files tO sPe whether 01 not vou have it record oil this i)C1on? 

Mr. 1'1,wEiv:.. 'I'll tIt is t1 lie ' it initiI Ste y) Yes, sir. 

Mr. E)wA)s. Ando] whmat i)rt'vnt o You Eave no record on Mr. PowERs. I don't have any accurate figure on the number of 

4611) records,". Tiitial;" I Iht\,' I)(,, in tflue section Si i 1, 1),cev ,rmhe of 1975 and January of 1976, and initially no records were kept as to how many were "no records." I have attempted to try and retrieve that at this time. The best, estimate that I have is, I would say that of the tobtl nubiler of repqests that we have received, about 9,000 have been no records. Now, that is not a precise fig-re. But that is about the best T can come to. I think if anything I would be erring on the side that that is perhaps more no records than we have. Mir. EDWAnrs. And those are answered immediately. then. within afew days, you write the person? Mr. PowFRs. Yes, sir. Mr. EDWARrx. They are nt put into the files? Mr. POWERS. No: lf it. is a no record, it is cleared up and a response is made. Mr. DiNA,. Would the chairman yield? Nine thousand out of how manv? Mr. Powprs. We have received a total, Congressrman. since .Tlnnry of 1975. up to .July 23. of 24.,375 requpests. fr. DRINAN%\. So probably one-third? 505 Mr. Powriw. Approximately. Mr. DRINAN. Thank you. Mr. EDWARDS. Your average is about the same as the CIA's, then. In 1975 they received 7,393 requests, 4,577 were no record. So there were 62 percent that they had no record of. So they were able to solve those problems of 62 percent immediately. Only 38 percent of the requests had a record in the CIA. Now, are you telling us that about 38 percent of the requests received have a record, or what percent is it again ?Mr. PowZRs. We would be talking, I guess, about 66 percent, then. Mr. EDWARDS. Have a record or do not Mr. Powzrs. Have a record. Mr. EDWARDS. Sixty-six percent have some sort of a record? Mr. PowERs. Correct. Mr. EDWARDS. Now, suppose it is a very easy one, and it can be handled in 1 or 2 or 3 days. Do you put that at the bottom of the pile for 8 months later treatment? Mr. Powims. Yes, sir; ve do. And if I may, rather than just answer-ing it so tersely, because what you are suggesting or what you are refering to here, when I first came to the section, and because of th backlog we had, it was one of the first things that I had addressed myself to. The problem is that if we are going to make someone wait 

for (; iiioitlis. aiel t liel go hack I ) tlheyin iTsfl. Iy. her( are two pages, two documents, whatever it may be, but something very minimal, that Iknow myself that I would be quite upset at that, that I had to wait 6months, and then I get two pages. Or that we were not able to posit i% elv establish the identity of the individual coming in, and from our review' of our central indices we can only tentatively say that a record in there may be identical with that individual, and then 6 months later go back to him and say, now that we have had a chance to look at it, it isn't you. That is almost as bad as the first instance. If there was some way that we could determine the volume of documents or records that may be involved in a particular request, go through and get rid of all the easy ones, and if we had 6.000 requests, maybe there were 4,000 ea.y ones, and we could do that in a few months. And then we would have that 2,000 hard core that niay take months and months to do. But at least we would have Patisfied" 4.000 people. But tie problem in doing that, and in trying to he fair. and then lnolking through initially to determine the size- -ned we opted for the fairness doctrine, I know I can hardly say fairness wbien we hnve the Naklog. but that wa. the intention at least of pitting everyone in chronological oTder, that eVVrVOT W19 1)lt il tli,, same position. 11,1d 

when you come in to be fair and impalidl to all. V011 would l handled in the order in which your request had been received, other than those in which there was no record. And in those cases then we would makr, that prompt first response and tell them so. Mr. EDWARDS. What percent of the requests have to do with suib-iects or people in your domestic intelligence area as opposed to the criminal investigative files? Mr. Powrs. T have no idea. sir. We do not keep any records on something like that, whether it alludes to criminal or security-Mr. Er4DWARDS. Could either of the other gentlemen hazard a guess on that? 506 

Mr. PowzRs [continuing]. Other than just saying, a large percent-age maybe. We are in the area of speculation. I truly have no figures, other than a canvass of everyone and just say, based on what you have received. From what I have observed I could go and say that the majority would be, in quotes, of a security nature as opposed to criminal, the majority. The precise number I cannot tell you. Mr. EDWARDS. I think it is pretty clear that it must be. And I think you would have a much more accurate guess as to that, one of you gentlemen should. You have only since 1974 maybe 150 or 200000, whatever the figure might be, domestic intelligence cases. That is so much larger than the criminal cases that the Bureau would have opeli at the time. So there must have been people more curious about their own records with regard to domestic intelligence, not criminill intelligence. Mr. Powms. We received a number of requests concerning matters of a criminal nature and from prisoners alluding to a matter on whom we have a criminal investigatory file. Mr. EDWARDS. Would you furnish something for the record, a typ-ical month's group of requests, broken down that way, or over a period of time, and spot checking it. I think it would be helpful to us. Mr. PowEns. Yes sir, we will give it to you during a given period. Mr. EDWAR S. The gentleman from Virginia. Mr. BULm . Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate the opportunity to share this information with the rest of the committee. It is very helpful to me to have these figures in some perspective. But the thing that is beginning to concern me is the diversion of the personnel. Does this operation adverse.Iv affect the primary is-sion of the FBI itselfI Where are you finding the persomel you keep t ransferring to this function? Mr. Powms. Well, when the FOIlA section was staffed, it was staffed in a sense really by robbing from our other divisions, and field offices, particularly in the Records Matnagement )ivision, a number of highly qualified and experienced personnel were taken to initially set up for the reviewing of the fies. Mr. Bu3rxr.R. Are we going to be getting behind in other aspects of the ordinary administration of the, FBI if this takes place? Air. POWF.RA. There have been sonie instances where we are Ixhind. Jim, could you help me? 

Mr. Aw.. it definitely affects the records operation, because a lot of (f1l11lified employees that we have laid in tle Records Manageiment )ivision have be:en sent. to the F)II'A section. And we have lost a lot of experience, and we have to try to get new employees. we have to go through a training program wiih them, and it makes it less efficient for tis in doing it. in this fashion. Mr. lh rim. I can see that. That is the fairly obvious answer to it. What I am trying to figture out is whether you have a personnel train-ing program for this particular aspect of the Fill, as obviously it ap-pears to be a permanent problem, whether you are going to be robbing from the other divisions? Over the long haiul, how will the Bureau provide the personnel to handle this? Mr. Pow:ns. Sir, as we stand now, with an approved complement 507 of 194, and a further increase up to 220, this next increase will cause us to take persomel from other divisions. There is no getting away from that. Now, once we reach the point where we feel we are able to handle the requests and cut into the backlog, I do not foresee at this time any fur-ther massive increases in complement. So that all we would be talking about at that time would be normal attrition for any number of avariety of reasons, for all we would then be needing would be one person who left or one agent who may be reassigned or moves upward, something like that. Outside of this next push of 24, I cannot foresee any further major increases. We sincerely hope, with this number being amsigned, with the problems we have because in our own division in the FBI because of the lack of space by taking over every room that we conic by, personnel and equipment, and so forth, that we have now reached the point that we will be, able, barring anything unfore-seen in the influx of requests, to handle that. And it won't have that effect. Then we will be in a sense our own training ground. Employees will perhaps not come right into that section. We will still take expe-rienceid personnel, but it won't be, such a drastic import at any one time. Mr. lium:r. You are finding that it takes some degme of sophistica-tion to handle this responsibility I

Mr. Pow.ER. Yes, sir, I certainly do. I have been here for, say, 7 or 8 months now. I will be very candid, I still do not feel that I have acomplete grasp of the nuances of both of these acts that we spend con-siderable time on. Among the agent personnel, and in conferences, we have conflicts among ourselves as to the interpretation, good inteni-tioned conflicts. And it is very seldom that. we really get a consnCsu.s of opinion, because variances of facts may jist change everything in agiven case. And yes, we l)ut quite a resl)o1siiity on our clerical em-ployees in dointr' this type of work. An that is :hvy we feel right now that we need the degiee of supervision that. we )have in overseeing their work. Those who have been here foray year or so are doing a ivr-markable job. Buit it dotes take tinte. I woul(i /say 6 months, before we really are getting our money's worth out of that employee as regards FOI'A moneys. Mr. BUrJER. Ilare you reduced thIis particular problenl to gni dines or a manual? Mr. Powy.Rs. Not yet, sir. We are going in that direction, institut-ing almost a specilie iiiit now for that purpose, so that as these lrob- 

> l(-ms

comie up we are getting additional guidance and instri,(,ions from t he Department in connection with our aplals, judicial guidance 

frol court. Interpretations, yes, wv will be reaching that point when that can I done. Ve have not arrived at that goal as yet. Mr. lhTrri.E. On1e more suggestion. You dispose of several inquiries on the basis that, you have no record. That is fine. Is there any way 

V011 can determined how accurate you are in making that determina-tion ? For instance, do ou have an error rate? Mr. PowF.Rs. We have a few examples. I would say it would be really minutscule. When I says few, in human error we h1ave mie.d. Ithink two to my knowledihe since the time that I have beken there. And those are the only two that I know about. Anl then another agency had a request ma(ile to them. "l'hev haad notified the requester that they had some documents from the FBI. and would we recheck our records. To mny knowledge that was just a hiunan factor. 508 Ir. Bu'rLE. So you feel pretty good about that? Mr. Pow j4. Yes sir. MIr. BUTLYJI. And this (toes not indicate any fallacies in your index-ing system ?

11r. low~tIs. No sir. I hey receive tie same service-we would for an agent writing in to try aild find out something about a bank robber or 11, kidnaper. 'elv receive the sante type of treatmentt. Anti we 11v', the expertise, and tile desire, if there is a record to locate it. 

Mr. lu'irixi. 'inank you, Mr. ("Chairman. Mr. ElVwAIos. Mr. I)rinan. MNr. Ilh .\Xn. ''hank you very nl ia, M r. ('la ritlln. 

A I1 tilank '(otl, gent'lltiel. I have somle strong feelings albouit this Cutestion, because I corre-

SpjOll(ld wit i Clarence Kelley for imontlis and mnontls before I got til, 

81ijgestlat tle Fll ke pt oi i. 

/h'JS g(et to tih, heart( of t his thing. Most )f this junk ought to be Alestro ,ved. And tle Attt)rn,\' (Ivilterl 1hi uisel f says t lat. lI, re is a letter of .i*ue 11, 1975. f, !o:n Ed trwad levi totme A ('omnittee of the I)epartnment of Justice atttrneys is now at work, they meet several lItns a week, putting together proposals for an Attorney (Jeneral's directive on FRI tile keeping. The problem, am you know, has inany favets. The lurdensome (ost of keeping a lot of Innocuous, Irrelevant uailtr Is o11y one of them. llowever, the ('omittee's work Is proceeding well, and I hope we can soon solve the quiestoums you have raised. '1'hnt is 1: lontlis ago. I [as anything lilp)enet to destroy some of tiles thiuigs so 1hat youl wouldnt have to keep tiltern 

M r. Ptow rs. I do not know wMat the p)resC-'t status of that inquiry withl the Attornev (Gemtral an tifthe lureia stands, (ongressrian. M'. I)i N\N. Y ou are n1ot telilng us anything, sit-. You sllolilol know. )out want to reduwe voitr problems. I (Ion't want to say that you are stonewalling. lt it vsay you tave no figures on criminal secu. rity. 

You can't tell us alxmit (OINTEIPR(O. You can't tell us why N.ouu titt't release fill of t1wn. or wih y vou aren't working with the Attor'nV General. You can tell wh\' you" are so unprepared. Y)7o say ielay is unot, intentional. 1 have to Say. jitst pitting it. on ilite efficiency basis, Ican't t ('ont.eive of General M(;tors or any corporation or any bank olper-ating this way. I have to say that tile delay is international. that there, are ways by vhiieh you can correct this situation. I have all types of ,Mrrt1slmlndelne fromn contit tents who are annoyed and perplexed anid worriel Huxt tfle Fill goes on montl after montli in defiance of whlat the, intention (of Conrress is. So say t hat the delay is intentional. And you say that 220 people can correct lt. When is thrit going to halp-plen, vi are you oinmg to get rid of the backlog? I)o von brave atarget (late? 

.Mfr. 1{m'oPIt4. I f I nav ad(lress myself to one of the points that v-oi liad, the nimhsr of individuals only' making one request. T wasn't, sure that that had been addressed to m'e. T don't know if vol are talkiner about, individual requ st or what, sir. .fr. T)rtvx. T have tlit ball pirk fiilre of 9.( out of 24.000 for whom %'-oi have no record. But respond. if you will. I am dis.satisfied. and T read all the material yesterday. I am just di~satisfled with the nonprogress that is wing made.   

> Mr. POWERR.

Well. with regard to the destruction of records, If rec-509 ords were destroyed and we did not have them to assess, we would cer-tainly be able to expedite requests. There is no question on that. There are certain archival rules with respect to destruction which must be ob-served. Perhaps Mr. Awe would be able to furnish something in that re-spect. And with respect to the inquiry between the Attorney General and the Bureau, I am under the impression, but I am just speculating, that that may still be an ongoing stage, I don't know if there has been aresolution. can just go on what we have now for destruction of records, pursuant to archival authority. Mr. DINAN. Would you agree with Mr. Levi that a lot of the mate-rial that you hand out is innocuous and irrelevant? That is what it was in my case. You started keeping a file for some unknown reason in 1958, when I was (lean at the Boston College Law School and conducted acivil rights conference addressed by the Governor. Some Agent in the FBI in Boston started a file in the central Head quarters on me. It con-tinued year after year, when I was in the civil rights movement and the peace movement. The whole thing is just absolutely outrageous. Ed-ward Levi has said that and other people have said it. I assume that this goes on; I have no indication that it has terminated. Do you see new papers coming in as irrelevant and innocuous as I said? Mr. PoweRs. I should have mentioned, too, on the destruction of records the moratorium that we are under as it concerns intelligence, security, and extremist files, which has a definite bearing on the de-struction of records. Mr. DIUNAN. What do you mean tle moratorium? You don't collect t hose anyway? Mr. Powim. No. We are not permitted to destroy any, such records. With respect to your question, is there any information in our files which may-and I forget the exact words--but perhaps is not entirely relevant or pertinent VYes sir, there have been some instances. Mr. DRINAN. I mean all of this 81 pages is irrelevant to anything the FBI is supposed to be doing by law. Mr. Pow.Rm. Now, with respect to your other question, are we try ing to do anythingabout that I Yes sir. Once again, in the light of the Privacy Act, the instructions have been issued to the field, a reminder to therri that in connection with an authorized lawful investigation, the 

facts to xe determined should just be germane to the investigation, and they should have a reawareneqs of first amendment rights so that wdint, is collected is only pertinent to----Mr. DRTNAN. There is no investigation. Let me make it clear, Clar-ence Kelley said to me: You have not been the subject of an'FBI in-vestigation, and our records contain the following. So it is not an in-vestigfation. All right? But are you still investigating? Are you still having all of this innocuous and irrelevant material coming in? Iquote Mr. LTAvi. Mr. Powrms. No. At the present time Mr. Levi and the Bureau, if they do not have them already, have established guidelines as to what may be the proper subject of investigation in the security field. Mr. D UNAN. OK. I have seen guidelines before that have been vio-lated ePTwriously. How much comes in day after day from the COIN-TLPRO successors regarding present extremists and the alleged mubversives? Mr. Powym. IFhave to say that I am not in a position, I am truth. A2 629-77-38 510 fully not, to comment with respect to the guidelines on its overview and just what they constitute. I can either try and get that information for you, or refer you to a proper party either in the Department or in the Bureau. But I know the guidelines have been established, sir, and that there is going to be an overview by the Department to insure jhat instances such as you are referring to in the past will not occur again in the future. I cannot respond to what has gone on, we are only trying to look ahead as to how we may rectify what may have beem wrong in tfhe past. Mr. DItmNAN. On the financing of this, Clarence Kelley said that Iowed him $8.10. Have you collected from everybody? Mr. Powt:its. Yes. We charge 10 cents a page, unless the individual shows in(Iigency. Mr. )i RNAN. How many don't pay? It was a very sloppy way of col-lecting it from me. I could lav'e foigotteii about it. I (loit tlink ally-body would have checked up. Mr'. IPowmts. WVell, tie system tlt is in effect 110w is that the 1ocil-

Iluius m1rc not svlit intil tlem money is recvivedl first. Mr. DmNN'. I low 111uch 1iaoney comis in ?Mr. lPowyl.s. I have not totilt(1( it 11p). 1 lave i li, figilres by lloit Ili. Mr. l)IN.AN. \WJiitt (10 )'Oli (I0 oiI) tlil(,'C iI volI loCttol)t li iu I; iii ?

That, is sort of essenitia]. )'()it say yO1i ii(,(ed 2:20 people. l iow i111i coies in ?'. ( ti file a ball park figlre. Mr. owmi:us. I a111 going to Saty )rlaps- CaIll cngive you fi figure in 

just i very few minutes on thit, e,ciiise I have it by moith, an( it wolild just be a matter of taking it look and totaling it up. And we have oir Finance and Personnel divisionn wliich keeps :ill accounting of all mloneys reeived in connection witi F0I1PI requests.  

> Mr.

I)u. INAN. Is it insignilicait in relation to tlie cost of this pro-

gram ?

Mi. ] Ivii.. It cerl1iainlly' is, tlilt I (,all sita without am,17 tloilt.  

> .Mr1'.

I)ii.NAN-. )o yoi llliik, sir, that at ear froi now we will hiav&3 another healing like this ind I will still he annoed ilt tile backlog 

that is still there? Mr. Iovi-.:us. No sir. 

Mr. I)muNm.m Wlat is your prediction? vlat is the probability? Can I tell a constituent whein I have an angry letter al)o it tle FAiL can I tell him this afternoomi that I have assurance froin tle highest official ill tile I)epartment of .1ii'stie that witlii( 6 niontv,, or 1 year there is not going to be any backlog ?

Mr. Powt:is. Well, not aiuy baelog, sir, I vatn't pronise tlait.  

> Mr.

)iu ,INN. That is the- essential reiliiest; tliat is why we called yoU together. If You can't, pirolote that, then I have to weigh voiir testilioly is zero. Ve, as the Oversight. Committee, wait tlhe Fl i to conih)l' 'viW hi lil- l:1w iIsofilr as l)OS5ilh,. I'o1 are ,saying tllit 3eou iave 

no plails to get, rid of the backlog; fliat is the way you talk to ile. 

Mr. PIow:mis. 'I'llt is not entirely fair, that we ,have o plain. Ml'. l)uiINAx. Will it iave (lisap)Jetire1 substantially in 1 yer? 

Mr. lPowils. Substnmitiall, I believe so, in the ftllsen of Soiiethingi like that wlich o'curre(l in',June. when we received 3 ,3 57 r(q( ests. in the abllsece of that   

> Mr. 1)mriNAN.

I thinly you shoill expect more requests, right ? Be-

catuse everybody is telling people, Yes, you ought to get your FBI file. 51!. Wly should they keep a file? When they see that the second highest guy inI tile FBI, a guy who is now in the papers this morning, engaged in dirty tricks to harass and discredit alleged political radicals yout are going to have a lot of new requests. I am certain. So it is going to go up. Is that the intention of the FOIIA? Mr. Powfms. Well, with tie experience that we are gaining, witi many of the problems that we had initially being resolved, with the ilncreasing coniplemient, and with tie acquisition of more space, per-haps some mundane things, but just from an adminiistrative sAid-

point, and the actual processing of (locunients, that is, how the in-formitation is actually taken out, and iiprovement in that area, with the expertise gained by the personnel that have been lere, I truith-fully, I sincerely, hopefully believe that there %Vill be i .ubtintital re-duction in the backlog. But whether it will be a completed riiwt ionl iII 

tim )acklog, tlutt I cannot promiise, because there are it iimel.e (if fa(ctor..----

Nr. r)UIN.N. Mr. Powers, if yoll don't, 1ve it plani, we Il'te going to iul)OS, it plan, right? If yol (on't haove a plan to plhse out this biak-log over the year the Congress will have to insist upon something. Mr. l)owk:Ets. I believe that we have it plan. Mr. I)nLN,'x. WhIat is the )lanI ? I (on't hear a plan. Mr. lowEtls. With our linc'ease ill persoilel anld t lie PXl ,rieiIc, tlat l as been gained, the continuing move to expedite the actual pro(.esming of (lie (loeunments, the plani all revol%'es around that. 'l'lire isno Iriumatic tling that I can suggest to do it. Mr. DrINAN. Mr'. Powers, 8,400 Americans right now, wieo have filed, 

havo been waiting for months -8,400. What is the phascotit plain; 800 Sii moit li, 1 ,000 a zuoitt, 2,00( it month ? Take your choice. I want action witllill a year, and I want to lie able to tell this constituent, a very im-portant lawyer, that you sai(d or you (lidlnt say, Mr. )owc'rs, that within a year you will have retired these 8,400. 1 don't want e itjivoca-tion, I want a categorical answer. If you say you can't ';ronei.s thIat, I will tell him that, and lie will be in digniant. I and the Coitgre~s will say that we will try to iil)ose a Idan because you cannot meet the basiv. requirements of the Free(om of Ilnformat ion Act. Iir. owiV:cs. I it\ sorry, I cannot give you a promise. 

N1'. I)iu NAN. I y field Imk tie balance of my time. 

.M1 r. Emw.,is. Tie gentlenllan froln (wolilecti tct. 

Mr. I)ODm. I have an opelniig statement, Mr. (C 1hairiman, that I wun't 

read- -

.NI'. En'o,%IllS. It will Ix- iad(' it part of lie record,, Ir. 1 )odull 

[Tile statement t i fevrred to( follo ws :]                            

> 1i'l.NI NSTATIMENT OF liON. (H RISTOi'll i.1. I) l, ('Omm iri ox Olliu:N TilE i,i)i(Y, Si '1mO1C iIi (: ON ('IVIL, ANlD CONSIrlTlTi(INAI iI1THS, .J iLY .29,

1976                

> Iwiatt to thliaik you, Mr. Power.;s, id your aisu.ciites, fir coin hg Iitermle ihis

Ihody ti 1tny to prov ide I.s % th itii tiu 1 r0 ; i tlno omil t lie' problilemI the Fill is ex-     

> jn'rieticlhiig with remjwct to

tie piro es i4lg of Frt'e( it (of I nftritn nlli II ri viil('y     

> Act reiiests. Iamt

c lliiIl,,lit t lilit ,(e it iil yoilr Ntiiff ,u i' li1y (,h ri(myli itilim I riils-         

> trii ii it imut t,1w 4h4lilyi4 whhch sire o(ccurrinig in o

wh -me x-4inlig tif owi.te rewilei .s, 

anrid 1 ii ',k ferw:rd to working with yOU to 1111d1 OtW I'i'it \%11S to U-0114' with h i problem i.                                    

> It Is lmty oi1liili thalt (herel' it1lye Isetn ftew Ivosililve Iniiatlives't, lil-!iiavs,
> spat rked the eillhtsiasin al ichi trovry ht vitihas (iihergttl sielee Cla'iiiitt tif lie Freedorii of Iifornilion Act Aiendiets tld the l'rivacy Act ;llie titlc coyet-pt

512 

is very sound, and It Is incumbent upon us to make the Acts work as they were intended. Several of my own constituents, who have submitted requests for access to In-formation they believe is contained in FBI files, have found it wholly unreason-

able to be told that it will take nine months for the processing to begin. I would 

have to agree that not only is this delay unreasonable, it is totally unacceptable in view of the statutory requirement for processing uew requests within ten days of receipt. Perhaps the most malignant aspect of these delays is that they perpetuate the public's fear of our law enforcement and intelligence agencies. The revelations of the FBI's illegal domestic counter-intelligence activities, and their invasion of people's privacy and abuse of civil rights, has left an unfortunate atmosphere--one which must be cleared. Long delays in responding on Freedom of Information and Privacy Act requests tend to give the impression-real or imagined-that the FBI Is "stonewalling"-intentionally withholding material that might prove embarrassing. I am sure that you are as Interested as I in eliminating all basis for this view. In order to find the most effective ways of coping with the influx of requests. and eUminitIng The present, unacceptable nine month backlog, several of my colleagues on this Sulommittee, and on the House Government Operations Sub-coremittee on Government Information and Individual Rights, have joined me in asking the General Accounting Office to look Into the matter and make legisla-tive and administrative recommendations. This study, in concert with hearings by this Sucomnmittee and your cooperation, should provide an effective vehicle for defining the problems and planning corrective measures. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. DODD. The current backlog indicated to the committee is totally 'Lnacceptable. And I suppose that the most serious question one would raise to the backlog is not so much the inconvenience to the requester, but what this could mean in the minds of the people that are making the request for information in terms of the feeling about our intelli-gence community. So I would certainly hope that every effort will be made to bring the backlog up to date. Let me ask you a serious question, if I may. You know, I presume, that some of us on this committee and the Government Operations Committee have requested the General Accounting Office to conduct astudy of the FBI process, its practice in responding to the freedom of information request. I wonder if you might tell us whether or not the records that you keep are in such a manner that would enable the General Accotnting Office to determine the time spent at each step of the process of responding to FOIAI Ur. PowvMg. Yes, I believe so. Mr. I)oDD. Then you will be able to determine that based on the records you keep? Mr. PowERS. Yes, sir. Mr. 1)ODD. I received, as did Father Drinan, quite a few letters from constituents. Would the present backlog of FOIPA requests to the FBI be eliminated with the present staff? I wasn't sure of your re-sponse. Would the present staff of the FOIPA section be able to cope with the current influx of-what is it,-the 55 or 00 requests you are getting dayI Mr. POWFRS. Yes, it would. Mr. DODD. You feel you would be able to handle itI 

Mr. POWERS. I do. And if I may-and perhaps I am doing a disservice to the section which I am here representing today when we are talking about delay-I can understand the concern of those who have written in and have not received a prompt response. I share that concern. We are con-513 cerned also. And I certainly don't want to leave any impression that we enjoy or that we are being dilatory for any other reason other than just an overwhelming number of requests. We are trying to do what we can and making a sincere effort. And we would be in a much better position in the FBI if we were able to respond within 1-day or 2. 

depending on the volume of requests. As a general rule it goes right back on a no-record response. I look forward to that day. Certainly that is what we are striving for within the section. And I don't want to leave any impression that what we are doing right now is intentional, because it certainly hurts us, there is no question about that. Mr. I)ODD. I understand that, Mr. Power.. I know you don't want to leave-that impression. But unfortunately the impression exists. And something has got to be done about it. I wonder if you might tell me whether or not you have a system by which at the time of initial request there is an immediate examina-

tion of the files to determine whether or not any information exists on that individual or not, an instant check, or preliminary instant check? Mr. PowERs. Yes; to determine whether there is or is not a record. And if there is no record, then we do respond to that individual, and so tell him. Mr. DODD. Iow long does that take? Suppose you take a request and find out there is nothing there, how much time does that take? Mr. PowFs. We are trying to do that within 10 days. And we have reorganization underway now that will improve that so that we can do it in I (lay or 2. Because the volume of mail being received, not only with requests but everything. attendant thereto, with the increase in personnel we hope to reorganize and have a group or unit doing noth-In but just responding to that incoming mail. Mr. DloDD. What I am getting at, if you make an examination ini-tially of the various files--and there are some 59 million headings, I understand Mr. PowERs. When a request comes in, and we make a search and there is no record that--Mr. DODD. Is there an initial preliminary search? Mr. Powrams. Yes, that is the first step. Mr. DODD. Not going into the specifics of what the information is? Mr. POWERs. Right. Mr. DODD. How long a time does it take? Mr. Powms. Just a few (lays to make that initial search, and then afew dais to get the communication back to the individual. Mr. DODD. Of the 14,50 or so requests made to the FBI in 1975. do you have any indication of how many of those requests indicated that there was no information at all on the individual request? Mr. PowERts. We have gone over-and of the total number of re-(, ests-I don't know the particular number duringg that year, b,,t of tl w total number of requests--there are about, 24,000 or 2.r.000-- -about one-third was a no record. Mr. I)ODD. According to the Department of Justice Annual Report dated March 15, 1976, the FBI received 14,000-plus FOIPA requests during the calendar year 1975. Did you nean lou receive(I actluallv more than that, but these were the only ones there was information on? Mr. PowF.Rs. No. Of the J3,875 received during calendar year 1975. about one-third had no record. 514 Mr. DODD. Do you have any indication as to how it is going to be this year? Mr. PowEis. Yes. Quite heavy. In fact, we averaged about 55 a day in 1975, and we are averaging about 73 a day this year, which is not really a true figure, because we had two extremely heavy weeks in June. The average was running about the same, about 55 a day this year. But the two heavy weeks we had in Jun6 upped that average consider-ably. There is an exhibit that states that, and it gives the receipts by week. Mr. Don)n. This would indicate, then, that this is not something fhat is going to d ie away. What did you attribute that to? Do you think this is an indication of the kind of load that you will expect as more and More people become aware of their right to have access to this infor-ination? Or do you think this figure is going to stabilize and level out and top off? Mr. PowjEits. Well, I would anticipate that the number of requests woid decline, at some unforeseen time in the. future. I would antici-pate, Iased on last year, and the receipts this year, other than those 2weeks, that they would have averaged at about 55 a day. Mr. DODD. That the theory under which the FBI is operating, that this is going, to drop oil', that the people are just taking advantage of something that, is new,'aqj wlen the interest (lies rdowii that-tie reqllests will (1ie dIowNl, i" 11 dt. the prestimption that exists at the F,'BI, overall, about the act? M[r. lPow'its. Well, the assigneitnt of personnel that we have to the section is ol the assumption that the caseload is going to continue as it. is right now, other than those 2 weeks at the rate of 55 a day. We  

> c,ii

handle that and make a good inroad into the backlog. And then if anything in the, future happens so that the requests decline-Mfr. 1),)1m). Is that just your personal guess, or is that a philosophy which exists ini the BIl for the fI1ture? Mr. I,,wEts. Our philosophy is to assign personnel to do the job as indicated by tho number that we have assigned. If the requests drop off to 1i)th~i'i fr" thle month of August., it would allow us to get. into' the lbacklog that much more deeply. Mr. I)om). What I am trying to get at is this. If the attitude is stch in the FBI today that this is something that is nly going to go on for -nother, maybe,'4 or 5 years., and after that thi t)iing will (lie diown, the people aren't going to bother with the request.,-nd that i dientes a certain kind of procedure to han(lle this intd of load that exists todav-if the attitude is such that one )elieves t hat this is going to be a('olt inuing situation, where people are going to tnlIce requests ai1d nmore          

> tin(I more people become aware of this ne(t. 1lien

Ioii hne to apply the standard and set lip a procedure for a bojig- r, ljur opj0l tir)t1l ii, t he future. Mr. 1towm s. With the amount of personal('! it hasn't leel tfle idea or llief that it is going to (lie out. It will not for it long. lono, tine. And if it were not, we would not have assitrln[l tle Sit)stu,iit :,l -,1auint of personnel that we have to it. his will iw wiI ii, s for a loia, iong timel, there is no (loulbt in my mind. Auid I hai is our feeling and pitil)sop yjind belief in the Bureau, we just don't foresee at alyi etime1 i Itiv, fNtre that it will (lie. 

Mr. Dom). Correct. me if I a1 wrong. bi t as I understand, it now. 515 when the inquiries are made on behalf of people, and if confidential material appears in the requested file, is it then referred to the Intelli-gence )ivision by the FBI. Mr. PoNRS. If it is classified information, yes, it would be referred to the Intelligence Division. Mr. DODD. And they make the decision in the Intelligence Division as to whether or not that information call be released or not? Mr. PowERs. As to the classified aspects-we arc the final arbiters in the FOIPA section as to everything else, but as to the classified nature-Mr. DODD. They make the decision in that particular section? Mr. POWERS. Correct. Mr. DODD. Now, do you think that we might be able to train FOIPA section people who might be able to do th-at step? Is there any reason that by proper training you could cut out that step entirely ? I presume it is going to be time consuming. Mr. POWERS. Well, it is going to be time consuming whether we have it on the fourth floor where they are located presently, and if it is done down there by a group of personnel, or if that group of person-nel is brought into the FOIPA section. It needs to be done. And by having those with the expertise in that particular area, we believe that the job is done faster by having them do it, individuals who have more familiarity wvith the overall nature of the information. Mr. DonD. 'That is because your own people are not trained in making those kinds of decisions that the Intellirenc, )ivision can make ?Mr. Pow-RS. They are already trained; they have allocated the per-sonnel, and they are doing the job. Mr. DODD. I am just trying to suggest a possible way of cutting into some of the backlog. When you are shuffling pal)ers around from one division to another it is time consuming. By the time you send some-thing to one division and get a lepSJ)0flS and it cones back, it takes time. You could save time on that one. You nmav be correct, that yoll could possibly train the FOIPA people to nake those kinds of (eci-sions. But certainly you could save ti ie by. having your own section people make those determinations if they had the proper training. Mr. PowFRs. I don't really think so, because the only time we would be talking about would be the actual t ransinission,' the nimessengers bet ween floors. And I think it would reailv he mininil in nature, because then tlie work has to be done, NN.)et lie it is brought into a room right next to you on the floor and (hle t here or so omewlhere else. Mr. )OD. W\hat special training do the FO)II.A section people have Mr. 1Pow'ERs. We have a week of initial training when they come in the section, including on-the-job training. And wev go over the act and the evolution of the act to date. Al then close supervision thereafter. Mr. DODD. And that first session is all 1 week on-the-job training )lhis going over what the act says and mean., and so forth? Mr. Pow+As. Right. And actually how documents are excised, and  

> (AOIncr

into t le court decision, find where we are right. now. and what constitutes a certain violation, and what constitutes a certain exemp-tion. and how it should be applied, and what to look for. And it )oils down to really that the bottom line would be tlie judgment of the in-dividiial. an awareness of what to he looking for, particularly in the area.c o f 1)rivaey, which causes us so much concern. 516 Mr. DODD. That is all that week period? Mr. PowzPw. Right. Mr. DODD. And after that you have close supervision? Mr. Powm. And conferences, weekly conferences with the person-nel. And then, remember, in our par ti(u ar section that we have, we are really broken down into teams. So there would only be five or six on. a team under the immediate supervision of a special agent to provide closer supervision and continuing training. Mr. DODD. Do you have a specific training schedule that you use for every person that comes in? Is there a definite training program? In printed form saying that this is the training schedule? Mr. PowFraS. We have a general outline in that area, but it has changed as those who have been on the job suggest where they feel that further training in a particular area would have been ef value. Mr. DODD. I ask that that schedule be submitted for the record. Mr. EDWARDS. Yes, without objection that may be received and made a part of the record. Mr. DODD. May we have that, that printed schedule that you have? My time has expired. 

MNfr. EDWARDS. Mr. Powers, how many cases do you resolve in an average day and solve and mail the stuff out? Mr. PoWERs. If we do just perhaps work on the average case and I could tell you exdctlv what the average case would be, weave found thatthe analyst can close about two cases a week-now, this is not on any record, but the actual completion of a case, and all that is attend-ant to it, and getting that case out to a requester-between one and two cases per analyst per week. And we have 90 analysts at the present time. That is going to be increased. The problem in trying to project this over any period of time is that there have been very few instances in the past 6 months when we have not been forced to pull off analysts to one court special or another. And aside from the requests that take periods of time from a week to a month and the few instances where there was no real special (liversion and they were diverted, the average that we had found was that an analyst can do about 100 to 110 pages a (lay of processing of documents. Mr. EDWARDS. That is somewhere in excess of 15 cases a day that you are resolving? Mr. POWV.Rs. We are talking about 90 cases a week that we are doina, or between 350 and 400 a month. And that is why with the number of requests comina in, we are just about equaling the number cominr in with the number we are closing. Mr. EDwuRns. You are fallin( further and further behind then. if the requests keep coming in at theasame rate? Mfr. Pnv.ns. At the rate that we have this vear. Of course with the increased personnel, no. it won't. That will probably account for that. And it has dropped back slightly under that delu. that we received in ,Tune. And then with the inere based personnel, we should be able to gret into that backlog even more. It is qo difficult to Lgive you 11 n idea. be-

ai.se on the reouets you come cross there may be very little in-volved in. and those ean be handled very rapidly. And then if vo;i get a request that involves 10 or 15 volumes of files, it iq goin-, to take consideribly longer. And we have no way of knowing and looking at the n,,.nher of requests there, what they constitute, whether it may be only 3 docuiments, or 1 volume, or 10 volumes. And that is why-517 I am not trying to beg the question, but that is why it is hard to say just what that volume of work constitutes, those requests, that they are all relatively small. We do know in our project area--and we consider a project that is anything over 15 volumes, some of those can run up as high as 200 volumes. And that will require one individ-ual, an analyst, months and months to do, or longer than that. So for all intents and purposes the services of that individual are lost. Mr. EDWARDS. -You point out on page 1 of your testimony the cost, and you point out how much the House Committee on Government Operations estimated wrongly how much compliance with the act would entail in expenditures. And yet you do not put in your statement the net cost. You didn't put in how much you collected for providing this information to various people. Mr. POWERS. No, sir. I can get that exact figure for you, what we have collected. Mr. IWDWARDS. It would have been more realistic to put that in the statement, would it not, Mr. Powers? Mr. Pow!,Rs. Right. That money does go, of course, to the Treasury and not to the FBI. Mr. EDWARDS. But it is still a collection for the benefit of the tax-payers? Mr. PowERs. Yes, sir. I can tell you, though, that the amount col-lected in no way approximates the-expenditures that we have made. Mr. EDWARDS. I believe in 1975 you billed for $34,000, and collected that less the $20,000 you waived for the Rosenberg search. Mr. PowFRs. Well, in salaries alone during the 3-month period on the Rosenberg case we spent over $215,000. And the only feks collected in that, since the search fees were waived, was about $3,000 for the number of pages we released to them. That was the only charge made. And that, of course, is not the typical case, but $3,000 was received as against $215,000 expended. Mr. EDWARDS. I think your statement should have provided that in-formation, Mr. Powers. knd also what your prediction will be on col-lections for 1976 and 1977. And I think your statement also should have provided, and you have agreed to provide for the committee, the breakdown of how many-what percentage of the inquiries have to do with domestic intelligence cases as opposed to criminal cases. And I think your statement should have made a prediction. which you state that you cannot make, as to how you are going to resolve the back-log, or what the recommendations are going to be to resolve the back-locg. I know we have been talking a lot about that. But in a nutshell. what is your prediction about the backlog? What is going to happen to it 2

Mr. PowF.ns. Well, as I say, I cannot really make any prediction. Iwould hope that with the increased personnel and all the other actions that we have taken, that barring any influx, unusual influx of requests. that we will be able to substantially reduce the backlog in the coming months. And we have received some relief, some court recognition in the Open America case, that has accelerated the proce.ing. If we re-ceive further relief in that area, with the increase in personnel, and some other just general in-house reorganization that we have made, which I believe will all go in a sense to improving our posture, I be-lieve that there will be a reduction. I don't think that we will within a518 ear, unless the requests would drop off drastically, reduce the entire acklog. I would hope so. But I sincerely feel, and it is our intention and goal, that there will be a reduction, and a fairly substantial reduction. Mr. DRINAN. Mr. Chairman. Mr. EDWARDS. I yield to Mr. Drinan. Mr. DRINAN. Just one suggestion, Mr. Powers. I think that every-body here, including yourself and your colleagues, would say that ayear is a reasonable time to bring the backlog of 8,400 down to zero or something very small. Mr. Chairman, I would suggest that we request from Mr. Powers and Mr. Clarence Kelley a plan for reduc-ing the backlog, including goals, timetables, and need for additional funds and staff. I would suggest that in the spirit of the FOIA you do that within 20 working days. Mr. EDWARDS. Will you be able to provide that, Mr. Powers? We would like to make that request. Or a reply, if you can't provide such a plan. Mr. PowERs. The plan that we have in mind for reducing the back-log? Mir. EDWARDS. Do you want to restate it, Mr. Drinan? Mr. )InNAX. Yes. I think that all of us would want to be able to say a year from now, say next July, that we have worked together as colleagues in government to bring about a plan by which the people of this country would have their rights satisfied under the FOIA. I sug-ge-st, Mr. Powers, that you and Mir. Clarence Kelley and other relevant people produce for this subcommittee within 20 working days a plan for reducing the backlog, including goals, timetables, and the need for additional finds and staff. Mr. Po)vwmits. Mfay I also include in that statement what action we have taken to date to try an(l arrive at that position? 

Mfr. 1)rINA. I think, Mfr. Powers, you have indicated that to(lay. Wlhat I am1 anxious for. an l I think the suli)committve is. is that we carry out our (ilty to seek to help the FBI to get rid of this back-log. We simply want a plan so tlat 10 months or 12 niontlis from now we CH11 proceed in an orderly way. It may be there will be some mis-calcnlatioil and inaolvertence. or'some other things will hal)pell. But you should iiiake those assumlptions; that so nany will come in a (lay. 

You should consider the contingency that 55 grows to a 100. and fioiire how many lyersolinel 'ou will nee(ld. We just want, in other word!(l, to 

carry out our oversight functions on the. implementation of the Free-doon of Information Act. M'r. IowiEits. I will make every atteni)t to (o so within tli,-we cal, but ti is will he difficult, proba bl within the time frain,, wVl ihl you set-once again, it will just )e 'taking personnel away froin (oing requests, which is almost what we are faced with in our court-ordered (leadlines. It will be (lone. lnt I think tlen we are not, going to tie basic problem tiat we are having. And that is in our conflictss lx-tween the two acts, because when we get. down to wha't. we are intendling to do oin tills in inplienientation of tfle act, and as it stands right now-now, not wlhat is going on before, but as it stands right now in the FOIPA section, our concern is for the privacy of the others. And there is hardly a tile in the "BI on which a request is made that just deals with tihet individual alone. And for us in or(ler to do what we feel 519 the Privacy Act calls for, which is a page-by-page, paragraph-by-para-gaph, line-by-line review-and there is no other way that that could Mr. DRINAN. I think we all know that. I just want a headline coming out from this subcommittee saying that the FBI and the Congress are working together to outline a rational plan over the next year to reduce the backlog. And right now if I were a reporter I would say that Mr. Powers, a high official of the FBI, refuses to outline a plan and refuses to give any guarantee that even within 12 months this act will be working as Congress intended it to work. Take your choice. Mr. Pow-Fis. Well, it is not a choice. I have indicated that we will be happy to comply. Mr. DRINAN. Are you going to comply with the subcommittee's request that the chairman has ratified, that within 20 working days we have a plan? Mr. PowLRs. Yes, sir; we will. Mr. EDWARDS. We will recess for 10 minutes to vote. [Recess.] Mr. EDWARDS. The subcommittee will come to order. Mr. Parker? Mr. PARKER. Mr. Powers, I have been listening to the questions this morning and to some of the figures which have been used. It is a little difficult to draw conclusions from those figures. But the prime problem raised is the reduction of the backlog. As I understand it, you have told us that it takes an analyst-and as I understand it further, it is the analyst who does the actual review of each request, is that correct? Mr. POWERS. That is correct. Mr. PARKER. It takes an analyst a week to finish approximately one to two cases. Mr. PowERs. Under optimum circumstances, yes. Mr. PARKER. If we use the figures of 55 requests a (lay-and I think you even used the figure today of 73 coming in in 1976-Mr. POWERS. Right. Mr. PARKER. But, the average in 1975 was only 55 a day, of which one-third, approximately, have no record, so we can deduct 18. That leaves us with 37 that do have a record. Times 5 (lays a week is approximately 185 cases a week. You presently have about 90 analysts, is that correct? Mr. POWERS. Correct. Mr. PARKER. Which means that the backlog is going up at the rate of about 90 or 100 cases a week? Mr. POWERS. Well, the backlog has progressed from 6,172 at the beginning of the year-it, was worked down to a little under 6,000. And at, the l)resellt time it. has increased to a little over 8,000. It is going uip. there is no question about that. And how much it will go up will depend not only on the number of requests being received, but how many other special things that may happen that require our taking away tie analysts froiii t ieir regular work on a case to handle a special project. Mr. PARKER. Htas your department done any kind of projections at all in terms of the number of analysts that will be needed to handle just the incoming cases? 520 Mr. PowxRs. In any projection there are many things that we can't take into account--cali them special cases--in the litigation and the court-ordered deadline. We have no idea how many of those may arise, and what impact that they will have on us, how close the dead-line may be. And I refer back to the Ro8enberg case again, when half the entire complement in the section was assigned for a 3-month period to that one request. And I point out that certainly is not typical, that is drastic. But we have a number of other cases. And I believe that Ihave in my statement that since April we have been working five or six individuals on one particular request to get out 4,000 pages amonth, and another one that we had to complete by the 25th of this month. So those are the ones that I can't account for. If we are work-ing under the optimum conditions Mr. PARKER. It is certainly clear that you are going to have peaks and valleys in terms of these special cases, like the New York case and some of the others. Have you given any thought to administra-tively dividing your section so that you *ill have whatever it takes to handle those 55 or 73 cases a (lay and work on the backlog, and then have some other unit, a special unit, which expands and con-tracts to meet these court cases. Mr. POWmRS. We have taken it into consideration in-the Open Amer-ica case, where we pointed out that we were in a sense running a two-track system in regard to project cases, those over 15 volumes, that we will have x amount of personnel assigned there, and the majority of personnel assigned to, for want of a better word, the routine requests coming in, the normal requests coming in. So that, they will at least move ahead a little faster. The only problem is that wve don't know, even with that system set up in recognition of not just assigning one voluminous case to each of the analysts-and then we wold really only say, we are working on 90 cases in the whole of the FBI from anywhere in a period of months, and each case would have a backlog. Mr. PARKER. On what basis do you presently make a decision on a project or nonproject case? Mr. POWERS. If it is over 15 volumes. Mr. PARKER. Would you explain that term. What do youi mean by over 15 volumes? Mr. PowERs. A file inay consist of a volume, that is the first volume, the first recording, the first record. And a volume, just approximately. consists of 200 pages. And just, from the size of it, to put anything more than that in, to give or take a few pages, just becomes cimmber-soie. Tlhen you would go onto volume 2. Mr. PARKF.R. So if it. goes to 3,000 pages, it becomes a project? Mr. POWERS. That is correct. Mr. PARKER. Does that mean that each individual might have some-thing mentioned about them on each of the 200 pages, or possibly only 1 of the 200 pages? Mir. PowEuR. It would not necesaarily be true that they would be mentioned on every one. Mr. PArER. It Just means that you have to read through. Mr. PowFRs. We have to read through each one, and we have no way of knowing.  

> M

r. PARK ".. You use a computer for certain kinds of information in the Bureau. "ou have certain personnel information in the computer 521 and you use a computer at the National Crime Information Center, and your CCH information is on computers. Has any thought been given to computerizing or automating any of the central files? Mr. PoWNS. If I may, I would like to let Jim Awe answer that. Mr. AwE. Yes, considerable work is in progress to automate our gen-eral indices. However, the indices are large, and it is an extensive proj-ect, it is the type of thing that will take time, that will make our opera-tion more efficient once it does become automated. And a considerable effort is going into this, to automate our entire record system as much as you can. Mr. PARKER. When you are talking about the indices are you talk-ing about those approximately 58 million cards? Mr. AwF. Yes. Mr. PARKER. How long would it take to computerize those? Mr. Awo. We think that within 3 years we will have a workable automated index. That will not include all of the 59 million cards. The cost factors alone wouldn't permit us to automate all of that. The state of the art just won't let you do it. Mr. PARKE . Assume for the moment that that is done, would that make the initial record check almost instantaneous in FOIA or PA? Mr. AwEg. Not necessarily, because the automated index will just lead you to a final number. But the file itself must be looked at. Mr. PARKER. Let me change the subject for just a minute to some-thing that came up this morning that piqued my interest when Father Drinan was talking about the time and trouble it took to get his own file. It appears that there are some basic conflicts between the FOIA and the Privacy Act. If I as a citizen write to you, to the FBI, and 

wsk for the file of Father Drinan, would I receive it under the FOlA? Mr. PowE s. I cannot give you a flatout answer "Yes" or "No" on that. And I think it goes right to the heart of the problem that we are faced with. My initial reaction would be, under the Privacy Act, cer-tainly not, not without the permission of Congressman Drinan. Mr. PARKER. What if I phrase it as a Freedom of Information Act request? Mr. POWERS. The nime would apply. The question that arises, and where our time comes in is in processing, is the question of whether it is an unwarranted invasion of pri%'acy, beause of the prominence of Congressman Drinan, would there not be an invasion of privacy perhaps with respect to some things therein, or if there was an invasion of privacy, would it be an unwarranted invasion of privacy. Mr. PARKER. If I requested the file on Mr. Tom Breen, who is amember of the staff of the subcommittee, would your answer be flatly "No"? Mr. Powras. My answer, and in the FBI, would be flatly "No." without permission from Mr. Breen. I do not know if that is t'he same in all agencies They may interpret differently in some agencies what is an unwarranted invasion of privacy, balancing the public right, and the public need to know, and the public interest. Mr. PARIUR. Liet me ask you further. Let's assume that you decide in the case of Father Drinan, because he is a Member of Congres-s and 

a prominent public figure, that there are portions of that file that you would release to me under a Freedom 6f Information Act request? The Privacy Act was really designed, as I understand it, for an 522 individual to be able to look at their file, update it and make sure that everything that is going to be disseminated in the file is accurate. Would you then notify Father Drinan that you were going to be disseminating portions of his file, and that he had a privilege under the Privacy Act to see if it was correct and that no erroneous inforina-t ion was being sent out? Mr. PowErs. No; I don't lkow that we would. And I would like Dick Dennis, the head of our Privacy Act unit to comment a little further on that. Mr. )ENN1s. On the Freedon of Information Act dissemination we would not have to check with the individual. It would be our decision. If Congressman I)rinan gave a speech and it was in his file, the qutestion would be, is thliat an invasion of privacy to give that out. he argument is that it, is. We would probably take time position that to give oit anytlling in the file would I)e an invasion of )rivacy. But if it is a 1'ree(ion of Informiation Act question we at. least consider touching )ase with the individual. Mr. HoWAmDS. how about Judith Exner, if somebody asks you about her? Mr. J)E,,NNis. 'Tme sane thing. If the information is a matter of public record, then that would enter into it, wletler or not it would constituted an invasion of her privacy. That is the position we would take in niost instances. But there may be public source informa-ion ill t lie file. Mr. EI)WARDS. But N'OU 1i 0iot Sill)Osed to be a collection agency of pliblic information. 'l'lIat is not inl the purvey of tle 1 riivacy Act. Mr. Bi-rr 4 yn. May I ask -a (que, stion? )o yol require anfy particillar standing for tim inquirer? 

I. I)E:',xs. I nder the Freeploi of In formation Act that is one of lite pI)Iblvls we have, that an (,ighth-grade st u(lent (-an come in and ask for the Io, ,buerq ca,,. and if lie hias time mnolmey to i)ay for 111, charges, lie , ets it tlhe same as a l)h. ). The act does not lif'erent iate between in(ivid uals. Mr. BUTLRii . I am talking aboutt the standing of the inquirer wlmen determining whether , Tdith Exuer hts achieved the prominence of 1, at lier 1)rinan so that hiis file would n'nde 'enerally a available to life public. Dloes th(e standing of tle inquirer Teiake any difference?   

> M1r. h:..txs.

No; it does not. Mm'. 1)mN.%.. Mr. Clairmian, I in ight sa" for the record that nmy file doesnt have an'thin" in it. You cati see ]Iow futile Ihe whole thing is. 

Mr. PAU Iul. 'Mv tinle has expired. 

i. E0t)w.% is. Mr. Butler. Mr. BU "LERn. I lhav'e no furi her questions. Mr. Er)w.ns. Mr. I)odd. 

Mr. DoD. Just a couple. If tlie regqjuester makes a ppl iea t ion for his file under the FOA. and certain information is with held from that file, is the requester notified at ti time t hat t li in fomi mat ion can he released, tie fact that there is 

alditional information that cannot be released? Mr. P'ow rs. Yes, sir. Mr. Down. They are notified that there is other material that c, nnot he released? Mr. PowFzns. Right. An1d the reason why it was withheld. 523 Mr. DODD. The broad reason under the specific exemption of the statute. Mr. POwERs. You would cite the specific exemption. And he is, of course, advised of his right to appeal. Mr. DODD. On page 5 of your prepared statement you state, talking aboit the personnel that are assigned to a particular section: "While most Special Agents assigned to FOIPA matters in the Bureau at Headquaiters would prefer field assignments more reflective of career interests, they have pledged themselves to implementation of the intent of Congress in their present assignment." Do you have any kind of rotation system? How do you know that most of them are unhappy IHave they stated such? have they stated on their application or questionnaire? Mr. PowERs. No, not in that manner. But we are a particularly close group in the FOIPA section, which is a relatively new section. Be-cause of the very nature of the work we have continuing and ongoing  

> ('onferenees.

There is very little established policy in this field. And I think that is why the continuing necessity for the conferences and the getting together. It is an extremely difficult job to do. I don't know just how to put it, but in talking about the FOIPA section at this particiflar time, I know of no other section within the FBI that is working as hard, I mean at night and on weekends, on a continuing basis. Mr. I)oDD. What is going to be done about that? You have got some people here who apparently are not happy about the fact that they are working iin the F()1lA section. Is there a rotation system whereby oyou will get them out of there? -Mr. PowERS. There will be a rotation system. But I did not intend-that that be interpreted in any way, about being unhappy, that it would in an wav reflect on their work: We would like to consider ourselves as professionals, and they will do the job, and they have a commitment to do it. As a very human factor, though, it is a difficult job. And Iimagine, yes, they will be happy when they can move on for other assignments, after they have done this one. Mr. l)oDD. But (o you have any intention, of putting in a rotation system? Mr. IPowERs. Oh, certainly, yes. I would assume, while we haven't gone into that in any depth, It in line with our regular career devel-opment program, that no one would stay there forever. And I would foresee th at. perhaps a 2-year stint or tour for an agent in that section 

would be long enough. Mr. )orm). One of the questions that I don't believe you really touched on is, assuming that there is a request, and there is a file that exists on an individual-and I realize that depending upon what kind of information in the file that the answer to the question is different, but given the normal file. let's say there is not any classified material-and we are not talking about the intelligence division, so there is nothing that would be exempted from the requester having access to it-how many people, or how many divisions or steps does that file have to go to before it is released to the requester, given the normal file without the intelligence division, deciding whether it is information that he or she could have access to; what are the steps, and how many people are involved in touching upon that problem? 524 Mr. PowF.Rs. The steps, if you are talking about something like that, in the absence of something unique, it would not go to any other divi-sion or anywhere else, that is the first step. And then the steps would be in reviewing the file, the file is Xeroxe(, so that based on theXerox copies a determination is made as to what is to be taken out and what will be left in-Mr. DODD. But is that all one person who is assigned to it? Mr. POWERS. We assume that it has been searched and now it is just handed to the analyst. Mr. DODD. And that is it? Mr. POWERS. That is it. And that individual just goes through. There is a research assistant to assist the analyst in making maybe Xerox copies of things. But in the absence Mr. DoDD. There is no additional screening process on that individ-ual decision, it is an analyst's decision to release that information? Mr. POWERS. Are you talking about supervisory review? Mr. DODD. Yes. Mr. PowERs. Well, in a typical case, no intelligence or classified in-formation, the analyst has a file, and reviews it, usually working in close conjunction with the team captain, who's an agent. It is then re-viewed by the team captain. The extent of that review will depend agreat deal on the knowledge and expextise of that particular analyst, that is, is it one who has been onboard for 3 months, or a year. From the team captain it goes then through a unit chief, who usually has four or five agents under him, for a modicum of review, depending on the complexity of the case, what may be involved, and any specific factors like that. But if it is just that routine case, it will then pass on either to myself or my No. 1 man, and that is it. Mr. DODD. So it goes from the analyst to the team captain, to the unit -what do you call it I Mr. Powzns. The unit chief. Mr. DODD. The unit chief-Mr. Pows. Right. Mr. DODD. In a normal case without involving anything else ?Mr. Pow-ins. Well, really if you are talking about review, three steps: not counting the analyst, four, if you do. Mr. DODD. Based on the request that the subcommittee has made for outlining some specific proposals to deal with the situation of backlog, is my understanding of what you have said correct, that the FBI is presently examining, one, the kind of information that is going to be 

collected in the first instance, the buildup in these files f

Two, how serious is the examination of the classification of docu-ments and the reexamining of tLat And then three, the point raised by counsel staff of the implementa-tion of the compilation of information, and flexible information ? Are you saying that that is something that we are ging to have to think about down the road, or is there something really going on down there that is going to see these considerations bear fruit in the-very short term, in the near future? Or is it something that is being bandied about I

Mr. Powris. This is something that has already been offered as in-struction for the field as far as those already engaged in investigation. Mr. DoDD. But it seems to me that in response to Father Drinan's 525 question you weren't real sure about the kind of information that is coming in today as opposed to what was coming in a year ago. Mr.Powms. That is an extremely broad question, because I don't see the information in a sense coming i right now. Mr. DODD. You must see the kind of information that is in the files. I presume you are reviewing it. Mr. PowiPs. But if we are talking, then, about a current file, it wouldn't be susceptible to review probably, because we would assume that it would interfere with a iaw enforcement proceeding, and it would not then have to be addressed as to implementation of the Pri-vacy or FOI Act right at that time. If it is an ongoing investigation, we would not have to look at it at that particular time. However, some court decisions suggest processing is required to identify any "reasonable segreable" information. Mr. DODD. My time is up. Thank you. Mr. EDwAm*s. Mr. Drinan. Mr. DNAN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Powers, I assume that you have read in the Washington Post this week four or five long articles. Have they been fair to the FBI I

Mr. Powzn. I have not seen anything unfair-I can't recall the articles in total-I can't recall any specific thing. Mr. DIn Az. This article states that the Defense Department has processed 44,403 requests with no backlog whatsoever, and that DOD 

Ithe policy of releasing more things even where there is a doubt. Apparently DOD has the best reputation of any agency in town. Why is the FBI so far behind when the DOD can process those things and keep upI Mr. Powm. Well, let's assume that we are not deciding that that is an accurate figure of what DOD is processing. One, I do not know what they consider to be a request. I have no idea in that light. Now, just to finish that up,I think the second most important thing is, I have no idea what type of record that they are referring to.I can only speak for the FB3f And in connection with our records, and our performance, it is doubtful that we would be able to match that. I don't know if you are talking about the difference between apples and oranges. If we are talking in the same general area, then I would be most happy to get together with the Department of Defense officials and see if they have any system or methods which we might be able to use. Mr. DWrTAN. Coming back to the FBI directly, Mr. Harold Tyler, Deputy Assistant Attorney General, was quoted as saying "What has been allocated now to the Freedom of Information section is more than a general allocation of resources." That seems to be a vari-ance from your testimony. Mr. Tyler said that you have got these people, Mr. Quinlan Shea stated that is what you have got. I don't hear that from you. You have promised us that you are trying to undo this backlog. Yet it is going up to a 100 a week. is that a contradiction, yes or no? Mr. Powzs. On the contradiction I would have to direct you to Mr. Shea. I am telling you that we are going to increase. Mr. DRIN AN. Mr. Harold Tyler said that what you have got now is generous, there is no way you are going to get a new allocation of resources. That is the way the Washington Post reports it. Who's right I92- 629-77-34 526 Mr. PowERs. I am telling you that we are increasing. Mr. I)IIIAN. Then he is wrong, or he is misquoted. Mr. POWERS. I will have to fee. Mr. DRIN-AN. You have the duty to know, sir. If that is contrary to the authorized statement that you are making, that you are going to get more personnel and you are going to clean up this backlog, then you have the obligation to say Harold Tyler was misquoted or he didn't say that. Obviously he is the second in charge. Mr. POWF.RS. Perhaps Mr. Tyler was not aware of the increase which we have now, which was just recently approved. The only thing I can do is, if you will permit me to check on that and find out, all I can do is tell you that we are going ahead with that increase contingent upon the acquisition of space, and so forth, because it has been approved. Mr. DRINAN. If I may add a qualification, a condition to the report that I think we have agreed you submit in 20 working days, I would like to have the Department of Justice and Mr. Harola Tyler, or the Attorney General, say that they will back up the request or the commitments that the FBI will 11iake to us hopefully within 20 days. Now, on the question of appeals, there are now 500 appeals pending. It is my understanding that one-fourth or one-third of those come from the FBI. The FBI apparently is much more careful or scrupu-lous or wrong in withholding information. Do you have any comments on that? What group of cases or what group of petitioners go into court on appeal the most? Mr. PowEns. Well, I would prefer to look at it with respect to the appeals that are in your first two words, that we are careful and scrupulous. Mir. I)niXd\N. The courts aren't necessarily so fine. As I read the case law, they haven't so stated. They said that in one case that extraordi-nary circumstances were present. But that question has not been re-solved. The volume of cases that are being appealed from the FBI is extraordinary. I frankly almost thought of a appealing myself. I went -to a lawyer who specializes in this. I cold figure out with his help that all the information that was withheld was withheld on a very silly bxsis, that you could piece. together in fact what. was withheld. But other people may expect that they have a right. Frankly, I think the FBI was ridiculously scrupulous in cancelling out things here. For example, they sent. me a copy of an antiwar petition published in the Washington Post or the New York Times. They went through it and blanked out the names of other people who signed it-a public record in the New York Tilnes. That is on its face ridiculous. But has this question come up, that voi are inviting loads of appeals? Mr. Poiwi:its. What we are faced with--as I put in my statement, we can reject just going through and releasing everything without examining the documents. I believe we are careful and scrupulous. We intend to be so. I spoke about Mr. Shea before. And Mr. Shea has in-di('ated to us that lie thinks the FBI does an excellent job in the proc-f'ssiiig of documents. There has been evolution over a period of time in omr iiiderstanding and interpretation of the act andcourt decisions. 'l}ie're were soine things that were perhaps taken out a year ago for one reason or another. I would anticipate that there will be further VIVolution. We are trying to get to that point, that we are doing every-thing possibly we can to implement the actwithout affecting any vital Government interest. We hope we are working toward that end. 527 Mr. DRINAN. Is this the position of the Department, that Quinlan Shea said he would like to have a flat exemption for investigative rec-ords in the current law, including the ri ght to not necessarily admit that we have such a file? Is that the official position of the Department of Justice, that you want to narrow and weaken the law? -Mr. PoWERS. Not narrow or weaken the law, but with respect to the particular thing in an ongoing case, that we would just have-there would be a flat exemption. Mr. I)rnhA,. Is that the official position of the FBI? MI. PowERtS. That would be of major assistance to us. Mr. lRrNAN. In other words, you are pushing that? Mr. PowF.Rs. In connection with an ongoing investigation. Mr. 1)RuxAN. What about including the right not necessarily to ad-mit, you have such a file? M1r. Pownits. There are instances, which I have put in my prepared statement, that a procedure to that effect would be of immeasurable help. Mr. DRINAN. It would be beautiful if you could say we don't have a file on the American people. Mv time has expired. I look forward to the reporting within 20 work-ing (lays. Thank you. Mr. E)w.kn)s. Mlr. Powers, what would you do under the Freedom of Information Act, if you get a request for your files on Lou Gehrig and "Babe" Ruth, both'deceased athletes, what is your next step? Mr. Powins. At the present time it appears that we will have to process such a request, and that certain portions of that file, if we do have such a file, mav be released. It will then boil down to a question as to what may an(l what may not be an unwarranted invasion of privacy. M~r. IDWARDS. So you would release the information. But, if a pri-vate citizenn wrote in and said, please send me the criminal records of Lou Gehrig and "Babe" Ruth, you would say that your regulations prollibit that ?lr. PowvEns. I'n sorry, Mr. Edwards, I don't-

Mr. lE]n)w.uN s. Well. time criminal rec-ords are l)lic records, the ar-rest re.or(1., conviction records of the people, those are public records. But. the dissemination thereof, of which there are a collection at the 

F111 hea..qiarteis-thev are confidential insofar as private individuals are (1on.,0ned, you cannot write in as a l)rivate citizen and ask for my crimiinal record-you could write but the FBI would say: "No, I am not troin to send it to you. we are not in that business." And yet I can't tiinlerst.and. mider the Freedom of Information Act you can send out information th.at you have collected about other American citizens that might )e derogatoryy. Mr. 1'wNMs. I don't know if I can take your first premise that that is true. That is the problem that we are faced with. I mean I cannot give a specific answer now. If someone writes in and asks for a record of a Coni.v(-sman. tien what we are faced with then is, with respect to certain information, if there is any in the file, would the release of that Ix, an unwarranted invasion of privacy. If the particular prominent individual involved did have an arrest record we will ask, since it is in a sense a public record. would the release of that be an unwarranted invasion of privacy to that individual. 528 Mr. EDWARDS. You wouldn't release it? There are some laws in cer-tain States that would make it a crime. Mr. Powxns. Right. But it would be something that would have to be looked at, I mean it would not be a flat out "o." And, specifically, when we are not talking about a deceased but a living individual, we would go to that individual and ask him to seek the authority of the person about whom they are requesting the record. Mr. Dennis would like to add a word to that if lie may. Mr. DENNIS. Could I just add, if an individual wrote in and asked to have an arrest record of the Rosenberg's, we would probably give that out. Mr. EDWARDS. Not under your guidelines you would not. Mr. DENNIS. We have already given it out wider the Freedom of Information Act, under instruction from the Department. And to go on down to whether or not Tom Breen has an arrest record, under our procedure we would not do it. But the invasion of privacy goes all the way from the Rosenberg's down to Tom Breen. And under the Freedom of Information Act, in a balancing of the public need to know versus the right of privacy, does the public need to know what is in the files of the Rosenberg's. The Department says yes. Mr. EDwARDs. That is quite a judgment to ask you people to make. Mr. DENNa. That is is what I am saying. Mr. EDWARDS. I wonder why you have not had meetings with the Department of Defense and the CIA at the middle or high level to try to determine what their policy is. Mr. PowERS. We have had meetings with a number of other agen-cies Mr. Edwards. Nr. EDWARDS. I am afraid we have to go. Unless there is objection, we will terminate these hearings now. Thank you. Mr. DINAN. Thank you. And I want to thank you, Mr. Powers. And we look forward to hearing from you. Mr. EDWAVS. We all thankyou. I think we are discussing the subcommittee visiting your shop per-haps next week or the week afterward to get an idea as to what your problems are. Mr. PowmS. We would welcome that. [Whereupon, at 11:50 a.m., the subcommittee adjourned subject to the call of the Chair.] FBI OVERSIGHT Freedom of Information Act Compliance by the FBI and Plan To Eliminate Backlog THURSDAY, SEPTEMBER 16, 1976 HoUSrE OF REPRESENTATIVES, SUBCOMMI-frEF ON CIVIL AND CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS OF TIlE COMMITrrEE ON THE JUDICIARY, 

Washington, D.C. 

The subcommittee met, pursuant. to notice, at 9:05 a.m., in room 2226, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Don Edwards [chairman of the subcommittee] presiding. Present: Representatives Edwards, Drinan, and Butler. Also present: Alan A. Parker, counsel; Catherine LeRoy, assistant counsel; and Roscoe B. Starek III, associate counsel. Mr. EDWARDS. The subcommittee will come to order. Good morning. Today we continue our oversight hearings which we began on July 29th, looking into the compliance of the Federal Bu-reau of Investigation with the Frcedom of Information and Privacy Acts. At our previous hearing on July 29th, we requested the Federal Bii-reau of Investigation to prepare for us a proposal relative to Freedon of Information and Privacy Act requests which would specifically address itself to the means of disposing of the existing backlog of such requests and additionally be able to handle on a current basis the in-coming future requests. We asked that that proposal be prepared and presented within 20 working days. On August 26th, I received a letter from the Director, Mr. Kelley. which was distributed to all the members of the subcommittee awd which I will now enter into the record, unless there is objection, in-forming me that the proposal would be completed on September 1st and forwarded to the Department of Justice on that same date. [The letter referred to follows :1           

> UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF-JUSTICE, FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVEST 'ATTON,
> Washington, D.C., August 26, 1976.

Hon. DON EDWARDS,              

> Chairma"n, Subcommittee on Civil and (rostitutfonal Rights, Committee on the Judiciary, House of Representative, Washington, D.C.

DEAR MR. CHATRMA: Your Subcommittee requested during the testimony of Mr. James M. Powers of this Bureau on July 29, 1976, that the FBI submit aproposal relative to the administration of Freedom of Information Act requests. This proposal was to specifically address mean. of disposing of the backlog of such requests. Due to the complexity of the problem In drafting such a plan, It will not be possible for the FBI to complete its work on this project until Sep-

(529) 530                                          

> tember 1, 1976, at which time it will be forwarded to the Department of Justice for their review and forwarding to the Subcommittee. Ihope you can understand the problems which make necessary the delay in the submission of this proposal. Sincerely yours, CLARENCE M. KELTLEY, Director.

Mr. EDWARDS. Today we have invited representatives of both the Departnment of Justice and the FBI to be here with us this morning to discuss the proposal and its implementation. I would also like to enter the proposal into the record, unless there is objection, andA we can then proceed to discuss it. Our witnesses today are Quinlan J. Shea, chief of the Freedom of Information and Privacy Appeals Unit of the I)epartment of Justice; L. Clyde Groover, section chief of the budget and accounting section of the finance and personnel division of the FBI; Jiames M. Powers, section chief of the Freedoin of Infornation- Privacy Act section of the records management division of the FBI; and Michael L. Ilanigan of tle Freedon of Information-Privacy Act section, records managenient division, FBI. Gentlemen, we welcome you and thank you for your diligent efforts in rearingg and forwarding to ustlhis proposal. 

Mr. Drinan, (1o you have a statement?    

> Mr. J) uNAN.

I liank ilese gentlemen for coming. I anl particularly pleaSed to C(e MI. Quinlan Slea ]here with whom I have had associa-tion for nianv years. I look forward to their testimony.  

> Mr.

Enw.1ims. Gentleniamn, we welcome you, and will you raise your right hand to be sworn? [Witnesses duly sworn.] 

Mr. Elmw\ms. We welconm you. I believe tlat M\r. Shea has an opening statement. Mr. Slea, you may proceed. TESTIMONY OF QUINLAN J. SHEA, CHIEF, FREEDOM OF INFORMA-TION AND PRIVACY APPEALS UNIT, DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE, ACCOMPANIED BY L. CLYDE GROOVER, SECTION CHIEF, BUDGET AND ACCOUNTING SECTION OF THE FINANCE AND PERSONNEL 

DIVISION, FBI; JAMES M. POWERS, SECTION CHIEF, FREEDOM 

OF INFORMATION AND PRIVACY ACTS SECTION OF THE RECORDS 

MANAGEMENT DIVISION, FBI; MICHAEL L. HANIGAN, FREEDOM OF INFORMATION AND PRIVACY ACTS SECTION OF RECORDS 

MANAGEMENT DIVISION, FBI; AND RICHARD M. ROGERS, DEP-UTY CHIEF, FREEDOM OF INFORMATION AND PRIVACY APPEALS UNIT, OFFICE OF THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY GENERAL, DEPART-

MENT OF JUSTICE          

> Mr. Stii:.\. 1Mr. (Ih'ira'n and members of the committee.

I am Quiin-lan J. Shea..Jr.. ,'liif of tlie Freedom,i of lnfiiiination i nl Privacv \i)-

pealds (Tlit, ()flice of tile I)v it)1 v Att,-'e" (I,,eral. lin aciulip'llivil 

1)y nivN delptv, 'Mr. Rieliard Rogers. I appreciate the opportunity to appear before you today on behalf of Attorney General Levi to 'oin-niefnt on the l)lOl)OSa I l)r(,1)are,1 by the F4ederal Birean of Investiga-tion at your request. That proposal, itself, recites the ninagnitide of the administrative burden which has befallen the Burea in the area of Freedom of In-531 formation Act and Privacy Act operations. It also recites the totally unforeseen commitment of resources in this area that has already been effected by Director Kelley. As we all know however, not even this very generous commitment of resources could keel) pace with the increasing magnitude of the problem. The Bureau's proposal is a sincere and conscientious attempt to formulate a plan to clear up the large and growing backlog of un-processed requests and to achieve a posture in which incoming requests can be processed efficiently. The 1)epartinent of Justice has considered the Bureau's proposal as thoroughly as the constraints of time have allowed. We continue to agree totally with its basic premise that the sensitivity and importance of many of the Bureau's records mandate careful review prior to re-lease, in order to insure that no vital interest of the Govermnent is compromised. Onco that premise is accepted the only real question remaining is whether the various assumptions as set forth in the proposal are valid. The most inipoitant of these, are the number of requests that will be received, the number of pages that will have to be reviewed and the processing rates that can reasonably be expected to be achieved. We in the departmentt are satisfied that, t4tke together, t, these assumpl)tions are a reasonable projection of what the future is likely to bring. Against this background, the Bureau's conclusions beconie a imatter of simiiple, inexorable mathematics, coU pled with what we believe is avalid apportionnment between structuraLreorganization and tw temn-porary diversionn of personnel to this area of operations. The current budget for fiscal -year 1977 includes some $3.4 million for direct FOIPA operations. I add parenthetically that that is for the Bureau. To accomplish the goals of the proposal, it. will be necessary to divert additional personnel resources to this area and the total esti-mated cost for fiscal year 1977 will be $11.8 million. Again, that is only for the FBI. Maifesting his own pereepln of the importance of the lro)osal and collvilme(l thlat tilere is iiternati ' to it, lie(.tor KeIlev lim., 

already initiated certain prelifihary phases of the plan. The Depart-ment of Justice supports the Bureaus proposal-drastic situations require equivalent remedie--and we will seek the requisite authority to submit to the Congress a request for any necessary supplemental appropriations for fiscal year 1977. What the I)epartment does not accept is the projection of the FOI/ 

)A. 1)rancllh into the imndefinite futture. at an estiniate( noninflation adjtisted cost of $6.4 million per year. We are committed to the maxi-mum practicable release of departmental records, but we simply cannot accept the proposition that such a continued expenditure of money and the full-timra activities of almost 400 persons are appropriate. "when weighed - ainst the other important missions assigned to the FBIT. 

We be'lite that there is a e tter long rangsouinarsnbl reformulation of the access provisions of tloese laws in light, of the peculiar and complex considerations presented by records created and maintained for law enforcement rp, in the alternative. sep arate statutory provisions governing access to such records. Mr. Chairman, this subcommittee had already expressed a willing-

# BEST COPY AVABLE, 532 ness to explore with us these matters of mutual concern and we are most appreciative of that fact. We hope that our willingness to support the Bureau's proposal, at least for fiscal year 1977, will be accepted as proof of the present commitment of the Department of Justice to responsible openness in Government. Our department accepts without reservation the proposition that the American people are entitled to know, to the greatest extent prac-ticable, what their Government is doing, how it is doing it anct with what results. We assert with equal vigor, however, the proposition that so-called openness which impedes legitimate law enforcement processes does not serve the American people well and is contrary to their interests and desires. On a number of occasions, Deputy Attorney General Tyler-who is responsible by delegation from Attorney General Levi for the day-to-(lay operations of our department in this area-has offered both per-sonallv and through his staff to join in a reasoned and constructive mutual effort to identify the principal sources of administrativeburden under these% statutes with a view to modifying those which provide no comparable public benefit in the area of records compiled and main-tained for law enforcement purposes. On behalf of both Attorney General Levi and Deptity Attorney General Tyler. T renew that offer today. There are certainly areas in these two statites which could he clarified. One is the extent to which privacy considerations should or should not preclude releases to third-party requesters. The third-party privacy area under the standards of unwarranted and clearly unwarranted nvasions of personal privacy has turned out to be incredibly complex and time-consuming. Another matter war-ranting clarification is the preiise quantum of information actually eontempilated by the last sentence of section 552(b) requiring the r(-lease of any reasonablv seareoahlall ion of anv requested record. The ren conabli svrep gbll provisi ot nires the total review of rec-nrds within the s cope of a remieut, e .where there is no possibility of the, roleae of any significant inforniation from those records to'the 1artivular reciester. Other questions for consideration are whether we should have to admit the existence of an open. active investigation in order to claim the 7(i V ) vemt~nn: whether the prntection of the reputation of adead person is of any interest to our society at all and whether aree, aminnt ion of the fee provisions nf these tw'o satutes is not overdue. Should we he able to siubstitute "information" for actual "records." at least when it. would help to preserve the identity of a confidential Ts there a reasonable way to distinmiish--in terms of the applicnblp time lim;t.-between n request by. for example, an anti-Vietnam war nctivist for records we may have Pertaining to himself and a request encompasing thousands or tens of thousands of pages on some broad ul)ject of general interest? As this suibcommittee fully realizes, this list of topics could easily be expanded, but there is no need to do so at this time. In conclusion, the Department of Jstice supports the proposal of the Federal Bureau of Investigation for fiscal year 1977. During that 

# BEST COPY AVAILABLE! 533 time we urge this subcommittee and the Congress to work with our de-partment in reconsidering carefully the proper interrelationship be-tween two very important societal interests--openness in Government and the valid needs of the law enforcement process. That concludes my prepared statement, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Powers and I would welcome the opportunity to respond to any questions the subcommittee may have. Mr. EDWARDS. Thank you, Mr. Shea. The gentleman from Massa-chusetts, Mr. Drinan? Mr. DRINAN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you, Mr. Shea. Inote in the document that you sent to us here, the proposal to clear up this backlog, that a large number of files have been destroyed. My rec-ollection is it is in the area of a million. There are files, I understand, on 6.5 million Americans and most of them are not related to law enforcement at all. I read from the report, 1-4, from beginning to end, that the 6.6 million investigatory files en-compassed information concerning many who are innocent and many implicated by association only, including those who cooperated withI the Government as well as persons who may be brought to trial. A lot of these have been destroyed under powers that you feel you have. I read from II that, of these 6.6 million cases, 1 million have been destroyed pursuant to the authority of the National Archives and Record Services. Why didn't you destroy most of them ? It is just a ballpark figure here: 1 million were destroyed pursuant to authority, 1.7 million exist on microfilm, and 3.9 million are hardcase files. Mr. HANIGAN. Ourposition is that we would like to pursue the file destruction program. However, for the past year, as you know, we have been operating under a moratorium in cooperation with Congress. Mr. DRINAN. When did you destroy the million? Mr. [ANIOAN. '[he million had ben destroyed during the history of the FBI. Mr. DRINAN. Irow did you select the million? Why didn't you select another million ?Mr. HANIGAN. We pursue the regulations in agreement with the Na-tional Archives. It is their responsibility as well as ours to agree on which records can be destroyed. Pursuant to that authority, 1 million have been. Mr. DmlAN. What happened to that authority? Mr. ILANIOAN. That authority was temporarily suspended in agree-ment with Congress. Mr. DRINAN. What body of Congress? Mr. JANIOMAN. It was the minority and majority leaders of the senate. Mr. I)I.NA. What did they say ?   

> Mr. IIANI AN.

They did not wish to have any of the files destroyed. fr. DmRNAN. You sl,l(l not Capitillate to l,,,1iticians if you have the power. Why (lid you capitulate? If you had the inherent power to destroy 1 million. mavlbe there is another 3 million you could destroy. Mr. 1IANIOAN.. I think the 1)iretor felt it was a reasonable request. Mr. )RmN.wA. Well. he is wrong again. I read all of this ad we could goon this way for months anl months. 

Tf von ,lon't want to h, it. you don't wait to 40 it. If you really wanted 534 to do it, you could do it. For example, back in the days of civil rights and the freedom movement, the civil rights division needed extra help and attorneys from other divisions were temporarily assigned to civil rights. q-las the FBI requested the Attorney General to make stich teln-porary assignments during this crisis? Mr. 'owERS. I believe the Director has taken an extraordinary step already with respect to the overall plan and a reorganization of our )ersonnel right now is ongoing in an attempt to put us in a status or posture whereby we will be able to handle requests on a current basis. YouI say we do not want to do it or reasons could be thought up why we would not (10 it, but I want to point out that we have already cc'nimenced an effort to comply to the maximum extent that we can rig,.. jow. We have taken some aflirmative action in that regard. Mr. IJ1tINAN. You are asking for $11 million l)lus. In the recent budget request t hat you ma(de, how many additional funds did the FBI ask for this FOTA backlog and what happened to that? Yoi kiiev nontls ago that !tiis was a problem you had and it was lot, contrary to wlat Mr. Quilan Siea says, totally unforeseen. It was not on fore-eeln nor 1i1zforeseeable. What was the response of OMB a1d wilat halp)ened in the plppropriations committee? Mr. POWERS. The amount askeI for was $3.4 million for 202 em-l)1,*-vws and it was al)proved.  

> Mr1'.

I)UINAN. It was foreseeable then that that was much too small. Mr. Pwk:its. At that time the alocation of resources was felt to be a substantial diversion bearing in mind our basic mandted investi-

gat i ve f lict ion. Mr. l)INAN'. It is just totally contradictory. You did not foresee what ,'ou were Sul)los&.d to (1o under the law. You said well, we are not going to enforce that law. It was foreseeable at that time tlat $3  

> tiillion

was not enough if today you sciy you need almost $12 million 

to do it. You didnt, foresee tle needs, that is all. You are coming to us and saying we need this. I am prepared to recomineld a supplementary a lqn-roriation. All T ,an say is youi miscllcilate(1. Mr. Shea, do you have any t luoi,.,k on, that ?M1r..Si:.\. 'le oilv thomgit I have on that is one of, I think, per-Iaps frlustrat ioll wvocl,! Sinn it t1p ;]s well asanvtlhing else. We started in this a,'ea- --1 was ip) in thie civil rigfht- division and just before Mr. Silberman went to igoslavia. Ow li I:ist thing lie dii( was to recruit  

> line

-ild t he,. go. We really ant icil)ated that maybe the 100 al)peals of the lp)rior year would go to 300 or 400 the n'.xt year and I and maybe 

a sevretarv or two and a coul)ie of lawyers would handle all of "the appeals. 

A 300- or .100-percent increase wvs wlat we tlouglt. I ann now atthiorized. for just ail)oeals in the I)ep)rtmnent. a staff of 26 persons and T have a backlog on the appeal level. Every time we hiave tried to antieil)ate the fiiture, we have been wrong and we have been wrong in one direct iou. We have been low. The 1)iO0osil says we think that thef increase will-thle new requests will (.Olle il as they 1Lave come in in the past. The Septpiler issue of a newsletter sent. )y Amerieav Expres. to its 7 million carliol(lers tells them how to request their li 3 from the FBIT. 535 We have consistently underestimated. Mr. DRINAN. So you are agreeing with me. My time has been con-sumed. Mr. Chairman, I want to come back to that agreement, which I never heard of before, with the leaders of the Senate. 

I never heard about that. I thought this subcommittee had jurisdic-tion over this matter and here we are told, after two, or three, or four hearings on this matter, that they told you not to fulfill your statutory powers and destroy these records, many of which are useless. 

Mv time has expired. Mr. EDWAR)s. I'he gentleman from Virginia, MIr. Butler? Il. luu. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

I appreciate the testimony of the witnesses. It is my understanding our function today is to examine the report requested by this subcom-mittee outlining the proposal to eliminate the backlog. The Bureau was given only 1 month to carry out this extensive study and draft a proposal and I have reviewed it, and I want to compliment the Bureau for its thorough work in compiling the data. 

My real concern is whether the Federal Bureau of Investigation is still involved in law enforcement. How much further did we fall behind in processing requests during the time that went into prepara-tion of this proposal? I will not put you in the position of answering that, hut my con-clusion is that you have done a very good job in response to our requests. I think you are swimming upstream. I appreciate the problems yi 

> l]faV.

It s,,ivis to n that the prol)lemlis are going to grow. We have to work together and do the best. we can to cooperate with tle Bireau and see how we ean 1w, helpful to you in meeting your statutory ,quirements. 

I :1111 not upset al)out. the moratorium on file (lestrietion which was worked out with the leaders of the Senate. ()Oe question still lingers in my mind. Exactly how fast (1o you l)r'os. a particular request? 1),oes a lawyer have to view vach anti ev\ery request ?Mir. 1 rwmis. We fvel. sir. 1x-,ause of the cojnilxitie" ,of the two acts that at tlis 1)arlicdlir iioint in time. ye s. iving th:Int tvpe of abiakground is essential. As time goes on, and I believe it was- t forth in the plan, perhaps a reevaluation may be made at some time. But at this point in time, I honestly feel that it is essential. Sir. we have a number of meetings with Mr. Shea on a ,,,t inning bnsis. IwI)Ol(! not say daily, although thero are sone weeks that it is on a daily basig. with his associate, Mr. Rogers, personnel from the FOIIA see-tion at the FBI and we have a number of discussions aniong ourselvvs, the p rose and intent being to comply to the maximum extent possible 

with the acts. We have a number of reasonable differences, I would say, between both1 thce Department and the FBI and within the FBI, among agent lie-,munel. in interpreting how a particular exemption should, in a.e,e. e1. handled. It is extremely difficult. Mr. I I ME. Are you making any effort. to train what we would call 1)aralegals in the private sector to pursue this and assume this respon-5i1)ilitv? 

.fr. lPowrns. No, sir, not at this time. You could say that our analysts 536 

are now in that position. Hopefully, with the separation of the branch as we now envision it, between a pure disclosure section so that in-formation will get out in a rapid manner, and an operations section to support that function and look into the aspect you mentioned-some-t thing like that may be feasible at some future time. Mr. Buimt. Explain, if you will, the administrative appeal proc-esses. What prompts an administrative review and who can initiate one? Mr. Powrns. I will defer to Mr. Shea on that since it is with Mr. Shea's unit that that particular process occurs. Mr. SrzA. Did you mean administrative appeal to the Deputy At-t orney General, sir? Mr. Burr Yes. Mr. SirrA. The requester initiates the appeal. It can either be from afailure to get a response or it can be on the merits or it can be both. At tlat time, and we also follow the sequential process, the case is assigned to one of our attorneys or the paralegals. They go over and they review either all or certainly a very substan-tial representative sample of the documents that were wiiheld. After that, they draft a memorandum addressed to the Deputy Attorney General who personally decides every single one of these appeals with in the Department of Justice from all components, not just the FBI. al-though they certainly are my principal client. They are not my sole one. That memorandum-some of them are generic. Occasionally we will get a bunch of appeals that deul with different ramifications of a problem. I remember spending the best part, of a couple of weeks doing a memorandum to the Deputy on the ques-tion of third-party privacy considerations in the context of a historical interest case such as the Rosenberg and Hiss records. You have the feeling you are counting jurisprudential dancing angels by the time you get through addressing the societal intere-sts in-volved in that. The Deputy makes the call and then his decision is sent to the appellant. The appellant can go to court and many of them go to court first and that has turned out to be a contributing factor to the backlog. The court, understandably in light of the provisions of the statute which say give these cases top priority will do it. In the Meeropol case for Rosenberg records, the ureau to comply had to put something like 60 people on it and pull them off processing other reqtests to processing l osenberg case records. That sort of thing just wreaks havoc with any administrative system that you have set up. We also-I am also the Deputy's adviser on gen-eral questions in this area and try to assist him in every way that I can to oversee his responsibility from the Attorney General, which is to run this. Mr. Tyler's instructions to me are very simple. lie read these stabtutes and he said. in effect, it is loud and claar. Congress has said, release every record that you can. They have said that there ar, certain kinds of records that you may withhold but they h:ive also made it, clear that if vou don't have to withhold those rpeor. . they would prefer that they be released to the requ(esters and to the piulie. His instructions to me are to enforce the letter and spirit of that law. Mr. Br-,n. That is the basic policy on which you are proceeding? 537 Mr. Siiz. That is it, sir. Mr. Bunx. . Thank you. Mr. EDWARDS. The subcommittee asked for a plan and you have iven us a plan. And now is the Department of Justice going to ask or the money to implement the plan ?Mr. SHTA. Yes, sir. But I must say that I speak just for the Depart-ment of Justice. I can't speak for the Office of Management and Budget. Mr. EDWARDS. It is going to take 591 people in two sections, one using 200 agents to get rid of the backlog in the crash program and the other raising the 220 currently allocated slots to 391 to process incoming requests. That is roughly what it will entail. But I don't understand one part of your study. It says here on page 29 that slightly over 171/2 requests per-working day constitutes new material to be processed and yet on page 78 on the top you indicate that the backlog increases an average of 100.7 requests per week. That 171 requests per working day does not seem to me to be too much of a statistical urden. Mr. Powxns. Well, what we are talking about--Mr. Chairman, the 18 requests per day out of the number received are those that are going to actually be processed. That constitutes a little over 18,000 pages a (lay that need be (lone. In that light, rather than just the number of requests, gives you abetter idea of the volume of work involved. I think it may be well at this time to make a point, too, which I do not believe that I made at the last hearing with respect to the number of requests that we have received. There was some comparison with requests received by other agencies. Up to this point in time, we have considered it as Just one request when an individual writes in even though that individual may bx 

asking for, let's say, about 51 different people. If you gentlemen remember, at the time you visited the Bureau following our prior meeting, that was discussed. There can be and are a number of instances in that regard. While we say it is one request because it came in from one person, it could be for just that individual or relate to 5, 10, or in one particular case 51 separate things. Mr. EDWARDS. But you would receive, perhaps 75 requests or what-ever the average is--what is the average? Mr. PowEirs. Seventy-two requests per day. Mr. EDWARDS. But only 171/2 of them are going to entail work. Is that what you are saying I

fr. PowriRs. Of these 72--our average per (lay this year--35 percent, based on the review we have done, amounts to a no-record request; that is, we have-no record of that individual or whatever incident there may be in our files. Well, let's work on the basis of 100 requests being received. Of those, 35 are no record. Following that, 40 percent are thereafter closed on an administra-tive basis at the time we get to processing the request. We may find that the files reflected from the search are not identical with the individual requesting the record. At that time we would so tell him. Additionally, there will be instances where we have asked certain information necessary to even comply with a request, that is, sufficient descriptive information, other 538 administrative things ani no reply is made. If the requisite informa-tion is not re,(eived, they ar( not processed further. That amounts to 75 percent. Of every 100 we would actually be going forward and working on 25 percent -of the requests receive(. But even with that number, it puts us in the position that we are in now. Mr. Erw.%Ai)s. On page, 3 of your report, you describe the problem, that is the heading for that particular section. You don't really describe the I)roblerl to us so that we can ui(lerstand it as well as you can. We asked you at the last hearing for a breakdown of these requests, how mnylv (1onc in from, people in prism. how many are security cases, just names that you have in your fiehs of people, just security cases? Iow many are from different sources? )o you have that off the top of your lead? Where is the big brden. from scholars asking for all the information you have on the Communist P)arty, for example, which really would be very distressing to get that and I think you (1id gett hat request. Mr.S Yes. 

M'. EDWARDs. What are you going to do with that request? I hope you sent it back to him? MNr. Iow [Rs. I appreciate this opportunity. I was going to ask if-I might get this on the record. At the time you did visit us, we had the answers to the questions you asked during my prior appearance and we had ((one a sampling of 100 closed requests and, for the record, Iwould like to tell you that at that time of the 100 that we had 36 were of a security nature, 41-this will be percentage-41 percent were of acriminal nature, 10 were of personnel files--that would be applicants and bureau personnel requesting their files. Mr. EDwARDS. Bureau personnel requesting their own files? Mr. JPowuals. Yes, either former or current personnel or other Gov-ernment applicants. 

,M r. EIMWAm)s. What percentage? Mr. P,,wrt:s. "'Iell percent. These are in(lividtals reqjuesting their own files. Mr. Emnwmms. Are these FBI a,,ents? Mr. lPowEits. And FBI al)plicants also. Mr. En)wmms. Asking why they didn't get accepted. Mr. Pow ;us. Additionally, 2 percent were informants. individuals who had been infornauits plreviously anld were requesting information. E.leven percent relates to general" matters, material, administrative measutres, a wi(le variety of matters. 

Of the 100 reqIuests, 72 were from citizens, 6 were from attorneys acting for someone, 3 from scholars, 5 from the news media, 2 from Stu1(ents ail 12 from prisons.  

> Mfr.

l4mws. That was a breakdown of the 41 percent? Mr. lPow:its. No. that was of the 100 reviewed. Mr. 14hwrIIs. The gentleman from Massachusetts? 

Mr. DRII..N. Thirty-six percent were for security. How many relate to the domestic intelligence program? Mr. PIowirmts. I would have no way of knowing without the actual review of the files, which this survey did not include. Mfr. DuI.,.N. What harm would be done if you sent everything to their ? The law says that, and Mr. Quinlan Shea agreed. Why not 539 adopt the rule: When in doubt, let it out? Why don't you just take it all and send them? What harn would it (1o? All the Socialists are going to be asking for their information. What benefit is done in keeping it? Why don't you send it to every-body? It would be cheaper. Mr. PowicIts. I believe there are valid considerations here not only for danger to some individuals, but for those who have furnished information on a confidential basis and those that have assumed an informant's status.   

> Mr. DRINAN.

Putting aside the question of informants, take the thousands of people who are going to write in pursuant to the revela-tions regarding American Express. They are just ordinary people. 

Mavhe there is a file on them. Why don't you just take the file and senl it to them ? These are ordinary people like myself. You have sent a million away already to the archives. How many files (io you think are absolutely useless? If you sent a million away, 15 percent of all the stuff you have, how many more millions could you send a way with no casuaitiea to anybody?  

> 'Mr. POWF.RS.

Well, we will not know that unless we review the file. 

M r. l)i.x. Yoi sent a million away. Mr. lPowrits. The act requires that certain information not be released. Mr. Diti, N-A. When did you send the million away ?

Mr. ILANIGA.N. That was over the entire history of the FBI. Mr. IJRTNAN. You must have some norms. Why can't you use those. norms? Isn't that one of the ways to get rid-of th is problem? 

Mr. PowmEs. That would certainly be of assistance to us in the FOI section if the lilies were not there. rLaughter.] Mr. I)II,-AN. I am going to help send those files to the Archives or something. I don't know about the moratorium. That may or in ay not be wise. AII I can say is if you have some standards for the destruction of these 1 million files, there is probably another 2 million which can ho destroyed also. I believe the committees in the Senate will say go ahead. I think that frankly you can't come forward and ask the Congres for $12 million when you don't, give us any norms as to how many of thee (.C million files could easily and really should be destroyed. More than one-third involve s"-called national security." You say security and that, is a big, tight word as if they are all spies. It does not mean a thing. It just means that they were against the war. Mr. ITANITAN. Mr. Powers said that. more than one-third requests involved security files. le did not say more than one-third of the files of the FBI involve security matters. Mr. lu,,x. One-third of all these people bothering the PBI every day with requests involve security matters. That means that they are against the war or they wanted civil rights. Why don't you impound or (lost rov all those cases or send them out blanket With one-third of the 72 every clay, there shouldn't be any problem at all. If they are security, just send it by return mail. One-third of the problem goesaway. "Mr. IlANIOAN. We don't include civil rights investigations. That is an interesting point you nale. We (lon't consider civil rights investi-gations as security files. We have had a number of requests from the subjects of civil rights matters. W4 

Let's take a police brutality case. There-is a police officer who would like to have the names of all the witnesses and the statements of the victim and all the information so he can pursue whatever his own pur-poses may be. We have also had a number of requests from the victims in such cases. We don't consider, first of all, that that is a security investigation. It is a criminal violation which we pursue pursuant to the direction of the Civil Rights Division of the Department of Justice. Are you suggesting thatwe should release those in toto Mr. DUiNAN. Don't put words in my mouth. You say 41 percent are criminals. Why don't you carry out the guidelines of Elliot Richard-son who says if the file s over 15 years old, release it. Just send it out. Why do you need lawyers to review it? There is no -harm in sending it out. When in doubt, let it out. That is the whole thrust of the problem. Everything has to be re-viewed as if vou have some secrets there. It is a lot of junk that you have. for example, clippings from newspapers. Send it out. People will think more of the FBI. Mr. PowF.Rs. We have an obligation to the people regarding infor-mation in the files. Because of the very nature and structure of our files, that tack cannot be taken. Mr. DRTNAN. I disagree with that because I know dozens of people who have written to me that there is nothing in their files which you sent to them that has any national security implications. Until you come forward and say that x number of these things contain some-thing that could be dangerous, I am not prepared to give you the $12 million. I will be insisting more and more that you release everything. You have the burden of showing that in these cases. I have seen hundreds of files of people which contain nothing. You should not have been collecting them in the first place. This is obvious. All I say is release it and the people will know that this was collected foolishly and unwisely, but that it is no longer there. You have the burden to say we have to go over every single one of these 36 percent of the cases which are security. I repeat to you, and I say categorically, that means they were against the war or they were for civil rights. Mr. POWERs. We have that burden because that is imposed by the act. Mr. DTrNA-. If you want the $12 million to clear up the backlog, yoi have to demonstrate to me that you have to go through this procedure in these cases where this procedure is a waste of time. You have not carried the burden and demonstrated the need. I sav release those things, release 36 percent just like that by return mail. *

I see no reason why you have to go through all this elaborate pro-cedure and withhold this and withhold that. I think that you are in violation of the FOIA which says if in doubt, release it. My time has expired. Mr. EDWARDS. Mr. Butler ?Mr. Btnm.n. I think the Bureau has made a pretty good case for the additional monev. and I would expect to support'it when the op-portunity arises. T have no questions, Mr. (hairman. Mr. EDWARDS. What are you going to do if you don't get the money? Mr. POWERS. Well, Director Kellev has authorized that we do go ahead and we have gone ahead already with a reorganization. He is 541 confident that the funds will be forthcoming, recognizing the intent of Congress of what they hoped would be (lone by these acts. He is willing to take that step and has taken that step. I feel vexy strongly, sir, and I an sure that Ir. Shea will have aword ol this, that this is not the final solution. The only solution can come with some legislative relief with respect to the acts themselves. This will have an impact on the operations of the Bureau and I think the funds being expmded is going to cause concern to a great number of people. While we are willing to go forward and have started, I think there are a number of otler areas that have to be looked into. Mr. EDwARDs. Mr. Shea, in his statement, makle a case that we will discuss later for legislative changes, which incidentally are not the resI)onsibility of this comnuijittee. Also t hrouglut the reolrt is a theme that you nee(l lawyers to l)rol)erly analyze these various requests. Yet I notice thlat out of 8.000 special agents in the FBI, 1,258, or only 

16 percent, are lawyers. I know that is not the subject of this hearing today but I cannot but Cxi)ress some (lismlay that, in the good ol days wlemn I was an agent, it was almost 100) percent lawvyers and CPA's. Now you are down to 10 percent.. 'hose few lawyers that. you have left as special agents must have more of a lbrden" than I would like to think ,II)Ilt. 

r. l 'mwers, woul(l vo'l-ca me to commiu. nit on that ?Mrr. I' ,\vi. ts. It. will have aI illlpact Nvitl tl t 11i lber. 'TIhe staff that we Iave on !,an(l riglt, now and the task for,'e of 200 starting in Janu-aiy will substantially affet field 0l)(eations in certain areas. They will Iil e to l)riolritize c'itaili iivestigatiolns ill tlie field. I lxlieve, 1,e(.a -e of tlie 'oilnl exity )f the act, that att m1 oivs are needed. I think te v will !b.. ab. to pmro)c(d faster ill the pwrm easing of re-

(ltiest awtl tley Will -r' t etl. tiii:tv filt ioi )f ,ei,,i r available, through a trn i., i l(r)!lil, to assist fie](1 ,1)erations. 'That. is a sil-5i(1iary benefit 1but. it will 1b( of so m e vali. 

I actuall\v tlhit at althis l)milt ill ti ,11 that it is ec smtial that we coil-

t i' oH. t 'hat tig~,~ett SIg(e(l ill t hie Irxssii og(4f these reqilests have a law 1akgrouml. If I imy.lr. dw'ardl, in r sj()n(ing to Von r otlier question wl('l yol were asking alxmt tle nmimlrs from whom tile requests were received and what tliv t'virust toward, vm had also re-queste(l-asked me at the last hearing.-and although I have advised 

vou orally, I would like to Imt on the record time ,lesti)m of fumds 

rece'(iv~ed jmi-s51 ii t to FO() 1 A nit ters. I)lri tg fiscal ,year 197-4, tie Fl1, .ilst dealing solely with FOIP'A matters, eXl)el(led $10;0.00). During fiscal year 1975, -tU02.0O0 an(d duringg fiscal year 97C). $2.51')91.000. 'I'0 ,late SilmCe 1.973. we have taken ill in toto $'21) 4);.72. When I say taken ilt. not that we are running amarkett. I Il(-Ii th e ']iirges for the (luj)licatimi of (locdltents and any 

search fees. 

Tl simi wasN , as of Sei)t (eetber 15, $29.(64.7. 

Mr. Emv.%)is. T'haank you for those figures. 'F-m;ight add as an asile that the siinomtittee is making a stuly of 

tihe personnel practices whiqh would have to (10 with the low percent age of lawven now in the FBI. Assuming the siOwomnmittee is still in existence next. year, after the next Congress. there will be a series of hearings with the 1Prl)ose of assisting the Bureau in analyzing better their )rsonnel l)rat ices and possibilitiess for imniprovement. 812 _C29 __-77_---35 542 

I have one last question before my time expires, I notice that the law requires that you prepare a report or il)lement the act wlen an alien living abroad makes a request. I)o you have to process that un(lt. the law? Mr. HANTGAN-. Yes, we (10. 

Mr. EDWARDS. Su)posO somel)odv from MoscoW writes you a letter? Mr. SHEA. Mr. Chairman, in fairness to the Blreal, I tthink I sh1oluld say that we overruled theiii on that. The Priv'acy Act says that a re-quester under the lrivacy Act mu1tist be a citizen or a resi ent alil 1,tit the Freedom of Information Act says any l)elrsonm. The Bureau said if he is an alien living overseas, lie can't make a re-quest under tle Freedom of Information Act. We sai(l that is not wlt t e statute says. We overrule(d then on that. Mr. EDWARDS. So someone in Moscow.asking for all the infonimat ion you had on Chairman Mao, you would go ahead-witl it.? Mr. SHEA. We feel tley, are required by law to (1o so. I hope they would not bend too far over backwards to help then out. Mr. EDWARDS. I think you lave unanimity on the subcomnmittee hop-ing the same thing. Mr. Drinan ?

Mr. DRENAN. I want to get back to the g guidelines by whicel you de-stroyed a million of these files. I assume you are not building) files that areAneeIless and that will tbe the subject of requests later on. When 

Voul did destroy these million files over a period of time, I assume you had some guidelines. If so, I would like to see them. Mr. POWEIs. I would be happy to resl)oil for the record as to tile Bureau's efforts i) thlat connection, the plrocedu'es and nomns that you refer to. Mr. I)INAIN. Generally what were the nor-)s?              

> Mr. PowERs. Time plays afactor in it. I(1o not hiave with ne the

exact guidelines or destruction rules but if you recall the last, time we. 

were here, one gentleman front the records Ibranch was here and he( would have been in a far better position to furnish you in entirety what the norms are and proceduress would be. It is governed by the Code of Federal Regulations and I would be 

happy to respond for the record and give it to you in entirety, sir. Mr. I) IINAN. All right. But if someone had not agree(] to thls morn-toriumn, and I don't know the nature or the extent or the time duration-of it, but if taiet were lifted, would the (lest riction of these files pluis-

ant to those amended guidelines or guidelines, would that be a way of getting sone relief? Mr. Siw-.. Yes. sir. I do think there is a countem'vailing sitilation-a consideration thlat is running here. There is a feeling within tie )epartment amd without tihe I)epartment tiat. to the extent that in-dividtials have perhaps been injiire(1 by record-Mr. Levi's COINTELPRO outreach program, to review records of )Peoplle who were hurt and contact them and also for people who we would not make that judgment on, to give people who were in the mlov'elimnts vou are concerned with a reasonable opportunity to cxme in and ask for their records and let them make their own juilgment as to whether or not they were unfairly treated or in some way harmed by Bureau activities. 543 We also feel that in the long run, certainly, the best solution, be-cause the record that no longer exists cannot hurt anyone any further, is for a record that was either improperly collected or is no longer necessary because it does not pertain, to a current need or mission of the FBI, it should be destroyed. It should not be a natter of permanent record if it is not a proper record to be kept. Mr. DnINA*N. Did you make these arguments to the leadership of the Senate '! 

Mr. SI[EA. I was not involved. Mr. DRINA.,. YOU are involved in it in spades, sir. You are asking us for $12 million to produce documents that you think should be destroyed. Mr. Silt\. '.M. Drinan, there is something called" the Interdivisional Information S'stein which is sitting locked LI) down in the )epart-itient. It has been deactivated and we don't need it anymore. We have decided it probably violates E-7 of the Privacy Act because it defi-nitely gets into exercise of first amendnent rights. During the sininer, Mr. Tyler sent a letter to Dr. Rhodes, the Archivist of the Uniited States, asking that that record systein's con-teiits be evaluated to see if anything in there had historical value in which case we would want to transfer it to the Archives. [The letter referred to follows:] TimF I)epury ATTORNEY GENERAL, 

Washington, D.C., May 20, 1976.    

> D~r. JAMIFS It. RHODENs,

Archivist of the United States, 

Washington, D.C. 

])EAI 1) P. RHODES: The Depmrtment of Justice maintains a system of records known as the Inter-Divisional Information System (Il)1S), which was designed to store information relating to clli disturbances. The system was deactivated on October 17, 1974, and Is no longer nectssary for any operational or adminis-trative purpose within the Department. The system is composed of informnatlon on magnetic computer tape and on ap-proximately 88,320 5x8 cards, which were generated by the Information con-tained on the computer tape. 'These cards consist of "subject" cards (white or green) and "incident" cards (orange). They are filed alphabetically by Indi-vidual name. They are also croms-filed by time names of particular organzatlon-a and by geographic areas (city or state). The "subject" cards number roughly 26,000 and contain such information as name, aliases, date of birth, address, membership In organization, FBI tile numbers, arrests and criminal record, spouse, and information relating to activities. The "incident" cards contain in-formation such as name, a description of a particular civil disturbance incident, the use of weapons and the Identification of any vehicles used at the incident. Also included within this system of records are master computer printouts, com-iuter flow charts, documentation of the computer program and various memo-randa relating to the system. In total, these records occupy six card file cabi-nets. two Hafes and one locked file cabinet. I have determined that it is improper for the Department of Justice to main-tain a deactivated system of records concerned, to a great extent, with the exercise of free speech, a",ociation and assembly. In fact, its continued existence within the Department may well violate the Privacy Act of 1974, specifically 5 U.S.C. 552a(e) (7). On the other hand, I am not convinced that destruction of this particular system of records, in whole or in part, is in the public Inter-est, given its pro*Ni1)le historical value. Whether that historical value exists and, 

if so, to what extent are judgments that must be carefully made. It may be that the potential danger In preserving at least some of this material is sufficient to outweigh its historical value and warrant its destruction. Perhaps an appropri-ate balance can be struck by eliminating at least some Individual identifiers. The fact remains, however, that if we, as a government, are to learn from our mistakes, we must not lightly destroy the records of these mistakes. 544                                                                                       

> In light of the serious questions raised by the continued nminten(.ice of this file by the IXpartnent of Justice, Ium requesting that tie National Archives and Records Service evaluate the I)IS files pursiult to 5U.S.C. 552a(b) (6) to deterlmine if these records have sufficient listorical value, in whole or in 1vrt, to warrant preservation. A(.e(ss to these records may le obtained by your staff at their convenience by contacting Mr. I)onald E. IaRue at 376-8728. Your assistance in this matter is greatly appreciated. Very truly yours, HAROLD R. TYixUR, Jr.,
> Deputy Attorney Gencral.
> Mr. Shit:..

If it. ,iIl't, we woul( request (lestriUtcion authority. This was tle big/'gy, so to speak. Well, one of the things that is allded to in tile letter from Mr. 'Tlver-I miglt add copies of which were sent to Senators Scott andi M'allsfit-lu, a1d Rlt)resenltative Rodino in his (apacity a.s clilirnia:u of your committee. Rel)resent.ative Alzug in her cal)acity as c'laiirlperson of tie ()veriglit Comliittbe al( Senators RiicofA aunl Kellmld -land there is a statement in there that this 

should be looked at very carefully. '"'The fact remains, however, that if we as a government are to learn from our mistakes we must not lightly (htst ro-y tle rivvcls of t mliesv mist akes." 

There ar, s01110 (101 Isihdoratibns ii li i erv, Rel)resentative I)rinan, tiat 'arrait very 'a'eful 'o[4iderlation. I t hink t hat there probably are 

114ordlb that, should be destroyed eventually. I think we should take all ste)s il llhe int('im to insure that such records are not further 

If it has beeii v'zitalblished b)Y our1 gu1idlile(s couiiiuiittee that it is imi-

pro'p'er to (10 so----t his is a very ,o(01 l -x area. 

"Mr. I)uiNA n. That does Ioot (pmite add 1) in niyllmind. Mlr. B iNiu'r.. Will llhe gentleman m yield( ?

A17r. DIN.AN,. Y(-S. M r. 11Wll you Iisted t lie liO)!e to N\'vhomn Nyou sent copies of 

Mr. 'I'vlei's letter, I noli(('le you dI id not. Senl anv t4) Rell)livians ('X-

.(c)t Senator S.ott.. Is that -ill over.siglt ? I won't require the gentle- 

> mIau

to answer, but I hope you w\,ill von\ey th~at usage(. 

Mr. ])froNAN. MI. Shea, anotime' point in this long docullint here. it is rcp('atedlly stressed(1 that the problems arise from tle FOIA andt lthe IPrivac'v Act, but i hat, is not stiistantiated .by the figures that, follow. 

'h,, priv:u. ,v vxeIlpt ion is relied upon only 117 times to den infor- 

> uIation.

Interaen'Vy uiemno is relied u1pon 99 tiles. Internal 1)ersOnel  

> I,

l(.s is rlie(LuljXi 7s1 l1im11S. Exception 7. the investigatory file was re.lied, u1pon svral tlhisa"liul tinies. This (loe's lot s ,eii to be inpor-tant. relatively Speaking. 

'Mr. Sim-A. l(prelsent ative I )rinan. tile Priva.vy Act only came into effle't late list vear and it was soimieti ,m, before tlie fitil)aet i(mVel-oi)ed. ()e of tile. first, ('onflit's wvhiii turned into a major crisis in tli 1)epartni'nt, was whether the Privacv Act, l ad repealed tle access pro-vision of tOie leeloii of it format iu l Act as to rt',.ourtls of in(livi(duals. Were thiey ,'om pl)lenlt'.1 v st ltIlet vs or were tI ('N vx'l usi ve slat Iit vs 

Pliey were coinl)lo'ieitar-Y. U ndier olr deiin tme'itial refrul',tiolls. Awe 

go hotlh ways. The conflicts involve lpriilalarily-with in the ,FB itself notxverv miiiich because, all of their investigatory records have been ex-enpted froni tle access provisions of the. Privacy Act except for those that, get into these areas of applicants and Ibekground investigations conduicted ly the FBI. 545 That did reqilire a revamllping lbe(ause K-5 of tie Privacy Act which permlits you to attempt-and I oilylv say attempt-to conceal tle iden-t itY of you1r source is not coextensive with 7(I)) of the Freedom of Information Act which permits v-oil to withhold information obtained onl]y from a confidential source. 

We keep getting into it. TIle two statutes (lont nsh 100 percent. I think that is a claritilde lnlerstatement. 'These )ro)lelmIs are not major 1ecallse ti FBI is doing tile great majority of thel and their investigatory records have been exenlI)ted from tle access provisions of the Irivaey Act. iut it did conplicate our life further. 

Mr. Th). "hat is interest ing but not -responsive. 'My time has expired.      

> AIt. EA)W\\'AR. A. soon as

the second bell rings, we vill recess for 

a IIiI i te. I ilut d i(l V l sI Say lI i IIvest i .at iVe files are xvI I ) t .Mlr. S)t :.%. Iell('Privac'y Act permits the lWad of an agency to ex-illp~t Illin ' st,,tions .T o,: K certain types of records from tlie acROss divisions of the P~rivacv Act. Not unnndertandal)ly, that. was seized  

> 11p)ol)

as a 1msis for all arument, that led to th is question of whether ill (P tet it Itiailt that )el)li' ,collide not get access to records "vithii t iet -cOl), ,,f lie J)rit(," C Act. The departmental i'egiiliationls Onl it requil'e that an v record con-tailtied itl a s\'st ,',i Of ie'nOt, ls wlii'hirb has 1welil extl li)ti,(! froin tit. a(','ess prov isions of tlhe Privacv Act will 'everilleless Ix. rev'iewe(1 e 1',elr 

tit, saitue old standards of the 4F'ePlo lo of Infortiation Act tI t latd 

itl ':,. s l ,eln , fl'ect.       

> So ill op erat4ion ,till-

indlividual1 get S Iiicces to wi icleve r way of look-in at it tidve j lI tle gl'pa tet access to hiis retorls. We felt that al-thogl.hd lile JaIgtIaige was not ,'i'ystal :'lear perhaps )Ion the intrpllase 

that that was tilt, intent. 

'I'lTat vas t lte I)eplt, A ttr)neY Gemnral's decision when thiis mlatter 

was fo' erliv presented to Iim within tie )epartment. 

Mr. El miv Is. The l ou, e of le, lresentatives hal miillions of files for it I bg I iti( ot raliial s, left nd right. Yoi know how we handled 

it ? WVe had the ,Ju1di'iarv ('omimt~ittee stild.v tie matter and tile .111di-,.ill'v ('omittee, thej, fill] col' iltee of vlich] this is :a sulconlmitiee, dccidii to take all of thlou files and lock them 1ll) fo'ever, 50 years 

or what ever. Aliil of yo r ; wrcen,6-1rnt security files. (qi itt a flliler of t ho's, files. I would l )reI..11. would fall into; thle category of railical files. Is that 'or'rect ?Mr. PW E-ts. A nain portion. yes. sir'. .i'. l'i)w.il)s. riat is somiiet thing that . oum cl11 consider asking p'eiliision to d(. Mr1'. l)I N AN. If the cliair i n wout ild vieid. that is preisel v tle point 

I w,,vaq gettingg at. ()f tile 36 pIercent, tmore t hat one-tlird of the buIrulen 

i'oidli he efliiiited. 'I'llev are not lucky ('no gh to 1wN' mE'ilw'i of 

(o,,nirre ss so tili.\- i'n't Ihx Sent iway on 'that basis. But it wolld help if \youI wotll]! determine tlat x nuniber of those tils involve so-'allei ra i,'aIls or extremints. call tliem what vol will, 

a1111 eit her '-endi tlhet direct lv to ti, people and no harm Nvill bv done, 

or,' iilpolltil till-i andil lIlt t llettI ,iiider the Archives. 

YNol have Ilie powerr to do that. M.r. EDWARIts. The suiomrittee will recess to move to Ilie floor of ti lle Ih ise for 15 u iutes. 546 [Votinig recess.] MI. EIWAmwS. The subcommittee will come to order. MJr. Parker? Mr. P.nKiER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Shea. on August 18, 

1976, Chairman Edwards wrote a letter to the Attorney General. In that. letter, he requested that any and all instructions given by the l)epartment to the Bureau relative to processing requests under the Freedom of Information and Privacy Acts, b forwarded to the silei n m i ttee. .ks of todav. I do not know of my knowledge that we have received tn answer to tNat request.   

> Mr. SJiF.A.

Sir, we did send an answer to that letter. I will cet t ,Iillv furnish an additional copy. It was an interim response which in (e,'et. indicated that there are two matters covered in the letter, the !Ili(lance and the plan and that we were trying to work on the plan 

:IMl we would comment on the plan and we would be putting the other stnIT together. Most of the guidance to the Bureau is in the form of the decisions of the I)eputy Attorney General, unless through the consultative, per-

siuasive process. Under this my personnel reach agreement as to w ether a suiipplenental release is appropriate. 'I'he blk of the formal guidance is silnply the-decision, the letter Ihack saying it is modified, the records that. were withheld, one. two. 

th ree, four, and five shall be released to the appellant. Mr. PARKFR. I assume there are a number of interdepartmental nyenoranda indicating the policy which the Bureau is to follow with res)ect to Freedom of Information and Privacy Act requests. You talked earlier about some collision between the Privacy Act, and the Freedom of Information Act. Some of that has been reduced to writ-in,.., hasn't it? Mfr. SIhEA. Yes.   

> -Mr. PARKERl.

Do you know what, the decision is by the Attorney Gen-eral and whether we will receive that, material ?

Mr. Slirii. I have not been apprised of the decision. We will be get-

I in~v to that matter now that we have got the plan and have come upI) with the assessment on the plan as indicated earlier. We have been doing that and trying to do the other things. too. and we will rivipond. Mr. PARKER. I am sure you can understand that we feel there is some interrelationship between the FBI and the Department of Just.ice in how these requests are answered. 

Mr. Powers, when the chairman said what are volt going to do if 

Vo (lon't get the money, you said that Director Kelley has already .,thmorized you to go ahead with the reorganization. Could you be alittle more precise about that? Does that mean you are pese jntly enraged upon enlarging the division to 391 personnel? mr. PowEras. That is correct. .lr. PARKER. So, the structure which is outlined jlst, after page 3R of 

vOUtr proposal which shows the breaking up into disclosure section 

t d operation section is going to go ahead I 

> .fr.

PowER.s. That is what we propose doing. 

M1'. PARKF.R. Then I ask the question again, what if you (Ion't get the ionev.1 ? Does that mean that all of the personnel will be taken from soniewhere else within the Federal Bureau of InvestigationI 547  

> M

r. PowFis. That is correct.   

> Mr. P'ARKER.

That would be an additional 137 people transferred front other sections? Mr. lPowpns. Whatever personnel would be needed to raise our comi-plenent from its present onboard quota right now of 194, up to 391, yes, would be absorbed from other areas within the Bureau.    

> M1. IMKER.

Does that also mean that the crash program-I don't INiow the specific name that you give the program to get rid of the ha:lokI, but which is bringing in the 200 spacial agents, that ha.s been antllorized and will go forward ?

Mr. lPowris. At this point in time, the Director has informed the I)epartnent in the transmittal of the plan to the Department that he was taking the extraordinary step of going forward with the reor-gaI)izat ion. 

I [t reserved, if that is the correct term, he reserved for himself the prerogative that if the finds were not fort coming, he would recon-sider his stance at that time. Mr. IPARKFi. Does that mean that the timetable included ini your )roosal is olerative-the administration's worl--that it is going for-wardl according to the timetable in the proposal ?Mr. POWERS. A.s clo., as We )OSsiblV call, yes 'here are a nunilor of prol)lems with respect to space as well as personnel. But, we have gone forward where we coild acquire space. 

The building is fully occupied right now. We have, however, taken 

so1m0 affirmative steps.   

> 11. PlARKER.

Just to make it perfectly clear again, subject to what-eVcni Minor delays there are in acquiring or changing personnel and getting some space, we can assume that this whole proposal is being illiJ)lemented as of today 'Mr. PowmJs. Ihe reorganizat ion aspect of the plan is ongoing right 

HOW. The crisis or task force aspect will be dependent upon the fund-in-g. It, will be up to the I)ir ,tor as to what, course of action he will 

Iake at. that point in time. With reference to the plan as to the reorganization, we are going forwa rd. As to the .January special aspect in bringing in the personnel. (i Director at somic point in time will make the decision and I assume it will lb dependent upon the financing as to if and how that phase of the plan will go.   

> 1I1. EDWARIXS.

If the gentleman would yield, ini accordance with tilt- sidelineses of the Attorney General wiih regard to the domestic se c1urity cases, thW lBureau has substantially reiuced the number of 

> ())41

('Il . It clo.Sedl the Socialist Workers- Party the other day which I ant sure will lessen the workload of the Bureau. 'here are $60 or $70 million spent per year on domestic cases. 'Ilhonsands of cases will not Ie opened and thousands of cases have 

already been closed according to the testimony received by this conk-m1ittee. Perhaps there were 100,000 or 200,000 open security cases in field 

offices that, have now been reduced to almost 2,000. I hope the Bureau and the Department of Justice are keeping that in inind, that there may be personnel released and available for this kind of work cause tiat is not anywhere near the bur(len that it was 1. or 2, or 3 years ago. 

ft. SHEA. Well-548 Mr. I)( "o wI. Well, I wold assni'le-I ai'l not pl'ivy to as III wl in-

formation as you have, but. I would assume that planning on an on-

!(,ig basis as the Director does, that it would be u) to him to )rioritize ds objectives. If, assuming personnel would x- available from a de-(-line in a s)eCific area of investigation, he wotild then take into con-sileration where that personnel would and could go. There may very well be a number of other areas that, le would like to intensify a'nd has not had the luxury of available )ers-ontie. Iwoulil leave that up to 31r. Kellev. M1'. PARK R. 'Thank vou. Mr. Emnus. Proceed. MIr. PARKER. Back to my original (llestion. I (lo1t mean to trv" voi' 

pit ience. On page 55, yout have vouxr time schedule for both the FOJ PA 

Act and the backlog. lIn Sept;xhllher. teire are Ielsominel notified ibv 

Sept ember 30. andi! do I iiu l('rstl:Iud from yulr i'x swer that that will go forward ?

M\Ir. lP,wt:mus. What axre you talking alabout ?.1'. I'.\tKYRlf. III tlhe b ;x in the l)we. left-lhain ! courier. It says per- 

> 54)11

iui' selected oi) Selptembilxr '25. 197(;, inI personnel Iotifie on Sp-

t.nbe'l, 30. 1976. ti lit thev are going to x )art of that )ac'klog phlln. I assnllie tl are goilig to Iepl) that timietal)le subject to a review of  

> xlonevs

avaihalde( in .Janiuary'. 

M. Powers. Right. Evei:Ntliug vill Ib (l0 1 ('lidh'it ulpol the rleij)t 

)f tle funds. ]lt Mi. Kellev hxs said lie is taking this extraordinary 

:' ion to sh)w h)is good faillh'thiat he is going forward.-

Some of the aspects in t1he plan in volving reorganization will he 

dee )e(n(lt 1l), m the aqlli-it ion of sp:ic. wit hin on r own lhlh liii. With 

regard1 t,) tlie backlog we umay iiistitnte sohm eprocedu( res, testi ,,. or 

phllnuix,,., ft' the l)er"1s(lll whto will t,) into( tiat phase. 

v ull'a not te k' 111' thinl ste) of il'luiriig tle )(J')r- oiie(l to (hilli- 

> 1)miteI

til-i bacu'kloig if till-iu 'cesix i' fumiding is not fort heoili illy. We arlii 

(rving it) ] miLe omr bet il a way.  

> N1'.

I)MM(K . YtOUY r'etjMInSo to me is limiitd d to jlst tle backlo, phin. 

Ymn are going to iiihi.pleiiment ihl lii In': ra.lx r.,101,anization reg-ar, -l ess o f Ihelia vi'illib ilit o f f unl i( s P, 

Mr. )P,1'wFnCs. Yes. we ar. goilig fo(rwl' I blut it is witl tlie( expecta-tionl that tle flunds will be forthieming. 

Ni'. I'.fKER~. l 1"tii 1 biil I 'k to whi('r I rtiiii (l from witi xI' jirst oliistion. i)irec'tor Kill *v lills ax utlio) iz('I vo to go ihead wiil th' ivoliga lliZa;lionI. Is that 'lependhlit ong I iug hle Ill(oxuev of1 a' v yo 

(uillg ieulleil withI th I'4oivallizatiolo within tilme Bunx'eamm 1111 the )e-

pi 1.1 Ilen f .11 ust ive ie'lvn i'( lv' S o I II.y fi W 11ire '1mJl ellim'It -. 1at 1ll)oxizat i mis ?" 

Mr. iP,,wFas. If Ir. ( wo'uld',' wmol~i like to answer. lie lav Iavi solmie i)pilt. it I want to make it clear r tliat tliis entire etrort is (i)einl('nt   

> oi] nltiimatc'

reiviing tl te funds. 

Mr. 1tmiz. Al II oua' going forward ! with is p lanniing for tile re)irga1nizat iono? 

fr. 1Powm:is. No. W4 nre goi uig fuhiit her tlmn that. WAe are actu ally making s)m, moves t)war,! the, ar'quisit ion of ('ertai) Ixi 'sn ael night nomw. We are going f'orwil"(. iltiluiatel', the effort is (ivlndent upon the re .ipt of ftuds -i d witl tljt, the. tlmoigliu tilnt tl funls wil be piI'Ii ve s. 549 

N i1', P)ARKEIR. I)o you 11ve soItI otller inICieenltal plan ill mind be-sides the.one whicl you have sUi)ilied tile colmiiittee. Is that what you are talking about ?

Alr. POwER.S. No. Mr. (61um-,it. Mr. Parker, , tl, stafling foIr tie reorganization plan will take place by taking people fromii otle' divisions tit FBI head-(Itial'ters and ill the field who are now il()ing jolbs whicll we collsitler es.,-1tial but which (ctl b leave l for a period of title. 

()ur lope is that, our1 funding will he received which we are u'elquest-i ng for thle Freedom of I n format ion- lPrivaev A vt work. At tlat. time we wouli tihen )ut those people with that money back \\herel't- tll y (1' 11e frtill I tlt w(' il-(' (1h\)till g to F()II'A lit. this til e. 'llie', work that we ar'e ta king tliciii away froll call't be delayed 

indeltfiniteiv. 

Mr. M',Kty En..MV (jt ionl 1 goes lmek to tile ciritia us tlittstioll. if        

> V\lt (niolnt gct tit(e flnds. (10I un

lerstald1 it t hatil tle iliplementat ioll of 

ill(- re rgi Ili Z'at i(3l will cease anutd those people will Iw sel lit, back to their regular ilits 

ir. ( ilE , \'ElI. If we (4, iit get an indication( thall t tilt- ftinls are folill- 

> co'n

i ig, I directorr K1lhy. with (,illr staff, will ainve to deci'le whet her we 

:I,'e( g IIIg t) (l('lav soIIIt lii g (iI ls( frt Ier a I ('ont il it- )1- --wl t Ir 

tle w rk that is beingg given ii!) teml)orarily tiow to staff ie F(I1'A   

> work sliotthil

ci'tit ile to gro lackingy orl whet her wve shomild take tilh-   

> peo()1 back out

of 1 "M I 'A 1111(1 nlel 11(31" )toe1 Iig tI Itt(-I's. Ml'. '.\RKER. I tlik tile ball g(rOs ilito t I ePMartinet (If ,111st iCes, cmuirt. NIr. Selle. voul' statemilent .. 14N'5 yV)1 itll) jiolp l lile plan. You (lou't 

Stll)l ' it ad iiifiiiitni. Are we to assuuiie ti1:l tile I)epral-t11int of 

.1i1st'ice is going to exh r'ise 'ill of its atitlorit " with ()MB andi t he adliiilli:1tiation to get this plan flnlded so it does come in Ieing? 

Mr. Sn.. 'le slippleilliltal us such is bin ,r picked apart by our M:aiaaivelt 1u114litibil.ct peofiple ill the i)e;parllllt 'itrit low, as vo 

w',, -Il ell tigi,,e 11id Xjel'ct. IThiat is winy I sail 14) t lt' extent that  

> tit,

)epirtmient ult ter iiiis it is lie('.saI, It) go for a1 siip)l h livital alppil iri:ltionl il til.-;,':,t,. tl, Ieii'llntliie l will ,r to M I1l.     

> Mr. I' ]\IK

um . '|'i:Iat dhci-i nh as Iot I'.'Il i 114 I c .

M r. Stir:.. I have Iot I leen al)iirisedl. I l1)l't ha e:41' "Ill *:l-%. er to tile que4st io . Mr. 'arker. 

Mr. I'.\t i I:. I .ce illv ti le :h sh jex irtei.         

> Mr. El. \i-m .s. '[Mr. ,'4tI .?

Nt. S"'.iEK. Thllk A)II. NMt'. ('1111ii'iaiaul.  

> I

w('lilfi like to f,,! v': i.l) -),1 a Ii '1t tIli: ciilumiiiiii I ei-(i with rIvqSict  

> to

lawyer special aljit llfmv" ti la\' special agents are ilvv 

.'s.i nlile toli t lI 'l (Alic' an11 I %iw 1t1h1111 are ill liealdl arters? .

.Mi'. i'W\'r:s. I believe t 'here is a total of 1.2.-is. I 44) not ktnow of Ili\-

ovn kin w'ld.c what n tilx ,r of ati lolit.,evs a ri lit, leall('tllu rters all !whiat n util x'r are assi,, ,eiI g t t( i e ipl(l. 'I'lp: fa i glet 'er 1 r' - rt io t a1ee. o f ('O I mt'q', otit i lIe li lI lv oflices as it were. I 'all't give oil a p'ec'ise figure.   

> II'. ,'T.%I;ij.

Witil re,.l('t to I ii' 204)S 'seial igult at torte'ys who are gillr ((i h'i'tglt to JVaslijiugton froli tl li (Il oflicefs. 1 (10 Iot Ili-

derstand 14 how Noi t'eav'i tilte conclusion tliat thils would not I .ecessa rii'v  

> Ilar

ll\.v i" tnile hu'dlen ml tile field Offices ?550 Mr. PowERs. I certainly hope I have not left the impression or inference or by any other means implied that that would not pose any undue burden on our field offices because it certainly will. There is 110 question about that. I wish I could tell you that by doing this two less baInk rol)beries will be solved, eight, less fugitives will I, apl)rellene ledl. hut there is no litmus paper test I can propo,('. We all know that if a kidnaping goes down it will be handled. 

But it will have III] iilljitit oil our operations. There is no question 

al1ol it. Ait. S'i.AREK. ])oes a lawyer special agent have any different role ill a field (ofive t 11111 a noi'lawver special agent ? I)o they work in l)art.iculai areas in wilihli 11 iolaw'(,r agents would not pursue? Mr. I'owF:its. I'liat i. a difli'lllt (liestion. I am going to say tlat in Sl)('cifti. arells for lvg'al cmiisel ani guidance in t le field they (1o. 

Bit as a getleral rile. al agent is Sul)l)ol to hbe preplared to lhandle 

a vill ntv of matters :111 wonll ol) so. 'i'li( re iniglit be soe l arii! i.lar iira whe re a legal bielgrouid would be an ad1vantage.  

> fIlleit

lhe would14 spvlt'iiizA' in) thalt part iiillar. a ica. We Iiigit feel 

1111t ii tlilis partiivila r a[rea, a legal 1ackgromid is, necessary. )tIer 

t Ilali t hut. I canlt pilt it down 1i1or4' lneisely. 

M[r. Srm.ii. I tlialiik volt. 

rIn. 1D 'I'Wai k * it very l1'i1 .No ftirt her qe-st iotis. .Mlr. l'D)WAi (S. Fromt woir state ent, Mr. Slhea, I think you are in-erviiig tial tHIie ) , vwitiiI of . tistice will iave sohni suggestioirs to nI ake for ainwtii ivid I t lis legislation. Is ftat correct.? 

Mr. Sivl:A . FTeni' is nothi in iihtl in) tenis of Specific lwopo-Ills or. 11Itl iing of that t .We l111ye had14-I lxit'e there have UIl 'en leisla-livi, Itrloposal.s witil t1le .111ieiary ( 'oniniittee for at lea'st :, l)O,,sil)v 5 ,e' rs, to (-III sI )i lica llv w it h Ilaw en fo)rceiient records as a cat egory 

of records. 

'l'llat is onile wy o1 f (dloi g it. Anotlier wul y' is 14) tryr to dealI wit it wlit is %,sejit ial l" solr Of a vertical con t i tet (of law enforeeiiient r4'ord1s witlii t lie fr'amework of lhorizonta i state los lint ('it acros-; tie loar(l. We will ]iiive beenl under tle alntelilllemt'l to the act, for il-

toS.t '2 Nvlars. wlen thlle, new (C'ogress collies into session ill .J11l1t11ty. 

We certainly Itre Ilooking very hard at our experience. I do ant iC'ite I ere will ! .soiit ling to 1)4 usi(l. Mr. Elm-mmns. WelIl, we. thank voii ver11 )Mtli for hielpfil testinlony. 

We will Seheti le a hearing for' the latter part of Janiary of 1977. 

We l )l to (li.i' itii n matter again with pm) at tlliit time. If there are no fiurtLer questions, we liank tle 1it'se (aw ! lile         

> sit 1JoJlilli it tee is ad jOlt iied .

I'lle. following: %,ts slluitti for lle record :1                   

> Fill PIOOISAL TO EFFc'FrrvELY ADIINI8T.R FRi:FDOM OF INFORMATION AND
> PRIVACY A(TS IFQ'YTr, PRFACE
> This relrt, submitted for the consideration of tMe

('iil%-and Constltiitional                                 

> Rights Subcommittee, of the House Committee on the Judiciary, Is in response to their request for aproposal from the FBI that will demonstrate a(urrent operational capacity to make timely responses to all Freedom of Informntion

and Privacy Acts (FOJPA) requests and within one year, eliminate the existing 551 

FIll haeklog of FOIPA requests. Tie Subcommittee requested the FBI to com. pl,,te this analysis, prepare and submit this proposal in twenty days. The FBI has been advised by the United States General Accounting Office 

(GAO) that they will conduct a review of our FOIPA facility and procedures. 

GAO has advised they expect their review to be completed within 5 months. Although only 20 work (lays were Involved in the actual preparation of the FBI's proposal, It nevertheless represents the contributions and analyses of over 300 person years of experience in administering requests under the amended Freedom of Information Act and the Privacy Act. Submission of any propoEsal to eliminate the backlog of FOIPA requests would prove futile unless coupled with an equally effective plan to enable the FOIIA Section to keep abreast of future requests. To do otherwise would allow regenera-tion of another backlog and diminish the significance of the extraordinary effort Proposed to eliminate, the existing backlog. ''his is an inescapable conclusion to whhl(h analysis hads when one realizes the present backlog resulted not from any failure of will by the FlI to respond to FOIIPA requests, but instead was caused by the volinnme of requests acting upon an extensive records system created during the pat 60 years. Individuals, researchers, historians, members of tie media and all others seeking information pnrsuant to the FOIPA are primarily accessing the Central Records l'ystemn remained at FBI headquarters. With the exception of the Identitication I)ivision records containing fingerprint cards Iprtaining to appli-c/ns , arimned f,,r.es iersomnrtl, persons arre-sted ftr Federal. state and local 

charges, adliissli, ris to lwnriiaI institutions ari citizens voluntarily submitting their fingerprints. all other FBI record systems art- miniscule by comparison in terms of information conlained. Even the Flild Offices which collectively retain duldi-c.ates of their record submitted to FBI Ileadquarters have, under the existing file destruction prtgram, relatively few documents over 10 years old. The central records system contains the record~le Prodluct of ov'er 60 years of investigative effort, which correlate-s to a total of slightly nore than 6.6 million .ass investi-gaited during the history of the Fill. Of tiese 6.6 million cases. I million were destroyed Iaursuat to ti authority of tie National Archives and Records Serv-Ives, G general Services Adlmniist rat ion. 1.7 mliii an exist on inlrofllm and 3.9 

million are "hard .4opy" case, flies. This s.stem is accessed through an indices that ecailains alpiruxinitfely 5S million yards . 19.3 million (of these eards identify tihe suspect (s) or sidhJe.i Is) of the investigation its well as the victims of particun lar crimes. An additional 38.7 million indlces cards reference the names of associates, witnesses, relatives. neighbors, ad infinitptn as well as the pseudonyin or Idiolnetically spelled counterpmrt of any of file above. Both thc Indicem an(d the records themselves require manual search anti re-trieval. To assure positive identification, a review of each record is necessary. This system was developed to ie utilized on an exhaustive search basis only for major Investgatons. Contrary to pulalic opinion it is not accessible by anutonllaled procedures, nor by pushing buttons on a computer. A common misconception results from the casual application of the word "dossier," to the records of the FBI. Though some Government agencies rniay compile dossiers, the term Is not meaningful when used in relationship to the FBI's juirisdiction. The FBI under current guidelines Is concerned with a slwx'lfic investigative task, i.e., the suitability of the applicant, the significance o)f a given security threat, tne idexiti.ation, alaprehersion an(i successful joroseeut ion of thi' criminal. This purpose has not been confused with some vague, ill-defined re-sponsibility to collect Information concerning individuals, nor Is our records sys. trn maintained on any such amorphous theory. The FBI does not collate inf,,r-mnation Into dossiers. A law enforcement Investigatory file begins with a reported crime or an allega-tian of criminal activity in progress or being planned. At the outset of an inves-ligation only those for whom involvement would have ten an Impossibility may be excluded as suspects. A gradual sifting process examining and recording the backgrounds and personal activities of many persons is necessary Wetorp a given Investigation can focus on suspects, clearly Identify subjects, proceed to those Indicted and thereafter to persons convicted or acquitted by trial. From beginning to end, every one of the 6.6 million investigatory files encompasses Information concerning many who are innocent, many implicated by association only. those' ,iho c(operated with the Government in resolving the matter under Investigation as well as persons who may be brought to trial. The FBI's success as an investigative organization depends upon and can be 532 

attributed largely to the paper system which has developed. Our statutory re-sponsiblilities demand precision and objectivity, leading to Judicial proceedings which require thoroughness and painstaking attention to detail. Our records systeii is a product of these demands and therein lies the difficulty. The infor-mation is received from, and concerns people to whoma the Government, not Just the FBI, owes a special responsibility. They have every right to expect the Gov-ernment as custodian of such records, in this case the FBI, will insure the records are, not iiiiMsused or disseininated to their injury or einbarrassnent. ''hiis FOIPA proposal is an endeavor by the FBI to cooperate with the Civil aind Constitutional Rights Subcommittee to meet the challenge which "open-ness in government" legislation presents. As this worthy endeavor continues, care must be taken, and careful review given, to assure that any public benefits accrued by exercising the right to know are not achieved by sacrificing privacy rights tir the effectiveness of resxpiisible law enforCetnt. 

ImpInientation of thiR pro posal canniot be aronlplixh('d without the lccc8sary        

> atdditionaql ftwiflx aw;l mtanlpoircr (1) oufttlil.
> OBJECTIVES s'rArE s:NT--'B! PROPOSAL

1. To establish an operational structure lossessing the capacity to provide tinel13, dispositllve respoiises to incoming FOIIPA requests. 2. To eliminate within one year the existing FBI backlog of FOIPA request., coii ngeiit upon flinl iniplementatlion of this plan. 553 

## CONT ENT8 

A. 

B. 

> (.

1). 

I":. Statement of (bj(etiv(s.. The problem. Inherent features of the FOI PA necessitating substantial personnel to administer requests.------------Current operational structure 

Statistical analyses and conclusions----------------------------. Proposed plan--------------------

1. Present status 2. lRestructure of i"OIPA section into F()IPA ia. l)isclosure section 

1). ()l)('.a ti()n S S(ctioll --.. .. ...... ......-C. ( osts-----------------....... 

d. Operational policy-- ..... . .. .. 

:1. Ellnrinati'n of the I'OIPA backlog a. Introduction ........ 

1). F unctional features--.... . ... . .

c . (' sts - . .. . . . . . . . . .. Ilih1)1(1110n1toti,1-ti 1,schedl.e----------------I. Schedule chart ... .. .. ... .. .. 

I. L(ong-range pro posals ...... . ... .......... . .I. (Cm iclusi - -ll .. . .. . .* Appendix: 1. Nor)-p~r,ject alrialysis -... . ... 

2. lriojeect :,ialx'sis ..... .... -.. .3. Project ioll of n: lialysts 1I4(l-(d ..... .. 4. Backlog I ,r '-.Si,,1 1111(d pr(,je.cti(,I . .

5. ':,neihi ,'-,,,rg:i aizatiiji es.ts .

fi. Sala ii's ... .. . .. . .. 7. ()tl er Annuaiinl: 

a. slii;,, r't -0chidll. Supplies -.-

1). SuiIport 'Chl '- Sp:a(e . _ 

> C.

Support s-chiedulh I tilitics 

d. support ,e(ll.ei l'quipment -.. 

v. l'1ransfer- _  

> S. 11,-1eklogK

cltirriliti a r -t-a. "l'I-A Ij'eted -

I). Ag nt tr,',l 

c. S1,. r'i' :id l en fits-(I. Pc'ist) ,11 'l . . . .

91. Br:,m'h :,trul lac'kl, g ti.t- l',,t:l- -I 

> it.

1,)t h:tl l it ioi:11 filoi.-

1). ' ]{ fl i i l ' 4) ie, ,grati,,n .it) "S ., l -,fr,,,l', lh ,lic'y P av'l-gr,, lld _branch T'a ge 554 550 

563 566 

56i7 

567 

568 

570 570 

57 1

5171 571 57 1

571 

571 

572 

574 574 574 576 577 577 

578 

583 54 

> 5,86

587 

587 

587 

5!0 

. 590    

> .. .-

UI()  

> _ _-

5110 I592 . . .... 5!12 .. . . . .. .. . - 592 ,-(I554   

> A. TIE PROBLEM

Simply stated, 'the prublein faced by the FOIPA personnel of the FBI is that with the administrative structure and personnel on hand we have been unable to keel) pace with the incoming requests due to their large nunibers and due to the requirements to comply with court orders, thus leading to a lag-tinie in resjlnSes of some nine months to three years and a present backlog of un-processed requests of 7,601. HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT AND YBI RESPONSE Historically, the impact of the Freedom of Information Act, and subsequently tem Privacy Act, ujn the FBI, has deielo*led from a nearly negligible figure in (0vtober of 1973, to one of huge prolxortions in Atugust of 11)76. ,'1he coiznittinent of llrmjnimnel by the Fill to reslm(d to requests has increased )roj ortionally. When the historical records conitept v as implemented by then Attorney General Ilichfards)In's Order in Oct ober, 1143, it was in terms of requests fur information contitined in lInvestigatory files compiled for law enforcement purposes whchI could be disclosed to a requester when the following criteria were met: 1. The requester Is a bona fide scholar or researcher, 2. 'Fire investigatory file is over 15 years old, and 3. The subject matter is of historical interest to the general public. At the time of this Order, the Freedom (of Information Unit consisted of three S-ecial Agents, three research analysts and two clerical en)l)loyees.           

> Fria October thru lDecenber of 1973, only 64 requests were received amount-

ing to an average of one per work day. This volume of requests was easily hali by the employees devoted to that task. From January thru Ihecenber of 1974. 447 requests were received averaging 1.29 per work day, again an easily handled work load. The number of requests during 1975 averaged for the full year Uplrroximately 55 new requests per work day, totaling 13,875 with the largest single number having ben received during the month of Augmst. 2.095 requests. The last six months of the year 1975 averaged approximately 70 new requests per day. 'l'he I)r(grsion has continued through the ye-r 1976. As of July 30, 1976, 

10..41 requests were received averaging 72.75 per work day. Also during June, 1976. the all time high of 3,357 requests In one single month was "aed. 

Illistrating further, during the two week period from June 14-25 of 1976, 2,.549 new requests were received. If the problem were merely a progression from October, 1973 of one request 

loor working (lay to 73 by July of 1976, the proportionate assignment of personnel could conceivably have kept pace with incoming work. However, during this game peri(ol of time the complicating factors of court ordered preferential treatment to certain specific requests arose, A detailed examination of all tMe requests assigned to the ection was made Int Jiuly. 1976. 'lhis examination revealed that the FBI had "in house" 23 requests whih at the end of July, 1976. required simultaneous preferential treatment by the 1'1BI of 19. four having just been processed to completion with preferential tr..atinent. Litigation problems, ns will be explained subsequently, drain sub-stantial numbers of personnel from handling other requests. I)itring 1974, the complement of the Freedom of Information Act Unit w.fl 

gradually increa.,e-d from 8 to 16 employee. In anticlietion of the increase of work under the provisions of the ne w amendments to the Freedom of Informa ion Aet, the complement was inereased to 105, then to 153 and at the present time the authorized complement stands at 220. In nn effort to deal with the incoming requests. the backlog of requests nod eourt ordered preferential treatment, non-Agent personnel of the FOT/PA ,S4ee-tMin for calendar year 1975 and calendar year 1976 through August 1.. 1971. worked 2.15. hours of overtime. Agent personnel from February. 1975. throimh              

> Jitly 31. 1976, worked 17.905 hours of overtime, which are the equivalent of 2.508
> n111

inays. Time pages following are graphic representatIons showing: 

1. The increase of requests from October. 1973. thru July, 1976, 2. The period from inception to completion of 23 requests wherein preferential treatment was ordered, and aflidavits neeesmitated, 3. INcrease of FOIPA Iw'rsonnel. 4. The request backlog development. 55 5#,, 

## I I I I I .- "~ 01 0 0 0100 01010 %A 4 -J co %D 0    

> 010 010

1 0 1 0

Nov 73 ,-

DEC 73 JAN 74 

rES 74 

MAR 74 

AP R 74 MAY 74 JUN 74 

ZU L 74 

AUG 74 - ISEP 74 

OC 74 - -- MONTHLY INCREASE OF 

NOV 74 FOI/PA REQUESTS, PRESENTING A

DEC 74 DAILY AVERAGE 

JAN 75 

FEB 75 _

MAP 75 

AR? 75 NAY 7

DEC 75 

JANr 76 

OCT 75 

APP 76 DEY 75 

JAN 76 

FED 76 

KR "; 67.00 sFf 7,. 

OCT 7 3

I556 

NOV 73 ... EC 73... .

JAN 741]TM...O FEB 74 ..... 

MAFR 74 APR 741.. - --- i-- I-- V 7]-FF<N iAL Y ,-

OllT 74 ... . J,I , I7

S I I • IOCT 75 

V IC" I' 7 4 -

JA" 76. X. 75 = 7r 7,5 i 4AN' 7557 OCT 73 0

NOV 73 

DEC 73 

JAN 7A 

r£B 74  

> FKE,

74 --

APR 74 7-MAY 74 - [

JUN 74 

JUL 74 i INCREASE OF FBI 

PESR$ONNEL ASSIGNED TO PROCESSING FOI/PA 

REQUESTS AT FBI 

SEP 74 HADQ K UARTERS 

Oc T 74  

> NOV 74

# -J..7. - ... 

AJ 75K -

-7-7iT- :- ----1 7 ... 4 L--j-li 

F-P 751 i

°.L h" i _ _. .. ... . _ = . L L_ .__-_ __ INk!. 76 1 4 T'.L~ I_   

> 7N 76 4-

rI T

s2 -- l 7 --.. l, 558 

OCT 73 

NOV 73 

DrC 73 

JAN 74 

TER 74 MAR 74 APR 74 

PAY 74 

JtN 74 

JUL 74 

AtIG 74 i _ 

> NOV_

MONT DEC 74 .FO X/ : PRIO: 

JJ A N ,]s-_ THE EB 75 RECO 

... 75- REQU!  

> '75

OF P

JUIN 7! JUL 7. ..- . ,I I

JAo, 76i L- "-,EB t' 16 .IJ *Ju74 76 I- - --

SEP 7E 

JPi 76T 

JUL 76 -

> ic*~

HLY-INCREASE OF PA REQUEST BACKLOG. R TO JUNE, 1975, 

BACKLOG WAS NOT 

RDED IN TERMS OF ESTS, BUT IN. TERMS AGES. 

I v I I I I I559           

> H. INIIERENT FEATURES OF TIlE FOIPA NECESSITATING SUBSTANTIAL PERSONNEL
> TO ADMINISTER BEQUESTS

No conception of the need for the large number of skilled personnel can be grasped without examining specific features of the Freedom of Information Act, Title 5, United States Code, Section 552 (5 USC 552) and, to a lesser extent, the Privacy Act. Essentially, the burdenstnA ltie yl-he statutes may be grouped as follows: (1) Access and records description, (2) Review, t3) Interpretation of exemptions, and (4) lltigaion and proof.    

> ACCESS AND RECORDS DESCRIPTION

5 USC 552(a) (3) requires a dispositive response to "any requests for records which (A) reasonably describes such records . ., pe'ovided the requester com-ilies with any published regulations. Any person Iby himself or using an inter-ineliary may request records concerning himself or others, living or deceased. The requester nay be a citizen, resident alien, or possess foreign citizenship and re-side abroad. lie may ask for records concerning one matter or individual or may submiit the names of a thousand individuals or describe innumerable separate iliilents. The work must he done and search charges will not be imposed, pro-vided the indices system is adequate to the task or, the requester seek infor-ination concerning himself. Review and preparation of the documents will fol-l)w and the requester may choose only to examine rather than receive copies. thus avoiding duplication costs. Alternatively, a requester may elicit a fee waiver hnpoll Iprcf of indigeney or justiflcation of public interest. As a repository for 60 years of Investigative records, the FBI, subject to tile 

FOIA, financed by the taxpayer's money, represents a real boon to the writer. listorian. researcher, (pixirtunIst or "scandal sheet", seeking information for their varied purposes. With all the material being collated. reviewed and made available for a nominal fee by tile FBI, why not? Requesters are not required to possess research credentlal.s, nor are they required to limit their lnquirls to nutt;'rs of historic significance related to a specific crime or fanious trial. They ive only to submit a name, furnish identifying details a..l wait. The only re-striction conceived by tile statute Is the limitation of human curiosity. Under this legislation tlht FBI (an he functionally considered just as much a-ollponent of the Library of Congress and the Government Printing Office as of tie l)epiartment of Justice. Indeed requests are received addressed to tile Federal Bureau of "Information", suggesting perhaps a derogatory connotation in view  

> oif

recent criticism, but just as surely describing the function perceived. If the only relevant considerations were retrieval and duplication of material, the mat-

ter otihl be easily handled. 1K) lower grade e' "loyees, 50 duplicating machines an1d .izeahle mailing staff would lie adequate. Series considerations which are relevant to the retrds of the FBI however, cainot lie overlooked. Ranging front classified materials eff-etlig national secu-rity. through persoInal details Involving the Iprivacy of milli,,ns, to records that (.011il! endmiger tim lives oif law elf4irceiuiivtt tficers and 111y citizens who have cooperated with their Government, these are records that cannot lie accorded cavalier consideration. REVIEW No)t only may on(- silmilt requests eonicerning any suliject matter or person rea.,wibally described. including oneself, the burden of review is the same for all requests. And that task is enormous 5 USC 552(h) reads in part, "Any rea-somalily sogregaide lx)rti)i, of a record shall be ptrovidedl to any person reqIuesting such record after deletion of the x)rtio)4 which are exempt under this sub-section." 'I'lis language has been Interpreted to mean as few as three or four words (in a single page regarding the sulbject matter; or. in some Ir,.4tances, it means nothing nore than a person's name and address. Line by line review is compelled, whether the scope of the request is five pages. 500 or 5,000. Tie only computer available to perform thLs task is that of the human mind. Review is an even greater burden than simply identifying that material which is not to he exempted. For in fact the analyst cannot look only for the material responsive to a particular Inquiry, but must be able to jwstify the burden of 560 

proof relating to any excisioi(s) within the record. Each excision requires adecision, regarding investigatory record. limilted by tile language that the 

tx(,lijtioli is aptpllcflle "olily to the extent that produtti'tlon (if the records woulld" result Ii one of six consequences (5 USC 5521 to) (7) ). The only guidance relatives to this standard is the interpretatiom that the analyst must perceive it reas nai expectation thi t thie Eiieset~iltlilit' soltight t li)e avoided will tn.sie 

if the contemplated excision were not madce. SubJectlve at Iest, this standard is 

reqllired to hi applied to (.onsiiluv'lit.es of a general iinatire aliit which assayists, jiIistk or setwasilogists .ould delhate for years 

(A ) Interfere with enforcement prQe('edings. (B) IDeprive a person of a right to a fair trial 

C) Constitute all un iar'apitrd inv 'ion ofr pt'r sllal priIlCy, 

(1)) Diselose the identity of at coifldc'ntictl vo(.ur' and 'oifidthntlil in-formation furnished only hy the confidential source, (E) J)i\('lose ill r'8tig/tire tt'('hfliqiw amid pr~ccdIur'.. 

(F) Endanager tie- life or physical safety of lwN enforcementt perswinll ; (5 

US(' 552(h) (7)) 

EltJin asis was id1itd to llslersi-tor4i the ilnaglligi w'hivhi allows row su.h it wide rmigi' f sUij'c'tive' iiterpi'twtiosi. itt-suPivinii ie c 'irr'ct apii~121of' tii('54 

e,.xe+iil Oils. and lhel li fi'1 It .iistitii flit- Imlirtlcia flfl thetre t'xIkt:; ai rt'asoti le e'xl -I'n' i n) hat lh ll ilItVl'l'Se ('iolSl'lji 'ilc',S %V41,0i 41 l'r silll, votJlis ll|( Ilit llI t 'sflt i'ff .or skilled lersomliltI at It very hilgh rate. INTEII'iEI ATIO" oi)' EXi;MPTI)NS Interp'retation wa.is ll ided ti Il 'the lrut'i ng jIaragral,l s. luit Iliv vtili hlsi+ 

flNI, 1 ll u ill fht' req ir'vil lit Ilint va i ai:lyst ittl it first le tii th, (ili t' q 't fo' th e+, .1l l lit le e~xe l'l l , NVIIt tfill- ev, ltzt! lia+l Illelt, ll ill a+ -Av'e l +,list, h l~t<lil s, aI 

c'll te(,lf4'h dilt'l'riit tlll. l4'si li Mat lmust iv rt .. s , ljved 'e'oe n rt'slpnilIe 41 belil' la' to fi, ll' l'e(limtsttr. "'hlnid ig flil ,'.iilltl ,f ipriva' antdl as .lliliT (411' i" falk-

In,- all olt inve.iligato ry reco. is l+ +l. i:t%%*v alf;i+torv t-m lt filll-HS ., tlll ill(- t

hiaw re'qire'is it very pri'''st' dlilvt'Jion oit h uitlt' ifoiliii tn hat is :1,1 ill-

Vlsl.,ill Ii' personal privacy lluist le r'lt'ase ,l. ( ily if Ow itt' ivai.idll is lillwaIriii'tlld 

ininy fill intsrial lov wit liluiv. If' liii I iiu.is Ilo rfill, geli'ral i'x.'ipf ions aplicialet ti nll rll'ords, iv. "c'It'trly iiun Varrirl tlui ii\'uiol if lr.i',,Pjal ijiiv;at'Y". 5 1- 1U '

552 1!It) If,'). ft'e sfuiiithiiitl I.. oiiujtisly 11104 sl'veit, Imt I liv apptlit'at 11 'tr 

I)14, Jirilir ;luli'ity pre''.liulh, llt f l, ;ilcti t'lfi of fit, priv'ac'y it-Xllpliill? Io" w lin t Il, r,,, I ::11y, (Ifi ,+ s the 1111,1ic' 10' :01H., ' 11 f it 14 . i, ! Ol i +ilu iry 111 lifir "puili iie oil''r r4'Slir loiisiliilif i''s '? '01)1 liei' t'Xillttrill filus.,l i111.5 ilt,'lVilig io'tr,'l :t . Elf' oxt re'iit' i ril;nWl anii, t i r, 

ht,,:,, v'oiiu'rruizig prot e' tlng 'otillidll'iifill s.illrcv4' t111d 4uhugtillg tilfti'evllet'it pro-

('t4'4lig.ig. A law enforc('-iieti orginiitilion is tll]ai"s eft'ff.i ve ns Its solr'e.s of inf'oraitlon. ,e' 'ulati lo will m11l i' ve, rii'sit ln the lit'sl 4o olulllintn is a|uris-

silt5 l.'" y unld'r very stringent evidentiary rules, lJt'; id pfit- lion f I24-niIs41lll,, ('V nee il't' llle fr'lel'ntly froini lls, iX'1'SlIiwvso liui iwl) riot \% i,;i to testify 

ore lit ifiild, I iel iudi llg Iprsons wh-st, li\e,- or ph,,iysicmal safty Vto(l dw eit-datn"-,rvil If fhey wo- re+ Idelilied'+. \W'ler'tvver S lil lt Individlual i.s idt-qitilied, that 11'ls ,!1 111io those of like mind eome mtor, ri'luict:,jit to 'ilt'Itl with th'ir 

(;,li'Jtlleiit, ili the ftltrtire. 'Many will atlintiritly r'tis, t, ' 'l holui iivtll\4'" 

o;lrln. Th fititllyst must r'co+glnize such i)'rsrils from th, r4'<,irds ilt'rt)' in. nlit' a iilr kt Inv st lh (h ternlif' if llst')liolre 4o f lii,, Iif'orm'at in , (lll i(l'hitif. tli, 

stollt'4, t It knowltedgt'abile reolul'ster or Ills assoc'-iInf's. 'Ilhis Is :it itnt i,, siloh, ta sk 

to a't've with ertainty for ti(l tin lyst nbosess n ('rystal a ill thit wmold Imruliii hin to 'rt'el 'e Informnation ronc'riing wilit'h lihe rvolu,.4ster is knowldg,- 

> 111h,.

And t le statiIte us writtv,ll a!low. frew i-tuiine's (of tittl a! x'i -i,i I I -fol';int inrlrnir tlon because tlivt liurlen I oetllishing the illt llitiin , Nvon svi a l it' only from tle confidential sou re is virtuia lly' imlo<issil)' t |ii-0eC. 'fwit' v.urru, it ilnterplnttatioi, refined by Jdllclal dl.eisionts, au the, apartmentt #if 

.1s ti''s Frmtedol m f Iinformation A jqs',l.-; 'nil's imIJlt'neitaimi (if thi s '1e-

.ii,.. Is Olflu itlrn111lit ilif+ rwi.firon ma~fy lov w\itlhle'd ortvlyx tot ilh extent tlhe iciiti (or fill' stlir('t, wuil hlie re'vl'led. .As ('o igres. corretly w3'4.1l1441, r(4lii.stti' wouiil',d slitlil it Inplllrie. con(irlniiig 

ontJiiijig 4'iforce in t lmrpi',t'ttlii g4 mid l 'rinlittfIdlhtll If th1,054 '.ht tinlw y Iti tit extent literft'renc'e wtiilhl result. Ali.%" reasomilfle scgregalt, lportioni of stielh rec-561 

ords must be made available. Leaving aside the question of what records would interfere with any possible enforcement proceeding, the unresolved question arisms when the very assertion of the exemption would thwart the investigation. Many tittles a successful law enforcement investigation hinges upon being able to prevent the suspect from becoming aware that law enforcement l)ersonnel have fuaiwnd uin ills activities. Addressing these tasks of correctly interpreting and prompt rly applyiig the exnl otins takes time. And though reasonable people may differ as to what con-sliltutis handling requests with all deliberate speed possible, no one cal dispute 

Ih, nee'd for considerable deliberation. APPEALS AND LITIGATION 

The Freedom of Information Act provides not only for administrative review 

Iby appeal., but permtlits Judicial review on an expedited basis with tile (ovtern-naent ioaying the plaintiff's legal fees should the Court determine plaintiff sub-stwitially lJrevaihd. Both lrocedures consume the time of those who must respond 

I io t her re(plests. It cijinnetion vith the J)lpartmnent of Just ice Freedoin of Information Appeals It'nit analysts re-examine all documents originally reviewed when an aplxal is taken. Thereafter, attorneys assigiied to the Aplw~als Unit confer with Fil per-sonmI, examining the materials and discussing all issues raised by tit, applica-tiont of exemptions to witllhold certain records. Additional evaluations are lrtmp.ired by the Ap wals Sla ff for the Im)cputy Attorney General. liot those asl'Cts of thil aplpeals 0do not generally involve time uor effort by FBI F()IPA personnel. 511 appeals regarding FOIPA requests to the Fil have been completed. 377 '.mit n to be dispatched. 

As iay be readily discerned from the foregoing discussion regarding access -inil records description, review and interpretation iroblexns, and given tit(e fact Ilii1 tie iigeli'y exelilliting lilly material be.;rs the bburden of proof, litigation n'repest'itis rriips flia' moiast seven' drain oti nimiilia'vs of Ix'rsoinel and available  

> t'X

pert ise to fllL'&'t'5 sfilyv tdlifii't delsioiis iadi'. lit iriler for thi' silver. try s.ys'll to ftllictioll. short or totally in cmrlallet review If t'xin'iptt'd materials, t tie tu.nrls require sibmissiuii (of a detailed ju.stltllt'ii f,,r every uxtision. Use of tlet word, vxcislii. slioI41 not he confused witi the  

> (exi'inllills

listed ill tile statute. There are onily hiuh' exemptions, one of which cnutaiis six sulipa rts. Ilowever, oinl' or more of tl( i'Xeilllniins or subparts niay 

lIe IIv l |liihu dried ; (r. even la'iuhllisIls of tilli's ill it givell reqellist. Ea(cl I1se- Is till 

t'xiisioii. ''he detailed justilt iin lnlust describe il iioi-'onclusory tennis tihe fact'nt (-intent of every excision without disclosig the material withheld. The t;sk is di ticult enough too aceomlplish wit hotit jep:i rlizlng tile very interests iighit to lie lrot4~'ted iasstrtihng tie exemlption; the affidavit which results is 

lfli its Irge its the lwu'kiige released and Imy lu 'olllti "Illu)(R hi lil' rt' c rds wit held. Four and five hundred page attaitnents to affidavits hiive iti'ely bieeni required. l'sIR(,l idig in this niatner to t ln.o re'quireinwelnts iilnli O ed by lit igat ion certalifly i'e.ssltates tile extensive use of l-r.so inti assiglied to FOI IA. Witimut belaboring tihe! point, the statutory respmnsibilitles of the Freedom (f lInfoirmiation Act are cmisidrable. 'i'lT Fill its custodians for it repositiory of voluminous records concerning matters of great interest to the general public, hies received and nay exiwct to continuee to re(.ive, large inimber of requests cCessNing those records. Ao-" fea.ibhle ilan to irovidt' timely. disla,.sitlve reslmises to anti'ltated reuests w.-ill rffluire the eXlenditure of several millions of dollars andt lit' permanent assigmiint of many skilled personnel. Regardless of orga-niiational structure or operational policy. t hough et-rta1ily important, the basile allity to aceoldiish the task will flow only from tlie comnilttnent of substantial rI''soiurces beyond t h1o(t' Ill v.Sitly allocated. 

C. CURRENTT OP'RATIONAI. STR'CTR-'li it I(w rt'mluesl Is a-%slgli! to) it Resenrch analystt, the list iro essitig stel) r'l irt's duuldicatitlg it ('Omlete v.'ipy (of the lolilllts cntailled iln tile files Which 

are wilhln the pmrview of the request. This is no stall task when it is realized tit(' average Non-Projet't ri4lulest deals with 700 pages and tile average Projeet re Iuest deals with 10.(Y)0 i1lg's. T11he next phase is the actual lrocessilig of tie docunets by a research Analyst which iay be a routine miiatter or extremely complex. In some instances maxinim 562 

possible disclosure may have been ordered by a court or the Department of Justice. In other instances very complicated issues of first instance may arise necessitat-Ing an Internal policy determination or consultation with the Department of Justice. In any event, the documents are processed and will either be withheld completely, released in part, or released completely, depending on their content. Release may be accomplished by one communication enclosing all the documents to be provided the requester; or, in Project cases where the number of documents is voluminous, by partial, periodic releases. Few releases are made prior to receipt of payment for any fees due. Waiver of fees in the case of a requester who has furnished proof of indigeney, or where great public Interest is Involved may o(Kcur. Rtequesters are notified of the appeal pro edures available by statute 

it eacth letter enclosing, or denying documents.     

> CURRENT REVIEW, APPEALS, AND LITIGATION

All documents are reviewed on a page-by-page, line-by-line, word-by-word basis by analysts. The statutory requirement to release those portions of a document which are "reasonably segregable" from any portions that may be withheld, dictates this c'jurse of review, Analysts work under the direct supervision of SipmIal Agent Attorneys to Insure a proper understanding of the laws'. Classiled documents within the files which are FIll originated must be sent to) t'e Intelligence Div'ision for a determination of whether the document Is currently and properly classified. Iocuments are forwarded by internal neno-ranlumi and th( review and conclusions reaIched by tle Intelligence J)ivision are reduced to an ad(enduin for re'ording, departmental review and litigatim purposes. When all phases of "processing" have been completed, the material is sill,-Jected to review by Special Agent personnel. Succeedingly higher levels or review oceur: normally three, but sometimes four, prior to release to a requester. Following completion of processing and release, ninny requests move to tli stage of administrative aplaal, wherein the )epartment of Justice reviews the FBI's determination regarding withhollizg (lKocimeMIts and/or portions of r -

ments from a requester. and the FBI's determnmi nat ion is either upheld, deilhd oir modified and the reluestr-r Is so notified. Tze lResealrc Analyst and the Agent Supervisor meet with a I-eimartimental Attorney on this Appeal. often in lengthy sessions, and the rationale ised in any chIllenged deilil i examined. A substantial number of requests lead to litigation. When litigation is Imisti-tuted, almost without exception time Court will order affidavits to be submitted. III 

the event of litigation prior to the comipletion of pro.esing, a "gotI faith" affi-davit setting forth the reasons th, FBI has bwen unable to comply with the time-liness required by the Acts is prepared. If the affidavit fails to convince the Court. an order is Issued directing compliance by a specific date. If the Court is convinced the lhiay enmcoimntered is reasonable, the norminl order will lie more time for completion. Either situation has had similar effect on the FNI/IPA Section. A request Is taken out of order and given preferential treatment to coni-ply with the ('ourt's order, resulting In the shuffling of personnel from their current assignments to one that Is most critical. And the backlog grows. Many court orders to date have required the FBI to submit affidavits ontain-Ing detailed justiflcations. When such an order is issued, Its effect on orderly l)rocem~ing can be devastnting. Thlis type of order, based originally upon a deci-sion that required detailed, justiflration. only for a random sampling of the do(uments, has been extended too a point where every such order imW)oses an onerous burden. FozPA SECTION 

Se+..m Ch;ef 

Mambowr 00mA C laek- ('rT-A) ream M r" --

Te, p_)*r 

Anlyrl-

> mm.uqw-wI

C/o -* 0 

> gtq~"Oo

Poole. I564 

D. STATISTICAL ANALYSES AND CONCLUSIONS FOIPA Section INTRODUCTION Contained i this section, discussing statistical analyses and the conclusions drawn therefrom, are four different groupings of figures. First, the current work load of all analysts assigned to Non-Project work was 

> naltI.ly7Ad.

Second, the current work load of all analysts assigned to Project work was 1fill lyz.. 

Third. oas(ld ()i the flg'ties derived front ole aId two albove, there I it gromllng of figures whih explains thli proJected increase of analyst persomnel neededl to 

remain current with In(oilig work. 

Tile fourth set of figures is a detailed (,xanililtion dealing only with tihe lirtigre'ssive increase of the hacklog, and has attached four tables which are appli-

cable to that examilnation. 

This di.wiiioni will separate the statistical analyses into two general eate-gories. The first, which will enwompass the write-ups of Non-Project, Project anl Ilie projection to the an1aalyst (omllement needed, will constitute the pro-Jlwtion toward Seclio rtetorganization. The second will deal only with tt(' backlog I,'itdlt'in. 'i'le statlstical analyses from which conclusions were drawn are in-cli(ncld ilk th' apIlndlIx.  

> DAi).Y O

0iRK JEII.NI) ON TIlE F0)1PA HIlANCII 

lased (it, lih, (,Xliliilt tin of iticoilliiag dinily work, red'ticed by cerlaii factors, %%v, hive ilet'rlmed Ihiat shglitliy over 171,.' reqiuests per woinkinrg ala.' (.Ol.stitite iit% it nnli-rial Io le pr'esstl. Nerll y I.m5 loerevat of the ite w work will I assigned Io the No-l'roject analysts idt the remainder to Ihe Project anatlysts. IHaving ex iiiniitld thte c.irrtliy assigned work loads of Ihoth groulps, the Iverage sliz, iii Itrllsl. tilf iges (of work, were dheterinled for tit' typical Nom-i'roj 'ct realliest and fir the lyilhlvil ]Project request. 'T'iese figures show that the FO PA lirl('1h i8ust Irot s alid (lis l,. rof i.1.3 page's if new work per day. iln comparing [ht pages i'r liy' lirice'sst,(l by the total aialyst comiplemnent with the total pages lx'r day of new work arriving, we have oncllthided thai to) reanii current with iiwomilg 

work wi ,d require I. S full-lime a analysts working under optillmil conditions. Taking into ribaicol(rit the Iiiforest'ii ('(ollli [cationis arising froin litigation ani also t he -ize oif tie three Non-I'rojet case's not included in the averaging, we litve .onclulid that all iddilional 12 analysts above the IS previously state-d wul t'liit, 114 lie FOIIlA Section to remainll (lrrenlt with Incraining work and lav it slight t h(ge aizallist emit Ieigecies. The Fii , therefore. concludes that for metirga iizati ,tof thlie 'Sec ilu, -414) analysts are iee.ssary.        

> WORK AE A.NI.ND.S 10 EI.IMINA'F '171lE IOI'A HA KI .()G

Bla'"'ii (ol flgoiri's iva\llaili'I,' m it weekly p'og r.i- Ihalsis we hlave ilrojected 

lhat Iby .JlaiImr 1:3, 1H177. the' Iaicklog will ci tialin 9.917.161 pagi'S of wiork too be 

Ior-cs'-wid. It will Il, a Iixllt tirer l'rtoJec-t ,lii Non-Projet work and allowances fl' I hit c|iffecrv'it sizes havto leie' Ii Ie. Aflter li ving arrived at Ile l lg4' ('ellil ttof t li 1,:a-klag, fcotir chial rt s lim- 'ivii attiatlied projectllag a rut,mbhier or j'rs (nel 

mvitiiii pl r,,iht'{ivihy ivr pi'r., i Im'r tiiv t) orrivi' i it mtiire whicl Is th liilulitr for ,itr1i1 iteci sAs'nry to) prioess tie ages in tle 'auklog. ( Siee Apix'ndix plpgs. 

A ,m'liil, prompt nlolrvatl, tie F1it hIs moi-lifiild tlmat from Septermlber 1. 1970. ueliti' t the- rt'lparantry stt'lu5 Ihededl . we ('lill ntt instilite ti effort of 

lif]i'.ilt 1iiilgiiiltle' iga IIst .it' hmcklog prior to .Jauinry 17. 1977. Thi.s leaves lllrexiarly 7!,,. ,ont th to 'e,,lllet't4' the prowet'silig of tie backlog :1il, still he 

wit 11wth ',ie-yviar time1, talilt. rt'tile.tecd boy the ('o111mmittee. All faiir charts ha va' ii litavy line drawn lit separating Ihose figures which r elirvi.ft e-Ight In1l, ths; (or lesq from Iho.e flglure4 that represent more thn alght it,,ith-;. It thvn I t''tuii{'v ,II iU' Ji(lgiat'lt of II)w nilnllny Agents. from I to ,500, 

Iirtvissimt.tzii, i alt hom, Iniiatln ilgt's pI'r a.y., varying from 50 to .375, nmudi-

tled Iv thit' aays/lioirs thli. groip f AgelitNt could perform , to arrive at the final littiltihitr 4if imlitlis cho.en. 565 

E. PROPOSED PLAN 1. PRESENT STATUS To administer requests effectively, avoid serious error iii coping with a task involving suIstailitial legal complexity, and prevent impairment of tile FBI's 

primary mandated responsibilities, certain essential policies were previously imilenented, Each Is considered vital not only to efltctive administration of the FOE PA, but also to lite ability of the FBI to nitinain a continuing caplcity to meet its statutory )blgations regarding Federal lIw enforcement and I'rotec-tion of the nation's Internal security. For basic policies are involved: 

(1) Use of law trinthed sulervisors for all atlminlistrative positions within the 

FOI IA Section. (2) Use of a two-track system separating the processing of voluminuils alses front those involving considerably fewer pages. 

(3) Use of a "sec reference" policy approvetl by ti, l)epuity Attorney (hleral to exlx.(dite our response to requests, while premr%-ing for the requester further 4olil unii illy to adleliltely identify any record not retrieved by tht initial st-airch. (4o l'se, of l ivaitqia rter's Imrsonhiel and the 'nt'utral records system to respond tbo iist requests, although (iujihicat e investigation' , tiles milly exist In tile Fihld 

triese. ('wiver.-ly investigations iiInretiorteti to HIeadquarters are requireld to lie pressed boy Fiilhi (P1ice ]s'rsonl, wlo are authlorlzt'd to) corri-sinil di reel ly with the requester. The reqmlremnet of la w-trailned suKrvIsors for tie F1OIIA leatdqua rters' ,ojerat ion Is griuldiqi il the legal complexities o)f the sta tute's, the le e.sity to provide proper instruction to the Field Offices to assure lawful compliance, and  

> th(

asle'ts of advocacy and del'ense nsl.)ciated with appeals and litigatioi. With the pas tagv, of time, further Judicial guidance In tie interpretation of tht lstt ltt's, and the development of aI training and policy nn nual providing. firm guide lii's to new personnel, fewer attorney supervisors may be required. For the foresee-able future, their continued assignment Is indispensable. Adoption and continued us, of the two-track system, recogized ioy the '.S. 

('Cmrt of Appeals for thw listriet of (',lumlda t.s reasomalle, p,.ruilts eff'live control and proper assessment of personnel in retsptiding to primarily non.viu-minous or first person requests versus voluminous requests t)r those witi historic    

> (Or ldilir'y signilleaice.

( (cit A merica, c it. v. The 1i(I'tcrgaf' ,Npceu l 1ror(i'ti-

tier Force, 01 al., ('asP Number 70-1371. decided July 7. 7T). A lialant e of thee Inturtst.s is tl(heied il 1irolirlitte in ket'iilnig faith witi tit, puliilc amd tile olhj-. tivi-, of Mle (C'oigrtss in illnllgatig the legismainthn. 'o reject tllils apli)rnachi tor i'nI li131siz. o e li t liet' 'Xi'lie of t it', t hier wtild tisr ii't the h"l1l's el'irt. too act re, l.lsibily lid to aiivswer the 1i11ltlii (liie('4ls eqiiitol Iy. Tit(e "see" refereitee Ili(y which concerns tlie seart'h, retrieval aniid fill review system used boy the FBI to resilnd to FOIPA requests hias it een explailltd Irevl-ously to Individual Memibers (of Congress and the llouse Committee oii (overn-mnt Operations. Documents regardlig Its tl'vt'lopmeinit. evaluai o! antd tll' -1iD)-proval for its use by the Deputy Attorney (eieral are i, mtaineId In tie lphs'dix. {See appendix page 120). Despite tie fact that tie FlI's backlog has grow Kihi-sillelit too tile adoption of this policy, It hias allowed eoncentration of existing personnel ol their actual lr(wessing of material respoonls.ive to reiqlests rather thai! using their services to review thousands of volitmes, only to determllie tie material is either not Identical with the requester or not responsive to the request. Continued application of this measure should add significantly to tm,, FIll's en-deavor to achieve and retain a current operatimnal capacity. Furthermore the policy has considerable merit from a requester's viewpoint as It allows 1i1l11 to provide the detail that will permit tie retrieval and identification of a record. which the FBI would otherwise have been unable to link with the requester or the subject matter of his inquiry. I'se of tile Central Records System at Hleadquarters to comply with tile roesjuests of most persons Is the policy embodied in Title 2-. Code of Federal Regulatioi. Part 16.57(c). Conversely where investigations have not been reported to Ilead-quarters, the requester is assured, by designation of the Field Oftce involved, of a complete search for any record of such an investigation. The Imlortanee may lie overlooked in the rather simple statement .wt forth in tile regulation; however, it was designed to preclude Fild Offices from having to review anld pr(M.,'sx vii-hinzious cne request.s or a large number of less voluminous request,. EIlther or both situntions would Impact adversely laxliii the primary function of lier-566 

sionel in the Field Offices, investigation. As few Field Office personnel would be available to process requests, tile burdens could become onerous overnight. Addi-tlonally there would be no way to balance a work load, governed solely by the hIoLe oIf offices to whom requesters could; If the policy were abandoned, address their letters. Administrative complexities that would stem from having most of the work handled by 59 separate Field Offices are staggering to even contemplate. Common sense dictates no reversal or abandonment of this policy; and certainly to do otherwise would not further the objectives set forth at the beginning of this proposal. An evaluation of current procedures provides the background against which proposed policy may be most critically examined. What follows is a bifurcated plan to meet the objectives established. Unquestionably problems will ensue and have to be resolved. This proposal is Intended to be a first step, and deals with very specific objec-tives. It is definitely not the final solution to the impact of the Freedom of Infor-mation and Privacy Acts upon the FBI. A proposal presented in any other per. spective would be presumptuous; and is likely to e stillborn, despite the care taken In Its conception. Necessary funding, and the further cooperation of Con-gress In the consideration of specific problems, will be necessary. 2. ReSTRUCTuRE or FOIPA SECrON INTO FOIPA BRANCH Attached immediately hereto Is a chart showing the physical reorganization of the FOIPA Branch. INTRODUCTION "'he iFOIPA Branch must have the capability to receive, process and make distclosure of a continuing daily work load of approximately 18,000 pages. The proposed reorganized structure is designed to achieve this capability. The Branch has been divided Into two Sections, Disclosure and Operations. This phAse of the proposal deals exclusively with the Branch day-to-day opera-tions and has been designed to achieve long range effectiveness, and the goal of maintaining a current status. However, it cannot be emphasized too strongly that without elimination of the backlog this plan cannot achieve an acceptable degree of success. Disclosure and the essential support structure to allow the necessary level of productivity required, represent the basic features of this portion of the proposal. TOTALS 

om Cw" 

> C1O

TOTALS 254 TOTALS 47 437TOTALS 391 

C.,' -.4 

> I

568 

A. DISCLOSUREE SFCTION 

The )isclosure Section, headed by a Section (hvf init a Number One Man, has be.n divided into six Units, three to handle Non-l'rojeot requests and t three to handle Project requests, plus a floating Crisis Teum. All research Analysts are within this Section and have the responsibility of pr~x-essing all d(wuments. Two lhundred Research Analysts have been choseni as the number needed to stay .ur-rent with the new requests, with a SulmNrvisor to Itesear,'h Anitlyst ratio of 1 to 11 

as the uplper efficient level for this type-work. Past experience has proven that the greatest (isruition too pr, messing has It,ien the shifting of Research Analysts from their own assigitnients to pr(cessiIig sonIP-where else on a crisis basis. Only one request his reiliired the assignment of iver 21 Research Analysts, and with the 11' Team, ( l'r, Je.t Crisis Tean I, available to le assigned in whole or in part to it critical pr, vrssiig ne(d, the efftect of shift-ing personnel will he minimlized. The Dislosure Section will increase to 2;-4 lwrsiiis its Indiated 011 thle ilrt. 

Since the FOIPA Section as currently (,institited is totally disclosure oriented, this represents an Increase of personnel devoted to tie disclosure function of :4. 

A clear delineation of function is essential. Even wil h 2.54 I-ople devoted to, the Disclosure Section, it will not succeed unless tae ()lIeratiuns Secti o),n is simml-taneously Implemented. The l)isclosure Sect bin miust lIe freed front all things snve the lr, .essng and rehase of tllocti(itents. 

It. OP:ArATIo.Ns S.:crioN The Operations Section, headed by a Se.t obi ('hief and a Numler 0ne Man. hins been divided into fcur Units. A. The Branch Apalytlcal, Research, Support tiiid .%.quiisition U'nit will he resiKinsible for the continuedd monitoring of the ]tra nyh olwratioii in terims of effielilncy and effectiveness of function, It will perform all research dealing with legal develolnnents as pertain to the Branch and will le respionsible for a con-tenilos)rateous test ing win( ac(ui'4ititin prograil ,esigited too fill vaicanies wilh it the B~runch with an absolute jiinimtin of deliy. This IV i will supervise ail tissist iii training all new I1'rsonnel. 

It. ''lhe Field Office Operational. flecortis, Ailippi Oit(Hiroliilti r Uit! will liiv'' is 

Its prime function the Implementation, and ntitoring for (iinli laine, (f F(0Il',A llrith. Department of .Justice atnd Court mitaninted iiilicy electintg tih' FBif's lieliwide compliance with the Acts. It will ((E.rdliniti' i atdlmitistrittive 0 lic.-iE 11(,tivitles, whether iead(iuirters or Field Office. itad in ,,olimjiietionl i,,itlt tie ARltSA Unit will irontulgate research and anilytiet.l ,.,,t.i usions. 

V. The ('lassiflcati mi Review ult will lie resiiitsiie fo r review, iluier ilie guidelines Of Executive Order 11.52, of all do .injent- p ertainimng to) F'()Ii'.A r4,quests, and the sulbsequent notifications anld tmlhII titg to) which their reviews 

1). The Centralized Iit lial Processing Unit will IN' responsible for all initial  

> ns1wets

of handling F )II'.A requests s1id premt ring them ls ciomlplete work iack-nges prior to assigning then to Research Analysts for ],rosessing. Also Includ iH ,e,lut,,rizel data capture and control of request assignment on it specialized lIosis. i)uring the time sani of time Backlog Elniinitin Plain. the ('11' ,Unit will have the additional responsibility of preparing all liniklogged requests for pro'-,ssimg hy the Agents on "SpIeciil". C. COSTS-- FOIPA BRANCH REORGANIZATION 

1. Personnel, yearly .................... ........................................ $6, 057,471 

2. SpK e, yearly--...................... ... .... ........ ..... _.. .. . . ......... . . 241. 741 

3. Supplies. yearly ........ ........................ ....... . ............ 106, 283 

4. fQulpment........ ..... . ....... .... ........... . . . $ .0 

S. Transfers ..... .....-............ ....-......................... 102, 581 ......... 

6. Communications ............................................... 26,600 41, 60 

Total_.... ............................................. 255, 182 6. 447. 261 Grand total ................................................. . 6,702. 443 

'To reorganize the F)II'A Bran,.h will oIst $6,7012,443 dizring the first year. nnd will be reduced for each succeeding year upon renovl of the one time costs 

of $255,182 to a subsequent yearly vost, )f $6,447,261. 569 

1). OPERATIONAL POLICY The FOIPA Branch will be guided by one over-riding policy, the quickest possible response to all requesters. The proposed reorganization plan has built-in features of self-monitoring, training refinement, personnel replacement aaid computerized data retrieval. Front-end assembly line techniques will be instituted, and the total Research Analyst complement will be freed to concentrate on nothing but processing documents. The Operations Section will serve to optimize the effectiveness of the Fill's response to tile mandates of the Acts. 3. EiIMINAION OF TIE FOII'A BACKLOG A. INTRODU-rIoN The Fill proposes a separate approach, deplendtnt lilion the reorganl'Ad FOII AItranch as a support facility, to meet the objective of eliminating the FOIPA backlog within one year. This 1. to be accomplished by an extraordinary crash program utilizing a complement of 200 Special Agent Attorneys selected from the various Fill Field Offices. They would be lodged in the Washington, D.C., area on a per diem basis and work In the Fill headquarters building, 10th and Pennsylvania Avenue. It Is estimated that this complement working Rix days per week, ten hours per (lay, at an average page production per Agent per day, of 2W0, will have completely processed the 9.9 million pages In the projected backlog within six months from the (late of inception, designated as January 17, 1977. It. FUNCTION. FEATURES This would place the complement of Agents, selected for the crash program to eliminate the backlog, contiguous to the reorganized FOIPA Branch that will support and supervise the program. Both the original files and pertinent com. mnnicatlons, as well as the special services of the ARSAUi and CItU would be Immediately available to assist in the resolution of )roblems. All agent personnel selected for the crash program will be attorneys. The lonrlmse of this selection is to minimize the training required and to assure the most productive and correct aplilh'atinn of the Acts. Presently, the total com-ilenient of law trained Fill Agents is 1.25.R Adopting tile principle of equitalily distributing the selection among all l,'iell Offices, with the slight added lrdon being placed on twelve offices having the largest attorney conplemnllt, no Field Office will le crippled by the personnel selection. All materials needed by the special complement would be prepared by the hadquarters staff of the FOII'A Branch. particularly by the jiersonrel as-signed to the Centralized Initial Propossing Unit. As the finished processed loii-mnents are produced, the necessary communications to furnish the released doen-

ments will lie prepared and (iselosure aceomlllshed by the PRC Team. To ex-pedite the release of all dcenient. processed during the crash program, an extensive use of printed forms. explaining the exemptions cited, the appeals procedure and the right to Judlelal review Is contemplated. Preparation of origi-nal transmintal conmmninineations can thuis be kept to an absolute minimum. Anal, ysls of this prc, dnre for Incorporation in the FOIPA Bronch operation wll be possible. C. COST--NON ETARY 'I'o .4,.t of the vrah| piirn in will idlv'eld (oi lie gzri des oif thie \gents deo-l-wiled to partlcipcnte. afnd thn rotation sRhedul e choon. It ,s felt that six months of concentrated six-day weeks at ten hours Iwr day Is beyond reason. Considera-tion has been given to various combinations of grade 12 and 13 agents, in two, 3months, shifts, and in three. 2 month shifts. The costs involved vary from R-1.911.764 to $5.321.310. deneading on ti eomblnatlon, sPlectel. The Agent snl-arip and benefits are Included as they must be allocated as a cost of the Spe-cial, however, their salaries would he a cost factor Incurred wherever the Agents nrt, assigned. Without the base Agent salaries and the flxel co ts Included. the additional costs incurred vary from $2,300,54 to $2,341,764. Calculation of tile high figure was arrived at as follows :570 

F1OIPA backlog elimination plan-monetary (B) 

1. Personnel costs ------------- ----------------------------- $3, 544, 800 2. Travel costs ----------------------------------------------- 123, W(M) 

3. Reproduction costs ------------------------------------------ 140, 964 4. Per diem ------------------------------------------------ 1.512, 00)0 

Total ------------------------------------------------ 5, 321, 34 

COSTS--SPACE REALLOCATION Providing functional work space for 200 Agents will require a pproxinately 18,000 square feet of space conducive to the meticulous examination of sensitive documents at an accelerated rate of production. Unspecified dollar costs may well have to be absorbed in making this space available. It will be necessary for tills space to accommodate desks and/or tables, have sufficient illumination for the processing task, and telephones for consultations with other agencies, regarding their documents, with the CRU and with the FOIPA Litigation Unit assigned to Legal Counsel Division. Orientation and initial training can be accomplished by using the Headquarters' building auditorium. Decisions regarding the reallocation of space to accommodate personnel as-signed to the backlog should be Integrated, and compatible with, reorganization space needs ioc the proposed FOIIA Branch, as both are inter-dependent. COSTS--AOENTS ABSENT FROM( RE8PECTIVE FIELD O7F'CES 

Once again, this Is not a fixed dollar cost, but dilutes the operational efficiency of each FBI Field Office from which Agents are drawn, particularly with respect to attorneys. Every effort will be made to choose Agents not in key positions, preferably not on Field Office administrative staff, and not to reduce the attor-ney staff of any Individual Field Office to a crippling point. As a matter of eco- 

> iioinics,

the choices will be directed toward the lowest grades, and the closest Field Offices with a large complement of attorneys. The Implementation-'Time Schedule shows September 25, 1976. as the late for notifying each effected Fi-ll Office of the Agents needed. This will allow our Field Office Administrators to prepare for the personnel loss, and permit reassignment of investigative mat-ters. It will also allow Agents sufficient time to set their affairs in order pi*e-paratory to an extended absence. The Implementation-Time Schedule has been drawn with the holiday season in mind, and the only hardship anticipated in this respect is on the part of Ileadquarters personnel in the FOIPA Branch who will be required to compete all prerequisite preparatory steps during the interim from September 1, 1976, and January 17. 1977. F. IMPLEMENTATION-TIME SCIIEDULE The reorganization of the Freedom of Information-Privacy Acts (FOIPA) Sec-tion into a Branch, and the Implementation of the plan to eliminate the back-log are inseparable. Indeed, In implementing a time schedule to meet the Con. inittee's request, it becomes apparent that Section reorganization Is ne.es,,mry before implementation of the backlog elimination plan. The C.I.M.U. stands for the Centralized Initial Processing Unit. The function performed by the CIPU would include the handling of all incoming communion. tins, searching them against pre-existing FOIPA re(juests, all preliminary com-munications between the FBI and a requester, searching of the FBI Ileadquarter4 Central Indices, calling for files to determine if identical with a request subject and counting the sections, the duplication of one complete file copy, computerized data capture for incoming and outgoing communications, preparation of pre-proce~sIng materials. including the file copy, into a package and the maintenance control and assignment to analysts of requests for processing. The Agent per-sonnel are available or will be ordered In, five of the seven needed duplicating machines are available, approximately sixty percent of the space needed has bee:: designated., and a number of the clerical personnel needed are available. The A.R.S.A. stands for the branch Analytical, Research, Support and Acquisi-tion Unit. This Unit would have the responsibility of analyzing, on a continuing basis, the effiiency and effectiveness of the disclosure operations of the FOIPA 571 

Branch. It would also maintain a testing program and a listing of available employees to replace personnel within the Branch as vacancies occur. The U'nit would have reslponsibility for killing vacancies wi tli qualified personnel with aIliinimuin of lag-time, and conducting the necessary research to keep the lranchl alireast of current developments within the law regarding the Freedom or Ill-

formation and the l'rivacy Acts. Court decisions in this develtilng area ff tile 

law have all isnliedliat( Impact oil the way (Immlients lt( ]iiwes ,ed no0w, and the responsibility of following tile applicable decisions and insuring tile rest of the Branciuh is ad hering to court decisions affecting policy would lie a prime reslonsiliility fo r this l'nit. Tie F,()O.ItA. .'. stands for Field Oft-ce (Ope-ratiual, Ret.,ords. Appleai (C'i-

o-di llt ion I'nit. At tll, tiiie, the FB'l I has two Age-lts ill et,' (of It-1 9 Fl ihjd 

Oflies desigliated1 fur handling F(IIPA aitiitters Iit tleir re.pi-ctive divisions. The F0)]i'A Set ioll liatF'BI Hleadquarters Is receiving iii'reashig ntimbers of it-quiries from th,, Field, and the eoordination and handling of these matters by aspecialized group is essential. (i'oiversely, l~lhcy, administrative, and judivia d]eterminations affectig the Flills handling of FOI PA matters lutst be ziade uiniformly avallaide to our Field Otice representatives, and! this would eolisti-

tute one of the chief tasks of this Unit. Additionally, adlniiiist rativ appeals lit the leadquarters level are growing in numbers. Along with the Hleadquarters' apleals, more adm]niistral lye appeals matters tire being received from the Field 

Offices. It Is essenlial that these appeals, to the extent possible, be haniled by asl julalized Unit, and not assigned to the l]sclosmire Seetion or any other I'llit within t he Operations Section. To do so would disrupt daily disclosure qlsotliH of the FOIPA 3ranch.  

> ('.

R.U. stands for the Classification Review Unit. Inherent within the processing of I .. miients in respoisve to an FOIPA request Is the need for laragraph-y-plaragraph review of classifled dwuuments uider the guidelines of Hxeculve Order 1l6'2. No other type classification review is usable to a Itesearelh Analyst processinig (ocunelts mitider thc FOIPA. '1'his Unit and its staff exists intact in 

another 1Division at FIII Ileatlutarters. Three additional- Special Agents have  

> -

I een added to meet work load projections. Integrating this Unit with the FOIIPA Biranclh, will require only slightly more space and equipment. It is felt the presence of this Unit is essential because of the many classified doc-uments withij files responsive to F(IIIA re(uiests. The Inemibers of this n'it could be most t'feetively utilizedl withiti the FOIP3A Branch structure proposed, allowing their coiiisel to mzield with the1 daily disclosure task of the Branch. 

As can be seen from an examination of the time schedule elart, a prerequisite to tle backlog elimination plan iN that the C.IP.IU. personnel have completed and prepared a total working package to be handled by the incoming personnel on s]ievial assignnpnt. This I'nit must lie ready as soon as lomsible since the Job involves aplproxinmtely 10 million pages of documents which niust be reproduced. Time, st titles were conducted and strict adherence to the implement at ion schedule Is r' uired If the objectives are to lie met. The A.R.S.A.I'. maust JIoe 1ully operational aid p~replared 1o conduct the esential orientation and training of all new personnel, Including those oil special , .,Igll-

ment when they arrive. The F.O.O.R.A.('.1'. must lie staffed. ad(1 available ulym the arrival of per-soniel onll Special assigniient am they will lie charged with initial and continuing sui]ervision of these personnel during the period of time necessoary to eliminate Ilie 

iacklog. The ('.R.U'. nilust lie In place in the FOIPA Branch Operatlons Sectio and ready to have representatives available from the first day to work with it(Il personnel on smpetial assignment. The ('.I. will lie able to furtish guildanve  

> iauid

advise tite- processors on the special in addition to advisilng the lesearclh Analysts aissignied t tle FOII'A lraneh. The (late for Imneenat it Ion of all phases hearing oil reorganization and back-log elimination has hevii cOsen am January 17, 11)77. The control date to determine tflat nil iirerequisite steps are proceeding (in schedule has been chosen as I)eeej-Iir 1, 11176. (O)nly after Implement at ion of both plases, and a iitlte~l period of 

,iperatlin, can truly a(,'urat predictions regarding this proposal be made wit h necessary adjustments to follow. It is estimated there will be a two week lag-

tlime before tile pers ijnel on sp1eal asigimnent achieve a significant (legree of pro ductivity; a.', at .oznewhat longer lag-time is necesary before It (.al be 572 

determined that the FOIPA Branch as reorganized is able to remain current with Incoming requests. Tie monitoring, and subsequent modifications, if neces-sary, wIll he a Joint resJonsilJltty of the A.R.S.A.U. and the F.O.O.R.A.C.U. 

BIeeause reorganization of the FOIPA Branch and clinination of the backlog 

are interdependent, adhercnee to the Time Schedule i8 essential to the 8succesv of this proposal. 

FOI/PA BRANCH REORGANIZATION AND BACKLOG ELIMINATION PLAN-IMPLEMENTATION, TIME SCHEDULE Disclosure 

Cl PU ARSAU FOORACU CRU section Branch Plan: Space allocation I. . Sept. 1. 1976 .... Sept. 1, 1976- .. Oct. 15, 1976.... Sept. 30, 1976... Oct. 15, 1976 Oct. 1. 1976..--

Equipment- ------------ Sept. 15, 1976... Oct. 10, 1976.... Oct. 25, 1976.... Oct. 15, 1976 .... Nov. 1, 1976 Personnel selection ---------- do .... -- Sept. 10, 1976... Sept. 26, 1976... (2) ......... Sept. 26,1976 

Personnel notification ..-.. Sept. 20, 1976... Sept. 15, 1976... Oct. 1, 1976 ... Q) ............ Oct 1, 1976 

On the job ............. Sept. 26, 1976... Oct. 15, 1976.... Nov. 1, 1976.... Oct. 30, 1976 .... Nov. 5,1976 Training completed ....... On the job Nov. 1,1976.... Nov. 15, 1976... Trained ........ Nov. 15, 1976 training Backlog Plan: Space allocation (Jan. 16 ................................................................... 

> 1977)2.

[quipment, materials ......................................................................... 

(lan. 17, 1977) 3. 

Dupicated file copy (Jan. --....................... 

17 1977)' IPrerequisitel. Personnel selected (Sept............................................................. 25, 1976) J. 

Personnel notified (Sept .............................................................. 30. 1976)3. On the lob (Jan. 15 to 16 .............. Initial Continued Continued ............ 

1977) 3. training, supervision, participation.  

> 2

Initial space for ARSAU necessary, expanded to full space later. Intact from Division 5 personneI, plus 3 agents. 

3 AlIdates set forth herein are progressive target dates with interdependence, as a control date Dec. 1, 1976, has been chosen. 

(S. LONG RANGE I'IO1POSALS 

('ow(('pt.4 addressed wvthi tis lportlon of the Irupiisal are not explored In delith, bit are presented to permit U (Jmnlreh(,nsive evalatlmni of tie raniiiea-

IiluMs lif adhiiJftilig the basic 1,)IIA propi,saI. Eavh (Olictpt (isi (,sed would efft,(t (,ither the work load (retrieval anti qiantit of reciirds stiloJe.t to review), tie no1tV real to) li, ex1t l2Itred 1t1td releks'd (type of Informatioln ru(drdi a l/(or the Nlinlier 11(1 j'di asig injtit ilf IK-rsmmel needed to (-mliljly with t liM l trtes. 

Fiir itetions rare Iz4'(essttr.. (thers will und1ouiltvdy arise ris tile plisses anld 

flit, l'l I alile to more tlh,-roughly lissess Its ciiiutllifin{ve 411d lite i1lmp1t oll' l, 111 IA rellexss 1lupon1 this Bureau. The four considered are: 

1. l1)'\I'i lilmet of aii a ,tt i.Lted retrievOI systet,', for the itdIe..; to the ('Cenral It-'4ords Systetiu. 2. lurlier developments and reinstitutloin of file destruction efforts,. 

3. levis i Investigative reorlinig Iireeduires its r'gar(. those Inatters man-Elite(l by3 Ilie I ri, cy Act, tiii thise l ro(,ed mres dealing with tlie e'i oteit of 

lI vestignigiry files inclu(linlg r(,ltnti1in 1x4hplles relative to criminal Investigations. 

41. Rtegulr re-evahiiatIon (if tte it ve for the ntinliber of I(rsonnel assigltt'd to Ilti.s lask with a view tot reduction. when and If, feasible. Itl h ite feasibility study and (leveloplment of an automated retrieval system for the v.entral Indices at FBI Headquarters are underway. Searches will lie i('('tlera#d using an alutoiated system. A regular progr in to re-evaluate the t'ontiinning need fir an operational stirtit-tlire (of tis size and c.tst is we.essary. ()nly by initiating such a program at the mltlse't (.1 Litiely noJuitst ineit of Intnl)wer ietls be imide, and will be the 

friction ct the tliSA Unit. II. ('o, ct.usioN 'rlnmsx rql Into work, tle objectives of this proposal. require the daily re-trieval, dul!ientioui and review of no less than 18,000 pages of material coulpled with release to requesters tif ll that iN not exempted, plus the eradlcatmion of alia.khg onsistlIng oif nearly 10 million pages which must be taken through the samlie prs.es. In onte year. 573 

Every day 8,000 Ageuts with thousands of support personnel are performing their mandated responsibilities, recording the investigative results, generating new records subject to future FOIPA requests. As prol)med, this plan wilt enable thie Fill to comply wih tit inin provi.,imis of the FOIPA, eliminate the backlog, and achieve it current olmratioinal capticity. It must be recognized this plan will be costly in ternis of money. Ti first year of operations, incu(linlg those for the "slpe.ial" will he ait lea-t $11,4114.207 and maty be as high as $12,023,807. Cost,, above those piresently ittith,'rized for the F()IPA oleratihn will bw at lea.st $S,204.207 and nmiy be as high Is sSM13,S17. Aft(er eliminating of the backlog, 1perimmnint costs for the Fl0)J A lrin . will annually Ie $6,447.261. A suizhstiittial re-allo(c ttiomi of spaice witiii li, FiST ll(4 Yi M a- l't, riers f,-lIltlits will ie ii'oessitry 'tnishiig (ilsllae'Inient oif sonic upatieat alla. tt,1ii[ain ry (lis-rul it of othe rs. 19,174 -AI li 're feet oif a d ith In I s ieace at the I . Ed La r Ib[over lWildinig will Ibe required o(l it I ierimtennt Inksis ; mii d, iltier 18,(H) -Itiniv, l'et of space will b(* re(luired for 6 mnth.5. 

Wf ('veii g'imi ter imla(t Is the diversi on of 20 iaw t itilled Agents f',mji IIlli" 

r('.)('tiv' fleld ,,fitce lssignimlnits fmor it le(,st six mitli,. '1ToI sole ( extent thlis in Im(t wi% I, lv a melirat ed Ipy lhe trtlt ing effect, jparti.itlan'iy as th(,se A(Agents 

ret, urn to t ir rl'espective Field Offices. 'lih, IvFed,'nd litreanu of Investigation i,, prepared to Iprv('evd with t his plan stl jeevt to the aproval, sil)l)rt and cooperation of tile Attrney General atid tiet (Coigress. 'lThatt cooperation atind support is the sine (Ilia n to liHe successful I mpleumeintai nt of this proposal. S2 621; 77----37 574 

I. APPINDIX NONPROJEOT ANALYSIS 

NONPROJECT-REQUESTS ASSIGNED-WORK ANALYSIS 

Requests Sections See referones 

Team 1.......................................................... 

Team 2 .......................................................... 

Team 3 .......................................................... 

Team 4 .......................................................... 

Team 5.......................................................... 

Team 6 .......................................................... 

Team 7 .........................................................    

> Team 8........................

Team 9 .......................................................... 

Team 10 ................................................... 

Team I I ........ .................. .......................... Team 12........ ......................... ......... .... .... 

Total (60 teams) ... ..... . ........................... 

13 24 17 12 10 

20 

14 13 22 19 212 13 15 10 725 

11 

18 217 12 12 12 513 

13 

10 18 

36 

21 17 17 414 20 24 512 11 17 14 15 10 825 10 29 13 31 25 11 10 23 14 915 8

18 

20 64 40 27 25 30 77 28 22 61 34 

3

25 35 47 22 

10 

202 17 67 54 219 288 61 26 23 25 56 15 36 78 23 38 68 20 27 35 34 12 31 38 39 27 59 316 44 15 56 37 70 55 41 18 67 32 

11 

82 13 34 52 

908 2,820 

The request assignments of 60 Non-Project analysts were examined. They cwi,-sist of 908 requests Involving 2,20 Sections and 3,290 see references. Equating 75 

s e, references to one section raises the Sections Involved to 2863.7 which whcn divided by the requests shows a non-project average sect ions per request (,f 3.15. No'rv.: T1'e above figures represent the work load of 60 Non-Proje.t aialy-'1t, of' which there are a total of 66. The 6 others were not considered In this work irad average as they dealt exclusively with referrals from other agencle.. Tie average work assignment of the 6 Individuals Is equally divided among 30 requests which average 65 pages per request of varying magnitudes. 

105 60 

872 69 

536    

> ......... ... ............. .............. o

22 83 

460  

> ........... ...

30 

51 78 4

153 

230 

33 

404 12 

18 

70 3, 290 575 Pbono! ANALYSI 

PROJECT UNIT-REQUEST ASSIGNED AND BACKLOG-WORK ANALYSIS See Requests Sections reference Team A .......................................................... 5 383 ........... 

7 40 5 259 .............. 

it 284 1900 tdacklog ...................................................... 20 723 .............. Team B.......................................................... 12 266 .............. 2 211 .............. 4 131 .............. 6 1498 .............. Backlog ...................................................... 9 1947 .............. 

Team C-----------.............................................. 2 56 .............. 2 57 .............. 

1 83 .............. 18 106 .............. 22 1654 .............. Backlog ...................................................... 10 692 .............. 

Team D..... ................................................... 8 28 810 

7 110 5

12 223 .............. 

39 667 .............. Backlog ........................-............................ 8 573 .............. 

Team E..... .................................................... 10 526 .............. 

4 925 .............. 

10 1352 .............. 8 241 .............. 

5 97 .............. 

1 43 .............. 

Total ...................................................... 248 13,177 3,115 

The total Project request load including backlog was examined. It consists of 248 reported requests, made up of 13,177 Sections and 3,115 see reference& Equat-Ing 75 see references with a Section, the section count is increased by 41.5 to 13218.5, which when divided by the requests shows a project average section per request of 53.8 sections. *Note: Three requests involving 38,400 and 2,228 and 2,582 Sections respec-tively were not included in these figures as they are extraordinary and would result in a distorted view of the average request. PROJECTION Of ANALYSTS NEEDED 

FOI1A ,cction-.4nalya t Complement Increase To Remain Currcnt With+ Inooming Requests 

A. FOIPA requests received per work day---------------------------- 72.5 (Result based on requests received from Jan. 5-July 16, 1976, 10,150, divided by work days from Jan. 5-July 16, 1976, 140) B. Reduced by the percentage of requests resulting in "no record" re-sponses -------------------------------------------------- 45.56 

(35.78 percent calculated on Apr. 1--Mar. 31, 1976, figures of 16,103 requests received and 5,762 "no record" responses) C. Reduced by the percentage of requests resulting iu closing by means other than processing and "no record" resiponses ---------------- 17.51 

(-0.08 percent calculated on Apr. 8-July 29, 197(6, figures of 5,149 requests. 2,00.7 of which were closed other than by processing and "no record" responses ID. FOIPA requests broken down by designation: 1. Nonproject, 95.86 percent, or by requests per day --------------- 16. 79 2. Project, 4.414 percent, or by request per day ------------------- 0. 72 

( Based on backlog figures captured on July 29, 1976; section-8420--849) 

1 In further explanation of C (above), requests are placed In a closed status when reiluestpr fails to provide a required Item, such as notarized signature, further Identifying tpersonal data, partlculars regarding the documents sought, etc. 576 

E. Average number of pages per section of file ------------------------- 200 

(Based on preexisting figures, plus a random sampling count of 20 sections of file done on Aug. 5, 1976) 

F. Average daily pages processed per analyst: 1. Nonproject --------------------------------------------- 105 

2. Project ------------------------------------------------- 90 

(Based on a survey directed to all analysts previously as to their own output. Project is lower due to the complex na-ture of the files and attendant logistics problems) 

0. Analyst complement on hand and authorized: 1. Nonproject (64 on hand, 20 increase authorized)----------- 84 

2. Project (23 on hand. 7 increase authorized) ------------------- 30 

11. Average sectiolis of file to be processed per FOJL'A request :

1. Nonproject --------------------------------------------- 3. 15 2. Project ----------------------------------------------- 53.3 (lisvi oil the work ti allysis of ioot I gimuips. conta itit-d elsewhere herein) 

1. Pages of analyst output per day (current productivity) 1. Nonproject (84) x (105) ---------------------------------- 8,820 

2. Project (30)x0) --------------------------------------- 2, 7(K) asedil on thi project of all analysts on hand and author-ized fully trained, aund wvorkitig under optiniiin conditions) J. Pages of pr cessing work received lper day: 1. Non-ProJect (16.79)x(200)x(3.15) ----------------------- 10577.7 

2. Project (0.72)x(200)x(53.3) ---------------------------- 7675. 2K. With all factors remaining constant, and considering only the number of analysts needed to process this incoming work load and remain current, the project of analyst complement needed becomes: 1. Nonproject (10577.7) :-(820)x(4) --------------------- 1X). 73 2. Project (7675.2)-(2700W)x(30) ------------------------- 5. 2 8L. With the (eletioln from the computations of three voluminous cass in the Project backlog, and based upon contemplated need for acertain number of analysts to conxtintly be devoted full time Ito other voluminous cases in litigation, and receiving Court oxlered preferential processing, It Is felt that a built-in additional group of analysts is needed to Insure the rest of the complement devotes uninterrupted attention to current requests ---------------------- 13 M. Total projected analyst needs ----------------------------------- 200    

> BACKLOG PROGRENSION ANtD PROJECTION

An examination of the growth of the backlog from Septembier 11. 1975 thru August 5, 1976 was conducted. Our procedure is to administiatively tu ke inven-tory on each Thursday. The increase in the backlog total and tile actual increase per week is represented in the below figures. 577 Data Backlog Change 

Sept 11, 1975 ................................................................... 74 ......... 

Sept. 18, 1915 ---------------------------------------------------------------- 3, 873 +!28 

SepL 25, 1975 ................................................................. 4, 08 1 + 208 

Oct. 2, 1975 .......................................................-------------- 4, 233 + 152 

Oct. 9, 1975 ------------- .............................................. 4, 459 +226 

Oct. 1h, 1975 ................................................. .................. 4, 740 + 281 

Oct. 23, 1975 ........................ . ......-........ ........................ 5, 004 + 264 

Oct. 30, V,75....------------- ---------------- ---................--.. ........ 5, 137 +133 

Nov. 6, !75.... .-.---.......-....................... . .------------------------ 5, 276 +139 Nov. 13, 1975 .................................-------------------------------- 5, 324 + 48 

Nov. 20, 1975 .................. ........................................... .... 5,481 + 157 Nov. 26, 1975 --------------------------------------------------------- 5, 421 + 60 

Dec . 4 19 75 -. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5, 544 + 123 

Dec. 11, 1975 ...... .................................................. ------ 5,646 +102 

Dec. 18, 1975 ........................ ...... -............... ............. - 5, 832 + 186 

Dec. 24, 1975 ............-------------------------...................-....... 5, 862 + 30 

Jan. 2,1976--- -.......................-.......................-.--. - 6,176 + 314 

Jan. 8 1976 .........-................................... .............. ....... 5,964 - 212 

Jan. 15, l976 ...........................-------------------................. 6,092 + 128 Jan. 22, 1976 ......................................... ..................... -6, U55 - 37 

Jan. 29, 1976 ---------------------------------------------........... 6,252 +197 

Feb. 5 1976 .....................-........ .... .... ................. -6,313 + 61 

Feb.12,1976 ............... . ....-..-.-......--- .----.------------. 6,457 +144 Feb. 19, 1976 ......................... ....... -......... -... ........... 6, 544 + 87 Feb. 26, 1976...- - -.........-.....-. ....-........ --......... ............ 6,612 + 68 Mar. 4, 1976 ........... ... ..... . ....................... ....... ..... 6,715 + 103 Mar. 11, 1976 .............................. .. . ........................... ,532 - 183 Mar. 18, 1976 -----------........... .. .. . ...-....................... 6, 673 + 141 Mar . 25 1976 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . - 6, 64 6 - 27 

Apr. 1, 96 -------------------- 6,782 +136 Apr. 8 1976 -- ------- -- -.............................--- - - - --..... 6, 350 -432 

Apr. 1, 1976 . .... . ............................ ------------ -- . 6,085 -265 A pr. 22, 1976 ..... ... . .. .. .-.. ......... ..... ...................... 6, 120 + 35 

Ap e. 7 9 , 1976 - . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5, 989 - 131 May 6 1976 ... ..... . .. ................... .. ... ...................... 6,037 + 48 May 1, 1976 . .........................-- -- - - 6,.001 - 36 

May 20, 1976---- ---.........---- - .----. .........--------------- 6, 070 + 69 May 27, 1976___ __... ..------------------.............-.......... 6,115 + 45 June 3, 1975-... .... . . ...... . ....... . .. . .. .---. . ....... .......... 6,347 + 232 June 10, 1976-..... --.-.-----------------------------...... .......... 6, 314 - 33 

June 17, 1976 ........ 6....... ....... ...... ..... 6,813 + 499 Juns 24 1976 7, 795 +982 

July ,1976 . ---------------- 8,368 + 573 July 1976 .. ....-..... . ........ ........ 8, 599 + 231 July 1I , 1976.....,.............. . .... -... .... .......- ......... 8, 335 - 264 July 22, 1976 ...... .-........----...... ..... . . . . . . . . . . . . 8,435 + 100 July 29 , 19 76 ... ................. ...... . .......... ............. ..... 8, 420 - 15 Au  g. 5, 19 76 .. .. . .. . . .. . . .. . .. . .. . . . . . . . .. . . .... . . . .. ... . . . . . .. . .. . . - 8, 4 78 - 58 

Ulmi (.€,znpl,,t iq] (r lii i lxI1in1tiri, it wbas determined that the total backlog i'rease iroml Septembler 11, 1975 t1iru Aigu t 5, 1976 wits 4,733 requests. This, when divided lIy the nimuber o f wewkly 1Rriods covered, (47), shows an average iL(rcliie if 100.7 requests int o backlog ]i'r week. Oli Ag1iist 11-12, 1976, t1he fiui I ,icklorg In existence wis reviewed and those re li-isuts ii wlich requisite infornatii esM(ntial to l)r1KeSing was lacking, de'i~te rejwated requests by tle Flil for this Infornation, were closed. 'T'aking the a('klog 115 reduced by theos re lests the projected increase per week which ciit he exlccted in the following weeks Is S2, which when projected to Jriun ry 13, 1977, teeomnes 9187.0 requests. With the backlog total on January 13, 1977. standing at 9487.9. there shouuh INo 95.841% or 10145.1 lnon-mject reltests a nd 4.14% or 392.8 pvojeet requests to proess. l'roJe(.ting tie two categories of hmicklogged requemsts, Project and Non-l'roje't, to their rexspective lmge count, the result Is set out below: 

(IRK)5.1 ) X (3.15) X (200) equals 5,729,914 Non-Project pages. (392.8)Q < (53.3) X (200) equals 4,1 7,248 Project ?ages, Trtl images, 9,817,111. 

Knoming the total ages that are In the baekliog to Ie promised, and the time limits within which It nutist be pirowNsed. the omly variahles left to consider are the number of ji4rms nel doing the pr(cessng and the collective productivity of t ihose lIw)le. 578 

Following are four charts which project personnel utilized and productivity into a resultant expressed in terms of months. Each chart deals with a different working time frame. A. A five day work week, 8 hour day. B. A six day work week, 8'Pour day. C. A five day work week, 10 hour day. D. A six day work week, 10 hour day. 

BASED UPON 9,917,161 PAGES IN BACKLOG 

8 HOUR DAY, 5 DAY WEEK, 

RESULTANT IS IN MONTHS 

OUTPUT  

> Aaents

50 100 150 200 250 275 300 325 3501 1 9445 4723 3148 2361 1889 1717 1574 1453 1349, 1259 

10 945 472 315 236 189 172 157 145 135 126 100 95 47 32 214 19 17 16 15 14 13 125 76 38 25 19 15 14 13 12 11 10 

150 63 32 21 16 13 12 11 10 9 6

175 54 27 18 14 11 10 9 8 8 7

200 47 24 16 12 10 9 8 7 7 6225 42 21 14 11 8 8 7 7 6 6250 38 19 13 9 8 7 6 6 5 5

275 34 17 12 9 7 6 6 5 5 5300 32 16 11 8 6 6 5 5 5 4

325 29 15 10 7 6 5 5 5 4 4350 27 14 9 7 5 5 5 4 4 4375 25 13 8 6 5 5 4 4 4 3

400 24 12 8 6 5 4 4 4 3 3

425 22 11 7 6 5 4 4 3 3 3450 21 11 7 5 4 4 4 3 3 3

475 20 10 7 5 4 4 3 3 3 __3 500 1.9- 10 6 5 4 3 3 3 3 1

> 375

Agents 50 

## 579 

BASED UPON 9.917,161 PAGES IN BACKLOG 10 HOUR DAY, 6 DAY WEEK RESULTANT IS IN MOM4HS 

OUTPUT 

100 150 200 250 275 300 1 325 1 350 375 

1 6347 3174 2116 1587 1269 1154 1058 977 907 846 

10 635 317 212 159 127 115 106 98 .91 85 

100 64 32 21 16 13 12 11 10 9 9

125 51 25 17 13 10 9 9 8" 7 7150 42 21 14 11 8 8 7 7 6 6175 36 18 12 9 7 7 6 6 5 5

200 32 16 11 8 6 6 5 5 5 4

225 29 14 9 7 6 5 5 4 4 4

250 25 13 9 7 6 5 5 4 4 4

275 23 12 8 6 5 4 4 4 3 3

300 21 11 7 5 4 4 4 3 3 3

325 20 10 7 5 4 4 3 3 3 3350 19 10 6 5 4 3 3 3 3 2

375 17 9 6 4 4 3 3 3 2 2

400 16 8 5 4 3 3 3 2 2 2

425 15 8 5 4 3 3 3 2 2 2

450 14 7 5 4 3 3 3 2 2 2

475 13 7 5 3 3 2 2 2 2 2

500 1 13 J. 6 14 3 3..2. _2- ,2 223580 

BASED UPON 9,917,161 PAGES IN BACKLOG 10 HOUR DAY, 5 DAY WEEK 

RESULTANT IS IN MONTHS OUTPUT 

100 150 200 250 275 3001 325 I 350 375 

1 7556 3778 2519 1889 1511 1374 1259 1163 1079 100 

10 756 . 378 252 1l" 151 137 126 116 108 101 100 76 38 25 19 15 14 13 12 11 10 

125 61 30 20 15 12 11 10 9 9 8150 50 25 17 13 10 9 8 8 7 7

175 43 22 14 11 9 8 7 7 6 6

200 38 19 13 9 8 7 6 6 5 5

225 34 17 11 8 7 6 6 5 5 5

250 30 15 10 8 6 6 5 5 4 4

275 28 14 10 7 6 5 5 4 4 4300 25 13 8 6 5 5 4 4 4 3

325 23 12 a 6 5 4 4 4 3 3350 22 11 7 5 4 4 4 3 3 3375 20 10 7 5 4 4 3 3 3 4 3

400 19 9 6 5 4 3 3 3 3 3425 18 9 6 4 4 3 3 3 3 2450 17 8 6 4 3 3 3 3 2 2475 16 8 5 4 3 3 3 2 2 255 3 -2 2_ 

Agents 

18 3 i2500 is 5 4 3 23 -2 Agents 50 

581 

BASED UPON 9,917,161 PAGES IN BACKLOG 8 HOUR DAY, 6 DAY WEEK, RESULTANT IS IN MONTHS 

OUTPUT. 

100 150 200 250 1 275 300 1325 350 375 1 7934 3967 2645 1984 1587 1442 1322 1221 1133 1058 

10 793 397 265 198 159 144 132 122 113 106 

100 79 40 27 20 16 14 13 12 11 11 

125 64 32 21 16 13 12 11 10 9 9

150 53 26 18 13 11 10 9 8 8 7175 45 23 15 11 9 8 8 7 7 6

200 40 20 13 10 8 7 7 6 6 5225 35 18 12 9 7 6 6 5 5 5

250 32 16 11 8 6 6 5 5 5 4275 29 14 10 7 6 5 5 4 4 4

300 27 13 9 7 5 5 4 4 4 4325 24 12 8 6 5 4 4 4 4 3350 23 11 8 6 5 4 4 4 3 3

375 21 10 8 5 4 4 4 3 3 3

400 20 10 7 5 4 4 3 3 3 3425 19 10 6 5 4 3 3 3 3 3450 18 90 6 5 4 3 3 3 3 2475 17 8 6 4 3 3 3 3 2 2

5 16 8 6 4 3 3 2           

> Soo 16 18 54-.332... 2

FIIPA I1HA NU II ROAN IZA'ION ('owrS 

The f'dloowing are the Ipr iJected salhry an1d Irsoilnel Ietifit figtires pr)Jected to , lJr4Jprposed F(IIA hIraih struc.tur,. The last page slMwNs iI thrue steps cii rr, olt ('o;ts. cu rreitt ly alit who rized i tml p IJi-'(td ('i,:t s c., respo 1(lI tig to t he pi, J; se, retorgimlizalt{on. 582 FOI/PA PROJECTION (BRANCH) Salary' 

GS (lncl. AUO) Front Office: Deputy Assistant Director ............................................ 17 37,800 Disclosure Section: Section chief ............................................................... 16 37.800 No. 1 Man ................................................................. 15 35,015 

Secretary .................................................................. 7 11,414 Secretary ................................................................. a 10, 610 

Subtotal ..................................................................... - 94, 839 

Nonpro ct Unit A: 

Unit chief ..................... . ......................................... 15 35,015 

Secretary ... .. .. .. .. ... .. .. .. .. ... .. .. .. .. ... .. .. .. .. .. 5 8, 925 

Agents (3)-----------------------------------------------------------14 97,071 Analysts (17) ---------------------------------------------------------- 9 229, 94 Analysts ........................................................ 7 182, 624 

Clerks (2) ............................................................... 5 19.638 

Clerk (1)----------------------------------------.. ------------------ 4 8, 508 Subtotal ...................... ......................................................... 580, 975 

Nonproject Unit B: 

Unit chief ...................... ........................................... I 35,015 Secretary--------------------------------------------------- 5 8. 925 Agents ()-------------------------- --- 14 97. 071 

Analysts 7) --------------------.......................................... 9 229, 194 Analysts (16) ........................... ................................... 7 182,624 Clerks (2) ................................................................ 5 19 638 

ClerksM . . ().....................- 4 8.508 Sublital ......................---- ...... ..... ......................... ............ 580, 975 

NonproJect Unit C:       

> Unit chief .............. ................... ............................... 15 35,015

Secretary ........................................................ ....... 5 8,925 Agents )------ ------- -.-.---.----...........................---------- - 14 97, 071 

Analysts (17) ........... -........ -........... -...........-................ 9 229, 194 

Analysts (16 .......................... ........... ................... 7 182,624 

Clerks (2)-------------------------------------------------- 5 19,638 

Clerks (1)--------------------------------------------------- -------- 4 8.508 

Subtotal ........................................ .............................. -580.975 Project Unit D: 

Unit chief .............................................. . ........ ------ 35,015 

SKretery ------------------------------------------------------------ 5 8.925 

Agents &(3)-................. 14 97,071 Analysts ) ............................................ --------------- 9 202.230 Analysts (15) .........- - -- --.................. . .......... .-........ 7 171,210 Clerks (2) ........ . ............ . .. ..... . ....... ........ 5 19, 638 

Clerks 1). () .... . ........ - ----------------- 4 8- SIM 

Subtotal. ................................................................ 542,597 

Project Unit E: Unit chief .... ................................... .. ............. . . . 15 35,015 Srelar 5 8,925 

Agents 1)-------------------------------------97. 071 

Analysts (15) .......................................-.. ..... .... 9 202. 230 

Analysts (15 ). --.............-........ ... -. . . ...................... 7 171,210           

> Clerks (2) ...... ............. .............. -.................. _-...... 5

19. 638 

Clerks (1) ........... .......... . .... .......- ... ..... ...... ....... 4 8.508 

Subtotal ............ . .......... ..... .. .... ........................ ... -.... 542,597 

PRC Team: 

Agent ( )- ............ ............ .. ........... .............. 14 32,357 

Analysts (5). .. -....---..-. .. ............... -..... -... -.. .. ....... . 9 80, 892 Analysts (5) .....- ....... . ........ . . . . . .... ...... ......... 7 57. 070 

Clerk (1). .-. ... ... .......... ... ... .... ....... ... ............ 5 9,819 Subtotal.- ....- ...... .... . . ..... -.............. .. .... .... .... .... 180, 138 

Project Unit F: Unit chef ............. . ... . ............-............................. 15 35. 01S 

Secretary .......-............ ....... ..... ... -.............. ....... 5 8.925 

Agents (3) . -. ...................... .......-............. .... 1- 97, 071  

> Analysts

(15) ............. ............ . .... . ................ ..... I 202. 230 Analysis(15)---------------------------------......-....... . 7 171,210 Clerks (2) ............. -... -............. . ...... ................- .- 5 19. 638 Clerks) ( .--------------------------------------------------------- 4 8, 50 Subtotal ..................................... ... ........ . ...... ....... 542. 597 583 

FOI/PA PROJECTION (BRANCH)-Continued 

Salaryl   

> GS VIncl. AU()

Operations Section: Section chief ............................................................... 

No. 1Man .................................................................. 

Secretary ...................................................... ........... Secretary ................................................................. 

Subtotal ................................................................. 

Branch Analytical Research Support and Acquisition Unit: Unit chief ............................................................. Agents (8) ............................................................... 

Secretary .................................................................. Clerks (3) .................................................................. Clerks (3) ..................................................... ............ Subtotal ............................................................. 

F. 0. Operations, etc.: Unit chief .................................................................. 

Secreta ry .. ................................................................ Aens 3). ..................................... cmZ:,ks (( 3------------------------------------------------------------------

Clerks () .......... .............................................. Subtotal ................................................................. 

Word Processing Unit: Steno supervisor ............................................................ 

Assistant supervisor ........................................................ 

Steno (45) ........................................................... I...... 

Subtotal ................................................................ 

Classification Review Unit: 

Unit chief ........................................................ ......... Agents (8) ........................................ ............. ......... Secretary ......................... ........................................ 

Clerks (5 .................................................................. Clerks (5) ................................................................ 

Subtotal ................................................................. 

Centralized Initial Processing Unit: Unit tlie . ............................................................... 

Secretary .......-.......................................................... 

Clerk................................................ 

Subtotal ........................................................... 

Incomin mail, etc.: 

Clerk-supervisor ............................................................ 

Clerks (2) ................................................. ................ 

Cleks (2) ................................................................ 

Subtotal ............................................. Initial correspondence team: Agent ...................................................................... 

Secretary ............................. ................................ Clerk-Supervisor .................................................. 

Clerks (5) ........................................................... Clerks 5 ........................................ ....................... 

Subtotal .......................... ................... Search slips 

Clerk ............... ................................. Clark ..................................................................... 

Subtotal .... ............................................. ........... 

File calling: 

Clerks (2) ................................... .............................. 

Clerks (I) ............................... .............. Subtotl ...................................... ....................... 

File duplication end assemLly:     

> Clrk-supofvisor -.....................

Clefk (6). ............................................. 

Clerks (6). ............................................. 

Subtotal ................................................................ 

16 37, 800 

15 35,015 7 11, 414 6 10, 610 94,839 15 35,015 14 258, 856 

5 8.925 5 29,457 4 25, 524 357, 777 

15 35,015 5 8, 925 14 97,071 

5 19,638 4 8,508 169, 157 

7 11,046 6 10,610 4 358.920 

380, 576   

> 15 35,015 14 258,856

5 8, 925 5 49, 095 4 42,540 394,431     

> 15 35,015 58,925 59,819
> 53. 759

6 9,946 5 19,638 

4 17,016 46 600            

> 14 37,357 58, 925 69, 946 549, 095
> 434, 032 134,355
> 59,81S
> 48,508 18,327

5 IS,63  

> 48,508
> 28.146

6 9,46 5 58,914 4 51,048 

> 119,98

584 FOI/PA PROJECTION (BRANCH)-Continued File Copy Maintenance and Assignment: 

Cleik ---------------------------------------------------------------------- 5 9,819 Clerk ---------------------------------------------------------------------- 4 8,508 

Typist_....-------------_--------.------------------------------------- 3 7,102 Subtotal ------------------------------------------------------------------- 25,429                        

> Total salaries .......-----------------------------------------------------5, 506, 797
> Personnel benefits (10 percent of salary) ------------------------------------------550,680
> Total personnel costs .... ..............-............................... 6, 057.477 1Based on average grades of current complement.

I1'OI /P.1 I'/'jcc(ifon 

> Total

Tott I

Total turrett ptrsonnatel costs ------------------------------------ $2, 713, 407 atlhorized personnel costs --------------------------------- 3, 1W4, '2.A I

pirojttd a'stoiiiel costs - --------------------------------- 6, 057, 477 I 11aied on ierst)nnel listing July 29, 1976, furnished by Division 4. 

liat-ed on above personnel list plus additional analysts computed at average grade. 

l•aliL.ed on proposed organizational chart and computed on average persolifinl costs 

(ierlvid froini above listing. 

Thli foliowi\l tg ite p'oJe'ted ann mutual costs, other thant persvat lil costs, for the 

proplise1 F)IPA br 'atch. The tale shows current amtial cost s (lIased oil FY 19741 

figiut'vs), ad(1itiolal costs reitiflred by tlietpraiatsetd bran ich strlctin vt aid total lro-

J'ccl ailiia costs. 

FOI/PA PROJECTION COSTS OTHER THAN PERSONNEL Current Additional Projected Supplies, printing, postage, miscellaneous ....................... $44, 933 $61, 350 $106. 283 

Space (GSA standard leval users charge)-------------------. - 10,671 141,070 241,741 Telephone, electric nstallati-jn, and so forth ......................... 21, 024 32, 376 353, 400 

Telephone, electric installation, and so forth (in area not previously used). 21, 024 47, 336 68, 360 Furniture and equipment... .. .................. .() 126, 001 126, 001 

Transfer costs ................................................... 102, 581 102, 581 

Toal othar costs ........................ ...................... ....... 644,966  

> I

Not available for FOIiPA section. 

3Not irKluded in total. 

'lie following is at supporting s'hi4tlle showing computation of the total 

prtjet-t(4 auinual .supplies and materials cost for the proposed F)[1I'A branch.  

> h'lt,

Itasis for eompuiutation Is FYT6 total expenditures. This Is dividend by total 

current eniiloyees It) derive at per employee average cost. This average c'ost Is multlliled tites the, projected number tf employees to arrive at total proje.ttmd cost. 

f)I/PA projcetion-supplies, etc. 

Fls.aal year 1976 for supplies, materials. etc ------------------------- $41, 933 t0irr .nt liumlacr of emldoye.s, 182 (per einlvryee) ------------------- 30 stagee (41,933 phus 3,000) ------------------------------------- 44, 933 

Projec'tetd annal t,'.st (t,230 tines projected numnler of em-

ployee,4, 391 ) ------------------------------------------ 89,930 IPostage, per month. iased on envelttlws or(lered ($250 over 182 em-ialoyees equals $1.37 times 391 employees) -------------------------- 536 

Projected I4statge for 12 ma ($536 tiaes 12 mos. ) ---------------- 6,432 585 

Supplies for reproduction machine (IBM), paper (200,000 copies per month based on December-March 1976 average) times 12 Copies per year ---------------------------------------- (2, 400, 000) 

Copies per roll ---------------------------------------------- (775) Cost of paper (3,097 rolls, at $2.11) --------------------------- 7. 557 Cost of ink (Toner): Copies per carton $2,416,000 (150 cartons, at $15.70) --------------------------------------------------- 2,355 Total cost of supplies for reproduction ------------------------ 9. 921 Total supplies and materials cost -------------- 106, 283 T'e fiw llowing is a supporting schedule showing (omlpfitation of total projected cost of space for the proposed FOII'A liranch. Toral cwJt was computed by mtulti-p'lying the square footage of space allowed each grade level position In tile pro-j. d(( Ihrancli, times the 0SA Standard IA-vel Users Charge.                   

> FOIiPA SPACE REQUIREMENT PROJECTION
> Number of Total SLUC I(dcdlars GS positions Square feet Isquare feet per sq. ft.) Total

17 .........------------------------ 1 300 300 7.38 $2, 214        

> 16 ..................... -------------2300 600 7.38 4,428

15 .... ..... ..... ........ ---------- 12 225 2, 700 7.38 19,926         

> 14 ......... ......................... 39 150 5,850 7.38 43, 173

13- -..... .......- ..-.----------------------- 150 ............ 7.38 .............. 

12 .................................... ----------- 150 .............. 7.38 .. ......... 

1..................................- ---------- 75 .............. 7.38 ............. 

10 ......... 9--------------------------- 75 ........ 7.38 ...-- 5 67 

9 ------------------- - ----------------------10 75 , 50 7.38 , 78 ......................... ........................ 75 .. . . . .7.38 ...... .... .

7.......................... .. 10 75 7,575 7.38 --- - 207 

6-------------------------....... 6 60 360 7.38 2,657 

5..-- .-.----.--.----------------- 51 60 3,060 7.38 22,583 

4 .............. ..........- .. --...... 76 60 4,560 7.38 33,653 

3------------- - 6.......... .. ! 60 60 7.38 443 

2.... .....-..-. .-............................. 0 . ... ..... 7.38 ..............                               

> Total ---------....... .......... 391 ............. 32,715 .............. 241,741 Based on space that should be allotted to each grade per code of Federal regulations. Based on current GSA charge per square foct for general office space.

The following is a supporting schedule showing comnputation of total projected telephone, electrical outlet and construction costs for the proi osed FOX ['A branch. Total cost was derived by multiplying the additional lxsitions r(qtlired in the proposed branch structure times telephone company and G(SA standard charges. 

FOI/P.A projection-tclephone, Oclctriv anird roistruction costs 

187 additional position (32 times $270)' cost/i nstallati1n ------------- $8. 610 6 (1er Installationi' (32 times $54'/month times 12) - - ----- 20. 736 Telephone cost initial year ------------------------------------- 9. 3761 GSA cost to drill telephone holes $40 times 17 ----------------------- 7, 480 

GSA cost to drill electricc holes $40 times 187 ------------------------- 7,480 Additional installation costs in area not lrevious!y Is( -------------- 14,960 

Total telephone and electric cost ------------------------------------ 44, 3.36 

Sound proof partitions for steno pool ------------------------------- 3. 0O 

Total cost ----------------------------------------------- 47,.336 

1'lir Dave caller (Division 7) there are 3 lines allowed for every 6 people: $250 Irsdallatton charge for each 6 people (phone on each desk) ; $54 monthly charge for each 

6 people. The following shows projected additional furniture and eoluipment costs for the proposed FOIPA branch. The total cost was cotmputed by adding the cost of equipping each a(tditiomil grade level position in the proposed Iranch and multi-plying that result times the number of new lpositionms. The tyle of equipment costed is the type ipresetitly wing purchased for the JEH building. FOI/PA PROJECTION (FURNITURE AND EQUIPMENT) (Additicnal positions) I-Branch 1-Section 

chief chief 5- Unit 

chiefs 12-AIents 7-sec 13-enog-

tarms raphers 91-Analysts 1-Typist 56-Clerks Total 

Desk I -----------------------------------. 

Chair ---------------------------------

Credenza -----------------------------------------

Ta ile . -------------- ------------------ ----------

Telephone stand --------------------------------

File Cabinet ----------------------------------

Wardrobe ---------------------------------------

230 1

230 105 230 214 186 

1 5 12 230 1.070 2,232 105 105 77 133 

7

931 

54 

133 

13 

1,729 

54 

123 

91 

11,193 

77 

133 

1

133 

54 

123 ------------------------

56 ------------------------f% m - - -- - - - -- - - - -

1 1 5 12 7 13 91 1 56 -------,-.-------_-

105 105 105 924 378 7U 7,007 54 3,024 ------------------------

135 135 130 ---------------

1 1 5 ----------------------------------

135 135 650 ---------------. . . .

160 160 160 160 ----------------------- 160 

1 1 5 12 -------------------- --- - 9

160 160 800 1,920 .. -,440 

85 85 85 85 ............ 85 

1 1 5 12 1----------- 9 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

85 85 425 1,020 --------- - 85 765 

100 100 ----

1 I

119 119 119 119 119 119 119 

1 1 5 36 2 4 18 119 119 595 4,284 238 476 2,124 ------------- _-

112 112 112 12 --------------- 112 112- -... ....--- 112.......... 1 1 5 12 ----------------- 2 15----- .---- 9

112 112 560 1,344 ---------- 224 1,680 ---- -............ ------ ------------------- 1 - 545--------------~10 145 ---- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

Typew rtter .............................. ........ Ma g-C ard . . . . .. . .. . .. . . . . . . .. .. . . .. . . . . . . .. . .. . . . .. . . .. . . . ... .. .. . . .. . . .. .. . . . . .. .. .. .. . ------- 2.328 

7

16, 296 

2, 328 ---------------------------------------------------- --------1,3 ------------------------------------------------------------ 

> 30,264 ------------------------------------------------------------

Xeoxof IBM copier -------------.-..-.------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------................ 2 ............ 20.3763 126,001-----Tota --------------------------------------- 1,046 1,046 , 4,625 11,724 17,843" 33,480 24.209 732 10,920J 20,.3763 I1,001 AU costs based on GSA supply catalog. 'Annusl cost based on monthly rental of $194. 'Annaul mental fa( 1 machine $849. 

/ IS88 

The following shows the computation of the total cost to transfer 11) addi. 

tional agent$ from the field to FBIHQ in order to staff the proposed FOIPA branch. Tile number of agents to be transferred in are multiplied iiy the average agent transfer cost (based on fiscal year 1976 amounts) to arrive at total trans-fer costs. FOI/PA projection transfer costs 

Agents to be transferred to FJIIHQ to staff proposed blroihl (19 at 

$5,399 ) ------------------------- $102, 581 Fiscal year 1976 average transfer costs. 

FOE/PA projection transfer costs 

Tile following shows the computation of total iroJected costs for the pr-posed F0)II'A backlog special. The four alternate, costs derived by using two different grade level Agents In two different plans (2 intitl tours or 3 monorth 

tours), consist of four elements; (1) transportation costs ( round trips), (2) 3cr diem cost of maintaining an Agent In the Washington, IR(., area, (3) Agvnt salaries and benefits, and (4) reproduction machine costs. Each elvniemnt (if vca.1 can be found on a supporting schedule. 

FO1/1'. backlogr, 200 agents at 250 pages per dly- 6-10 ot's days for to n',ptth., 

l'm n l-Two Agent Groups-3 months each :

'ranslprtation-400 Agents at $206.0) ---------------------

Mfo1thly average agent cost for 20 agents at $1,110.(X) I ioes C6 

Total personnel costs-G,-12 (salaries and henefi-ts) Total reproduction costs .... 

Total costs using GS-12 agents_ Total per on el ciosts-- 0-13 .... 

Total other costs (alhove) 

Total Costs using (,-13 agents ......... l'an 2---Thret' Agent Groups.-2 iontls each Transportatio'i-600 agents at $201.00 -----------------------

Total all other costs (above) -GS--12 agents-Total costss using G-12 agents_-_ Total lrsouiiiel costs-GS-13__ Total other costs (abo',) -----------------------------------

Total costs rising GS-13 agents-$82. -'00'. o0 

1, 512. 0 0. IN) 

3, 176. J0W. 00 

IJ(0. 9f;'. 00 

4,911. 70J. 03, 554. $00. 00O 

1 735. 364.00 

5, 280, 1(-I. 00 123. 600. 00 

4. S29. 31.00 

4, 952. 964. 00 

3, 544. S4X). I1X 

1,776. 56A. IN) 

5, 321, 3W1. 0M) 

''hse folloNhvitig shows c(Onilutation of the average cost ,if hring ng an agent 0)   

> imm dfrom

Washilngton, D).('.. to vork on the special lilust flie avo-ragl' nijolntlily (01s 

or imaitaiinIiig him in lithe Washingti,. I).('., area. The aIiunlts Ilsed are based (in standards rates derived by the training division. FOI/PA BACKLOG COMPUTATION OF AVERAGE COST PER AGENT FOR "SPECIAL" Monthly "I-time Amount cost charter"                               

> Transportation costs: 3
> Air fare (found trip) ...... Taxi (residence to airport).-................. Per diem (based on &day to and from)........ Total. transportation coin's .
> Per diem: District of Columbia metropolitan area per diem =$42X30 di

$146 ............ 20  

> 40.
> -..-.-$206

mys.............. 01.260...........                    

> IAverage figures computed by training div,sion for transpoation to Washington, D.C. (National Ai(rport). Used in fiscal year 1978 budget submission calculations.

The following shows the computation of personnel costs ( salaries ani hicm'tits )for two different grade levels of agents assigned to the Fo)IA backlog sixcial for six months. It shows total costs for six different work week schedules. Tile monthly rate per agent is (erivedl from a supporting schedule. 589 FOI/PA BACKLOG: COMPUTATION OF AVERAGE COST PER AGENT FOR "SPECIAL"-PERSONNEL COSTS                                          

> Monthly rate Based on--per agent Agents Months Total cost
> 5days at 8hr per day:
> GS-12 ..------------------------------$7.836 200 6$2,203, 20
> GS-13 ........................................ 143 200 6, 2,571,600
> 5days at 8hr per day plus 2hr per day AUGO:
> 08-12 ......................................... 2,176 200 62611,200

GS-13 ......................................... 2,483 200 6 2,979,600                             

> 6days at 8hr per day:
> S-2........................................ 2, 212 200 62,654,400
> GS-13 ......................................... 2,519 200 63, 022,800 6days at 10 hr per day: -12----------------------------------.. 2,401 200 62,881,200

GS-13 ......................................... 2, 708 2W 6 ,                        

> 5days at8 hr per day plus 2hr per day AUO plus Iday at 8hr regularly scheduled O.T..
> GS-12 -----------------------------------2,552 200 63,062,400

GS-13 .................... 2, 20 3, 5 days at 8 hr per day plus 2 hr per day AUO plus I dsy                               

> at 10 hr regularly scheduled O.T.:
> GS-12 ......................................... 2,647 200 63,176,400
> GS-13 ......................................... 2,954 200 63, 544, 8O
> Note: To compute total cost (col. 4) multiply col. (1) by col. (2) by col .(3).

The followhig shows the computation of monthly personnel costs per Agent assigned to the FOlPA Lcklog special. A rate is shown for two different grade leveLq for six different work week schedules. The total costs per Agent are car-ried forward to the total personnel costs schedule. 

FOI/PA backlog computation of agent tonthly personnel cost Basic salary :

G8--12 (2d step)-$20,032 per aisnui divided by 12 sio (per month) -------------------------------------------------- $1,69 

08-13 (2d step)-$23,670 per annum divided by 12 mo (per month) ------------------------------------------------- 1,948 Personnel benefits G8-12: $167 plus $1,66) monthly salary (per month) --------------------------------------------------- 1, 836 Personnel benefits G8-13: $195 plus $1,1048 monthly salary (per month ) --------------------------------------------------- 2,143 lase salary plus AUO : .kA'(--$3,70Y2 per anm :

GS-A ::12 nmo at $30 plus 10 percent, personnel benefits, $1,818 ------ 2, 170 GS-13 (plus $2,143) ------------------ ------------------------ 2,483 Base salary plus overtime (time and 1/,, 11 days per week) :

$10.70 ier hr. 1 (maximum overtime, rale) timnes 32 hr (per montli) - 342 

,S-12 (pls 10 preent l)rsonne'I isuietits, $1,04) ------------------ 2, 212 G8-13 (plus $2,143) ------------------------------------------ 2, 519 

6 days a t 10 hr per (lay :           

> (S-12 ($10.70 per hr times 4,8 lours overtiue per niontli equals $,514

per month plius 10 pereent pers.onnel benefits, $1,3,) ------------- 2, 401 

GS-13 (plus $2.143) -----------------------------------------. 2,708 5 days. at 10 hr and I (lay, at 8 hr: 

0I8-12: Basev salary plis AT'O. $2,176 plus 32 hours overtime per month. $376 ------------------------------------------------- 2, 5-52 

(;S-13: $2,483 plus $N71 ..--------------------------------------- 2. A5 II 

5 (ays. at 10 hr and 10 day, at 10 hr: S-1"2: Ba'.~e salary puis A\I, $2,176: $10.70 lx-r hour tihes 40 hr. $42g: over time per month eqluals 10 percent personnel Ienefit.4, $43- 2, 647 08-13: $2.483 plus $428 and $43 -------------------------------- 2,94 M.aximium rate computed on G8-10. 

The following shows the comlpulation of total reprodu netiol costs related to Il1e F)iPA lianklog. The ('Oml iotltl 1i Iase(l on 10,0M).000 copies (rounded) In the liacklog to Ibe reproduced times tle standard charges for paper, toner and Imi'heine tistage. The tabhle shows a monthly cost figure', for the six month special as wtll as it total figure for the entire six months. ,42 619 77- .s 590 

FOJIPA backlog-computation of reproduction cost. 

IBM copier (monthly rent) Paper: 18,000,000' copies to reproduce In backlog= (6 months)__ 3,000,000 copies per month=3,871 rollsX$2.44 per roll--= Toner: 8,000,000 copies /month X .0044 per copy=----............ $849 9,446 13,200 Total reproduction costs per monthl-(6 months) ----------------- 23,494 

or IBM copier for 0 months ---------------------------------------- 5,091 

Total paper costs ---------------------------------------------- 56, 67) Total toner cost ---------------------------------------------- 79, 200 Total --------------------------------------------------- 140,964 Consists of 10,000,000 work coplea plus 8,000,000 estimated release copies. F(0IIPA IRAN('1I REORGANIZATION AND IIACKLOO ELIMINATION CO8T&--ToTALs The following shows total adlitlonl funds needed, tiver and above the annual 

appropriation, to fund the proliosed FollPA branch In order to maintain work in current status and the cost to handle a backlg special to bring the work load up to (late. The backlog slpeclal amounts are shown for each of the alternative plains of gradeh level utilization (use of ad--12's nu 8GS-13's) and length of ulrs o;f duty. Salaries and benefits are sutitracted from total costs to arrive at actual addiltional funds needed. 

FOI/P.1 projection additional tids nr(df'd 

Ii'tal prdtcl'd annuait (ost for reorganizatlou of FOI/I'A section 

(3)1 enijloyee work-years)------ ---...... -.. . - - - - - - --. . ;, 7(.'--. 441 Total funds alaproprated-.--i-scal year 1977 1202 eml)oyee, wo rk-

years)------------------------------------------------------ 3,410,000 Afltitioni finds ieded ( 189 enipliyee work-years) ---------- 3. 292, 443       

> TOTAL ADDITIONAL FUNDS N(FDED FOR BACKLOG SPECIAL

Plan I... Plan 2.. 

Plan 3..                          

> Plan 4.-.
> Plan 5... Plan 6.. Add i1;onsl Projected Salalles costs
> $4,911,764 $2,611, ?0 $2, 300, 564
> 4,952,964 7,611,200 2,341,764
> 5,280.164 2,979,603 2,330,564 5,321.364 2,979,600 2,341,764
> 5,  C9., 954 2, 795,400 2, 300, 5M4
> 5,137,164 2,795,430 2,341,764

'I'le foIllowing slthows tile I(stal pri'jeeted annual (ost for Ile loroiised FMPI1'A 

intaiih and tei total projected cost of tile FOI PA ba(kl)g spm'eiltl. lineklog slet'iil :alioluits aie showi for the alternative plans ,f' Agent grade level utilization aid tirigt h (f tours of duty. All figures are based on a six month duration, using :(X) 

Agents, 10 hours per day. 6i days per week. All figures are suppiortefl by atl(lti'na schedule. 

,'OI/PA projection 'Tot al prJojcteid annual c,st for reorganizat it of l'.).1. 1'.. . 4.tiot. T'tal projected comt for backlog special (6 months-200 agents) :

0 .4-12 agents --tvo groups -------------------------------------

(38-12 agents -- hree groups-...... G8-13 agents--two groups---------------------------------. 

(GS-13 agents--three groups --------------------------------- 

> ('18-12

anuid 13 agents Iaveragt,- -twvo gronpls ..- - -........ 

(]; --12 it I 1 a geti 4''ltJ t lir',' grIis it s a........... 

(',, 7 02. .1431 4, 11, 76-

4. 952. 9(1 5, 2 8. 164 5. 321, 64 . 137, 161 

# ... ..... ... .... .... 591 

"'E1" lr.EVERENCE PoiIcY BACKGROUN) I)OCUMFN'FT8 NOVA.IBYR 3, 1975. Memorandum to: The Deputty Attorney General. From: Director, FBI. Subject: Interface Between t1he privacy and freedom of lriforniitilu.e acts as re-gards "See" references an obstacle to compliance. Reference is made to recent informal discussions by the FBI with Mr. Quinlan .J. Shea, Jr., Chief, Freedom of Information Appeals Unit, Department of Justice, concerning the Interface between the two information acts and its effect upon 

I lie handling of "see" references.' Manpower allocation to the processing of "see" references is a major obstacle to thnely, cost effective responses to information act requests.' File review time to determine which documents are identifiable with a requester necessitates an extensive preliminary review to eliminate main file references and 

'see" refereu.:es under the same or similar natme of a r1luester, but which are not identical." Fifty years of compiling documents and Iuilding Indlces have left the FI1 with approximately 58 million Index cards. Estimates indicate tht.Lse indices consist of approximately 19.3 million inain file indis carols and 38.7 million Inci-dental "see" reference cards which correlate to a total ,Vf 6,628,000 eases investi-gated during the history of the FBI.' Careful and extensive indexing, which is essential to successful criminal and 'e(x!urity investigations, has become a severe imeldlinent to the expeditious han-tiling of information act requests. To insure that no witness, b.stander, ass(K.i-ate, suspet, Iseudonym, relative, or pfhoneti'ally spelled colliterlprt of any of the above is overlooked, each is indexed if devined relevant by the supervding Agent. Victims are also indexed; but as they are carried in the title of a ease awain file index card would exist for them. Multiple subject cases and the listing of victims In the case caption account for the reason that approximately three times as many main file index (ards exist as the total umlmer of cases investi-gated. Therefore, an indexing system of considieralble value to fill investigative agency exists which presents a unique prolilein with regard top information act requests. A significant portion of the time devoted to) lro-esing information act requests involves prexming "see" references from dtiO'tluiets which *rtia fto the gllb-Ject(s) anid oeens! nally the victini () of ivestligatiiis ,iherwise uinreh t.ed to the requester. The United States Civil Servi.e ('onnislsio takes the Ipsition that such a document pertains to the suibJect of the Ilvestigation anid not tilit person who is interviewed, i.e., the referenre.4 The FBI in handling requests under the 1iriE4isel gtililelines pertaiiling to the Interface of the Privacy Act and the FOIA ree'iniijntiOl emisiileration (f the fol-lowing proposal :

All hlieditts searclhs tursui ni to) all in firmatii atet request r0ieould he restricted 

l n"i tie wis- -earche". Such a lr,'egs would eliminate the examination of loreakdowns or bulldups of a name, the search ltwng limited instlld to tile  

> I

The term "see" reference under Fill ,earch procedures means that an Individual other thim tie subject of the Invesligaton I% mentioned In the docuiments compiriing the 

invAtligation. Conversely the subject of any case will be listed In an Indlc,i search as having a main file (ease Investigation). -"A random t sampling of 206 nonproJeet FOIPA rases, October 7. 1975. revealed a total of 424 main files and 10,055 'pee" references. All main flies and "see" references were r,.vlewrd an(i confirmed as identical with the requesters. At a minimum all 424 main file   

> v1,mns', iasmiuning

only one volume to each main file) and conservatively siaking at least , wit, voiunies containing riferences must be Individually located, retrieved, disassembled. X,.'rixl, reassmbhled, and refiled to process these 206 cases. 'Arid these tIgures do not Include the examination of all main flies and "aee" referencee  

> tht

were possibly Identical with the requesters. Initially the search for possibly Identical tW#-4 nr references might have involved 20,000 separate volumes. This Job i handled by file review. ' Information obtained from surveys made by the Records Management Unit. Ples and 

,',,rninicattions Division, FRI. Over one million of these flies were dpotroy#4l by Archival :,thorty. 1.7 million exist on microfilm and 8.8 million are "bard copy" case files. Figtr, talkulat~ed July 22. 1975. 5 ,iirtnation obtained from Mr. Clark Trapp, Iirector. Freedom of Information Act. |'niteil States Civil Service Commission. October 3. 1975. Admittedly the FBI tse of the tIvr "ste" referee encompasses more individuals, nevertheless, the principle is the sante. Where the requester I. both the subject of the Investigation (or victim) and the person i,,inir interviewed. the document will be located In a main IlB file pertaining to the ,'eitv,-ler. not a "Fee" reference. 592 

Iudlividual's completed name, .ommonly a bbreviated name and business signature. In conjunction with this limited search,' the FBI proposes to process only main tiles identified as a result of an indices search of requester's name. "See" refer-ences would not be listed' except for any "see" references to general files.' If requester further, or s cificall.h, identities records associated with a particular organization or incident contained in an investigation otherwise unrelated to requester, every effort would be made to locate and process such a record. 'i'he alve procedure Is designed to bring the FBI into conforinance with the rest of the Deloartnient of Justice pe'r Title 2X. Codxe of Federal Regulations, Section 16.3 (1), (c), (d) (I) and (2) (as amended March 1, 1175). These regu-lations Irnilt the lepartinent to request Identification of the particular lwnd-

Ing litigation, case title or otherjrelevant information that will iennit identi-fication of the records by a "lirwvss that is not unreasonably burdensome or dlisrulptive of apartment oi~erati-ns." Indeed that Fill has request no sl Pci-flicity or additional information to reduce the scope of "see" reference reviews; relying Instead iilxoi our own resources, this Agency has engaged in extensive research efforts to locate, retrieve and process any docilnuent that may relate to the reqiuester's Inquiry. Rather than information retrieval under established procedure. the effort to loo-ate, Identify or eliminate potentially relevant material has liPtleoin investigatory. Additioallly this prolsxsal is consistent %, i1i ti, philosophy expressed in the proposed regulation 16.57, which stipulates that all requests by an in-dividuial for information pertaining to lminslf he treated prowedurally as Pri-vacy Act requests with disclosure of otherwise: exempt files being made lit tli, discretion of the Attorney (Ueneral. Such discretion should eli('tEIilss the estnl lineiit of pro "htdres that would sernit irhnit, miista/thal cinilihlince with the mandate of Congress. ('ontlinued use of ain indices search and file review Jirwedure designed to facilitate the Fill's primary invest iga t lye funct ion imposes it burden and sutbseqjuent delay in responding to requesters which has reached disruptive proportions within the FIl. A request by jsrsons for ay document co intaining their namne as oplisled to a case investigation captioned In their name, ie.. a anin ile reteren'e, constitutes a categorical request iinder existing iroed tires. As the PiB[ now has a Iacklog of 5.137 informnathn net requests of which only 1,084 are presently being processed, the problem of noncompliance under the statutes is grave. Additionally the FBt continues to receive between seventy-five and one hundred ten new informatloi act requests etch day. Exigting procedures utilized by the FIll in an attempt to fulfill the statutory in(lates are outside the bounds of t common sense approach to conpllance. Administrative changes are necessary. Elimination of. or a sigluitfllt reduc-tion In the processing of "see" references, would suimlstantially lnrirove D -partment of Justice eoiniflance with the Infornmation act statutes and signifi-cantly reduce the disruptive effect of taxing out of ile and proc.es.-ing thon-sands of volumes (ontaining "see" references. The proposal outlined in this ineniorandumn 14 consiilered a feasible and proper plan to reduce a growing backlog of requests. It is urged that the Deputy Attor-ney General act with celerity In consideration of this iir pisal which Is strongly rp'ommended Iby the FBI. 

MEVMORA'NDlM 'FOR TI;: IM)EP;TY AT'rioN)Y (flN KRA. 

Re Interface between the Privacy mind Freedom of Inforaintion Acts as Regards. "'Se" References. nil Obstaele to ('ompllanee.         

> "Aj oplooed In an examination of nil

hreakdownx ,nit holidou p of A iminu. fior trtinuial  

> 11,4

%te',tirltv Investliations. e.g.. name Robert Edward Ie with an Indileet oenrch under tiot ,,nlv full iamp. hilt also Robert N. 1"e. Robert L.ee. R. E. I". R. Edward Lees. E. Lee. 

1111d It. A-'P. beltior conducted.                                          

> tIIs to be noted that VOlA exiw'ri,,nce ,lPmonptratex that "see" refereics's are fr'-q'ltently reported in sublstanct lo any main file ,f which the reiiuexter It the xlll.ect. '(icllerAl fll..s ore those vl'leh Ito tiot relate, to nsinie. containpl lnvo-tizatmn. Inchid-
> iuug iusteal du.etumentp

grould by category. Each duniumetnt relates to a oeparatl,, activity which Is generally noninvesetlgatory. Rxamnples are correapondence tile. purchase contract 

illes. ininvatigated allejgtlon., lialon and ml-t ellaneoua matter. Records Manarement 1'1,it. J111. ha tleii II fled tlis.' c.l's,,iflenttons ae I) fl],,o In all classifications. and the 62. 6.3. 

,M. anmd 94 claxlfl,,ittons in the Field Otmces and Ifeadqnuarters as well as the 84) .laidici-    

> 1101 ,ly lt Field Offices.

593 

Background 

Attached [Tab A] is a memorandum from Director Kelley which sets forth in detail the Bureau's current procedures involving searches for records pur-suact to Freedom of Information and Privacy Act requests. Director Kelley seeks your approval of certain modifications in those procedures. These involve going to a system of "on-the-nose" searches, based on the information furnished 

by a requester, and the elimination of "see" reference checks. 

Departmental Positions 

I agree with the procedural changes which Director Kelley desires to imple-nient and propose that you approve them for future operations. In forming my own opinions, I have relied substantially on representations, within and with-out the attached memorandum, that the Bureau recognzlms that approval to make these cl niges ,'slin ol ,rnte only toi create "geuenel rile.;" and that there will be cases in which more refined search procedures will be required as a matter of logic and fairness. I have coordinated my position with DAAG Lawton and Mr. Salos-chin of the Office of Legal Counsel and [very Informally] with Ms. Ruth Matthews of the staff of the oversight subconmmittee chaired by Representative Abzug. All agree that the minimal impact on Individual requesters which will result from these changes is more than offset by the significant favorable impact we antici-pate in terns of reducing processing time within the Bureau. 

[I) srusiort f

"On-the-nose" Searchcs.-IThe current lpracti'e within the Bureau is to under-take essentially the same sort of sophisticated files check in F.O.I.A. and P.A. cases 

its it would run In aniy other case. This involves. Inter alias, building up and breaking down the reqlester's namne Into nany different combinations of names and Initials. In the F.O.I.A. nd P.A. area, thils involves considerable effort, which Is rarely, if ever, rewarded in teris of records Istively identifiable with the requester. As a general prol)xwition, I)ire.tor Kelley Intends to linit searches to the - laiine Ised I for nivmes provided] by the requester, 1)eternilnation as to whether files so h('ated fl re or are not Identifliable with the partl(.iflar r14lueSter will ordinarily be nade by iuse of the hiforliation furnished by the requienster. The Bu-reau fully realizes and a'celts that there will Ie mixc'itle rehlestm concerning which logic and/or fairness will require a more comprehensive search; It also accepts the fact that it may end ip rtlhlning several checks IlI a case, to the ex-to-tit that requesters write back with farther Ildlitifyillg information. I lprolpose that you approve the(' rt'.iiest (if lIlreet,,r Kelley to go to a system oirdilnarily (onduct ing ily "oli-t he-nose" sea riches. 

"ScC" Reftcrcnce ('hckA.-This is I'y far the illtiri, intumntaIt lrolpos4l change In terms of facilitating tilt irea's onigoing efforts to (tit Into Its liseding lwackloog (of riqliests anl reduce sulbsti ntihlly the length of tine the JIro'essing (if tihe average reiliuest will take. "S'h " references Ire very peripheral InI nature. 

litll fr t 1he, i' lmn ri lliv' oif tihe hifor ali tyili' ('lmitali tibotit i l ie individual %o referen-ed. .A ',5411 well kow., it thle Ifntt ir i 5hts ally siglficant Infornlntion a bout a ii iIdividaial or Is seriously itresti'll 0 himl. he- will liu1ve tits own file. 11oliret'tr Kelley lrolises to llniit sea r(lh's toi umnin tilts Identified with the re-

quester, pils ('ross-referenced general files [dws'laments groliis'd hy category, e.g.,  

> (',rreslipnde.e.

lmr(itw c()nltrait, uninvestigateld( llegtltioibi. liaison. miS-('ellaileolis. etc.) mind nmly fille renting to orgilt iiza titiis ilm ib/tr In('elentS which ire' i114111itl Ity the r'llivstv,. al litmigli it herwivse silierfieiilly mitarein ted to h111im (i.e.. lie is not Indexed us it siilIje 't or victin l. nde'r this Iirtw d'llre, it is diffl-

4'llt-to set' hWo any Inforaat ion of any signi fitlilii'e allwmut a reqoliet'r will lnot Ie  

> ifi'at

d, T rec(OgllizIe that thep stattes (It l'oll('ern talk alxillt 'rec-ords." rather than "significant information." I ('in.tone that aoPlti 11 oof thoi ltiiroe'04llo rtlm.;t'd by T1irettor Kelley rtlprese'nts a delil,'rit lmirr mvlig of oiur seilr('|is on these re-ieNts iII a WQ y that 'oulcd derivele' all in idividtisil (if al iiijmlil'&tlt ion as to tile re'ierds that would he' located tlhrilagh the "et " refertltie-c. Nneth.less. I believe that mnost r(euesters are prinnrily [if not, ini faet, slely (',tn(erne'd with what we have "on" them. Givenl the pres4tnt sitUlaticll f(eed toy the Buireau-where the Indlng hacklog continues to rise Ptach 111il1th Slonl" solutions mulrt be found. .1ilthough I iftlen diagree with the F.B.I. its to what the vital Internsts of the 594 Department and Bureau are, all of us agree that the review procedures must be sufficient to protect those interests. Similarly, it is not reasonable, in my opinion, to require the Bureau to increase its already generous allocation of personnel resources to the F.O.I.A./P.A. area. The proposal of Director Kelley conforms to the current practice within the Civil Service Commission and the C.I.A. as well as D.E.A. and the other comlupIIenqt of this Iejartnient. 

Recommendation 

I recommend that you approve the proposal of I~irector Kelley, with appro-priate caveats. A memorandum to effect this result is submitted herewith.       

> QuiNLAN J. SHr&, Jr.,
> Chid/, Frcedom of

Jnforinartion al lkri t'qj (ot il.   

> I)kxF.rsnI 1,

1975. Memorandum to: Clarence M. Kelley, Director, Federal Bureau of Investigation. From: Harold R. Tyler, Jr., Deputy Attorney General. Subject: Interface between the 'rivacy and Freedom of Information Acts as Regards "See" References an Obstacle to Compliance. Reference is made to your memorandum of November 3, 1975, subject as above. Given the magnitude of the Bureau's pe, ndlng caseload in the Freedom of Inforination Act-Privacy Act area, I concur generally in your proposal to ,niltfy your existing search procedures. Reliance, in most cases, on the use of "o1-the-tiO.e' searches and the cessation of "-ee" refe-rence searches am ai g,-neral idli, may operate, technically, to deny some Individual requesters the adjudication as to every record pertaining to them to which they are arguably entitled under these Acts. Nevertheless, it is clear to me that this effect of your proposal should le very minor and that it will be more than offset by the fact that the processing of pending and future requests will be greatly expedited. Accordingly, your request in these regards Is approved on the hasis that it 

will significantly advance our mutual efforts to comply, to the greatest feaslblo exent, with both the letter and spirit of these two Acts. [Whereiipon, at 11:50 na.u., the silh('omnittec, adjoiluned slu)ject ti) ('all of the Chair.] FBI OVERSIGHT Preliminary GAO Report on FBI Accomplishments and Statistics WEDNESDAY, SEPTEMBER 29, 1976 H OUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES, S(iCOM.11MI'TIrEE (IN ( IVIL AND CONSTTTIrONA, RIGHTS or1" TIE (v.%ITu'rEE ON TIE JUDICIARY, 

Wa.8hington, D.C. 

11hc s' I'lllnlittve int, jirsiiant to notice, at 1:45 p.m., in rool . ) .) : . ,.'.,i, lRayburn louse Office Building, Ilon. )on Edwards [chairman of tile Suilollln ittee I l)resi(ling. lPreset : Repiresentative; E~dwards, Seiberling, Drinan, Dodd. ilitler. alii ], inI(lnes.. Also present Alan A. larker. (o1lus4l; Catlerine LeRoy and "'holiias P. Ireeii. assistant counsel" and lRoscoe B. Starek IlI, associa te coililsel. 

Mr. EDmv.mms. 'I'll( suicomii ittee will come to order. We apologize for 11e delay. 'I']l(h eletronie voting machine broke down. We had to go back to thle Middle Ages in voting. It tak(s 45 minutes. First, I wi.,li to ex re. s tile ,,ulwommittees al)l)reciation to the ((,l-tral Ae'ouit tilig (flite for :cconini~lo(ating our abrupt chiutge in sched-tliuig.(c to, a meeting of tl(, full ('onlitjttee oil the .Judiciary this  

> Il oioll Ing.

I wislh ilso to exj r(-,s ilt' alreCi:t ion for your c(')lper'atio ali(l willingness to appear and present your lprogre.ss to (late before your" review has lxein comlleted. Oversiohit. in all it.s facets, over the Fe(deral bureau oif Investigation has heelt thle 01 Ijective of this subcommittee sinCe *tine of 1974 whten II iat asigilnent was first undertaken. An illiportalt asset of ours ill tils (nleavor hias )een the resorces 

> W

ill ( x,,.rat ion of the ( generall \A'ecolit ig Office. 

It was i,0i .une :3 of 1971 that we first asked for the :;-,is.,.tan4'e of tle (GAO( to provide for i , onl a continuing basis information on the eflhcieno.cv, econtun iv. an ir fect i vinesqs of thle FBHI's op erat ions. ( )ill initial ciniern wi:s Ilie ilureau's (lotnetic intelligence operations. You responded with a preli inlary relot ill Septeniber' of 1975. and 

'our corn mplete review on tie FBlI's domesticc intelligence,. operations was received on Fe|ruary 21. 1976. It still remains as the basic source (locunivilt for information il c, rrent limeatu ipra'lw ices inl t hant area. 

We have asked tlat yoii follow up tiat review with a new study. r14)Owtihgi to this Suil OilliiIitte( VoiIIr filldinls after thw illel] ntlllta-tion of the Attorney General's guidelines aid the recent reorganization 

by Director Kelley. with reslwct to doilestic intelligence matters, ,,o that we ilia\, know the true efle'ts of these recent changes on this t roublesome area. (695) 596 .As we near the end of the 94th Congress, let, me take a few minutes to outline our progress and activities with respect to the FBI. This subcommittee, since June of 1974, has publicly looked at the COlNTEI1I)RO's, outlining for the first time the structure and extent of FBI counterintelligence programs; leld liemrings with Attorney General I.A'i whiich covered tile FBI information gatlering rfictices with respect to Members of Congress and citizens of the United States" covered the special official and confidential files of J. Edgar Hoover and the destruction of same; covered how the resources of the FBI were misused by tlie exe'ut i \ve bianli. We also initiated and discussed with Attoriney Gener-al Levi tle liftingg of guidelines to speak to the appropriate investigatory areas and! tie -4ope of tie Bureall's inve.,tigatory practices and completed plunlic heariings ol tilt Oswial(-Rub'-IN alter-W,\arren (omnmission-FlBI con lect ing interests. 

As p reviously\ mwntioned . lie subcoiiiittee requested and received a report froiii tfi' (iAton FI domestic intelligence operations- Their ]'lir)o.-A' aiId Scop,' IssiiCs That Need ''o B e l'Nsolve(d. This repIort lelrvevl slte iti(ost ('(.iprclieinsive and in(lethI look at the FlI's cur-rent loli iesti ic telligeh',' lOj)Cat ions. It was and is the single most 111 1 )iWhilnt resour.Ce d(louinlilt ill this frea. 'lle followup study now in 

)I'(g('Y1ss will inl(licilt, whlit r or not tle (.liilige., il-.t ituted are of l'il orl sullstltuce. 

Tile Stllixolii tittee recently c(,IcIttd4le a look at the )roblens occur-ring ilk the BI,4ll's abilitY to comply witl tit. statutory provisions of tile IFreedoni of Iiformiation anl Privacv Acts. "I'he subcommittee dJenll ded 1inl receilt Iv r'eivel! a l rop)sal froi ie FIl to efectively' adiiliister in it ti miel\" fashion F'reedoni of Inforiimition aicl Privacy Act reqll(',-IS. Tiat po)o)(sal reqliies a titalisfer of 1iminumili elr alil filnls. a111(1 we will I. iiioriitorilig %t'ry clo.(ly thlie i ilenientation of thiat proposal. Sii igit (l tiat is lanotlier alia were tile (GA() is p)erformiilg an   

> 1lit lt.

i1(l we look forwa i'Ci to t he rnedilit s aai your" reconilin(iitit ions        

> ill that alrea.
> Mon. in iortillant. however. air

lie lier(,sllt 1'ojects wli ic.li ir- ongoing at the Stall level lild oil w i(' 1 we will thold eal-'iigs ill thii- coning Oversiglit. t() be ele cive. ieeds to b e co!l-t :lit mil r-eleit less. From tiliuw to tilie it will surface with it 5I)IRSi of putblicity andA tlit is lie+' ,41i1a, i i lielpfulI. as, is tile pulic scritiny-every agency .iould uin(lergo; Iut"t5 peliemiit of effective overnight is (ontant roIing anid! (iest ioning 

011 i uil" l Lsis bi traiiinel ail kiowlelgeal)le sta lf lxrsomis. Tie FIl is a vast buillreaicirac'y of approximately 2O.CIil total em-ployc's ani 1 2 divisiois. Thorioui4l-going oveprSiglt requires that every  

> i104)k

ani ci-mu l v Ix, looked ii lit il -'gil inr an 11 rillg il ' iitel'l. ii tj ist tie seisatioiial must be l irllovl. but the olp'rations in their entirety must be scrutinized. Q questions regarding tie estalismnlelit of lpolicy 

ilnd its illilel entatioli must be constantly' asked. ie suil K'Oliloiit tee is p)irevsitly asking l qm-ist ions id! delvi g

into tlie Ilrea of informints. 'T'lis will en('collass the history an uls 

of informants by tile FBI. tie law surroun(iing tlieir use, a survey of instrutlionls givenl bv tile FBI to informants, a srilev of tie iet lods u4 d ill handling then. the (liiferen('es ill their uti'lization lxt ween criminal and intelligence matters, an analysis of their use compared to other techniques, an attempt to profile informants used, and to cate-gorize the abuses caused. by informants or the use of informants. The subcommittee shall also examine the relationships between U.S. attorneys and the FBI-the control system for agents assisting U.S. attorneys and who sets the investigative priorities. I might add that the report to be received this afternoon points up the importance of this examination. We will also continue our check on the current status of the FBI's electronic fingerprint identification systems, and check on continued use and effectiveness of NCIC. The subcommittee is examining the employment/personnel manage- 

> nient

policies of the Bureau. looking at their present policy in recruit-inent of agent personnel; determiiining the edlucationial and background Deeds of the 0BI and how those needs are being filled-, estalishing the pattern of education and experience of agents hired in the last 10 years; examining their EFO efforts at all levels of employment; looking at their disciplinary policy, their grievance and appellate pro-C(e(ures and determinilg tle, 1)oiCies and practices of a-ssignments. Additionally, we are examining the educational activities of the Bureau, the operation of their training academy at Quantico and the police academy, and checking tle facilities, the curr-culum, and the inst ructors. 'his list is not meant to 1K all incbisiv. but to provide the general outline of the areas we will be be looking at first. All of this takes time. All of this will result in public hearinprF and public disclosures of our findings. It is our goal, both in the short and long range, to assure the American people that they are getting full value from each dollar expenled by the Bureau. Just as important we nuist assure ourselves that all FBI activities are .olidly based on con-stitutional authority. These-two concepts are inseparable in my view. 

Iet me turn now to the PuI)ject of today's hearngs. For sm tine the FBI has been publishing an annual report. The introduction to each report always refers to tle achievements recorded. the accompl islh-ients the report outlines. 'TIesle reports and statistics have been widely used, even lbv Congres-s. to clronicle the accompiisliment of the Bureau, to measure its efft'c-tivenes. and in sone ca-:es as a bawe on which to appropriate fulnds for its operations. Therefore. thte suibcomniittee asked the GAO to look into tle figures to determine tici r -validist v and their rev,(vance. Are tlv acc,,rate vard,,tickc of )ow wv(,l th, B,,reau pirforms its Aisilgned task and legitimate f,,n'tion;? Are they relevant to tellin,. the story of h~ow efficiently the Bureau performs? , there a better 

Inea sure? .ShrTtlv the HousA and Senate will approve an LEAA authorization bill which will provide tlat all future appropriations for the Depart-ment of ,Tustice must first 1w authorized by the .Tudiliarv Committee. We proposed that sug ,estion and lave worked hard for its passage. Our work here this afternoon will be helpful in looking forward to that authorization responsibility. We have with us today Victor Lowe, Director of the General Gov-ernment Division of the General Accounting Office. Mr. Iwe is ac-82 Qf -77- 39 597 598 companied by Daniel Stanton, Associate Director of the General Gov-ernment Division, and by Daniel Harris, Supervisory Auditor of the General Govenment Division. I ask you to rise and raise your right hand. [ Witnesses duly sworn.] Mr. DJNAJN. Mr. Chairman, I have a routine motion for media coverage. I move that the committee permit coverage of this hearing in whole or in part by television, radio, still photography or by any such methods pursuant to committee rule V. Mr. EDWARDS. Without objection, so ordered. If there are no statements by the members, you may proceed. TESTIMONY OF VICTOR LOWE, DIRECTOR, GENERAL GOVERN. XENT DIVISION, GENERAL ACCOUNTING OFFICE; ACCOMPANIED BY DANIEL STANTON, ASSOCIATE DIRECTOR, GENERAL GOV-ERNMENT DIVISION; DANIEL HARRIS, SUPERVISORY AUDITOR, GENERAL GOVERNMENT DIVISION; AND ROBERT POWELL, 

SUPERVISORY AUDITOR. SAN FRANCISCO REGION 

M r. I.owF. Mr. Chairman, I understand there are some time con-straints so if it is suitable to the Chair, I would proceed to read through page 10 of my statement and then read the last two pages. Mr. EDWARDS. Without objection, the full statement will be made a part of the record. Y'ou may proceed. 

[ rh plmpared statement of Victor L. Lowe follows:] STATrMENT OF VICTO L. LOWE, DrxEaRos, GENERAL GOVERNMENT DmsoN Mr. Chairman and Members of the Subcommittee: Our testimony today deals with the methods by which the FBI develops, reports, and uses accomplishment statistics on its criminal Investigative activities. The Chairman of this Sub-committee has expressed a continuing interest in this review and particularly in the validity of the accomplishment statistics claimed annually by t,,e FBI. 

Although the review Is not yet complete, we can report on our progress to date anl provide information that may be helpful in carrying out your oversight res lonoibillties. The initial purpirwe of our review was to determine the validity of the FBI's accomplishment statistic resulting from Its Investigative efforts. Early in the review, however, we also began to focus on the more important ismue of how useful and representative the FBI's accomplishment statistics are a trilicators of the effectiveness of its criminal investigative efforts. Our work is being conducted at FBI Headquarters and six FBI field olNcP*-Boston, Chicago. Los Angeles, Milwaukee, Sacramento, and San Francisco. From these six offices we selected 1,199 criminal cases for review as shown ii, Appendix 

I. Our observations today are based on 683 or 57 percent of these cases. Before I begin with the subject of today's testimony, I would like to briefly discuss the FBI's cooperation with our audits. In our previous two appearances before this Subcommittee regarding our review of the FBI's domestic Intelligence operations, we pointed out several problems we had in conducting the review and in obtaining access to FBI records, particularly investlgatlvp files. Since that time, as you know, the FBI has agreed to cooperate with GAO audits and to provide us more complete information on Its activities. However, it still does not Include access to Investigative fles or to original file documents. As you know, we are conducting several reviews of various FBI activities, including the one which we are testifying on today. To date, FP" officials have been very responsive to our requests for information on all ongoing reviews. Their cooperation has been particularly good on this review. The FBI has shown real 399 

interest and has been taking astem to improve its methods for managing re-sources and measuring investigative results. Following a briefing on the tenta-tive results of our rovlew, the FBI Director asked our assistance In developing better management information and directed his associates to provide us with any lnfor-mation we needed in this regard. -

I would now like to discuss our observations with respect to our review of the FBI's investigative results and accomplishments. The FBI has traditionally maintained and reported five categories of accom-plishment statlstis--Convictons, Fines, Savings, Recoveries, and Fugitive Lo-cations--as the prime measurement of the effectiveness of its criminal Inves-tigative efforts. We found only a small number of errors in the accomplishment statistics. However, the statistics are subject to misinterpretation because of the way they are presented. More important, they are limited as a management tool In that they do not adequately portray the impact and effectiveness of the FBI's total Investigative effort. The FBI's accomplishment statistics relate to only a small percentage of the total criminal investigations it conducts. Our work to date Indicates that most investigations do not produce one of the traditional above-noted accomplish-ments. Most cases are terminated either administratively within the FBI due to lack of a Federal crime or failure to identify a suspect, or by a U.S. attor-ney's declination to prosecute. Cases ivestigated by the FBI, whether they produce accomplishment statis-tics or not, range from serious and complex instances of fraud and embezzle-ment, kidnapping, and armed bank robbery to what the FBI has termed "areas of marginal Importance." The fact that many cases do not produce a measurable accomplishment may be somewhat attributable to the reactive nature of the law enforcement business and the FBI's view that it must Investigate all situations where It has sole or partial enforcement responsibility. The FBI said that unless directed otherwise by the Department of Justice or local U.. attorneys, it must investigate all apparently valid complaints of alleged violations of Federal law within its Jurlsdiction, and present each case for prosecutive opinion if the necessary elements are developed. Therefore, the FBI is expending resources on cases where it finds there was no crime or where the U.S. attorneys decide the violation was not substantive enough to justify the effort and expense of court proceedings. Little agent time s expended on these cases individually. Since. most cases terminate without being authorized for prosecution, however, these cases In total consume a large amount of FBI resources, the impact of which-except for any possible deterrent effect-may be limited. The FBI has allocated its investigative resources primarily on the basis of caseload; that is, the average number of cases handled by a special agent. Gen-erally, little attention was given by headquarters to the quality, nature, or scope of cases. Management Information was limited and primarily caseload related. No information was kept to relate resources expended to the types of cases on which they were expended and the results achieved. A year ago, the FBI initiated a different approach to investigations aimed at improving the management of its resources and cases. Field offices were In-structed to "strive for early resolution" of investigative matters of "marginal importance" and "concentrate investigative effort on the major criminal prob-lems" in their area. It was also suggested discussions be held with the U.S. 

attorneys regarding areas for concentration of Investigative efforts. The new concept should channel investigative resources Into areas of greatest need to achieve maximum impact on crime. However, without better and more comprehensive Information on the results of investigations and the corresponding effort expended, the FBI cannot adequately evaluate the effectiveness of the new concept or assure that resources are allocated to achieve the maximum impact on major criminal problems. The FBI agreed It needs better and more comprehensive management infor-mation. Actions, which we will discuss later, have been taken by the FBI over 

fhe past 2 or 8 years to develop such information. Also, In August 1976, the FBI Director appointed a task force to review their management information needs and asked our assLitance in developing better ways to report Investigative results. 600    

> MANAGEMENT OF !NVESTIGATYZ RESOURCES

The FBI is responsible for investigating a large number of criminal violations and civil matters. Even though the FBI--like any other law enforcement agency-is required by law to investigate all violations within its Jurisdiction, from a practical standpoint its resources are limited. It must therefore establish priorities and focus its efforts where it can have the most Impact on the,crime problem. Thus, the way the FBI organizes Its criminal Investigative activities and the information it uses to manage and control its resources are Important to achieving maximum efficiency. Management of FBI resources has been based on limited information such as personal observations and opinions, and reports that 4o not provide compre-hensive information on all aspects of Investigative efforts. FBI headquarters decisions regarding priorities, staffing allocations, and con-clusions regarding program success have been based on caseload information from administrative reports, accomplishment reports, periodic manpower sur-veys, and annual inspections. Field office decisions have been based on case-load, and on the squad supervisors' and field office managers' personal knowl-edge of performance and resource needs in specific areas and the capabilities of personnel working those areas. Accomplishment reports, compiled monthly by headquarters, show fines, sav-ings, recoveries, convictions, and fugutive locations claimed by field offices. These reports are available to the field offices, but their usefulness is question-able because they lack information on the resources expended. Administrative reports, also compiled monthly from similar field office reports, contain data on the number of cases received, closed, and pending, the number of agents assigned, and average caseload. In lieu of routine information on manpower usage, which-as will be discussed later-will soon become available, manpower surveys were periodically made of selected 2-week periods In various field offices. Although these surveys became Increasingly refined since they were initiated in 1973, they still only approximated the percentage of total agent effort expended in each investigative and adminis-trative classification. In addition, with certain exceptions, the surveys (lid not go beyond these classifications to categories or types of cases. Average caseload has been the primary basis for allocating resources, with some reliance placed on the Inspection Division's assessment during annual field office inspections of caseload and the adequacy of staffing levels. However, this system gave equal weight to all cases without considering their quality or sig-nificance, and it generally implied that enough resources were available to cover all cases. Also, under this system a tendency developed at the field office level to maintain high caseloads by opening and retaining relatively inconsequential cases to justify staffing levels. In late 1974, recognizing the problems with the "caseload management" ap-proach, the FBI initiated a "use of personnel" study to determine whether the field offices "could produce a more meaningful and significant investigative prod-uct if they were unencumbered by the caseload system with its direct correlation to manpower allocation" and whether "office efficiency, productivity, and morale would be positively affected by a managerial approach which emphasized 'Quality over Quantity.'" After a trial period in four field offices, the FBI initiated in September 1975 the so-called "Quality over Quantity" concept in all its fleld offices. Instructions were issued to the field offices to (1) conclude as expeditiously as possible cases of "marginal importance," (2) establish investigative priorities In conjunction with the local U.S. attorneys, and (3) concentrate on quality cases and on major criminal and security problems within their respective territories. In our opinion, the FBI's acceptance of the "Quality over Quantity" approach to conducting investigations and managing its investigative resources is a major step forward. However, certain problems must be resolved before the concept can become effective, including defining and establishing criteria for determining "quality" cases and cases of "marginal importance." Also, since caseload has ien the primary method tsed to allocate manpower, the successful implementation of the concept could be hindered by any lingering suspicions in the FBI that adrop in caseload could result in closing smaller offices, transfer of agents from offices having small caseloads, and manpower reductions in general. 601 

For the "Quality over Quantity" concept to be viable, the FBI in conjunction with the U.S. attorneys must make determinations of which cases or types of cases should be investigated, and to what extent resources should be committed to a given case. Criteria should be developed to help determine whether the FBI should become involved in a case and what priority the case should be given. Information presently available to the FBI does not provide a complete picture of its criminal investigative efforts and, thus, is not a firm basis for measuring the effectiveness of past operations, determining where resources were used, allocating resources, or planning future operations. After about 2 years of design and development, the FBT recently Implemented an automated system to replace its periodic manpower survey that will routinely account for agent tiinexpendedby general investigative classiflcations and sub-classifications. Sub-classifl-iitH--n- of the existing classifications and other changes are also being considered for the existing administrative or caseload report to Improve its usefulness. Although these changes are Improvements, they do not go far enough because of the wide range in complexity and degree of Importance of individual cases. The FBI does not develop statistical information on the results of cases. Gen-erally, there Is no information that relates the time and expense of investigations to their seriousness or complexity, or their final disposition. Such information is necessary if the FBI Is going to adequately evaluate the effectiveness of its operations. Since accomplishment statistics were claimed in only about 25 percent of the criminal cases closed in the offices we reviewed, the limited accomplishment in. formation applies to a small part of overall operations. Most cases investigated are terminated either administratively under authority of the Special Agent in Charge (SAC), or by a U.S. attorney's declination to prosecute. In the six offices for the period April-July, only 530 or about 9 percent of 6,209 cases concluded-were accepted for prosecution. About 50 percent were closed administratively by SAC authority and about 41 percent were declined for prosecution. The fact that so many cases were not authorized for prosecution may not be bad. The problem, however, is that the FBI currently has no information on the disposition of caisi rm identify the number of, and amount of effort expended on, cases declined for prosecution, closed by SAC authority, or accepted for prosecution. The FBI should have more comprehensive management Information to effec. tively manage its investigative operations. Better information Is needed to ef. fectively select priority areas for concentrated efforts and allocate resources between field offices and squads. In addition to providing for better internal program management, such information could help the FBI Identify areas in which action by the. Congress and the Department of Justice is necessary to effect Improvement. Such actions could Include revising laws, and issuing pros-ecutorial guidelines setting forth Investigative areas that will not normally be prosecuted or that should be routinely referred to other Federal, State, or local authorities having concurrent jurisdiction. RECORDING AND REPORTING ACCOM.%PLISU MENT STATISTICS 

Each year, primarily in Its annual report and budget justification, the FBI reports the results of its investigative activities in the form of five types of accomplishments--convictions, fines, savings, recoveries, and fugitive locations. This is the primary basis which the Department of Justice, Office of Manage-ment and Budget, the Congress, the public, and the FBI Itself have for judging and evaluating the FBI's performance and effectiveness. Although generally the FBIP's accomplishment statistics were accurate basel 

on the FBI's criteria for determining accomplishments, we believe that they could be subject to misinterpretation because of the nature of their presentation and lack of detail. Many of the accomplishments represent Joint efforts between the FBI and other law enforcement agencies, and contain estimated potential rather than actual dollar amounts. The criteria FBI headquarters provides to field offices for recording accom.-plishments is limited. IPowever, the basic rule followed by the FBI Is that If it had any Involvement whatsoever In a case, it claims credit for the resulting accomplishment. The main control Is headquarters review and final approval of accomplishments, which are generally submitted by field office personnel as part of a periodic or final investigative report. 602 Of the 473 cases examined to date, we questiened 16, or about 8 percent, on 'the basis that they could be subject to misinterpretation unless further detail or explanation in provided. A small number appeared to be in error. Appendix 11 

shows the number of cases examined and questioned by category of acmplisih-ment. We questioned accomplishments claimed in the cases reviewed on the basis of the following criteria: The accomplishment claimed was either inacurate or a duplication. The accomplishment claimed was in a case where there was little apparent FBI involvement. The role of the FBI in achieving the accomplishment was clearly supportive, or another agency played an important role in the accomplishment that is not recognized. The amount claimed was based upon an estimate of potential loss that could have occurred had a scheme been successful or had a suit against the Federal Government been successful. We will now discuss our findings with respect to each of the five accomplish-ment categories. 

V onvictions The FBI expresses the convictions it claims as accomplishments in terms of the number of persons convicted and the sentences imposed. The format for present-ing convictions treats all convictions the same and does not allow for distinction as to their relative importance in terms of irmpact on crime. For example, a con-%iction of an influential organized crime figure is given the same weight as aconviction of a bookmaker. Also, multiple convictions of the same person could be misinterpreted since the reader may assume each conviction applies to a different person. It is FBI policy to claim a conviction on each indictment even though it may be on the sane person. Further, the FBI reporting does not recognize the contributions of State, local, and other Federal agencies In securing the convictions. On the other hand, it does not recognize the contributions of the FBI in somue a-ses tried by the States where the FBI may have spent considerable resources. 

Of the 108 cases reviewed in which convictions were claimed, we questioned 

10, or about 9 percent, on the basis that they could be misinterpreted. For example: In a case exemplifying multiple convictions of one person, a suspect wrote 10 worthless checks totaling $887 at two military Installations. The FBI investi-gatetd tile case and presented it to the U.S. attorney. The suspect was convicted of each of 10 complaints and the FBI reported 10 convictions. In a case exemplifying the unrecognized involvement of another agency, two Juveniles fatally wounded a third individual and left him on military property. Military investigators obtained a description of the Juveniles and notified the highway patrol, which apprehended the suspects. They turned the suspects over to the military which then turned them over the FBI. The FBI arrested the suspects who were later prosecuted as adults and convicted. The FBI reported two convictions and two life-term sentences. 

Puhes 

The FBI reports fines as accomplishments, whether they are actual or sus-pended. In 16 cases, or about 21 percent, of the 76 cases reviewed, the fine" claimed were suspended in whole or part and thus would not have been collected by the Federal Government. Although a fine Imposed, even if suspended, is an accomplishment, it Is misleading for the FBI to report this as if it were an amount actually collected by the Federal Government. For example: In a case involving the conviction of a bank employee for -embezzling funds using fraudulent withdrawal slips. The subject made complete restitution and was sentenced to 6 months probation and a $1W fine which was suspended.-The FBI claimed the $5,50 fine as an accomplishment. saings The amount of savings the FBI claims includes the actual or estimated value of money or property that could have been lost because of criminal acts, or could have been paid in civil muilts brought against the Government. Most savings are claimed because of disiLssals or reductions in the amount asked in civil suits brought under the Federal Tort Claims Act. When requested, the FBI assists U.S. attorneys who represent the Government In such cases. The FBI claims as a savings the total amount asked for in suits that are 603 dismissed and the diffeence between the total amount asked for and the am aut awarded In other cases. This practice is questionable became It cannot be assumed that the Government would have lost the cases and paid the entire amount had the FBI not assisted the -U.S. attorney. One U.S. attorney pointed out that the amount asked for often bears no relation to- the reasonableness of the claim. We questioned all 50 cases reviewed involving savings claimed on the basis that the amounts were highly judgmental and subject to misinterpretation and require extensive clarification. For example: In a clvil suit, the plaintiff asked $1 million claiming the Governmeat had clouded the title to some land. The U.S. attorney requested that the FBI cheek the two plaintiffs' backgrounds. However, before the background checks were provided to the U.S. attorney, the claim was disaissed on Its merits by the court. The FBI claimed a $1 million savings in the case. Another case involved a $1.5 million medical malpractice suit brought against the Federal Government charging that the victim's death resulted from amilitary doctor's negligence. The FBI assisted the U.S. attorney defending the case by investigating the doctor's background and circumstances surrounding the victim's death, and determined the doctor was possibly negligent. The suit was settled for $7,000 and the FBI claimed a $1,493,000 savings. In a case involving a criminal act, five persons attempted to sell counterfeit money orders. A Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) informant learned of the scheme and notified DEA which in turn notified the FBI. DE.k recov-ered money orders with a potential face value of $231,400, while the FBI recov-ered an additional $314,800. DEA's recovered money orders were turned over to the FBI which claimed the entire $546,200 as a savings. Since none of the money orders were successfully passed, this represented only potential savings, 

Recoveries 

The recoveries category-includes stolen, duplicated or created property, money-and other financial documents, which are confiscated in the course of investigat-Ing a crime. The FBI's procedure for reporting recoveries indicates that the FBI was solely responsible for recovering the Items even though the recoveries were made either by other law enforcement agencies or in a coordinated effort between the FBI and another agency. The recovery category includes the confiscation of pirated movie films and recording tapes, whose value is routinely estimated based on the projected potential losses that may have occurred if the pirated Items were distributed for monetary gain whether or not they were distributed. Of the 110 sample cases involving recovery claims, we questioned 41, or about 

87 percent, primarily because the recoveries were made by other law enforce-ment agencies or involved arbitrary figures related to a potential act. For exam-ple: In one case, the FBI claimed a recovery although no Federal violation oc-

curred and they did not-work on the case. A piece of equipment valued at $6,400 was turned in to a local police department the same day it had been reported to-them as being stolen. The local police department notified the FBI thinking the theft might constitute a Federal violation. Although no Federal violation had occurred, and no suspect was apprehended, the FBI claimed a $6,400 recovery. In a case involving an estimated recovery based on a potentlil act. the FBI recovered copies of copyrighted movie film from a collector. The collector had made no money from showing the copies and there was no indication that he planned to use the films for finanial gain. However, the FBI claimed a recovery of $ 9,627, ascertained by applying a certain percent to the original films' gross receipts to date. This method was worked out with the film Indumtry. With regard to pirated films in general. FBI officials stated that sometimes the subject of an Investigation will claim he is only a collector but later will sell the film. 

Pwgt*e located IBI claims of fugitives located include subjects wanted on Federal charge caught either by the FBI or other law enforcement agencies, Most fugitives located were deserters from the military services. Other major categories were persons wanted for unlawful flight to avoid local prosecution, escaped Federal prisoners, and parole and probation violators. The FBI's presentation of fugi-tive location statiatics does not reflect the fact that many fugitives are appre-headed by State or local law enforcement agencies with the assistance of the 604 FBI, or that the FBI's contribution may have consisted solely of having originally entered the suspect's name into the National Grime Information Center (NOJO) as.a wanted person at the time he became a fugitive.. We questioned 39, or about 30 percent, of the 129 cases reviewed involving fugitive location claims because some other law enforcement agency was re. sponsible for the apprehension. For example: In one case, a deserter was arrested by a sheriff's office on local charges. The sheriff clhcked NCIC, discovered the suspect was a fugitive, and notified the FBI. The FIJI confirmed where the Suspect was wanted on the deserter charge and claimed the case as a fugitive accomplislunent. Obviously NOIC is a major aid to the FBI and other Federal and State agen-cies. But, It is misleading to claim accomplishments resulting through checks of NCIC by others on the same basis as apprehensions made by the FBI. FBI officials agreed that their accomplishment statistics as currently presented coul(l be subject to misinterpretation and are limited as a measure of their Investigative effectiveness. They expressed a commitment to develop new wuys to measure and report investigative results and accomplishments. RECORDING AND REPORTING TIlE RESULTS OF INVESTIGATIVZ ACTIVITIES As we said before, the accomplishment statistics the Fil claims relate to only a small portion of their total investigation. Also, the statistics seldom reflec-t the final result or disposition of an investigation. For example, a case where a mone-tary recovery or a savings was claimed may never have ben prosecuted, let aloije involve a conviction. Front an investigative results standpoint, a case, when followed to its logical conclusion, can be terminated administratively within the FBI or be referred to the local U.S. attorney for a prosecutive determination. The U.S. attorney can decline to prosecute which would result in its termination; or he can author-Ize prosecution which, if successful, can lead to a conviction and possibly a fine. We concluded that to get a complete picture of FBI Investigative efforts, we needed information on the disposition and the resources expended on all types of cases. Neither the FBI nor the U.S. attorneys maintain such Information on a routine basis. At our request, the six FBI field offices in our review recorded the disposi-tion of criminal cass on which they concluded investigative work during the period April through July 1976. As shown in the table in Appendix I, of 6,209 cases recorded, about 91 percent were either closed administratively by the SAC or declined for prosecution by the U.S. attorneys. Only 9 percent were authorized for prosecution. For 497 cases randomly selected from the three categories, we determined the nature of the investigation, the disposition, qad the estimated agent time expended. We will now discuss the results of our review of 210 of the 497 

sample cases. 

Administrative closures 

The FBI closes investigations administratively when all reasonable Investi-gative effort has failed to deVelop either a suspect or a Federal violation. Administrative closures are made at the squad supervisor's discretion on the delegated authority of the SAC. Of the 83 administrative closures reviewed. 32 involved no crime, 8 no Federal crime, 25 no suspect, 3 insufficient evidence, and 15 were closed for a number of other reasons. Based on estimates from special agents, we deter-mined the 83 cases were open an average of 130 calendar days and involved an average of three agent work days. The cases covered a variety of violations. Areas most commonly investigated were theft of Government property and inter-state transportation of stolen property including motor vehicles. For example: The FBI opened an investigation when an oil company owner reported that an audit of his company disclosed a $20,000 theft of tires, batteries. etc. It was presumed that the theft involved interstate transportation of stolen property for which the FBI has Jurisdiction. The case was closed after the FBI found there had not been a complete audit in over 5 years; and because of sloppy bookkeeping practices, it could not be established that a loss had in fact occurred. The case agent estimated that 46 hours were spent on this case. A case was opened when the FBI learned a suspect might be in possession of $200,000 in stolen Jewelry. The FBI interviewed the suspect's friends and 005 

acquaintances. Local authorities searched th* suspect's rtdence but did not find any Jewelry. The case was closed because no Federal Violation was established. The FBI estimated it expended 20 hours on the cas .Another case Involved the alleged theft at a national park of a bicycle valued at $100. Three field offices were involved in trying to locate the owner and obtain an ld ntlflcation number for the bicycle. When finally located, the owner could not supply the bicycle's Identification number. The case was then closed because there was no suspect and the stolen property could not be Identified if recovered. The case was open 210 days and Involved the estimated expenditure of two days by the originating office and an unknown number of days by two assist offices. U.S. attorney decUnations Of the 92 cases we reviewed that the U.S. attorney declined to prosecute, 27 were declined because tile cases lacked prosecutorial merit, 11 because there was no criminal Intent, I because of Insufficient evidence, 3 because the cases came under a blanket declination, and 23 because. of other reasons. Another 27 cases were declined for Federal prosecution but referred to appro-priate State or local authorities for prosecution. Based on FBI estimates, the cases were open an average of 185 calendar days and involved an average of at least 4% agent work days. The cases covered a variety of Federal violations, some of which involve concurrent jurisdiction. As in the case of administrative closures, two of the nost common violations were theft of Government property and interstate transportation of stolen motor vehicles. Other common violations declined for prosecution were bank fraud and embezzlement and crime on Indian and Government reservations. For example: The Fill opened an Investigation after a bank robbery was committed. The thief fled with $339 but was identified by the local police through photographs. The suspect later surrendered to police in another city. The U.S. attorney declined prosecution in favor of prosecution by local authorities. The case was open 30 days and an estimated 44 agent hours were exlpenled. In an,,dher case a suspect was apprehended by a security officer at a military base exchange after allegedly changing the price tag on an Item from $2._50 to $1.75. h'le]-FBI entered the case because the suspect was a civilian. The U.S. attorney declined prosecution because, In his opinion, the case lacked prosecutive merit. The FBI estimated that it expended about I day investigating the case. The FBi opened another case after a review of its records showed that two suspects with previous criminal records had been arrested by local police for p~ossessing a stolen car. The FBI estimated It expended about 10 hours request-Ing and reviewing the suspects' criminal records; Interviewing the arresting of-fier; determining the disposition of local charges; requesting other field offices to interview the car owner and verify the theft; and, finally, presenting the case to the U.S. attorney for a prosecutorial decision. The U.S. attorney then declined the case in favor of local prosecution. 

Casts authorized for prosccution The U.S. attorney authorizes and Initiates prospective proceedings when, In his opinion, the case has prosecutive merit, a provable Federal violation has oc-curred, and there appears to be sufficient evidence to prove the suspect willfully co1mujijtted the violation. Some other factors in the decision to prosecute are whether the case should be tried by local authorities In cases of concurrent Ju-risdiction, and whether the subject In a repeat offender. Bank robberies were the violations most frequently authorized for prosecution among the 85 cases we reviewed. The other most frequently authorized viola-tions were generally the same as tile ones that were frequently closed administra-tively or by prosecutive declination. However, the nature of the violations In the authorized cases was generally more serious or involved repeat offenders. The complexity of the authorized cases also appeared to be greater than those front the other two categories. In this regard, the 5 sample cases were open an estimated average of 315 calendar days and Involved an estimated average of 10T agent work days. The following cases are examples. The suspect of one case allegedly provided a bank false information to obtain Inans totaling almost $1 million. When the loan defaulted, the bank found the business collateral offered was nonexistent. The FBI entered the case upon acomplaint from the victim bank. In another case, two suspects wanted by the FBI for over 20 other bank rob-beries, were caught by local authorities while attempting to rob another bank 808 

with a third suwee Prosecution of all three suspets, two of whom had stolen about $25,000 In total, was autborisw and they were convicted. SUMMATION The estimated time spent on cases terminated by administrative closures or U.S. attorney declinations is subtantially lower than on eases authorized for pros-ecution. However, when taken together, the large number of cases not prose-cuted represents a considerable Investment of FBI resources. Unless there is concurrent Jurisdiction with respect to a particular violation or specific guidelines from the U.S. attorney as to what generally will not be prosecuted, the FBI may have no choice but to Investigate every complaint with-in its jurisdiction that it can reasonably handle. However, 48 percent of the administrative closure cases we sampled were closed because either no crime or no Federal violation wad involved. Furthermore, 59 percent of the cases we sampled that were declined by the U.S. attorney were declined because they lacked pro*-ecutorial merit due to the nature and degree of seriousness of the offense, or referred to State or local authorities having concurrent Jurisdiction for their consideration to prosecute. Based on these- results, it seems the FBI might be able to reduce its efforts on the large number of eases not being prosecuted and focus its efforts on greater priorities by assuming a more supplemental role in areas of concurrent jurisdiction and obtaining more guidance from U.S. attorneys on the types of cases normally not prosecuted. To identify priority and marginal areas, the FBI needs a system to provide information on a regular liasis regarding how available time Is ieing used and with what results. Once problem areas have beei Identified and necessary agree-ments reached, the information can be used to monitor the effectiveness of FBI field officies In reducing efforts in marginal areas and increasing Investigative results in priority areas. The major factor cited by FBI officials as Inhibiting the FBI from limiting the expenditure of resources In areas of "marginal importance" Is that It Is 

hound by law to Investigate every reported slleged violation of Federal law even though there may be dual jurisdiction with State and Io[al agencies. Several (if 

the U.N. attorneys we contacted said that. In instance of dual jurisdiction. appil-

cable State and lmal legal sanctions should he applied in !ireferK'e to Federal sanctions which prohibit esentially the same act. FBI officials indicated their efforts could be reduced In some areas If IT.S. attorneys would issue specific prose-cutorial guidelines or blanket derlinations. The U.N. attorneys expremed differ-ing views on the benefits and limitations of guidehlnes. We believe the basic Issue is to Insure that the FBI's resources are focluasw to have maximum Impact on major crime problems. The Department of Justice and the FBI need to explore ways of reducing Fill efforts In marginal areas and re-directing them toward priority areas. This concludes my prepared statement. We hope this Information and the in-formation in our final report will assist the Subeomnmittee In Its oversight of Fi1 activities. We would be pleased to resind to any questions. Arupi'Dix I             

> NUMBER OF CASES SAMftED BY CATEGORY IN RIEW OF INVSTIATIE RESULTS AND ACCOMPLISHMENTS
> Cow Ire-

cown In Cowe vw as f

Ceotewe _ mlsvm guplod Aug. 13. 1976  

> Aomplfsmeet

ew (July 1975 to APII 1976): cc0vl.tlen. .. ................................... 2.045 170 1et        

> Fuglitl Itio ........... ........ ........... 3.0

ISO 129 S . .............. 40 131 76         

> Sn-............................ 6i 61 50
> heOvorios 1.041 ISO Ito

TOWl ..... . ................... 7.435 702 473 Ote results cae. (Aol to July 1976): Admi stathve. .......... ................. ,, 17 U.S. Atorney decilintion RW 160go        

> U.S. Attooney eutlorztIom for Posecut 530 Mis

# TO . . ... . . .. ................................ 47 497 Tol ocemplisIenont and owter reul cto . 13,644 1.160 683 607 FIN CRIMINAL INVISTIGATIONS SAMPLED BY GAO IN WHICH ACCOMPLISHMENTS WERE CLAIMED DURING THE PERIOD JULY 1075 TO APRIL 1076 Cam re-                          

> vw!@d as of Cos" Category Avg. 13, 1976 qmoslond
> Coowltloa ..................... I..... ...... 10 10 Fu itive so......... ..... ............. ........ ............ 1......2..... ........ 12 39
> .. ine .....................

76 16 

R o .- .... , . ].z ..... i.i. i.:.. ::.. .. ........ ......... "................. 110 41 

Total ................................ ... 4731 Mr. LowE. Mr. Chairman and members of the subcommittee, our testimony today deals with the methods by which the FBI develops, reports, and uses accomplishment statistics on its criminal investigative activities. The chairman of this subcommittee has expressed a con inu-ing interest in this review and particularly in the validity of the ac-complishment statistics claimed annually by the FBI. Although the review is not yet complete, we can report on our progress to date and provide information that may be helpful in carrying out your over-sight responsibilities. The initial purpose of our review was to determine the validity of the FBI s accomplishment statistics resulting from its investigative efforts. Early in the review, however, we also began to focus on the more important imite of how ueful and representative the FBI's ac-complishment. statistics are as indicators of the effectiveness of its criminal investigative efforts. Our work is being conducted at FBI headquarters and six FBI field offices-Boston, Chicago, Los Angeles, Milwaukee, Sacramento, and San Francisco. From these six offices we selected 1,199 criminal cases for review as shown in appendix 1. Our observations today are based on 683 or 57 percent of these cases. Before I begin with the subject of today's testimony I would like to briefly discuss the FBI's cooperation with our audits. In our previous two appearances before this subcommittee regarding our review of the FBI's domestic intelligence operations, we pointed out several-prob-lens we had in conducting the review and in obtaining access to FBI records, particularly investigative files. Since that time as you know the FBI has agreed to cooperate with GAO audits and to provide us more complete information on its activi-ties. However, it still does not include access to investigative files or to original file documents. As you know, we are conducting several reviews of various FBI 

activities, including the one which we are testifying on today. To date Fil officials have hx-en very responsive to our requests for information on all ongoing reviews. Tfieir cooperation has been particularly good on this review. The FBI has shown real interest and has Ien 'taking action to improve its methods for managing resources and measiling investigative restilts. Following a briefing on the tentative results of our review, the FBI Director asked our assistance in developing better management informat ion and directed his associates to provide us with 

any information we needed in this regard. 608 I would now like to discuss our observations with respect to our review of the FBI's investigative results and accomplishments. The FBI has traditionally maintained and reported five categories of accomplishment statiStics--convictions, fines, savings, recoveries, and fugitive locations-as the prime measurement of the effectiveness of its criminal investigative efforts. We found only a small number of errors in the accomplishment statistics. However, the statistics are subject to misinterpretation be-cause of the way they are presented. More important, they are limited as a management tool in that they do not adequately portray the im-pact and effectiveness of the FBI's total investigative effort. The FBI's accomplishment statistics relate to only a small percent-age of the total criminal investigations it conducts. Our work to date indicates that most investigations do not produce one of the traditional above-noted accomplishments. Most cases are terminated either ad-ministratively within the FBI due to lack of a Federal crime or failure to identify a suspect, or by a U.S. attorney's declination to prosecute. Cases investigated by the FBI, whether they produce accomplish-mnent statistics or not, range from serious andcomplex instances of fraud and embezzlement, kidnapping, and armed bank robbery to what the FBI has termed "areas of marginal importance." The fact that many cases do not produce a measurable accomplish-ment may be somewhat attributable to the reactive nature of the law enforcement business and the FBI's view that it must investigate situations where it has sole or partial enforcement responsibility. The FBI said that unless directed otherwise by the departmentt of Justice or local U.S. attorneys, it must investigate all apparently valid complaints of alleged violations of Federal law within its jurisdiction, and present each case for prosecutive opinion if the necessary elements are developed. Therefore, the FBI is expending resources on cases where subse-quently it finds there was no crime or the U.S. attorneys decide the violation was not substantive enough to justify the effort and expense of court proceedings. Little agent time is expended on these cases individually. Since most cases terminate without being authorized for prosecution, how-ever, these cases in total consume a large amolint of FBI resources, the impact of which-except for any possiblee deterrent effect--may be limnited The FBI has alloated its investigative resources primarily on the basis of caseload; that is, the average number of cases handled by aspecial agent. Generally little attention was given by headquarters to 

tihe quality, nature, or scope of cases. Management information was limited and primarily caseload related. No information was kept to relate resotirees expended to the types of cases on which they were extended and the results achieved. A year ago the FBI initiated a different approach to investigations aimel at improving the management of its resources and cases. Field offices were instructed to "strive for early resolution" of investigative matters of "marginal importance" and "concentrate investigative effort on the major criminal . . . problems" in their area. It was also sug-gested discussions be held with the U.S. attorneys regarding areas for concentration of investigative efforts. 609 The new concept should channel investigative resources into areas of greatest need to achieve maximum impact on crime. However, with-out better and more comprehensive information ol the results of investigations and tie corres)onding effort expended, the Fill cannot adequately evaluate the effectiveness of the new concept or assure that 

resources are allocate to achieve the maxiniium impact on major criminal problems. 

The F111 agreed it needs better an(l miiore coml)rehensive manage-ment information. Actions, which we will discus later, have been taken 

by the FBI over the Iist 2 or 3 years to develop such information. Also in ,kugust 1970" the FBI directorr appointed a task force to review its niiagemiient inifornultion nee(is id asked our assistance in developing better ways to report investigative results. 

'The l4 FI is responsible for invest igut ing a large number of criminal violations tuid eivil matters. Even tlioigh the FBI-like any other 

law enforcement agency-is required by law to investigate al'l viola-tions within its julrisdiction, froml a j)racticl standlIdoiit its resources are limited. It must tllerefore estalflish priorities and f(wus its efforts 

where it. can hia ve the. most inI xt oil the crime l)roldli. 'Th1us tle way tie FilI orga nizes its criminal investigative alt ivities a4 l he in forll-tionu it uses to manage fid control its resources fre imjorltialt to achiev-ing mlaximnumnl tilicivney. M iiageniment of Fi I resources hats beeun lased on liiitted illfornin-tiou such as personal olbservaI lolls 111141 olilliolls, and rjl)orts t ! ilat do 

not lrov'ide colmlprehelsive in fornla i oil all as )ects of investiglt iye 

e forts. I

FBI headquarters decisions regar(lillg Jpriolit i(s, staffing allocations, 

and concliusiomis regarding prograin succe,; have been lt)ase(d ol cwlloald information from a(lministrative rep)rts, acconpl ishnient rel)rts, periodi, 1n111ower surveys, m ild annil ills s('CtiOs. Field office dlcvi-si-1s have 19een1 bMIS ( on e54'a1(ml, ill! On 1tV ne sad SUlprvisors' and field office nutiagers' p usmial knowledge of wi, rformn nte and resouIrce. lvh,(Is iii s)eCiic areas und(1 the ('apabilities (J )erolnnel working those a 1(bilS. Acomllplislllijnt rIu)orts, (ollpiled monthly I y luew(lquarters, siow fines, savings, recoveries, convictiols, lid fligit ve locations claiill(I by field offices. These reports are aviilalle to tie field oflives, Imt their usef ilnvss is questionalle because thmey' la ck information on the re-solrl'CeS eXpc ld(let. 

AJIllilli stiative reports, also colpile d otll, from simiilar field oflice reports, contain (ati on the imuuni-r of case; received, closed i til( 

pendiig, the numiler of agents assigned, al( average caseload. In livu of information o3 mianlower usage- whiCl is will bKe dis-eus.eo(l laiter-will soon lvcolnei available. iuiamlpower surveys were Jmiriodliclilly made of selected 2-week periods in vairiouis til(l oflies. Alt hough thies4, surveys e'llzlle inicreasingly refined sillee tev were init iate(I in 19l73, tiey still only ailllxiilliated tile Iirclnltage of total agent effort expende~l in eacll Investigative ai amllnilistrative classi-fication. In addition, with certain exeep~tiois, tile surveys did not go bevolld these (lilsisieations to cittegories o" I vl Ws of cases. Average caseload has bee-n tile priliary basis For allocating resourees, With soil ir liilice placedl oi the Tispectiion )ivision's assesnielit dlir-i1g annual field oice ils sections of caseload an1id the adequacy of 610 

staffing levels. However, this system gave equal weight to all cases without considering their quality or significance, and it generally im-plied that enough resources were availaule to cover all cases. Also under this system a tendency developed at the field office level to maintain high caseloads by opening and retaining relatively inconsequential cases to justify staffing levels. In late 1974 recognizing the problenis with the caseload management approach, the F3BI initiated a use of personnel study to determine w ether the field offices-

. . . could produce a more meaningful and significant investigative product 

if they were unencumbered by the caseload system with its direct correlation to manpower allocation and whether office efficiency, productivity, and morale would be positively affected by amanagerial approach which emphasized quality of quantity. After a trial period in four field offices, the FBI initiated, in Septein-ber 1975, the so-called quality over quantity concept in all its field 

offices. Instructions were issunA to the field offices to: 1. conclude as expeditiously as possible cases of marginal import-

ance; 

2. establish investigative priorities in conjunction with the local U.S. attorneys, and 3. concentrate on qliality cases and on major criminal and security problems within their respective territories. In our opinion, the F B1s acceptance of tile quality over quantity apl)roach to conducting investigations and managing its investigative resolved before the concept can become effective, including defining resolved before the concept can become an effective, including defining and establishing criteria for determining quality ca-es and cases of marginal importance. Also, since caseload has xen the primary method used to allocate manpower, the successful implementation of the con-cept could be hindered by any lingering suspicions in the FBI that airop in caseload could result in closing smaller offices, transfer of agentss from offices having sniall caseloads, and manpower reductions in general. For the quality over quantity concept to be viable'. the FBI in con-junction with thle IT.S. attornepvs n:ist make determinations of which cases or types of vases should be investigated, and to what extent reSources should be committed to a given case. Criteria should b, 

developed to help determine wletler the FBi should becomi;e involved 

it (lase and what priority the case should be given. Information presentlv available to the FBI does not provide a com-)lete picture of its crime final investigative efforts and, thus, is niot a firm 

H.is for measuring the effectiveness of past operations, determining where resources were used, allocating resources, or planning future operations. After about 2 years of design and development. the FIl recently ilplemented an automated system to replacA, its periMic manpower survey that will routinely account for agent time expended by general investigative classifications and subelassificat ions. Suiclassificat iMs of the existing classifications and other clianges are also being considered for the existing administrative or caseload report to improve its use-fAil ness. Although these changes are improvements, they (10 not go far O11 

enough because of the wide range in complexity and degree of im-portance of individual cases. The FBI does not develop statistic.-!d information on the results of cases. Generally there is no ir forination that relates the time and expense of investigations to their seriousness or complexity, or their final disposition. Such information is nec-ssary if the F1BI is going to adequately evaluate the effectiveness of its op-erations. Since accomplishment statistics were claimed in only about 25 per-           

> cent of the criminal cases closed in the offices we reviewed, the limited

accom plishment information applies to a small part of overall opera-tions. Most cass investigated are terminated either administratively under authority of the special agent in charge (SAC) or by a U.S. attorney's declination to prosecute. In the six offices for the period April-July 1976, only 530 or about 9- percent of 6,209 cases concluded were accepted for prosecution. About 50 percent were closed adminis-tratively by SAC authority and about 41 percent were declined for prosecution. The fact that so many cases were not authorized for prosecution may not be bad. The problem, however, is that the FBI currently has no information on the disposition of cases so it can identify the number of, and amount of effort expended on, cases declined for prosecution, closed by SAC authority, or accepted for prosecution. The FBI should have more comprehensive management information to effectively manage its investigative operations.'7Better information is needed to effectively select priority areas for concentrated efforts and allocate resources between field offices and squads. In addition to providing for better internal program management, such information could help the FBI identify areas in which action by the Congress and the Department of Justice is necessary to effect improvement. Such actions could include revising laws, and issuing prosecutorial guide-Jines setting forth investigative areas that wil1 not normally be prosecuted or that should be routinely referred to other Federal, State, or local authorities having concurrent jurisdiction. As previously indicated, the estimated time spent on individual cases terminated by administrative closures or U.S. attorney declinations is substantially lower than on cases authorized for prosecution. However, when taken together, the large number of cases not prosecuted repre-sents a considerable investment of FBI resources. Unless there is concurrent jurisdiction with respect to a particular violation or specific guidelines from the U.S. attorney as to what generally will not be prosecuted, the FBI may have no choice but to investigate every complaint within its jurisdiction that it can reason-ably handle. However, 48 percent of the administrative closure cases we sampled were closed because either no crime or no Federal violation was in-volved. Furthermore, 59 percent of the cases we sampled that were declined by the U.S. attorney, were declined because they lacked prosecutorial merit due to the nature and degree of seriousnss of the offense, or referred to State or local authorities having concurrent offense, or referred to State or local authorities having concurrent jurisdiction for their consideration to prosecute. Based on these results, it .eents the FBI might be able to reduce its efforts on the large number of cases not being prosecuted and focus its efforts on greater priorities by assuming a more supplemental role in areas of concurrent juris-612 diction and obtaining more guidance from U.S. attorneys on the types of cases normally not prosecuted. To identify priority and marginal areas, the FBI needs a system to provide information on a regular basis regarding how% available time is being used and with what results. Once problem areas have been iden-tified and necessary agreements reached, the information can be used to monitor the effectiveness of FBI field offices in reducing efforts in marginal areas and increasing investigative results in priority areas. The major factor cited by FBI officials as inhibiting the F11 from limiting the expenditure of resources in areas of "marginal impor-tance" is that it is bound by law to investigate every reported alleged violation of Federal law even though there may be dual jurisdiction with State and local agencies. Several of the U.S. attorneys we contacted said that, in instances of dual jurisdiction, applicable State and local legal sanctions should be applied in preference to Federal sanctions which prohibit essentially the same act. FBI officials indicated their efforts could be reduced in some areas if U.S. attorneys would issue specific prosecutorial guide-lines or blanket declinations. The U.S. attorneys expressed differing views on the benefits and limitations of guidelines. We believe the basic issue is to insure that the FBI's resources are focused to have maximum impact on major crime problems. The Department of .Justice and the FBI need to explore ways of reducing FBI efforts in marginal areas and redirecting them toward priority a lea s. This concludes my prepared statement. We hope this information                       

> and the information in our final report will assist the subcommittee in its Oversight of F1BI activities. We would be pleased to respond to any (111estions.

Mr. EDWARDS. Mr. Lowe, when the FBI went to the Apvpropriations Committee for their appropriations for fiscal year 1975,-thev asked and got $449.546,000 to run the FBI for that fiscal year. But in their te-st iniony to the House and the Senate Appropriations Committee, the FBI testified that in fines, savings, and recoveries, they had collected--or wlmatever it, might b1-or saved the American taxpayer $498,030,000f and advised the Approp)riations Committee that for every dollar spent on the FBI, $1.10 came back to the taxpayer. Now ti, 'ample cases you examinetl-and there were very few, and I have four of them here-in those cases you found V$3,330,001) flat tle FIT hod claimed in fines, savings, and recoveries not to hold up. not to be valid savings to the American Government. Is that correct.? Mr. LoWE. I have not ad(led it up to see al)out the $3 million, Mr. Chairman. But if you look at the appendix, that will respond to your question. If you look at Appendix 11. we have a summary there of the number of cases that we reviewed and the number of cases questioned. It depends on the particular category. Under convictions we ques-tioned less than 10 percent. In the savings category, we questioned every one of the .50 that we ran across. I think in nearly every case you can analyze, the FBI should have been able to claim some savings. Which figure you choose is really the source of disagreement, I suppose. Mr. EDPWARDS. Well. for fiscal year 1974 and to obtain the appropria-tions in fiscal year 1975, they claimed savings of $498 million. Can you 613 extend your examination and guess at or estimate how much of the $498 million that they-claimed in fines and recovery, savings and recov-eries, should not have been claimedI Mr. Lowi. No, Mr. Chairman. We would have to go back and look at every one of those cases making up that total report. When we finish our ongoing job completely, we will be able to make a projec-tion in the six field offices. In other words, we will be able to show how much each field office had in claimed savings and how much it actually saved. But that would not be a valid projection for the total FBI. It would give you some idea but it would not be statistically sound if you estimated on that basis. Mr. EDwARDs. We can expect you to give us a reasonably statistically sound idea lMr. Low. At least for those offices that we cover; yes, sir. Mr. EDWMs. In these few cases that you cite in your testimony, Ijust added it up while you were talking and it is over $3,330,000 that was claimed and not claimed validly. Have you asked the FBI about this? Mr. LowE. No. We have not yet prepared our report and submitted it to the FBI for comment. We have discussed a couple of these spe-cific cases with them and we are prepared to deal with those specific ones if you are interested. Mr. EDWArms. Do they know that these statistics don't bear examina-tion? Mr. LowE. They do. As I indicated in the earlier part of my state-ment sometime ago the Comptroller General, Mr. Stanton, Mr. Harris and I met with the Director of the FBI and a number of his top peo-ple and briefed them on what it looked like we were coming up with in our study. The FBI was already involved in trying to improve its manage-ment, reporting system. The Director felt we were all going in the same direction an(I gave us cOmplete cooperation. As a result of ouir prelint-inary discussions with them, in addition to tle work they already had underway, they have taken into consideration sonie of our prelinm-inary findings and have started to make changes in their reporting requirements. Mr 1'. EDWARDS. Have they specifically told you that they are not going to continue the present practice of going Mfore the Appropriations Committee ard making these rather large claims about hundreds of millions of dollars saved? Mr. Low. No, sir, but I did not ask them that either.   

> M1'. EDWARDS.

We will ask them. The gentleman from Virginia. Mr. BtrEa. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I apologize for being late, Mr. Lowe. It seems the FBI may be able to red uce its efforts on a large number of the types of cases which are not being T rosecuted. Of course, that, is a (lsiral)h, ,11n result. You will have recommendations as to specifically how they can go about doing this, is that correct? 

Mr. Low. Yes, sir. They have alreadv started in this direction in some respects. As Irecall, there are 94 I.S. attorneys. Obviously each of them has a dif-ferent way of running his own shop. But upon Mr. Kelley's instruc-tions, the FBI agents in charge have dealt with each one of the U.S. 

> 82-629-77---40

614 attorneys in trying to reach an agreement with the U.S. attorney as 

to what type of case he wiU not prosecute under niost ciroum0tanoes. In that way the FBI is able to devote little or no time to those kinds of cases unless they are outside of the normal as laid down by a particular U.S. attorney. In this specific instance, they will be able to save some manpower. Instead of having to develop a case and take it to the U.S. attorney, they will have some guidance in advance which we think is desirable. We think it would S10so be desirable to have better overall guidance from the Department of Justice level. I think to date it has been primarily left up to the individual U.S. attorneys. Perhaps the Justice Department ought to be able to give them some guidance also. Mr. BuTxFR,. I guess that is my next question. What limitations would you place on the discretion of the local U.S. attorneys as to how theycan make this policy decision ?Are th ey fairly well bound by Department of Justice policy in this regard ?

Mr. Low. As far as I can determine, they are 94 individual entities, appointed by the President and responsible to God knows who. Ithink they are pretty much on their own. Mr. BUtLER. Are you critical of that autonomy? Mr. Low. Well, I am not an attorney but I would think that the individual U.S. attorney has to be able to exercise some discretion fnd commonsense in deternining what cases he wants to prosecute. How-ever, I do think that there is room for some overall guidance by the Department of ,Jistice level as to what each attorney ought to do. Mr. B1TmxR. Well, I guess what I am disturbed about is the fact that the FBI under this direction will be abdicating its responsibility to make basic decisions as to where to proceed in investigations. Is that wise? Mr. LowFE. I would not interpret it. that way. Mr. Butler. I think that if the local SAC knows in advance that if lie takes a particular tyle of case to the U.S. attorney and lie will not prosecute it, that the local SAC then can say I will not devote any of my manj powerr to develol)iJzg those ty QS of cases. It seems to me that woulh be asaving of manpower rather than a waste of manpower. In any event, the U.S. attor:ley is going to make a decision. The F111 feels that without guidance they iave to investigate every one of them. It seems to me that it avoids wasting time on cases he won't prose-cute anyway. MNr. Br'iyF.R. Well, an investigation that does not result in-a prose-cution is not necessarily a wasted effort, is it ?

Mr. LowE. No, sir. Not necessarily. 

Mkfr. BtrTrF.R. Have you endeavored to )as judgment on the quality of the investigations? Mr. Lowr'. No, sir. ,%r. BUTLER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. EnwAwms. The gentleman from Ohio, Mr. Seiberling. 

Mr. SErI.ILIwo. Thank you. Mr. Chairman. I think this is a verve, very helpful statement. I listened to it with great interest. Let me just ask you a general question. Do you think that measuring law enforce. meant effectiveness solely by adding up convictions, fines, fugitives 615 located .nd so forth is really appropriate or are there other ways of measuring effectiveness that might even be more appropriate? If so, have you any thoughts as to what they might be? Mr. LowE. That is a tough question. I think some types of statistics are desirable such as the number of convictions and that sort of thing. I think law enforcement with no convictions and no arrests and no fines reported might be just as good if that is the way you wanted to run it. Thank heaven the policeman on the beat or the FBI agent on the beat is awfully important whether or not any of these other activities take place. What we were driving at here is with some additional information and refinements in-the way it is presented, we think that the upper level of the FBI will have a much better idea or at least an improved idea of where it wants to put resources and manpower. Mr. SEIBERLiNo. To the extent that law enforcement deters crime, whether it is by the FBI or local or state law enforcement authorities, it, is like preventive medicine. I guess like preventive medicine it is rather difficult to measure the results. But I just wondered if in the course of your further investigations Yvou could be thinking about possible ways to measure that because it seems to me that perhaps that is at least as important as the measur-able results that the FBI reports in its various reports to Congress and the nblic. thr. Iow,.. In our own office, we have somewhat the same problem in describing what we do and how well we do it and how much we 

(10. Mr. SFIBERINO. I would say we have the same problem, too. [rLaiiiter.] Mr. SmimiuiNo. Well, in reading your report, it seems to me that the FBI Ias done what in private business they refer to as puffing andi building iup their case to continue to be in the favor of their customers, which is the public. I think some sort of truth in advertising approach may even be needed here as it. is in private industry. But I get the impression that findamentally, wiflithe possible exception of the figures as to savings, vou feel that tl F3BI figures are reasonably accurate representations of what they purport to represnt. Mr. L~owp. Well. I don't know whether I would like to lump that all in one senteice or not. But I think Appendix II gives you some idea of what percentage of the five categories we question, at least. In one ease it is about. 10 percent, another slightly more and one is 50 eases out of 50. 'File important thing is that the FBI has already recognized that they have a problem here and moved out in the last month or two trying to revise its whole system. Even in those cases we have given as examples, there were some savings that the FBI could have claimed. The amount is the question. For example one of the points that we questioned was about a movie whiich had been pirated or was held by a collector. They worked out a method with the movie industry which was very comicerwed about people stealing movies. The one we gave as an example might sound like a little puffery. But we also have a case where they claimed no savings based on this same criteria. This movie-one issued in the last year or two-was avery profitable movie. 616 From the FBI's standpoint, it was unfortunate that they recovered a stolen copy before the movie had grossed any money because it bases its recovery on the gross of the movie. The movie had not yet been released. The FBI recovered a stolen copy but under the ground rules they couldn't Claim any savings. If it had been 6 months later, there would have been a tremendous savings. Mr. SFBmERLINo. The example you gave wherestolen equipment in-volved valued at $6,400 was turned into the local police the same day it was reported stolen and they simply notified the FBI and there was no Federal violation and no arrest and the FBI claimed that *as one of the things they had saved which strikes me as going a little far. Is that in accordance with their guidelines? Mr. LOWE. I don't think it woufh fit with their guidelines, no. Each report is looked at here in headquarters. We have been shown cases where they caught errors, turned them down, and told the field office about it. Mr. SI:rnmFi ao. Thank you. Mr. EDWAmS. The gentleman from Ohio, Mr. Kindness. Mr. KINDNESS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Lowe, we appreciate your interim report here and realize that it, is awkward for you to be reporting on an interim basis at this time when your work is not complete. But what is disclosed in your testi-niony today seems to me is encouraging overall. You point out on page 5 of your testimony that over the past 2 or 3

years the FBI has been working to develop) the needed information that is discllssed there. On page 6 at the bottom of the page, it. is noted that accomplishment reports are available to the field ofices but there might be the need for improvement there. On page 7, you note there has been a policy of having manpower -surveys made periodically over a period of at least 3 years. I cannot 

1)(41 bult be concerned with the same question that you touched on a little while ago, and the General Accomting Oflice has a somewhat paralegal problem in evaluating the ways that resources are used. )o you have any guidelines within GAO that do have some sort of paralegal status? Mr. LowE,. We do, Mr. Kindness. We go through the same exercise each year for our appropriations hearings and for our Comptroller General's anumnl report. I thini our procedure is consideralJy tig).ter than the ones the F111 has beeii operating unler up until now. Essenttially, it. is the same problem. I think our guidelines have been refined fairly well over the years. As a matter of fact, I think we report some things as clearly dollar savings while other things are just impirovements in the way business is done. Some things result in more ex pendit Ir's. I remember one case in mr work at the Department of Agriculture 

where we (lid a review and issued a report on the pesticide regulatioi division. We pointed out that they needed to beef that operation up. The ap)proI)riation was suibstantiallv increased the next year. I thiink 

we could very well claim credit for improving a very necessary operation. Buii on the other side of the ledger. I guess you would have to say it cost the Government some additional money. Mr. 1Kix'wss. That is almost bound to be true with any such im-provemnent, I sul)pox. What concerns me a little bit is whether it is 617 worthwhile to go through all this evaluative process if the FBI is .charged with law enforcement activities and once decisions are made as to where to place the emphasis in terms of categories of claims to be given the greatest amount of attention. Placing a value on this seems to be a very silly exercise probably prompted-by the politics of this Congress, as a matter of fact, in terms of the appropriations process. But something attractive has to be said when the Appropriations Com-niittee ib hearing their particular case. Do you feel that there is some value that should be attributed to this law enforcement effort that relates somehow to budgetary con-siderations or is this a ridiculous exercise I

Mr. LowOE. I think there probably is some validity to it but it is also a little silly in some ways, too. It is probably something that has been forced on them in some degree. Mr. KINDNESs. Originating right here, I suppose. I don't expect you to answer that. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. EDWARDS. Mr. Drinan? 

Mr. DRINAN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, gentlemen. What am I to think when Clarence Kelley in his most recent report said convictions soared in 1975 to all time highs and he has the inevitable chart where convictions are going up and up? I am referring to convictions in FBI cases. They go up from 13,40Q in 1971 to almost 15,800 in 1975. Do these have any meaning after what you have told us? 

[The chart referred to follows:] 

# CONVICTIONS IN FBI CASES 

158600 15,750 15v600 

15,400 

15,200 -

15,000 

14,800 14,600 -

14,400 - -

14,200 -

14,000 --,__oo 

13,800 13,600 

13,400 13, 2 0 0 -... . .. ..-

## 1971 1972 1973 1974 1975 FISCAL YEARS      

> Reprinted from FBI AnnuB! Report, 19T.

618 Mr. Lowz. I think so, Mr. Drinan, particularly if they were pre-pared on the same basis from year to year, even if the bases.might have some error factored in. I think the comparison would be relatively valid. Mr. D NAN. Except that you say that they claim credit for any-thing that the other people have done. The basic rule followed by the FB1is that if it has had any involvement whatsoever in a case, it claims credit for the resulting accomplishment. Furthermore, you have told us that the FBI reporting does not recognize the contribution of any State or local or even any other Federal agency. Thus it may reflect multiple convictions. So I ask you again what does this mean? Mr. Lowe. Well, I think the FBI only claims a conviction in the case of a Federal crime. In the case of crimes that they touch or are involved in at the State level, I don't think they claim convictions in those cases. Mr. DRTNAN. That seems contrary to what you have been telling us. What is the practice with other law enforcement agenciesI Mr. LowE. I don't know. Mr. DmNAN. Do you have any ballpark figure as to what the FBI might have saved us? As the Chairman. Mr. Edwards has pointed out, it claims in the Appropriations Committee to have made money for the Federal Government. There was $1.11 returned for every dollar. Can you draw any con-clusions as to what the Bureau has gained for the American people by way of savings? Mr. Lowz. Not overall, Mr. Drinan. As I mentioned before. though, when we do finish with the six particular field offices we will have agoci drift on those things based on our sample. But not overall. We can give you an indication. I can see where they are faced with a difficulty where the judge imposes a fine and then abates the fine or suspends it. I gues you cou1d say that would be saving for the FBI and a loss by the judge. Mr. DRINAN. When did this misleading practice begin? From time immemorial I

Mr. LowE. It seems to be historical, yes. Mr. DRINA'. Iave convictions gone up every single year? Have they ever gone down? Mr. Lowr,. Not according to that chart, no, sir. Mr. D1Ru.AN. You are answering my question as to the validity. That is the purpose of your study" I qtuote: "The study is to dete"-mine the validity of these claimed FBI accomplishment statistics." It is indier ted on page .5 that a task force was authorized or appointed in Atust 1976. Was any thought given to an outside agency, such as Arthur D. Little, or is this an in-house task force and if so, who is on it? 

Mr. Lowi.. This is strictly an in-house task force. The FBI has sev-                                       

> eral effort, underway to improve some of their nianageiient reports. After we brief the FBI Director and some of his top people on what the outlook was for our study. he took action to have his people work with us and improve their reporting practices.

Mr. DRINAN. Who is on this task force and will they work with this quhconimitteeI Mr. Lowy. Mr. Harris? 619 Mr. HI-Aqms. It is informally structured, sir. Mr. DRwAW. Do they have names I Are there 6 or 601 Who are they? Mr. HARmRs. These are special agent supervisors at FBI head-quarters. Mr. DRiNAr;. The people who have been involved in all of this are sitting in judgment on themselves? Mr. HARRm. No, sir. I don't think so. These are different people from different situations--people from the FBI's Office of Planning and Evaluation, people from the Administrative Services Division, and the Finance-and' Personnel Division-that are working on various aspects of the FBI's statistical needs. Mr. DRINAN. I wondered if they get overtime for thisI In 1975 the overtime pay that the FBI gave was the equivalent of 2,117 full-time agents. They admitted iii the appropriations hearings that they gave $46.8 million in overtime. So I am wondering whether or not this informal group is getting overtime for their new duties. Mr. HARRIS. Sir, I can't answer that question. Mr. DRINAN. My time is up. Thank you. Mr. EDWARDS. The gentleman from Connecticut, Mr. Dodd? Mr. Dowo. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Did you in your studies at all show any relationship at all between the levels of caseload that were sent from the field offices to the head-quarte.s and any relationship between that and promotions and meritorious citations? Was there any indication of an incentive for people to build up statistics in order to promote themselves? Mr. lbow. No, not along that line. I think it was an understood incentive to maintain the caseload so the staffing of the office would not be reduced. Mr. l)oro. But as far as any incentives or promotions if one main-tained a high level of caseloads, there was no indication of that at all ?Mr. Lowy. Not that we know of. Mr. Doim. On page 9 you talked about the cost relationship, expense, time. Wwould you be more specific as to what you think ought to be (lone in order to determine the cost, expense, and time of cases? Mr. Low. If I can stay with one example that we used, if the FBI develops information showing the manpower and the cost going into specific types of cases not prosecuted generally by U.S. attorneys, that would be a valuable piece of information that headquarters o ght to know so they can devote less effort and less manpower and less dollars to that type of effort. It is a little hard to get specific right at the moment. We are right in the middle of working on that problem with them trying to develop some tves--Mr. Dorm. What I am getting at is there might be a direct relation-ship between the dollars spent either in salaries or equipment and so forth bv the FBI on a successfully prosecuted case. But in addition to the expenses that relate to that particular case, there might be other expenses that one would want to take into con-sideration. In addition to the direct amount of time spent or the ex-pense. what. are the cost benefits that could be gleaned from the success-ful prosecution of a case? I wondered if you could be more specific in that area I620   

> Mr. EDWARID.

If the gentleman from Connecticut would not mind, we should go vote now and come back. By that time I am sure Mr. Lowe will have the answer to that question. Then I will recognize the gentleman from Connecticut upon our return. We will recess until the vote is over. [ Voting recess.] Mr. EDVARDs. The subcommittee will come to order. We will proceed in the interests of time. Mr. Low& Mr. Chairman, when you left to take a vote, Mr. Dodd had left a question with us and even though we had a lot of time to think about it, I am not sure we have a very good answer. Mr. EDwARms. We will hold it until Mr: Dodd gets back. Mr. Lowe, you questioned all 50 cases reviewed involving savings claimed on the basis that the amounts were highly judgmental and subject to misin-terpretation. Now, for example, I would like you to tell the committee about the civil suit on page 15 where the FBI claimed a million dollars sa v'ed to the taxpayers. Mr. Lowz. In that particular example, the plaintiffs had sued the Government for $1 million claiming that the Government had clouded the title to some land. The U.S. attorney asked the FBI to check the two plaintiffs' background and before the background checks were pro-vided the U.S. attorney the claim was disallowed on its merits by the court. The FBI claimed a $1 million savings in that case. There is another case of a $1.5 million malpractice suit brought against the Government charging that the victim s death resulted from the military doctor's negligence. There was an investigation of the backgroundof the doctor and it was determined that the doctor was po sibly negligent. The FBI claimed the $1.493 million as a saving. IlTose numbers don't look reasonable, but perhaps some number ought to be used. Obviously, in those cases, we questioned the validity of those figures. Mr. EDWARDS. In those two cases they claimed they saved the tax-          

> lpay'rs $21/2 million. And yet the total actually that they can prove

woUld be, $7,000? Mr. LowE. Possible. We don't know how much in the first one. Ithink basically what ve are questioning is the method of presentation. I think in each one of these cases, the FilI had something to do with tho ease. Some cases are more important than others. But it is just the method of presentation. As I indicated before, Ithink we go through somewhat the same process and we have cases where we try not to assign a dollar value. It is very difficult sometimes. I think that is the trap that they have fallen into, trying to assign adollar value to some cases where it A~i really impossible to do so. Mr. E~ )wArs. Well, you tested 110 cases involving recovery claims, for example, stolen property, I presume, or stolen jewels. Would that be a typical case? An automobile? Mr. TowF. An automobile would be a ease. yes. Mr. EDWARDS. You questioned 37 percent primarily because some-body else recovered the stolen property, not the FBI, but the FBI cla imed credit for it: is that correct? Mr. Lowr. That happened in some cases. In one case they had re-covered a copy of a copyrighted film and thev claimed savings based on a formula "worked out with the industry. There was one, however, 621 

that they recovered that was a fantastic grossing film and they claimed no recovery. Mr. EnwA.us. Let's move to another subject where they claimed, that they located x number of fugitives and that is a statistic that they provide every year. You tested 129 cases where the FBI said that a fugitive had been apprehended or located, presumably by the FBI, according to their statistics. But you found out that 30 percent of these cases involved some-other law enforcement agency apprehending or locating the criminal. Is that correct? Mr. LowE. That is rght iyes, sir. Mr. EDWARDS. Why wouldthey claim 30 percent of those as an FBI accomplishment? Mr. LowE. Only because they had some involvement, particularly through this National Crime Information Center. I don't think that makes it valid but they did have some involvement and perhaps he might not have been located except for that Crime Information Center. But I think this whole thing has been recognized by them and they are working to straighten it out. Mr. EDWARDS. My last question before I yield to the gentleman from Massachusetts would be this: Of 6,209 criminal cases where the FBI included investigative work April through July, 1976, 91 percent of these cases were closed out either administratively by the special agent in charge or about half of them the U.S. attorney declined prosecution. Is that an appropriate percentage that out of every hundred cases, 9 percent go to prosecution? Mr. LowE. I would have to answer it this way. Nine percent going to prosecution was probably appropriate or that is what the U.S. attorney decided. I have no basis for arguing with them. I think that is the whole point of us and the FBI working together trying to improve their administrative reporting. I think when you get to particularly the figure of 2,600 cases where the U.S. attorney declined to prosecute, with additional giddan efrom the U.S. attorney, they ought to be able to short circuit those cases to determine whether or not they meet the criteria laid down by the U.S. attorney for prosecution. They ought to be able to stop some of them shorter than they do now. During the course of our study, as I mentioned before, our staff did talk with a number of U.S. attorneys while they don't all agree-sonie of them think that it is really not proper to have a blanket declination saying that if you get a certain type of case we will not prosecute it-most of them agree that that is a useful tool because not only does it waste the FBI's time but it is a waste of the U.S. attorney's time. As far as we can see, the U.S. attorneys are short-handed, the courts are short-handed. That is one reason for declining some of these cases which otherwise would be valid but perhaps not a major case. The type of prosecution guidelines that, we are talking about, for example, is that in several jurisdictions the U.S. attorney has said if you have a bank embezzlement case-this is one of the big categories of the FBI-under a certain dollar amount and there has been no prior problem with this particular person and this particular person is not a supervisor or an officer of the bank, we will not prosecute. That gives the FBI some guidance. When they run into a case like that, they get the facts and move on. Interstate transportation of stolen 622 scurities. A number of prosecuting attorneys have said if you find acase that involves X amount or below, no prior convictions, no eompli-cating circumstances, we won't prosecute, Don't waste your time. It is that type of thing that needs to be developed a lot further in order to save the FBI some of its resources. Mr. EDwARs. Thank you. Mr. Drinan I  

> Mr. DTINAN.

Thank you, Mr. Chairman. On page 4 "The FBI said unless directed otherwise by the Depart-ment of Justice or local U.S. attorneys, it must investigate all valid complaints of alleged violations." Has anything developed so that they do check on a regular basis with the Department of Justice or with the U.S. attorney ?It seems the FBI is drifting without guidelines and without knowing exactly what their priorities are. Is there any sentiment that they shouldV Does the policy announced a year ago, also mentioned on page 4, reach that I

The FBI initiated a different approach to investigations. Is that along the lines I have said I Have any results come about in the last year? Mr. LowE. That is along the lines you indicated and quite a few re-sults have come about. In the four FBI offices where they had the pre-liminary trial with this type of quality versus quantity type thing, as Irecall the caseload-the reported caseload-was reduced by 22 percent. If nothing else happened it reduced a lot of paperwork. Obviously it freed up some resources for more major crimes. Mr. DnrtAN. Except that they are still dictating their own guide-lines. According to this policy adopted a year ago, as I read it, FBI agents don't check with the Department of Justice or the U.S. attor-neys. They simply make their own judgment as to what is marginal an'd what is very important. Mr. Low,. Except that situation has improved substantially in the last year or so. Mr. DRINAN. Do you have any facts to indicate that? Mr. Low,. Not necessarily in this study, but we are also doing areview at the request of this subcommittee of the operations of the U.S. attorneys offices. Between these two reviews, we have found that in the recent past the FBI, under the instructions of the Director, has gone to the U.S. attorneys at the various locations throughout the country and tried to work out somi instructions in advance from the U.S. attorney as to what type of cases not to waste their time on. I think that more of this can be done. I particularly think-we have not developed this fully yet-that a lot more can be done to issue guide-lines at the Department of Justice level, giving due recognition to the differences in various jurisdictions. One crime in Texas might be con-sidered pretty bad while the same crime in New York City might not be colwi(lered too bad. Mr. DRiNA.. Do you detect any differences in statistics from the six regional offices that you investigated? Are there any variations which would be important Mr. hARRIS. We have not had time to make comparisons between different field offices. 623 Mr. DRINAN. Let me ask this going back to the change of priorities. it has been ammoued recently that the whole counter-intelligence pro-gram or at least most of it has collapsed. It appears that the several thousand cases including surveillance of alleged extremists and sub-versives has been reduced to a few hundred. What is going to happen to all FBI personnel formerly assigned to the work of chasing extremists and subversives I

Mr. Lowz. I don't know, Father Drinan. I do know the committee has asked us to do a follow-up review on our domestic intelligence work. I assume there is enough work to go around for the FBI but Ithink this indicates the importance of developing the right kind of management report so they will know how their manpower is being used. Mr. DRINAN. That ties into what I wanted to ask before time rims out. We have this beautiful graph showing that the FBI is becoming more and more efficient, and the number of convictions goes up. Have you uncovered any evidence that the number of unsolved crimes is going up, going down, or remaining the same? Mr. Lowz. I have not. Mr. DRINAN. That would be very relevant. I hope you will search for such evidence. Mr. LowE. That would be the number of open cases. Mr. DPU AN. You stated you found a small number of errors in the accomplishment statistics. Yet you told us at another point that the FBI claims everything that apparently would look good in the statis-

tics. If they had any• involvement whatsoever in an investigation which resulted in a conviction, they claim it. I-low therefore can you say there was only a small number of errors? Mr. Lowx. I think we were referring here to mathematical errors rather than the way the material is presented. In each one of these cases where we in effect disagree with the FBI, it is primarily a matter of presentation. If each one of those cases were presented individually with the whole story, I don't think anybody would have any problem with them. Obviously, when you try to produce them in a summarized fashion, you have to have a lot more detail than the FBI has at present. That isbasically what we are talking about. I think as far as mathe-matical errors, or errors in putting it together, or just plain errors in duplication, there are very few. Mr. DINAN. You have already pointed out many errors where they claimed savings of millions of dollars and those millions of dollars never came into the Treasury. Those are substantial amounts, and if your testimony is any norm. there must be many more. You are very nice to the FBI. You say this is subject to misinterpre-tation but it seems to me that that is just wrong to put down alleged fines or alleged recoveries that are not there. Let me quote to you from Page 15 of your testimony. 'The suit was settled for $7,000 and the FBI claimed a savings of $1,493,000." Isn't that an error? Mr. LowE. I think it is not properly stated. I don't know whether I would call that an error or not. The FBI did have some involvement. Whether or not the suit was settled for less because of that involvement, I do not know. Certainly they can claim some credit for doing work with the U.S. attorney on that suit. 624 

Mr. DRINAN. On page 18, "FBI officials agree that their accomplish-ment statistics as currently presented could be subject to misinterpre-tation." Which FBI officials, Clarence Kelleyf Mr. Lows. Yes, sir. We discussed this with him back in August. He was at that time concerned with what we had found. He was also concerned that his people were working on it and he asked us to get together with his people and see if we could give him some help in straightening this thing out. That is what we are doing now. Mr. DRINAN. When do they publish their latest annual triumph over evil? Mr. Low. It has not been published yet. Mr. HARRIS. It will probably be coming out sometime in the late fall. Mr. DRINAN. Maybe before the election? fMr. HARRIS. I don't know. 

3fr. DRINAN. Can we hope for some revision or modification here? Mr. HARRiS. No, sir. Mr. DRINAN. Why not? Mr. HARIus. We talked to them about this. At this time, it would be too costly to make any revisions in the fiscal year 1976 data, from which our sample was'drawn. The revisions will apply to any subse-quent data. Mr. DRINAN. They have made these revisions for fiscal 1976? Mr. HARRIS. I think the fiscal 1976 statistics have gone to the ,publisher. Mr. DRINAX. Perhaps we should suggest that, since their accom-plishment statistics as currently presented could be subject to mis-interpretation and sre misleading, the FBI should not publish them. There is no divine law that says they have to be published in the fall. Do you think the committee should suggest to Mr. Kelley that he should postpone the date of publication? Mr. LowF. The subcommittee will have to decide that. I think that having an idea of what kinds of problems the statistics have would be helpful at least to you. Mr. DRINAN. But the copy has already gone to the printer so there is nothing that can hold it up. They are printing how many thousands of copies? My time has expired. Thank you. Mr. EDWARrs. Mr. Parker? Mr. PARKER. Mr. Lowe, T want to discuss the is.ue of aecms to file and file documents at the FBI. As I understand it you at the GAO are presently operating under an agreement with the FBT regarding your audit. While that agreement does not permit total access to investigative files and documents. it does provide for you to be pro-vided with a synopsis and a selected access for verification purposes if necessary. Are von indicating in your statement to us that the nareement hv the FBT is not beinz followed or adhered to or are you simply indi-catinr that total and complete access to investigative files is still not avnilable".1 Mr. Lown Wht we are savinal here is that they are living up to their arrreement. As a mattr of fact. we hnve made a lot of progress with them. Tn this particular job, the FBI Director personally in-structed everyone present to give us anything we asked for. 625 

. We still do not have access to investigative files. We maintain in the agreement with the FBI that we have the right to access. They maintain we don't. But we move ahead with our work on the basis of this agreement. They have agreed to furnish us certain information with names excised and that sort of thing, out of those files when we are working on projects that involve the investigative files per se. Mr. P-ARKER. Does it inany way impair the validity of the findings you have presented to us? Mr. LOWE. No, sir; not on this study. Mr. PARKER. DO you foresee that that lack of total access will cause you any further problems on projects underway now? For example, will it hinder your followup study on the effectiveness of the domestic intelligence guidelines? Mr. LoWE. There could be some hindrance in that particular review but right now we don't anticipate any. I think we will be able to work it out so we can follow up and see how effective the actions are that they and the Attorney General have taken. I think our followup will be , valid study and we will get the information that we really need. Mr. PARKER. I have one other question in terms of your example on page 15 in that civil suit where the plaintiffs asked $1 million from the Government. Was the Government the defendant in that Suit? Mr. LowE. Yes. Mr. PARKER. The U.S. attorney was there for representing. the defendant. Mr. LowE. Yes. Mr. PARKER. Is it a regular practice for the background of plain-tiffs to be checked out in these matters I

Mr. Low. I don't know whether that is a regular practice or not. Mr. PARKER. Another matter which the chairman has previously discussed is this business of the workload of 100 cases which 50, ap-Sarently, according to your statistics, are closed at the administrative evel and within the Bureau. Of the remaining 50, 41 of those would be declined for prosecution. That raises some very serious questions. Either there are not enough -... 

U.S. attorneys to prosecute those cases or the cases may not have been,-prosecutable, in the first instance when they are brought to the U.S. attorney in his judgment. Would you provide to the subcommittee in your report on the rela-tionship between the U.S. attorneys and the FBI some more definite information so we can make some judgments in this area as to where the problem is, whether it is on the investigative side of it or on the U.S. attorney's side of it? Mr. LowE. Yes. Well, Mr. Parker, my off the top of my head re-action to that question without getting too specific is that most of the U.S. attorneys that our people talked to were very high in their praise of the FBI's investigations. Generally speaking I would say the cases were declined for prosecu-tion for other reasons-the type "of criminal, the severity of the crime and workload in the U.S. attorney's office and the courts. Mr. PARKER. If there was a closer working relationship they would know beforehand what to bring to the U.S. attorney's office ?Mr. LOWE. Yes. Mr. PARKER. If I understood you correctly earlier today, you indi-.cated that for all of the figures that are compiled, the statistics come 028 

out of the field offices, go to headquarters and are all lookedst by some-one at headquarters before being incorporated in -the report? Mr. Lowz. In the accomplishment reports, ye.. -

Mr. PAmRm. So these examples that you have given us where a per-son pleads guilty to 10 counts of check fraud and the FBI counts it as 10 convictions, those are all looked at at headquarters? Mr. Lows. In that particular case, I think there was some over-sight because I do believe that the FBI's policy would be to count that as one conviction. Normally, if I understand the situation correctly, if there are two separate indictments-two separate crimes and two convictions--that is counted as two convictions. However if it is a number of counts on one indictment, it is only counted as one conviction. I think that is their normal policy. Mr. PARKER. Are all those criteria set down in writing I

Mr. LowE. No. The criteria are fairly general. There are some cases where the guidelines are quite specific. Mr. PARKER. And have those been appraised by the GAO Mr. Low&. Yes. Mr. PARKER. Will you include those in your final report Mr. LowE. We wil if you would like to have them. Mr. PARKER. We woud like to have them. My time has expired. Mr. EDWARDS. Mr. Stark? Mr. STAREK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. If in fact the FBI is charged now by law to investigate all alleged violations of Federal law, how could more liaison or better cooperation with the various U.S. attorneys lighten the workload by the Bureau with respect to investigation of cases Mr. LowE. I think it could substantially shorten the amount of manpower and the amount of paperwork going into each individual case, particularly in those cases where they know that the U.S. attorney will not prosecute under certain circumstances. Once they ascertain that those circumstances exist, then as far as they are concerned, the case is over. I think that would be a saving in resources. In addition, I think that the FBI is probably correct in saying that it has investigate every alleged crime unless they are given instructions by the attorney general because it is his instructions they are ope rating Under. I think the Department of Justice could do more to delineate the. types of cases that they should spend less time on. Mr. STARrx. Thank you. With respect to these questionable savings cases which you list in appendix 2, 50 out of 50 -as I read the chart, were these cases questioned because there was a minimal involvement on the part of the Bureau in the actual work on the case or was it be-cause of what Mr. Seiberling referred to ns puffingI Mr. LowE. I think that there is some of each. I would like to men-tion one other example we have here. This one probably involved a minimum amount of time but it was otherwise absolutely valid. This is a case of a recovery. In this case. thieves contacted an FBI undercover agent to try to sell a truckload of stolen whisky. The suspects were arrested when they entered the truck. The FBI claimed a $50,500 accomplishment. That is a valid one. It probably took a very short period of time as far as man-days went. But 627 it would not bebased jiist on the amount of time but maybe a combina-tion of those factor It is sort of a judgment thing oneach case. I think that is.the way theihave been operating.             

> HrAZE It seemo that maybe the problem here is the use of the

term "saving," monetary savings. Are you going to suggest to the FBI how they can better categorize the facts which are really recorded 

as statistics and labeled savings. I am not sure what kind of category could be used. Mr. LowE. I am not sure I know at this stage either, but we are working on that very thing with them. We hope to work out some way of better presenting and better gathering their statistical data. Mr. EuwArws. I would specifically like to know under savings for 1975, the $128 million saved the taxpayers in the area of the Federal Tort Claims Act and $86 million in savings on interstate tranpsorta-tion of stolen property and $90 million on recoveries of interstate transportation of stolen property. That. is a lot of money. I would like to know how often the local police found an abandoned car and the FBI was not involved ? These statistics have to be accurate. Let me direct your attention to this, the FBI Annual Report put out for fiscal year 1975. There am the criminal investigations, convic-tions in FBI cases. It shows straight up improvement, from 1971, 13,-200 convictions to 1975, 15,750 convictions. Actually in 1965, they claimed, there were 13,011 convictions. So the improvement in 10 years has been from 13,011 convictions to 15,750 convictions. Do you think that is a chart that in your capacity as auditors is appropriate? Mr. Lowz. I really have not examined that thing very closely. But assuming that the figures they are using are valid or at least that they are comparable to each other, the chart should be reasonably valid. In other words, if they were using the same criteria back in 1971 that they are using now, even though there may be some complications about the numbers, they should be comparable to each other. Mr. EDWARDS. Now in fines, you reviewed 76 cases where the FBI reported fines as accomplishments. However, you found out in 16 cases, about 21 recent of the 7 cases reviewed that, the fines claimed were sspended in whole or in part and could not be collected by the Fed-eral Government. Was that money appropriately shown in the statistics as collected by the Federal Government? Mr. LowE. Is that the word they used? Can I go one step further with one of those examplesl Let's as.sume that the judge imposed a

$1,000 fine and did not suspend it. Then I think all of us would agree that that was proper, probably a valid FBI figure. Whether or not the Government collects it has nothing to do with the judge's fine. We found in studies years ago, that the biggest portion of those fines are not collected, even when they are imposed. I don't know quite where you draw the line. It does present a problem. Mr. EDWARDS. YOu as auditors would think that the audit ought to be on a cash basis I

Mr. Lowi. It could show fines imposed and fines suspended. Mr. STANTON. The point you made is the fasis on which we question these. 628 

Mr. LowE. It could show both figures and it would be a full dis-closure so anybody reading it would understand what it was. Mr. EDWARDS. Don't you agree that reporting on a cash basis would 

be much more appropriate, actual money aiin to the government? Mr. LowE. Tie FBI would have trouble determining that. The U.S. attorney is the one that keeps the books and does the collecting. The FBI has to get out of the business at that stage of the game. But the U.S. attorney is responsible for that. I would say in this case that the FBI- couId show tle fines imposed by the judge, the amounts suspended and that is as far as they could go without turning themselves into a bookkeeping organization. Mr. EDWARDS. I have no further questions. I thank you for the pre-liminary report, and I am looking forward to your complete report. 

I hin deeply disturbed by the statistics which you have provided today, mnnber of cases reviewed, 473. Number of cases questioned, 156. Of the 50 cases reviewed for savings, 50 questioned. Of the 76 fines cases, 16 questioned. Those are really unsatisfactory statistics. Our job is to help the FBI become a more crackerjack criminal invesitgations organization and that is what you are helping us do. I thank you very much. Mr. Drinan I

Mr. DRINAN. I want to thank these gentlemen, too. You make the point on page 10 that the FBI should collaborate with Congress and the D)epaitnient of Justice so that we could deterinine whether some laws need revisilng or whether the U.S. attorney should set forth guide-lines, or whether the Department of Justice'could utilize manpower better. It seems to me that Mr. Kelley, or whoever sent the printer this ad-vance copy of the annual report, should have simply sent it to the over-sig]t. committee. Mr. Chairman, I would like to suggest that the committee ask Mr. ]Kellev for tlat report so that when it comes out we will be able to say thi;s is misleading or that they will improve. Hopefully they will. MIr. Chairman, we won't be here next week so we cannot, have another oversight, examination. But I think we ought to know, if tiere is im-proveinent in the report and, if there isn't, we would have no knowl-ecge of what they are pres.iting to the American people today as their aceom l ishiments. Mr. EDWARDS. rhe subcommittee will meet tomorrow morning at 

10 n.m., in room 2141 of this building. The Secretary of IIUD, Carla Iills, will be the witness on discrimination in housing. Again, Mr. Lowe and gentlemen, we thank you very much. Mf'. ow F. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

Mr. EDWARDS. We stand adjourned. [WN'hereupon at 3:35 p.m., the subcommittee adjourned, to reconvene at 10 a.m., Thursday, September 30, 1976.] 

# 0
