Title: Housing Burden

URL Source: https://immigrantdataca.org/indicators/housing-burden

Markdown Content:
Home/ Indicators/ Housing Burden

**Insights and Analyses**
-------------------------

*   The high cost of housing affects immigrants and their U.S.-born counterparts alike. In 2021, throughout California, 54% of all renters and 31% of all owners were burdened, spending more than 30% of their income on housing.

*   In California, more than half (57%) of immigrants who rent were burdened by housing costs in 2021.

*   When disaggregating by status, a higher proportion of undocumented renters and owners spend more than 30 percent of their income on housing. Across the state, in 2021, 63% of undocumented renters and 41% of undocumented homeowners were burdened by housing costs.

*   California’s high cost of living — even prior to the pandemic — continues to burden families and communities. The California Budget and Policy Center found that between January to April 2022, more than half (51%) of low-income renters who reported housing hardship were households with children.

*   Experiencing housing unaffordability could mean choosing not to buy essential items and food, or pursue health care, as well as having to live in crowded households. Kids Count Data Center reports that, in 2023, 27% — or over 2.25 million — of children in California lived in crowded households. According to Housing Matters, housing instability negatively affects health, educational outcomes, and economic prosperity.

*   According to a June 2025 report from the UCLA Latino Policy & Politics Institute (LPPI), immigrant workers are vulnerable to housing insecurity due to labor exploitation, limited access to housing assistance, and fear of retaliation from reporting housing rights abuses, such as illegal rent hikes or threats of unlawful evictions. LPPI describes housing insecurity as the primary factor to why unaccompanied immigrant children are pushed into exploitative, low-paying, and risky jobs.

*   Immigrants are more likely than native-born residents to experience higher eviction filing and eviction rates. ICE detentions and deportations have taken the breadwinners of some families, leaving them vulnerable to eviction. Additionally, CalMatters reports that the threat of deportation or exposure of immigration status deters immigrant tenants from exercising their tenant rights amid experiences of alleged housing-related issues that could further exacerbate housing burden. Furthermore, a survey conducted in August 2025 by The Rent Brigade and other community groups highlighted the immense burden the Los Angeles ICE Raids added to housing issues, including returning to work out of fear of eviction, facing threats by landlords to report them to ICE, and experiencing a drop in weekly earnings. Other vulnerable housing settings for undocumented immigrants include lack of legal protections from living in housing without a formal lease in their names, as 70% of foreign-born Latinos in California entered homelessness from living in non-leaseholder housing, compared to 46% of U.S.-born Latinos, according to a June 2025 report by the UCSF Benioff Homeless and Housing Initiative.

*   Racial disparities among the unhoused population persist, as Black Californians comprised about 7% of the state’s population, yet they comprised about 29% of unhoused people accessing services in 2024, according to the California Business, Consumer Services and Housing Agency. Native Hawaiian and Pacific Islander Californians also disproportionately experienced homelessness.

*   The National Low Income Housing Coalition estimated that in 2023 there was a shortage of over 977,000 affordable and available rental units for Californians who are categorized as extremely low-income renters.

*   A January 2021 report by the state’s Legislative Analyst Office on the impact of COVID-19 on renters and homeowners, found that low-income households, who are more likely to be renters, experienced more job losses during the pandemic; meaning they were disproportionately burdened by housing costs. The increase in unemployment (UI) benefits and stimulus checks helped some unemployed workers avoid evictions or late rent payments; however, undocumented immigrants continued to remain in precarious standing as they were excluded from receiving federal aid.

**The Asian Pacific Environmental Network (APEN) brings together working-class Asian immigrant and refugee communities in the Bay Area and Los Angeles to develop and fight for progressive solutions to address affordable housing, environmental justice, and economic justice.**
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

APEN has worked for over 30 years to build the leadership of Asian immigrants and refugees, beginning with helping communities address environmental hazards in their neighborhoods in Richmond and expanding their work to fight for affordable housing preservation in a rapidly gentrifying Oakland Chinatown. Their work also includes collaborating with other organizations across the state and nation to help build a shared vision around environmental, social, and economic justice through power building strategies like civic engagement and policy advocacy. Locally, as rent skyrockets and low-income Asian families continue to struggle to find quality affordable housing in the Bay Area – in particular Vietnamese renters and Korean homeowners – APEN continues to work with community members to propose policy solutions that address the need to preserve affordable housing and create safer living conditions in working-class communities like Oakland, Chinatown, and Richmond.

For example,in 2019, APEN won a 16-year campaign to ensure a new Oakland luxury waterfront development included 465 units of on-site affordable rental housing for seniors and families making between 30 and 60 percent of the area median income. That same year, APEN also helped push forward AB 1482, housing legislation that would cap rent increases and protect people from eviction. APEN's community leaders also successfully advocated for the Healthy Homes Act (AB 1232), which includes provisions for a program to utilize existing energy efficiency funds to help renovate the homes of working class families and conduct research into whether these kinds of statewide environmental programs cause displacement. Additionally, APEN advocated for a citywide emergency moratorium on tenant evictions in Oakland in order to help protect tenants during the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as disbursed $60,000 in emergency funds for immigrant and refugee community members. More recently, APEN expanded their organizing work into communities of the South Bay area of Los Angeles.

APEN is also a key leader in environmental justice in the Bay Area and throughout California. In recent years, they have continued their decades-long fight against pollution in Richmond by building the organizing power of Asian communities and forming alliances with other organizations to end statewide policies that allow for further use of fossil fuels in frontline communities. In 2024, APEN and other environmental organizations in Richmond won a $550 million settlement from Chevron that is slated to be reinvested back into the local community. APEN has also created pathways for local communities to secure climate resources, including by helping a senior affordable housing complex get state funding to install solar panels and assisting to secure public investments to build a resilience center in Oakland Chinatown that can keep communities safe during climate disasters like extreme heat and flooding. For more on APEN’s work, please visit their website here.Read APEN’s most recent joint report on building resilience in the most vulnerable communities to respond to climate disasters here.

_Photo credit: Asian Pacific Environmental Network_
