Title: 

URL Source: https://www.muckrock.com/news/archives/2018/jun/27/FBI-high-visibility-memoranda/

Markdown Content:
Donate
Tools
Newsletter
Investigations
About Us
 Search
File Request
Sign Up
Log In
June 27, 2018
FBI’s High Visibility Memoranda document FOIA’s greatest hits

Memos identify some of the most significant of the Bureau’s files that requesters can make public

Written by Emma Best
Edited by JPat Brown

When the Federal Bureau of Investigation’s FOIA office in the Records Management Division prepares to release a file that it deems significant, newsworthy or controversial, it issues what’s known as a High Visibility Memoranda. These memos, circulated to different parts of the Bureau and often to the Director’s Office as well as outside agencies, outline the proposed releases and their possible fallout. A recent release of over 500 pages of these memos serves as a list of files for FOIA requesters to file new requests for so the files can be published online, as well as showing government reactions to the requests themselves.

Although often short, the memos are likely to be exceptionally useful to FOIA requesters. The memos typically include an explanation of why the request is important, or the most significant disclosures within them. One of the earliest memos released, discussing records on the Anti-Defamation League of B’nai B’rith, explains that the file revealed “the extent of the liaison between the FBI and the ADL.”

In some instances, the memos provide page counts for both released and withheld documents, and briefly describes the types of exemptions that are being invoked to withhold information.

In some instances, the memos seem to imply that the release is significant less because of the subject matter itself than because of the requester.

Far more significantly, other memos highlight attempts to handle FOIA requests improperly. In one particularly notable instance, regarding the death of Vince Foster, the Secret Service asked the FBI to withhold a document in violation of the law. According to the USSS, the document contained “inaccurate” information, and thus shouldn’t be released because their employee “denied making the statements.” USSS “suggested” that the FBI deny the information to protect the privacy of the employee in question, and “to the information provided in confidence.” The memo doesn’t explain how the USSS felt that the statements hadn’t been made and had simultaneously been made in confidence. The FBI withheld only the name of the employee in question.

In some instances, like a FOIA request for files on James Jesus Angleton, reveals that the matter was considered so sensitive that a special Central Intelligence Agency task force was created to work with the FBI to review and redact the file.

In a few instances, the memos highlight files as containing information that was “most embarrassing” to the FBI and other government agencies.

One of the memos, in this case an email classified as a High Visibility Summary, highlights the limits of both the FBI’s ability to investigate matters and their ability to process FOIA requests. In response to a MuckRock request filed by Shawn Musgrave, an email was sent that described MuckRock (the Bureau got the camelcase wrong) as “an internet site that is part of the Freedom of the Press Foundation.”

Despite being fans of their work, MuckRock is not and never has been a part of the Freedom of the Press Foundation. (The Bureau may have meant to refer to MuckRock having received a grant from the Foundation in 2012.)

Overall, the memos detail hundreds of FOIA requests that are of significant interest to the public. While all of these files have been released, many are worth requesting again as they aren’t available online. As many FOIA requesters know, requesting preprocessed files is an excellent way to reduce or avoid search and duplication fees. In some instances, files can be re-reviewed and re-released with fewer redactions. Readers are encouraged to use the memos as inspiration for their FOIA requests.

Read the largest selection of memos embedded below, and the two additional sections on the request page. Additional memos have also been requested.

Image via FBI.gov

PROJECTS
Inventorying the FBI
TAGS
foia fbi muckrock 9/11 secret service foia advice freedom of the press foundation memos rockefellers will sessions adl clintons high visibility memoranda vince foster
RELATED REQUESTS

Completed

15 files

High Visibility Memorandum

Emma Best sent this request to the Federal Bureau of Investigation of the United States of America

Completed

6 files

High Visibility Memorandum

Emma Best sent this request to the Federal Bureau of Investigation of the United States of America

Related Stories
We want to know how local governments are using ChatGPT. Here’s how you can help.
by Kelly Kauffman
September 16, 2025
Newsrooms of all sizes deserve better reporting tools and support. Through a new Knight Foundation grant, MuckRock is expanding our portfolio to make that a reality.
by Michael Morisy
August 27, 2025
The future of FOIA
by Britton Struthers-Lugo
August 06, 2025
The path to smarter tech for scrappy newsrooms
by Melanie Plenda, Johnny Bassett and Allan Lasser
July 31, 2025

For the Record

Keep up on new releases, projects and reporting with MuckRock's weekly newsletter

Subscribe with your email address
Subscribe

By subscribing, you agree to MuckRock's Terms of Service and Privacy Policy.

Together, we hold power to account and shine a light on government transparency

Your donation fuels vital tools such as MuckRock Requests, FOIA Machine, DocumentCloud and oTranscribe that promote civic engagement.

To donate via Apple Pay, please visit our dedicated GiveButter page.
Or mailed to:
MuckRock Foundation
263 Huntington Ave
Boston, MA 02115

You can always find our most current financial statements at MuckRock’s financial transparency page.

If you’d like to support our work with a legacy, a gift of stocks or crypto currency, contact marcia@muckrock.com.

MuckRock is a non-profit collaborative news site that gives you the tools to keep our government transparent and accountable.

Make a Donation

MuckRock is a 501(c)(3) organization.

Our tax identification number is 81-1485228.

Donations are tax-deductible.

© 2010–2025 MuckRock

SECTIONS
News
Projects
Requests
Agencies
Jurisdictions
Newsletter
ABOUT
About Us
Staff
FAQ
API
Editorial Policy
Privacy Policy
Terms of Service
Financials
FEEDS
Latest Reporting
Latest Questions
Recently Filed Requests
Recently Completed Requests
