Title: 

URL Source: https://www.fws.gov/sites/default/files/documents/Fully_Releasable_Redacted_1.pdf

Published Time: Fri, 24 Sep 2021 16:26:20 GMT

Markdown Content:
# Conversation Contents 

## DOI Daily Report 

# "Hinson, Alex" <alex_hinson@ios.doi.gov> 

## From: "Hinson, Alex" <alex_hinson@ios.doi.gov> 

## Sent: Thu Dec 07 2017 08:34:09 GMT-0700 (MST) 

## To: undisclosed-recipients:; 

## BCC: @fws.gov 

## Subject: DOI Daily Report 

# INTERIOR DAILY COMMUNICATIONS REPORT 

# NEWS TO SHARE: 

## CNN-Opinion: Ryan Zinke: Why we shrunk the monuments 

## “Across our great land, objects of cultural and historic significance tell the story of our nation. From the Statue of Liberty to the birthplace of George Washington, preserving our American heritage means protecting these objects. In 1906, President Teddy Roosevelt signed the Antiquities Act, giving the President power to proclaim objects on federal lands as national monuments and to reserve the smallest area of land compatible with their protection as part of the monument designation...President Trump was absolutely right to order this review. The President pledged during the campaign that the forgotten men and women of this country would be forgotten no more, and he is delivering on that promise. I met with countless local stakeholders, rode the range with ranchers, spoke with conservationists, and spent time with Native American tribal leaders, trying to understand the effect that these monument designations have had on everyday Americans.” 

## Fox News-Gingrich Productions: Trump and Zinke are Right on National Monuments 

## “Once again, President Donald Trump is taking a reasonable action to correct enormous overreach from previous administrations, and once again, the media and the Left are going berserk…The land around the monuments will continue to be federally protected and managed by one of our several highly-qualified federal land management agencies – which are the same agencies that manage national monuments. These surrounding public lands will be reclassified and will become national forests, wilderness areas, or other federally-controlled, cherished natural sites. Here’s the difference: The regulatory regime for a national monument is focused entirely around protecting specific objects, so federal regulators have more control over what activities can and cannot happen on the designated land. A regulator, for example, could decide to prohibit activities which would otherwise be allowed in a federal wilderness area or forest.” 

# CORRECTING THE RECORD: 

## CNN: Patagonia, Interior Department trade Twitter barbs over 'special interests' (b) (6) “Outdoor retailer Patagonia and the Interior Department continued their public spat over US national monuments Tuesday on Twitter, trading barbs over each others' ties to "special interests." The company announced Tuesday that it plans to take legal action over President Donald Trump's move to dramatically shrink two national monuments in Utah, a move that Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke recommended. Following that announcement, Zinke took aim at the retailer on a press phone call Tuesday, saying, "You mean Patagonia made in China? This is an example of a special interest." Zinke also accused Patagonia of lying when it emblazoned the words, "The President Stole Your Land," on the homepage of its website. On the press call, Zinke labeled that claim "nefarious, false and a lie" because no antiquities protections on the land had been removed -- and added that Patagonia's push was a ‘blatant lie to fill their coffers.’” 

## Reuters: Interior secretary urges size cuts, management changes to more monuments 

## “Zinke said the Cascade-Siskiyou National Monument straddling the border of Oregon and California and the Gold Butte National Monument in Nevada were both too big for the purpose of protecting important historical sites and should be reduced in size. He said Trump should also consider changing the boundaries of the Pacific Remote Islands and Rose Atoll Marine National Monuments in the Pacific Ocean. He also recommended changes in the management of 10 other monuments to allow for more grazing, timber, fishing, road access and other uses. Trump on Monday had already acted on Zinke’s recommendations to shrink Utah’s Bears Ears and Grand Staircase Escalante national monuments, ordering cuts amounting to millions of acres in a move that triggered swift legal challenges from tribes and environmental groups.” ** LINK TO WHITE HOUSE TALKING POINTS** 

# OTHER TOP STORIES: 

## U.S. News and World Report: US to Review End of Protections for Yellowstone Grizzlies 

## “U.S. officials said Wednesday they'll review the recent lifting of protections for Yellowstone-area grizzly bears in light of a court ruling that retained protections for gray wolves in the Great Lakes. About 700 bears in and around Yellowstone National Park lost their threatened species status on July 31, opening the door to future trophy hunts in Wyoming, Montana and Idaho. Just a day later, a federal appeals court in Washington D.C. said in the wolf case that wildlife officials needed to give more consideration to how a species' loss of historical habitat affects its recovery. Like wolves, grizzly bears have seen a strong recovery over the past several decades in isolated regions of the U.S., but remain absent from the vast majority of their historical range.” 

## Reuters: Alaskan oil lease sale brings few bids despite vast territory offered 

## “An oil-and-gas lease sale that raised concerns with environmentalists due to the vast amount of acres offered in Arctic Alaska drew few bids on Wednesday, government officials said. Seven bids were received, covering about 80,000 acres - or less than 1 percent of the 10.3 million acres offered in the National Petroleum Reserve in Alaska by the Trump administration. It was, by far, more territory than ever offered in any of the previous 12 NPR-A lease sales held since 1999. The sale was the latest move by the administration of President Donald Trump, a Republican, supporting his pledge to make the United States “energy dominant” by boosting output of oil, natural gas and coal.” ### --

> Alex Hinson

## Deputy Press Secretary Department of the Interior Conversation Contents 

## U.S. Department of the Interior News Briefing for Wednesday, December 6, 2017 

# Bulletin Intelligence <Interior@bulletinintelligence.com> 

## From: Bulletin Intelligence <Interior@bulletinintelligence.com> 

## Sent: Wed Dec 06 2017 04:00:25 GMT-0700 (MST) 

## To: <Interior@bulletinintelligence.com> 

## Subject: U.S. Department of the Interior News Briefing for Wednesday, December 6, 2017  

> Mobile version and searchable archives available here. Please click here to subscribe.
> DATE: WEDNESDAY, DECEMBER 6, 2017 6:00 AM EST

# Today's Table Of Contents 

DOI In The News 

• USA Today: After Bears Ears, Trump Administration Ponders More Changes To National Monuments. • New York Times: Patagonia, REI And Other Outdoor Retailers Protest Trump’s Decision To Shrink Utah Monuments. • Deseret (UT) News: Utah Rep. Chris Stewart Proposes National Park In Grand Staircase-Escalante. • The Hill: Navajo Nation Sues Trump Over Utah Monument Reduction. • Salt Lake (UT) Tribune: Former President Bill Clinton Says Shrinking Utah National Monuments Is ‘Wrong Economic Decision’ And ‘Wrong Environmental Decision’. • Washington Post: Pilfered Artifacts, Three Suicides And The Struggle Over Federal Land In Utah. • Reuters: While U.S. Senate Pushes Alaska Wildlife Refuge Drilling, Industry Looks Elsewhere. • NBC: Wildfires Ravage Southern California. 

Bureau Of Indian Affairs 

• Incumbents Lead Nooksack Election Results Amid Allegations Of Fraud. • Omaha Tribe Mismanaged $13.9 Million In Federal Flood-assistance Grants, Audit Finds. • 9th Circ. Gives Navajo Partial Win In Waters Rights Suit. • Wis. Tribe Seeks Quick Win In Gambling Compact Spat. 

Bureau Of Land Management 

• Houston Chronicle: Oil Companies Clamping Down On Methane Leaks. • E&E Publishing: Trump Admin Takes BLM Methane Fight To Appeals Court. • WyoFile: Budd-Falen: Provocateur Or Protector? • Associated Press: Critics Sue Over Mine Exploration Near Alaska Eagle Preserve. • Salem (OR) Capital Press: Grazing Slowly Returns To Land Scorched By 2015 Soda Fire. • KRTV-TV Great Falls (MT): BLM Expands Brewery Flats Outdoor Lab For Junior-high School Students. 

Bureau Of Reclamation 

• Columbia River Wild Salmon Runs Face Regulatory Hurdles, Political Indifference. • Idaho Ancient Bison Fossils Now Available In 3-D At ISU. 

Bureau Of Safety And Environmental Enforcement 

• Remembering The BP Oil Spill, A Disaster Of Historic Proportions. 

Fish And Wildlife Service 

• McClatchy: House Moderates Opposes Allowing Arctic Oil Drilling In Tax Bill. • Associated Press: Wildlife Officials Say White-Tailed Prairie Dog In No Danger. • Associated Press: 2018 Plan For Mexican Wolves Calls For Fostering Of Pups. • Miami Herald: Federal Wildlife Managers Clear Way For Walmart In Vanishing South Florida Forest. 

National Park Service 

• USA Today: Pearl Harbor Remembrance Day 2017: What Happened On That Fateful Day 76 Years Ago? • Ste. Genevieve (MO) Herald: NPS Predicts Annual Budget Around $1 Million For Ste. Genevieve Proposal. • Associated Press: Work Begins At Carlsbad Caverns To Replace Elevators. • Fountain Valley (CA) Patch: Ioniq Hybrids Donated To National Park Service, Hyundai Says. • Next-Gen Transportation: Yosemite National Park To Deploy Proterra Electric Buses. • Salt Lake (UT) Tribune: Arches National Park Celebrates End Of Massive Road Project With Free Entry This Weekend. • MLive (MI): Plans To Rehab Old Negro League Baseball Park Taking Shape. • MarketWatch: When ‘Star Wars’ Came To California: Documents Reveal History Behind Original Film. • Bismarck (ND) Tribune: Public Comment Sought On Refinery Proposed Near Theodore Roosevelt National Park. 

Office Of Insular Affairs 

• Pacific News Center: Interior Releases $14.9 M In Guam Compact Aid. • Marianas Variety: US Senator Plans Legislation To Limit Trust Fund Spending. • Virgin Islands Consortium (VIR): Congressional Delegation Tours St. Croix To Assess Hurricane Damage. • Marianas Variety: House Panel: Proposal To ‘gGet Back’ American Memorial Park Requires Legal Review. • Saipan (MNP) Tribune: House OKs CW-1 Resolution. • DAWN (PAK): UN Votes To Nullify Israeli Jurisdiction Over Jerusalem. • Korea Herald: President Moon Calls For Enhanced Ties With Pacific Island Nations. • Saipan (MNP) Tribune: Okeanos Marianas To Represent NMI At Yap Summit. • Papua New Guinea Today: Air Niugini To Upgrade Services To Cairns, Chuuk And Pohnpei. • Interpreter (AUS): Australia’s Coal-fired Diplomacy Burns Pacific Friends. • teleSUR (VEN): Additional Coverage: U.S. ‘Dome’ Of Nuclear Waste In Enewetak Atoll Wreaking Havoc On Indigenous People. 

Office Of Surface Mining 

• Interior Won’t Say What It’s Doing With Coal Health Study. US Geological Survey 

• Charleston (WV) Gazette-Mail: Agencies Working On Flood Warning Improvements In WV. • Additional Reading. 

Opinion Pieces 

• The Right Move On Monuments. • Time For Trump To Follow Through On Coal Promises In Arizona. • Additional Reading. 

Top National News 

• New York Times: Trump To Recognize Jerusalem As Israel’s Capital. • Reuters: Trump Expects Tax Bill Out Of Conference “Pretty Quickly.” • Reuters: White House Says A Government Shutdown Is Still Possible. • Reuters: House Republicans Debating Duration Of Continuing Resolution. • Wall Street Journal: Trump Wants Republicans To Address Welfare Reform After Tax Bill. • Reuters: UN Official’s Visit To North Korea Sparks Hope Of Mediation. 

Editorial Wrap-Up 

• New York Times. - “Does President Trump Want To Negotiate Middle East Peace?” - “Going National With Concealed Guns.” • Washington Post. - “What A Presidential President Would Have Said About The FBI.” - “Democrats Take A Hard Line On Harassment In Congress. Republicans, Not So Much.” - “Two Troubling Elections Threaten The Health Of Latin American Democracies.” • Wall Street Journal. - “No Alternative, No Tax Problem.” - “The Right Move On Monuments.” - “Judging Roy Moore.” 

Big Picture 

• Headlines From Today’s Front Pages. 

Washington Schedule 

• Today’s Events In Washington. 

Last Laughs 

• Late Night Political Humor. 

# DOI In The News 

## After Bears Ears, Trump Administration Ponders More Changes To National Monuments. 

In the wake of President Trump’s proclamations reducing the size of the Bears Ears and GrandStaircae-Escalante national monuments, USA Today (12/5, Korte) reports that Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke is recommending he “scale back four more national monuments...and make modifications to at least four more, continuing an unprecedented blitz of presidential action to ease restriction on public lands.” Zinke “is recommending that Trump reduce the size of Cascade-Siskiyou in Oregon and California, Gold Butte in Nevada,” and “boundary changes to two marine national monuments: the Pacific Remote Islands and the Rose Atoll.” Zinke also recommended modifications to Katahdin Woods and Waters in Maine, Northeast Canyons and Seamounts in Massachusetts, and Organ Mountains-Desert Peaks and Rio Grande Del Norte, both in New Mexico. The Washington Post (12/5, Eilperin) reports that Zinke “said he was ‘fairly confident’ Trump would accept all of his recommendations, and he intends to brief him ‘multiple times’ in coming weeks to get his sign-off.” Also reporting are the New York Times (12/6, Nash), Reuters (12/5, Volcovici), the Washington Examiner (12/5, Siegel), the Los Angeles Times (12/5, Schneider), The Guardian (UK) (12/5, Staff, Agencies), the Huffington Post (12/5, D'Angelo), BuzzFeed (12/5, Dalrymple), and KXLY-TV Spokane (WA) Spokane, WA (12/5, Gardner). Additional coverage was provided by the Palm Springs (CA) Desert Sun (12/5, Roth), KPVI-TV Idaho Falls (ID) Idaho Falls, ID (12/5), and KIFI-TV Idaho Falls (ID) Idaho Falls, ID (12/5). 

Zinke Defends Monument Reductions, Supports Badger-Two Medicine. The Missoulian (MT) (12/5, Chaney) reports that Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke in a call with reporters on Tuesday “repeated an earlier proposal to create a new, 130,000-acre monument in Montana protecting the Badger-Two Medicine region surrounded by the Blackfeet Indian Reservation, Glacier National Park and the Bob Marshall Wilderness Complex.” Zinke said, “I think there’s a really great opportunity for the Badger-Two Medicine as the number of crowds and visitors continue to break records in Glacier (National Park). Here’s a virtually untapped area and a chance to do it right. There’s the possibility of revenue from tourism and an untapped culture. I think it’s deserving of monument status.” Also reporting are KRTV-TV Great Falls (MT) Great Falls, MT (12/5) and KTVH-TV Helena (MT) Helena, MT (12/5, Jochim). 

Jessamine County Site At Camp Nelson Could Be Kentucky’s First National Monument. 

The Lexington (KY) Herald-Leader (12/5, Kocher) reports that Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke “formally recommended Tuesday that Camp Nelson Civil War Heritage Park should be one of three new national monuments in the country.” Zinke said in a statement, “Camp Nelson is one of the places where our nation was made stronger and history was made. As a key depot, training center and hospital, Camp Nelson recruited and trained thousands of African-American war heroes who helped restore the Union.” Rep. Andy Barr said in a statement that he “can think of no site more deserving of the distinction than the Camp Nelson Civil War Heritage Park where thousands of African American slaves found freedom. ...I strongly encourage President Trump to follow through” on Zinke’s recommendation. Additional coverage was provided by the Lane Report (12/5). 

Zinke Questions Legality, Offers Few Specifics About Cascade-Siskiyou National Monument’s Fate. The Oregonian (12/5, Theen) reports that Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke “offered few additional details Tuesday about the administration’s plans for Cascade-Siskiyou National Monument in Southern Oregon.” Zinke said, “We have not set down in specifics on what an adjusted boundary would look like.” The article notes that “Zinke’s final recommendations included some of the same language from the September draft plan, saying the Oregon boundary should be revised to ‘address impacts on private lands’ and commercial timber harvest.” Also reporting are AP (12/5), the Salem (OR) Capital Press (12/5, Perkowski), the Redding (CA) Record-Searchlight (12/5, Arthur), the Salem (OR) Statesman Journal (12/5, Urness), KLCC-FM Eugene (OR) Eugene, OR (12/5, Burns), and KOBI-TV Medford (OR) Medford, OR (12/5). 

Zinke Recommends Shrinking Nevada Monument. The AP (12/5) reports that Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke is recommending reducing the size of the Gold Butte National Monument. Zinke “said Tuesday he would focus changes on the site’s water districts.” He “declined to specify how much land he wants to remove from monument status in Nevada.” Also reporting are the Las Vegas Review-Journal (12/5, Saunders, Brean) and KSNV-TV Las Vegas Las Vegas (12/5, O'Neal). 

New Mexico National Monuments To Remain Intact. The AP (12/5) reports that “the boundaries of New Mexico’s two national monuments that were under review will remain intact, but Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke says modifications will be made to protect the long-standing culture of grazing and to ensure hunters and anglers don’t lose access.” Zinke on Tuesday said “his decision to keep Organ Mountains-Desert Peaks and the Rio Grande Del Norte national monuments the same size followed discussions with the governor, the state’s congressional delegation, ranchers and conservationists.” He “said the administration was comfortable with the New Mexico monuments and wanted to ensure they could be actively managed in perpetuity.” Also reporting are Albuquerque (NM) Business First (12/5, Ortiz), KRWG-FM Las Cruces (NM) Las Cruces, NM (12/5), and KRWG-FM Las Cruces (NM) Las Cruces, NM (12/5). 

Interior Secretary Wants To Maintain Katahdin Woods Monument. The AP (12/5) reports that Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke on Tuesday “reiterated his support for a ‘made in Maine’ solution that keeps intact the boundaries of the Katahdin Woods and Waters National Monument.” Zinke “recommended that timbering should be permitted on the property and that infrastructure upgrades and public access for ‘traditional uses’ like snowmobiling and hunting should be prioritized in a management plan.” Rep. Bruce Poliquin said Zinke’s recommendation “strikes the right balance.” He called Zinke’s recommendation “a smart compromise that will help ensure traditional uses of the land and sustainable forest management are safeguarded, along with the jobs they support in the area.” Also reporting are the Portland (ME) Press Herald (12/5, Miller), the Bangor (ME) Daily News (12/5, Sambides), the Boston Globe (12/5), and WAGM-TV Presque Isle (ME) Presque Isle, ME (12/5). 

Newhouse Praises Interior Decision To Maintain Hanford Reach National Monument. 

KNDU-TV Yakima, WA (12/5) reports that Rep. Dan Newhouse in a statement praised the decision to not change the Hanford Reach National Monument. Newhouse said, “In June, I shared my concerns with Secretary Zinke and the administration that no modifications should be made to the Hanford Reach National Monument. I am pleased that after today’s report by the Interior Department, this national treasure will continue to be open to public access for future generations to enjoy.” 

## Patagonia, REI And Other Outdoor Retailers Protest Trump’s Decision To Shrink Utah Monuments. 

Meanwhile, Patagonia and other outdoor clothing and equipment retailers are speaking out against Trump’s plan to reduce the size of the Utah monuments, the New York Times (12/5, Hauser) reports. In a pop-up message on its website, Patagonia said, “The president stole your land. ... In an illegal move, the president just reduced the size of Bears Ears and Grand Staircase-Escalante National Monuments. This is the largest elimination of protected land in American history.” The company’s general counsel, Hilary Dessouky, said through a spokeswoman Tuesday “that the company planned to file a lawsuit on Wednesday challenging the president’s shrinking of the national monument.” The Times also highlights criticism of the move from other outdoor retailers. The AP (12/5, Daly) reports that Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke on Tuesday accused Patagonia “of lying when it said that President Donald Trump ‘stole your land’ by shrinking two national monuments in Utah by some 2 million acres.” According to the article, “an angry Zinke called the claim – made in large type on the company’s home page — ‘nefarious, false and a lie.’” Zinke “told reporters the land targeted by Trump remains protected because it is still under federal control.” Additional coverage was provided by the AP (12/6, DALY, McCOMBS), The Hill (12/5, Delk), Fox Business (12/5), Bloomberg News (12/5, Natter), the Missoula Current (MT) (12/5, Kidston), and Fortune (12/5, Abramson). Also reporting are AP (12/6, DALY, McCOMBS), the U.S. News & World Report (12/5, Trimble), the Washington Post (12/5, Bhattarai), the New York Post (12/5, Steinbuch), Bloomberg News (12/5, Rupp), CBS News (12/5, Layne), Fox News (12/5, Bartiromo), the Independent (UK) (12/5, Oppenheim), the Independent (UK) (12/5, York), the Drum (UK) (12/5, O'Brien), KTUU-TV Anchorage (AK) Anchorage, AK (12/5, Polk), and KWYB-TV Butte (MT) Butte, MT (12/5). 

Obama’s Action On Public Land A ‘Blatant Misuse Of Power’. Newsmax (12/5, Fitzgerald) reports that “the Obama administration’s decision to lock away several million acres to protect them for environmental purposes was a ‘blatant misuse of power,’” Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke said Tuesday, “while explaining the decision to return large tracts to the people of Utah.” On Fox News’ “Fox & Friends” program, Zinke said, “We’re giving a voice back to Utah, a voice back to the local communities that live and work there. It was a blatant misuse of power.” 

AP FACT CHECK: Trump’s Curious Case For Shrinking Monuments. The AP (12/5, Woodward, McCombs) fact checks President Trump’s statement on reducing the two Utah monuments. While Trump said the Antiquities Act “requires that only the smallest necessary area be set aside for special protection as national monuments,” the AP says the law “doesn’t demand that such land be kept to a minimum. Such protected land ‘shall be confined to the smallest area compatible with proper care and management of the objects to be protected,’ it says.” Trump also claimed that “this tragic federal overreach prevents many Native Americans from having their rightful voice over the sacred land where they practice their most important ancestral and religious traditions” and that “we have seen harmful and unnecessary restrictions on hunting, ranching and responsible economic development.” The AP says that “native rights are generally enshrined on national monument lands, not terminated. So are other public uses of the land,” and “the notion that rural families can’t enjoy the beauty of a national monument is unsupported.” 

## Utah Rep. Chris Stewart Proposes National Park In Grand Staircase-Escalante. 

The Deseret (UT) News (12/5, Romboy) reports that Rep. Chris Stewart “plans to introduce legislation to create a new national park in a piece of the Grand Staircase-Escalante National Monument.” The proposed Escalante Canyons National Park “comes on the heels of President Donald Trump dramatically downsizing the 1.9 million-acre monument.” Stewart said, “We feel that’s a win-win. You love tourism? So do I. People will come for a national park, but many of them won’t come for a monument.” Also, the Salt Lake (UT) Tribune (12/5, Burr) reports that Rep. John Curtis “unveiled a measure to add law enforcement to the two remaining swaths of Bears Ears National Monument, forbid oil and gas drilling and mining in the region and give tribes a role in managing the lands.” However, state Sen. Jim Dabakis “said in a statement that Stewart’s plan to create a national park is just a ploy to distract from the fact he and other Utah GOP officials want to open up large chunks of land in southern Utah to mineral extraction.” In addition, “the Southern Utah Wilderness Alliance said Stewart and Curtis’ efforts to create a park and turn Trump’s actions into congressionally approved law were just a way to distract from actions to destroy the monuments.” 

## Navajo Nation Sues Trump Over Utah Monument Reduction. 

The Hill (12/5, Cama) reports that “the Navajo Nation and four other American Indian tribes said Tuesday they had sued President Trump to undo his action reducing the Bears Ears National Monument in southern Utah.” The lawsuit, “which the tribes had long promised, argues that Trump did not have the legal authority to remove more than 80 percent of the land protections that former President Barack Obama had established in 2016.” The tribes wrote in a statement, “Through the Antiquities Act, Congress delegated to the president the limited authority to designate national monuments and retained to itself the power to revoke or modify national monuments.” They continued, “The proclamation signed by President Trump today is so extreme that it revokes and replaces Bears Ears and thereby violates the Antiquities Act and seizes authority that the Constitution vests solely in Congress.” Also reporting are the AP (12/5), USA Today (12/4), the Huffington Post (12/5, Visser), and the Albuquerque (NM) Journal (12/5, Grover). 

## Former President Bill Clinton Says Shrinking Utah National Monuments Is ‘Wrong Economic Decision’ And ‘Wrong Environmental Decision’. 

The Salt Lake (UT) Tribune (12/6, Harkins) reports that “former President Bill Clinton denounced President Donald Trump’s decision to shrink Utah’s Grand Staircase-Escalante and Bears Ears national monuments, saying it was a bad move in multiple ways.” According to the article, “Clinton prefaced his remarks by recalling his contentious choice to protect Grand Staircase-Escalante during his presidency – and the positive feedback he got for it five years after – and said he was “mystified and heartbroken” about the recent cuts.” Clinton said, “I think this is the wrong economic decision. I know it’s the wrong environmental decision. I think it’s the wrong cultural decision. I mean, this is supposed to be a time in which he honor the native-born over immigrants. The only true native-born Americans are the tribal people who live in the area protected, who all oppose this” 

## Pilfered Artifacts, Three Suicides And The Struggle Over Federal Land In Utah. 

The Washington Post (12/5, Swenson) reports on a raid carried out on June 10, 2009 in Blanding, Utah that “would prove to be the match igniting long-simmering tensions across the region.” For Native American groups, Operation Cerberus was “the first step in a much-needed crackdown on looting in a unique archaeologically-rich region.” However, “for others the handling of the operation became yet another example of federal overreach – one that continues to impact the region today and now is reflected in the Trump Administration’s policies.” 

## While U.S. Senate Pushes Alaska Wildlife Refuge Drilling, Industry Looks Elsewhere. 

Reuters (12/5, Rosen) reports that while the Senate moves to allow oil drilling in the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge, the energy industry is more interested in the BLM’s auction for 10 million acres in the National Petroleum Reserve. Industry supporters say NPR-A development could yield barrels much more quickly than drilling in the Alaska’s remote frontiers. Executive director of the Alaska Oil and Gas Association Kara Moriarty said, “NPR-A has the potential to fulfill short-term oil and gas needs for the state. ... It’s right next to currently producing fields.” She said that even if the ANWR is opened to drilling, it would take 10-15 years before any oil is produced. 

## Wildfires Ravage Southern California. 

NBC Nightly News (12/5, lead story, 2:45, Holt) reported that 30,000 residents have evacuated areas throughout Southern California as wildfires have rampaged through the region. Winds that have fed the flames “are expected to peak Thursday morning at some 70 miles an hour.” Hundreds of buildings are feared to have been destroyed. ABC World News Tonight (12/5, lead story, 3:05, Muir) reported that the fires have destroyed over 45,000 acres. The largest fire is threatening Ventura County, home to 100,000 residents. Additionally, firefighters have “had to let some homes burn because they didn’t have enough water pressure in some of the hydrants.” ABC World News Tonight (12/5, story 3, 1:05, Muir) also reported that wind gusts of up to 40 miles per hour could hit Los Angeles and San Diego on Thursday morning, exacerbating the already dangerous conditions. Finally, ABC World News Tonight (12/5, story 2, 2:00, Muir) reported that three fires are currently burning simultaneously in Southern California: the Santa Ana fire, the Ventura County fire, and the Thomas Fire. The CBS Evening News (12/5, lead story, 2:15, Glor) reported that the extreme conditions are projected to last “through at least Friday morning” in Ventura County. The CBS Evening News (12/5, story 2, 1:45, Evans) also reported that the Sylmar Fire in the Los Angeles area stretches 11,000 acres and is still growing. Winds on Tuesday night were expected to decrease to 20-30 miles per hour with up to 50 miles per hour gusts. The Los Angeles Times (12/5, Vives, Nelson, Parvini, Hamilton, Kohli) reports that “at least 150 structures – including at least one large apartment complex and the Vista Del Mar Hospital, a psychiatric facility – were consumed by flames.” As of 5 p.m. Tuesday, the Thomas fire was moving west and was 0% contained. “The burn area is pretty much all the mountains between Ventura and Ojai and extending east to Santa Paula,” said Ventura County Sheriff’s Sgt. Kevin Donoghue of the Ventura fire. “It’s a challenge because of the enormity of it, and it’s a challenge because it’s pretty rugged terrain.” The New York Times (12/5, A1, Medina, Stack, Bromwich) reports that the Thomas Fire spread to 10,000 acres between the time the sheriff’s office received initial reports at 6:24 p.m. on Monday and midnight. Los Angeles Mayor Eric Garcetti “said the weather stoking the fire in Los Angeles County would probably continue for the next five days.” “We have lost structures; we have not lost lives,” said Garcetti. “Do not wait. Leave your homes.” 

# Bureau Of Indian Affairs 

## Incumbents Lead Nooksack Election Results Amid Allegations Of Fraud. 

The Seattle Times (12/5, Shapiro) reports that “allegations of fraud and irregularities already cloud the outcome of a long-awaited Nooksack tribal-council election.” Preliminary results “show victory for four incumbents in favor of kicking out hundreds of members.” On Monday, Seattle attorney Gabriel Galanda, “who has long represented those facing disenrollment,” filed a challenge to the results with the tribal election board. Galanda “said he also plans to lodge a protest with the Bureau of Indian Affairs.” Meanwhile, the Seattle Times (12/5, Shapiro) reports that “even before the feds sign off on election results for the Nooksack tribe, the chairman said he will move ahead with a renewed attempt to kick out some 300 people he says are not rightfully tribal members.” Nooksack tribal chairman Bob Kelly “said he plans to start a new round of disenrollment hearings this week.” 

## Omaha Tribe Mismanaged $13.9 Million In Federal Flood-assistance Grants, Audit Finds. 

The Omaha (NE) World-Herald (12/5, Hammel) reports that “a recent audit slammed the Omaha Tribe for mismanaging $13.9 million in federal flood-assistance grants, and for ‘contracting with itself’ to generate ‘artificial profits’ that covered its required matching funds.” The Department of Homeland Security’s Office of Inspector General “said that the tribe’s accounting and record-keeping were so ‘unreliable and in such disarray’ that it should receive no further funds from the Federal Emergency Management Agency until it can show that repair work was done, and done at a reasonable price.” The inspector general’s report added that “the tribe’s poor record-keeping has been a long-running problem that resulted in sanctions by the Bureau of Indian Affairs from 2011 to 2013.” 

## 9th Circ. Gives Navajo Partial Win In Waters Rights Suit. 

Law360 (12/5, Lidgett) reports that “a Ninth Circuit panel on Monday gave the Navajo Nation a partial win in its water rights suit against the U.S. Department of the Interior, ruling that a district court’s dismissal of its breach of trust claim was not warranted, and sent the claim back to the lower court to consider it on its merits.” 

## Wis. Tribe Seeks Quick Win In Gambling Compact Spat. 

Law360 (12/5, Posses) reports that “the Forest County Potawatomi Community on Monday asked a D.C. federal judge to vacate a Bureau of Indian Affairs decision rejecting an amendment to the tribe’s state gambling compact, arguing that the ruling was based largely on the incorrect conclusion that the proposal imposed payment obligations on a rival tribe.” 

# Bureau Of Land Management 

## Oil Companies Clamping Down On Methane Leaks. 

The Houston Chronicle (12/5, Osborne) reports the American Petroleum Institute announced a voluntary program to reduce methane emissions “even as the Trump administration takes steps to roll back existing environmental regulations targeting those emissions.” Starting next year 26 companies will implement standards that include “employing advanced leak detection technology and replacing older equipment prone to leaks across their U.S. operations.” However, “the announcement did little to assuage criticism of the oil and gas industry for its longstanding fights against climate change regulation, which included fighting the Obama administration’s methane efforts.” Reuters (12/5, Gardner) reports the API launched a voluntary program to cut methane emissions from oil and gas operations. Twenty-six companies agreed to the initiative, including Shell, XTO Energy and Pioneer Natural Resources. The firms will look to reduce emissions by plugging leaks, reducing venting at aging wells, and replacing or retrofitting pneumatic controllers. Bloomberg News (12/5, Dlouhy) reports program participants will provide information on their efforts to the API annually, and then the trade group will release a yearly report containing aggregated information. Also reporting are The Hill (12/5, Henry), Axios (12/5, Harder), Breaking Energy (12/5, Ratner, Nelson), Reuters (12/5, Gardner), PennEnergy (12/5, Snow), and Natural Gas Intelligence (12/5, Bradley). 

## Trump Admin Takes BLM Methane Fight To Appeals Court. 

E&E Publishing (12/5, Gilmer) reports that the Trump Administration is appealing a federal district court’s ruling in October regarding the Obama-era methane emissions oil and gas industry standards. The legal dispute will have large “implications for both wonky administrative law issues and oil and gas operations across the United States’ public and tribal lands.” The dispute centers around whether the Department of the Interior breached the scope of its authority in using a Administrative Procedure Act measure “to postpone parts of the Bureau of Land Management’s methane venting and flaring rule.” The Hill (12/5, Cama) reports that Judge Laporte ruled that agencies can delay a regulation’s “effective date” but cannot delay its “compliance date.” The Department of Justice attorneys that are representing the Department of the Interior “filed a brief notice in the District Court for the Northern District of California late Monday, saying they are asking the Court of Appeals for the 9th Circuit to review and overturn the ruling.” 

## Budd-Falen: Provocateur Or Protector? 

The WyoFile (12/5, Thuermer) reports that “the prospect of Karen Budd-Falen’s appointment to lead the Bureau of Land Management elicits strong reactions across the political spectrum.” Conservationists and environmentalists are concerned that Budd-Falen “would bring a long career of anti-regulatory antagonism to the agency headquarters.” On the other hand, “the ranching community, rural western politicians and multiple-use advocates...view Budd-Falen as a fearless legal champion who’s spent a career fighting for the common man, struggling under the heel of a distant and oppressive federal government.” Meanwhile, “a third view holds that Budd-Falen, who specializes in western land-use conflicts, zealously represents her clients but is tarred with too broad a brush.” 

## Critics Sue Over Mine Exploration Near Alaska Eagle Preserve. 

The AP (12/5, Joling) reports that “an Alaska Native tribe and three environmental groups sued the U.S. government, claiming an agency granted mineral exploration permits without considering how a mine could affect a major salmon river and bald eagle preserve.” According to the article, “the lawsuit filed Monday by the Chilkat Indian village of Klukwan calls for revocation of the permits granted to Constantine Metal Resources Ltd. upstream of the Chilkat River near the port of Haines in southeast Alaska.” The lawsuit claims the Bureau of Land Management “issued permits after considering the effects of exploration but not of a mine.” Also reporting are KTOO-FM Juneau (AK) Juneau, AK (12/5, Collins) and Law360 (12/5, Posses). 

## Grazing Slowly Returns To Land Scorched By 2015 Soda Fire. 

The Salem (OR) Capital Press (12/5, Ellis) reports that “Idaho and Oregon ranchers have just recently started to resume grazing their cattle on some of the 279,000 acres of prime range land scorched two years ago by the Soda Fire.” The article notes that “as part of BLM’s post-fire restoration plan, ranchers were not allowed to graze their animals on those allotments for at least two growing seasons following the blaze.” According to Peter Torma, BLM’s Soda Fire project manager, “grazing has resumed this fall on 48 affected pastures and BLM officials expect to make decisions on the remaining 36 pastures by the end of December.” 

## BLM Expands Brewery Flats Outdoor Lab For Junior-high School Students. 

KRTV-TV Great Falls, MT (12/5) reports that the Bureau of Land Management in partnership with Lewistown Junior High School has expanded the use Brewery Flats as an outdoor classroom. BLM Lewistown Field Manager Pete McFadden said, “By partnering with the BLM, the Lewistown Public Schools continue to expand the learning opportunities afforded their students, and the BLM continues to support the local community by helping educate the next generation of public land users and managers. Connecting kids to public lands connects them to America’s natural and cultural heritage.” 

# Bureau Of Reclamation 

## Columbia River Wild Salmon Runs Face Regulatory Hurdles, Political Indifference. 

Forbes (12/6, Holden) reports that the Trump Administration is being urged to approve a management plan for Columbia River wild salmon. However, “it may be a tough sell at a time when the Trump administration seems intent on cutting back its support for public resources, from fish to National Parks.” The article notes that “the situation on the Columbia River is perilous: the salmon--which provided a steady diet for Native American tribes for centuries--have fallen victim to a string of mammoth hydroelectric dams.” Moreover, “tThe fate of the remaining Columbia River salmon is complicated by tensions between recreational fishermen, commercial gill-netters, and Native American tribes (whose treaty rights to half the fish was reaffirmed by a federal judge in 1974).” 

## Idaho Ancient Bison Fossils Now Available In 3-D At ISU. 

The Idaho State Journal (12/5) reports that “the Bureau of Reclamation and the Idaho Museum of Natural History (IMNH), which is located on the Idaho State University campus in Pocatello, have partnered to make fossils more available to the public.” Beginning Tuesday, “the 3-D scan models of Bison latifrons specimens are available online to view, download, and print in 3-D.” Jenny Huang, an archaeologist with Reclamation’s Snake River Area Office, said, “The 3-D scanning of the objects is fantastic in and of itself, but by placing the 3-D scans onto an interactive website and making those scan files downloadable, we can get them out to the broader public. We are proud to be able to take our museum property management to the next level by making the collection available to everyone.” 

# Bureau Of Safety And Environmental Enforcement 

## Remembering The BP Oil Spill, A Disaster Of Historic Proportions. 

The New Orleans Times-Picayune (12/5, Pope) reports that a survey of scientists performed by the Associated Press shows that “the Gulf was less healthy than it was before” Transocean’s Deepwater Horizon “calamity, but scientists were mixed on the spill’s long-term impacts on the Gulf’s ecosystem.” The spill has spurred changes to drilling operations as “spill cams” are now being used on the ocean’s seabed. 

# Fish And Wildlife Service 

## House Moderates Opposes Allowing Arctic Oil Drilling In Tax Bill. 

McClatchy (12/5, Daugherty) reports that some moderate House of Representative Republicans sent “a letter to Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell urging the upper chamber to pass a tax bill without oil-drilling concessions in the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge.” The letter stated that “for decades, Congress has voted to prohibit oil and gas development in the Refuge, with the overwhelming support of the American public.” The letter added, “support for this protection remains strong today. After years of debate, the Arctic Refuge stands as a symbol of our nation’s strong and enduring natural legacy.” The letter was not successful as the plan was passed by the Senate. The Adirondack (NY) Daily Enterprise (12/5, Cerbone) reports that “Northern New York Congresswoman Elise Stefanik publicly opposed drilling for oil and gas in Alaska’s Arctic National Wildlife Refuge on Friday after advertisements from the Wilderness Society targeted her and 12 other Republican congresspeople, asking them to vote against the Senate’s GOP tax bill including a rider for Arctic drilling.” 

## Wildlife Officials Say White-Tailed Prairie Dog In No Danger. 

The AP (12/5) reports that U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service officials “say the white-tailed prairie dog does not need special protections under the Endangered Species Act because it’s in no danger of extinction across the U.S. West.” Tuesday’s announcement “culminates a lengthy review of the squirrel-sized rodent’s legal status.” Reuters (12/5, Zuckerman) reports that “the decision was a victory for energy companies and ranchers who could have seen increased restrictions on lands that are open to oil and gas development and livestock grazing.” 

## 2018 Plan For Mexican Wolves Calls For Fostering Of Pups. 

The AP (12/5, Bryan) reports that “U.S. wildlife officials have a plan for fostering as many as a dozen captive Mexican gray wolf pups with wild packs in Arizona and New Mexico in 2018.” The aim of the proposal released by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service is t”o boost genetic diversity among the endangered species.” The Albuquerque (NM) Journal (12/5, Hayden) adds that “the plan also provides for the translocation of wolves who stray outside the experimental range or which may be at risk of mating with closely-related wolves in the area.” 

## Federal Wildlife Managers Clear Way For Walmart In Vanishing South Florida Forest. 

The Miami Herald (12/5, Staletovich) reports that “federal wildlife managers on Tuesday cleared the way for a Walmart-anchored strip mall in one of the world’s rarest forests, a tract of vanishing pine rockland inhabited by butterflies, bats, snakes and fragile wildflowers found no place else.” According to the article, “in approving a conservation plan, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service officials said they do not expect the sprawling box store and mall, a parking lot or 900 apartments to threaten the survival of more than 20 endangered plants and animals — including the Miami tiger beetle — that live in the pineland.” The plan “divides what was once about 90 acres of forest scattered across 138 acres near Zoo Miami into two 20-plus acre preserves connected by a pathway, with the mall and apartments at the center.” The article notes that “the plan differs little from the proposal submitted by a Palm Beach County developer two years ago, despite more than 3,000 comments filed by critics with the agency during the review.” 

# National Park Service 

## Pearl Harbor Remembrance Day 2017: What Happened On That Fateful Day 76 Years Ago? 

USA Today (12/5, Diebel) reports that on Thursday, a ceremony will be held at the World War II Valor in the Pacific National Monument to mark the 76th anniversary of the attack on Pearl Harbor. According to the article, “in attendance will be Pearl Harbor survivors, World War II veterans, family members and dignitaries.” 

## NPS Predicts Annual Budget Around $1 Million For Ste. Genevieve Proposal. 

The Ste. Genevieve (MO) Herald (12/6) reports that the National Park Service “still anticipates having six to 12 full-time employees on site of a national historical park proposed for Ste. Genevieve with operating costs of between $800,000 and $1.2 million per year, according to written testimony provided this month to the House Natural Resources Subcommittee on Federal Lands by Sue Masica, acting deputy director of the NPS in the U.S. Department of the Interior.” According to the article, “Masica made brief comments about the four bills that were on the agenda for the November 15 subcommittee hearing but a longer written statement was submitted to Congress.” Rep. Jason Smith, the bill’s sponsor in the House, “and city of Ste. Genevieve Mayor Paul Hassler spoke in support of the bill, H.R. 2888, to establish a national historical park in Ste. Genevieve.” 

## Work Begins At Carlsbad Caverns To Replace Elevators. 

The AP (12/6) reports that “the primary elevators that take visitors below ground at Carlsbad Caverns National Park are being modernized as part of a project that began this week at the southern New Mexico tourist destination.” The National Park Service “announced the start of work Tuesday, saying it will include installing new motors and elevator cars as well as repairing and installing guide rails.” The work is “expected to be done by the end of May 2018 at a cost of about $4.7 million.” 

## Ioniq Hybrids Donated To National Park Service, Hyundai Says. 

The Fountain Valley (CA) Patch (12/5, Ludwig) reports that “six Ioniq Hybids by Hyundai were donated to the National Parks Service, it was announced on Tuesday by the Fountain Valley, CA automobile manufacturer.” According to the article, “two Ioniqs were given to each park—Blue Ridge Parkway in Virginia and North Carolina, Santa Monica Mountains National Recreation Area in California, and National Capital Parks (East) in Washington, D.C.” Reginald Chapple, division chief, Partnerships & Philanthropy, National Park Service, said, “The National Park Service is grateful to Hyundai for this donation, which reflects the long-standing tradition of private sector support for national parks and the National Park Service.” 

## Yosemite National Park To Deploy Proterra Electric Buses. 

Next-Gen Transportation (12/5, Bebon) reports that “electric bus maker Proterra has announced that Yosemite National Park will add two Proterra Catalyst buses to its fleet.” Yosemite is the first national park to “permanently add zero-emission buses to its shuttle fleet, offering its visitors a modern, ecologically friendly transportation option, according to Proterra.” 

## Arches National Park Celebrates End Of Massive Road Project With Free Entry This Weekend. 

The Salt Lake (UT) Tribune (12/5, Wharton) reports that Arches National Park will “waive entrance fees Saturday and Sunday to celebrate the recent completion of a monthslong road project that inconvenienced visitors and caused closures much of 2017.” The project took nine months to complete and “replaced roads that were built in the late 1950s and early 1960s.” According to the article, “the $16 million worth of road work included the resurfacing, restoration and rehabilitation of approximately 23 miles of roads and pullouts, including those along the entrance (U.S. 191) and main roads, in the campground and other spurs and loops.” 

## Plans To Rehab Old Negro League Baseball Park Taking Shape. 

MLive (MI) (12/5, Burns) reports that “officials are making moves toward a plan to renovate the historic Hamtramck Stadium, a still-standing relic from a past when sports were segregated by race.” Hamtramck “hired Smith Group JJR for $76,900-plus to create a pre-development plan as a precursor to any construction, city planners announced Monday.” Hamtramck “received a $50,000 National Parks Service African American Civil Rights grant to offset the bulk of the cost.” 

## When ‘Star Wars’ Came To California: Documents Reveal History Behind Original Film. 

MarketWatch (12/5, Cherney) reports that through the Freedom of Information Act, Marketwarch was able to “discover a bit about what the U.S. government knew about the original ‘Star Wars’ trilogy.” Director George Lucas received approval from the National Park Service to film in Death Valley National Park. Documents “include several photographs from production, as well as permit applications, a pamphlet that offers parkgoers a guided tour of the filming locations and a letter to the California Highway Patrol outlining how the production planned to film one of the scenes.” Additional coverage was provided by the San Francisco Chronicle (12/5, Pereira). 

## Public Comment Sought On Refinery Proposed Near Theodore Roosevelt National Park. 

The Bismarck (ND) Tribune (12/5, Dalrymple) reports that on Tuesday the North Dakota Department of Health said it will be accepting public comments over a proposed refinery near the Theodore Roosevelt National Park. The comments period starts Friday and a public hearing will be held in January. Meridian Energy Group has proposed the project and is likely to meet with the North Dakota PSC on the project’s plans on December 19. 

# Office Of Insular Affairs 

## Interior Releases $14.9 M In Guam Compact Aid. 

The Pacific News Center (12/6, Kaye) reports that the Office of Insular Affairs has “released close to 15-million in Guam Compact Aid, a bit more than mandatory funding last year for FAS migrant costs on Guam, but still not what Guam officials argue they’re spending.” According to the article, “the $14.9 million in mandatory Compact Impact funding will be split between GovGuam general operations and the Guam Department of Education School Leaseback Program.” 

## US Senator Plans Legislation To Limit Trust Fund Spending. 

Marianas Variety (12/5, Johnson) reports that “in response to appeals from Bikini Atoll leaders, the U.S. Interior Department disengaged from oversight of a dwindling U.S.-provided trust fund last month.” On Friday, “just days after the Interior Department policy change,” Sen. Lisa Murkowski “weighed in, saying spending from the trust fund must be controlled to ensure its longevity.” In a letter to Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke, Murkowski “rebuked Interior for the unilateral decision to wash its hands of trust fund management that she said she learned of ‘via a press release.’” 

## Congressional Delegation Tours St. Croix To Assess Hurricane Damage. 

The Virgin Islands Consortium (VIR) (12/4) reports that “with more congresspeople visiting the USVI in an effort to determine the kind of aid that should be given the territory following Hurricanes Irma and Maria, Governor Kenneth Mapp continues to push for help, telling a U.S. House Committee on Energy and Commerce who visited St. Croix on Sunday that the territory requires the help of Congress in order to rebuild a stronger and more resilient infrastructure.” Mapp “told the congressional leaders that more resources are required than provided for under current laws.” He said, “If there is one thing I ask, it’s that you seriously consider amending the Stafford Act. We don’t just need to rebuild, we need more mitigation and to rebuild for the future.” 

Pallone Holds Roundtable After Trip To Puerto Rico, Virgin Islands. My Central Jersey (12/4) reports that Rep. Frank Pallone Jr. “met with local advocates and leaders Monday in the city to discuss his Energy and Commerce Committee Delegation weekend trip to Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands.” Pallone sought comments “from the advocates on the ongoing post-Hurricane Maria recovery.” According to the article, “Pallone’s concerns include access to clean drinking water, the restoration of reliable power and the rebuilding of the electric grid, access to healthcare, and ensuring proper use of government funds.” Mapp Plans To Incinerate 35 Percent Of Debris. The Virgin Islands Daily News (12/5) reports that “in his hurricane recovery briefing Monday night, Gov. Kenneth Mapp said he is telling the Army Corps of Engineers to begin burning vegetation debris.” Mapp said he is following “the advice of his debris management team — Agriculture Commissioner Carlos Robles; Waste Management Authority Director Roger Merritt; Planning and Natural Resources Commissioner Dawn Henry; and Public Works Acting Commissioner Nelson Petty.” Mapp “said the first permit for incineration will be issued this week and he expects a second permit to be given by the end of the week.” 

## House Panel: Proposal To ‘gGet Back’ American Memorial Park Requires Legal Review. 

Marianas Variety (11/29, Villahermosa) reports that “the chairman of the House Committee on Federal and Foreign Affairs said the proposal that the CNMI should acquire the American Memorial Park will require a thorough legal review as it involves the islands’ Covenant with the U.S.” According to Rep. Gregorio Sablan Jr., chairman of the House committee, “there is a current agreement between the U.S. Department of the Interior and the CNMI government to lease the property to the federal government so it will be managed by the U.S. National Park Service.” In a Tuesday meeting, “the committee decided not to take action on the resolution.” 

## House OKs CW-1 Resolution. 

The Saipan (MNP) Tribune (12/5, Sablan) reports that the House of Representatives has unanimously passed “a joint resolution that seeks to have the CW-1 program extended past its 2019 expiration.” House Joint Resolution 20-07 now heads to the Senate for consideration. 

## UN Votes To Nullify Israeli Jurisdiction Over Jerusalem. 

DAWN (PAK) (12/3, Haider) reports that “the United Nations General Assembly voted on Thursday to adopt the draft resolution ‘Jerusalem’ entailing ‘that any actions by Israel, the occupying power, to impose its laws, jurisdiction and administration on the holy city of Jerusalem were illegal and therefore null and void’.” The action “came after reports that the Trump administration was actively considering relocating its embassy to Jerusalem.” The article notes that “an overwhelming 151 states voted in favour of adopting the resolution, while six states — Canada, Federated States of Micronesia, Israel, Marshall Islands, Nauru, the United States — voted against the resolution.” Additional coverage was provided by Egypt Today (12/6, Maguid). 

## President Moon Calls For Enhanced Ties With Pacific Island Nations. 

The Korea Herald (12/5) reports that South Korean President Moon Jae-in “called for efforts to expand his country’s cooperation with Pacific island countries Tuesday to jointly tackle climate change and other various global issues.” Moon “had a brief meeting with foreign ministers from 13 Pacific island countries, including Papua New Guinea, Tuvalu, Nauru and Vanuatu, at the presidential office Cheong Wa Dae.” The diplomats visiting “for the third South Korea-Pacific Islands Forum foreign ministers’ dialogue.” 

## Okeanos Marianas To Represent NMI At Yap Summit. 

The Saipan (MNP) Tribune (12/1, Bautista) reports that “for the first time in eight years, the CNMI will be represented at the annual Yap Canoe Festival at the Yap Living History Museum in Colonia.” According to Okeanos Sustainable Sea Transport LTD. managing director Emma Perez, “the Okeanos Marianas will represent the Commonwealth in this year’s event.” 

## Air Niugini To Upgrade Services To Cairns, Chuuk And Pohnpei. 

Papua New Guinea Today (12/5) reports that “Papua New Guinea’s Airline, Air Niugini will be upgrading its services to Cairns, Australia and Chuuk and Pohnpei in the Federated States of Micronesia (FSM) to cater for demand during the peak period.” According to Air Niugini Chief Executive Officer Simon Foo, “ANG will be operating Boeing 737-800 series aircraft instead of the scheduled Fokker 100 and F70 aircraft.” Foo explained, “This is to cater for passenger demand during the peak period as there are more seats on the B737, combined with an extra leg room for passenger convenience. There will also be upgraded business class seats on offer for passengers who wish to take those seats.” 

## Australia’s Coal-fired Diplomacy Burns Pacific Friends. 

In a piece for the Interpreter (AUS) (11/25, Morgan), Wesley Morgan writes that Australia’s “promotion of coal exports directly undermines the security of Pacific island countries.” A new Foreign Policy White Paper “acknowledges climate change presents a serious threat to small island states and the coming decade will see an increased need for international disaster relief for Pacific island countries.” However, “the paper also suggests Australia’s economic interests remain tied to coal, the world’s dirtiest fossil fuel and a chief driver of climate change.” 

## Additional Coverage: U.S. ‘Dome’ Of Nuclear Waste In Enewetak Atoll Wreaking Havoc On Indigenous People. 

Additional coverage of the threat posed by a nuclear waste site located in Enewetak Atoll, west of the Marshall Islands, was provided by teleSUR (VEN) (12/3). 

# Office Of Surface Mining 

## Interior Won’t Say What It’s Doing With Coal Health Study. 

Bloomberg BNA (12/5, Lee) reports that the Trump Administration isn’t “sharing any details about its review of a coal mining study it halted three months ago.” According to the article, “Democrats and environmentalists are becoming increasingly concerned about why the Interior Department remains silent about the National Academy of Sciences study, initiated under President Barack Obama to look into the potential link between coal mining in Appalachia and the health of people living nearby.” Critics “castigated Interior’s ongoing silence as a notable example of poor government.” 

# US Geological Survey 

## Agencies Working On Flood Warning Improvements In WV. 

The Charleston (WV) Gazette-Mail (12/5, Ward) reports that “state and federal agencies are working on a proposal they hope will lead West Virginia lawmakers to better fund a network of stream gauges that are important links in the state’s flood warning system, lawmakers were told Tuesday.” According to the article, “officials from the state Division of Homeland Security and Emergency Management and the West Virginia Conservation Agency told a legislative interim committee that they would have a proposal prepared in time for the committee’s next monthly meeting in January, just before the state of the 2018 regular session.” The article notes that “the current year’s cost of the stream gauge network is about $1.8 million, with more than three-quarters of that coming from the U.S. Geological Survey and other federal agencies.” 

## Additional Reading. 

Researchers Trying To Determine How Much Hampton Roads Is Sinking. Hampton Roads (VA) Virginian-Pilot (12/5, Adhikusuma). 

ESPA Groundwater Users Face Flow Meter Deadline. Salem (OR) Capital Press (12/5, O'Connell). 

# Opinion Pieces 

## The Right Move On Monuments. In an editorial, the Wall Street Journal (12/5) welcoming President Trump’s decision to reduce two national monuments in Utah. The Journal says the move brings an end to federal overreach and restores power to local citizens., 

## Time For Trump To Follow Through On Coal Promises In Arizona. 

In an op-ed for The Hill (12/5, Bearson), Darren Bearson, the president of Compass Point Strategies, supports keeping the Navajo Generating Station “open long into the future.” Bearson argues that “in Arizona and around the nation, a diverse power grid is essential to energy reliability.” Bearson points to an analysis released early last month by Quanta as “perhaps the most sobering perspective yet of the potential impact of closure.” According to Bearson, “becoming overly reliant upon a fuel like natural gas weakens the grid because it removes the most reliable and available resource of all from the pool and opens the door to conditions like those outlined in the Quanta study: blackouts, brownouts and looming questions about the stability of the grid.” 

## Additional Reading. 

Monuments Executive Order: Not The First Time. National Review (12/5, Regan). 

America’s Worst Idea: Donald Trump’s Dismantling Of Our Natural Heritage. Huffington Post (12/5, Sierra). 

Trump Admin Makes An Odd Argument While Giving Away Federal Land. MSNBC (12/5, Benen). 

Commentary: Trump’s Action To Cut Bears Ears Is A Historic Injustice. Salt Lake (UT) Tribune (12/6, Bowekaty, Filfred). 

Editorial: Our Shrinking National Monuments. San Francisco Chronicle (12/6). 

Trump Gives Away Public Lands To Special Interests. Sacramento (CA) Bee (12/5, Morrill). 

A Monumental Mistake. Eugene (OR) Register-Guard (12/6). 

This Land Is Your Land .... Newport News (VA) Daily Press (12/5). 

Don’t Count On A Utah Shale Oil Boom Despite President Trump Actions. USA Today. 

Selling This Cherished Arctic Landscape To The Highest Bidder Is A Grievous Mistake. 

The Guardian (UK) (12/5, Van Noppen). 

Upgrading The Indiana Dunes To A National Park Is A Horrible Idea. Chicago Tribune (12/6, Nagle). 

Trump’s Criticism Of Big-Game Trophy Hunting Could Help Bring Real Change. U.S. News & World Report (12/5, Pacelle). 

Congress: Use Disaster Relief To Stop Megafires. Newton (IA) Daily News (11/30, Moats). 

Michelle Carr & Robert Littiken: Battling Megafires Across Our Country Takes A Toll Here In Illinois. Southern Illinoisan (12/6, Carr, Littiken). 

Connelly: A Settlement Signals Coal’s Last Legs In Northwest. Seattle Post-Intelligencer (12/6, Connelly). 

# Top National News 

## Trump To Recognize Jerusalem As Israel’s Capital. 

Reports that President Trump is expected to announce Wednesday that the US will recognize Jerusalem as the capital of Israel cast the move as a major shift in US policy. Outlets also cast the President’s decision as being made despite warnings by leaders in the region. The New York Times (12/5, A1, Landler, Halbfinger) says the “symbolically fraught move...would upend decades of American policy and upset efforts to broker peace between Israel and the Palestinians.” Palestinian officials said Trump told President Mahmoud Abbas that the US would move the embassy to Jerusalem, but American officials “said such a move could not occur immediately for logistical reasons.” As a result, Trump is expected to sign a waiver that “would authorize the Administration to keep it in Tel Aviv for an additional six months.” Saying “many fear to inflame tensions in Middle East,” NBC Nightly News (12/5, story 2, 2:20, Holt) reported the President told the leaders of Israel, Egypt, Jordan, Saudi Arabia, and the Palestinians on Tuesday he will recognize Jerusalem as Israel’s capital. Andrea Mitchell said the move will pit the US and Israel “against most world leaders,” and was made “despite warnings from Turkey, Jordan, Saudi Arabia and all NATO allies that this could kill hopes for peace in the Middle East.” Reuters (12/5) reports Abbas, Jordan’s King Abdullah, Egyptian President Abdel Fattah al-Sisi and Saudi King Salman, “who all received phone calls from Trump, joined a mounting chorus of voices warning that unilateral US steps on Jerusalem would derail a fledgling US-led peace effort and unleash turmoil in the region.” Israel, however, welcomed Trump’s decision. Bloomberg News (12/5, Jacobs) reports that while “many details about what Trump may announce remain vague,” both Abbas and Abdullah warned Trump against it, with Abdullah saying it would “have serious implications for security and stability in the Middle East” and will “fuel the feelings of Muslims and Christians.” Saudi Arabia’s foreign ministry expressed its “deep concerns” about the potential move, while Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdogan threatened to cut off ties with Israel if Trump goes forward with the move. The Jerusalem Post (12/5) reports Palestinian officials described Trump’s move as a “death knell” to a two-state solution and “to any US role in its future diplomatic engagement with Israel.” Reuters (12/5) reports state-run media quoted the Saudi king as saying “such a dangerous step is likely to inflame the passions of Muslims around the world.” Bret Baier began Fox News Special Report (12/5) by saying Trump is preparing to “pull the trigger on a move that allies warn could inflame an already volatile Middle East,” and Wolf Blitzer said on CNN’s Situation Room (12/5) that once Trump officially announces his decision on Jerusalem, there will be a “very real threat of potentially widespread violence.” The AP (12/5, Lee, Federman) reports Trump “forged ahead Tuesday with plans to recognize Jerusalem as Israel’s capital despite intense Arab, Muslim and European opposition to a move that would upend decades of US policy and risk potentially violent protests.” Administration officials Tuesday, however, were “still debating the particulars of the president’s expected speech as they fielded a flood of warnings from allied governments.” On the CBS Evening News (12/5, story 4, 2:25, Glor), Seth Doane said “officials in the Trump Administration have said some of these moves could jump start peace,” but “it’s unclear when this might happen, if at all.” Calling the move “a momentum shift in US foreign policy,” ABC World News Tonight 

(12/5, story 4, 2:20, Muir) said “some world leaders are very concerned about this move and potential flare-up.” Martha Raddatz said as President Trump called Arab leaders, “one after another prompting new alarm. ... Egypt’s president saying a move could undermine peace opportunities. Jordan’s king saying it will provoke Muslims and Christians alike, and the Palestinian President calling it unacceptable with various Palestinian factions calling for three days of rage.” White House press secretary Sarah Sanders said the five leaders Trump spoke with Tuesday are “hardly indicative of everybody across the globe,” but Raddatz noted that “there is no other country in the world that has its embassy in Jerusalem.” The Washington Post (12/5, Morris, Eglash) likewise notes that “no other countries have their embassies in Jerusalem, with a long-standing international consensus that the city’s status should be decided in a peace deal between Israelis and Palestinians.” The Los Angeles Times (12/5, Zavis, Bennett, King) reports that asked later in the day “whether Trump had made up his mind,” Sanders said, “The President, I would say, is pretty solid in his thinking at this point.” She declined, however, “to say what he had decided, but said the president would make a statement on the policy Wednesday.” Politico (12/5, Restuccia, Toosi) says it is “unclear precisely when Trump intends to move the US Embassy,” but “White House aides said the president is determined to eventually move” it. USA Today (12/6, Korte) reports Administration officials, who spoke on condition of anonymity ahead of Trump’s official announcement, said the President would portray the move “as an acknowledgment of a historical and political fact: That Jerusalem has always been Israel’s capital city and seat of government.” CNN (12/5, Diamond, Gaouette) likewise reports on its website that the Administration cast the move as a “recognition of reality” that Jerusalem has long been the seat of the Israeli government. The Washington Times (12/5, Boyer) quotes an Administration official as saying, “It doesn’t change the status quo with respect to the holy sites. We are leaving space for the peace process to move forward.” The Wall Street Journal (12/5, Schwartz, Nissenbaum, Jones) says that by declaring Jerusalem the capital now, Trump can delay the embassy relocation while still fulfilling part of his campaign pledge. Barak Ravid Of Israel’s Channel 10 News writes for Axios (12/5) that “White House officials think Trump’s decision to follow through on his campaign promise – even if only partially – strengthens his credibility around the world as a someone who stands by his word, isn’t intimidated by threats, and doesn’t cave to international pressure.” The Washington Post (12/5, Morris, Eglash), however, reports European leaders also have urged Trump “not to make any radical changes” regarding the Jerusalem’s status. French President Emmanuel Macron “told him in a telephone call that the city’s status needed to be decided in peace talks between Israelis and Palestinians,” and German Foreign Minister Sigmar Gabriel said in an address that such a decision would have “far-reaching consequences” and could prove “counterproductive.” In addition to world leaders, NBC Nightly News (12/5, story 2, 2:20, Holt) said the Secretaries of State and Defense also cautioned Trump against the move. Asked if Secretary of State Tillerson is “on board” with the decision, spokeswoman Heather Nauert said, “He has made his position clear to the White House, and the Department of Defense has as well. But it’s ultimately the President’s decision to make. He’s in the charge.” NBC said “multiple sources [indicate] that the Vice President and UN Ambassador Nikki Haley both support the decision.” Sen. Richard Blumenthal said on CNN’s Situation Room (12/5), “Jerusalem is the capital of Israel, and I’ve long supported acknowledging that simple fact. So has Congress. ... But there have to be meaningful negotiations to advance the progress of peace.” He added that “this issue is very fraught in the Middle East. ... I’m deeply concerned about the threat of terrorist reaction and more fundamentally the reaction on the street, the reaction of the people who compose the population of our allies. I think we need to be on the alert, both here and abroad.” On CNN’s Situation Room (12/5), Rep. Denny Heck (D-WA) said, “I think it’s going to both literally and figuratively blow up the peace process in the Middle East. We know it’s a bad idea, because every ally and friend we have is telling us it’s a bad idea. But it’s specifically a bad idea for two reasons. Number one, it’s going to engender violence in the short-term. ... But the second, and more important reason, why this is a terrifically bad idea is it is tantamount to the idea of the United States getting up from the bargaining table and walking away.” Kimberly Strassel of the Wall Street Journal said on Fox News Special Report 

(12/5), “One of the sticking points always when you get to an Israeli-Palestinian negotiation is this question of Jerusalem. What this does, in moving the capital and actually taking the step, it is an acknowledgment that that is something that the Israelis are never going to budge on and that the United States backs them in. It’s also a way of highlighting that the Palestinian focus on this has been an obstruction to moving ahead in negotiations. So, there is an argument to be made that if you get it done and get it over with, you lay the groundwork to then move forward.” Mara Liasson of NPR said on Fox News Special Report (12/5), “The President will be fulfilling a campaign promise. He will be making his base very happy, conservative Christians, members of the Jewish community, but I don’t know exactly how this increases the momentum for Middle East peace deal.” A New York Times (12/5) editorial says that while Trump insists he is committed to achieving the “ultimate” Middle East peace agreement, his decision “to tip the scales toward Israel on this critical matter...almost certainly will make an agreement harder to reach by inflaming doubts about America’s honesty and fairness as a broker in negotiations, raising new tension in the region and perhaps inciting violence.” Though “some optimists think that Mr. Trump could lessen the harm of a decision on Jerusalem by making clear he will not prejudge the future of East Jerusalem or other core questions like the borders of a Palestinian state,” the Times says his “track record so far gives little evidence that he has the temperament or skill to navigate such a nuanced position.” Eliora Katz, a former Robert L. Bartley Fellow at the Wall Street Journal (12/5), writes that the symbolism of recognizing Jerusalem as the capital is not worth the instability it will likely cause in the region. 

State Department Warns Embassies Of Violence. NBC Nightly News (12/5, story 2, 2:20, Holt) reported that the State Department is “warning embassies around the world to be alert for violence” in wake of the announcement, and the CBS Evening News 

(12/5, story 4, 2:25, Glor) said the State Department is “warning US diplomats and their families to avoid Jerusalem’s Old City.” amid “fears of violence.” The CBS News (12/5, Shabad) website reports they are also banned from traveling to the West Bank, including Bethlehem and Jericho. The AP (12/5, Lee, Federman) says the “mere consideration of Trump changing the status quo sparked a renewed US security warning on Tuesday.” Reuters (12/5) also reports the warning. The Jerusalem Post (12/5) reports Israeli police and the military are “bracing for possible violence as a result of the developments.” 

## Trump Expects Tax Bill Out Of Conference “Pretty Quickly.” 

Reuters (12/5, Rampton) reports in a brief item that President Trump said Tuesday that he “expected the conference committee hammering out tax legislation in Congress will work well and get the job done fast.” Before meeting with a group of Senate Republicans, Trump told reporters, “I think something’s going to be coming out of conference pretty quickly.” The Washington Times (12/5, Boyer) reports that Trump also “referred to his lunch guests, who included frequent Trump critic Sen. Jeff Flake of Arizona, as ‘this wonderful group of Republican senators.’” Politico (12/5, Cook, Lorenzo) reports that Trump told the senators that he would “like the final deal on tax reform to move even faster than the Dec. 22 goal they’ve set, according to White House officials.” 

Despite Trump’s Claims, Polls Show That GOP Tax Bill Is Unpopular. CNBC (12/5, Pramuk) reports on its website that though Trump again said on Tuesday that the GOP tax bill is becoming “more popular,” polls show little support for the measure. New polls from Gallup and Quinnipiac show just 29% of US adults in support of the bill; Gallup had 56% disapproving, while Quinnipiac had 53% disapproving. CNN (12/5, Lang) reports on the Quinnipiac poll. 

## White House Says A Government Shutdown Is Still Possible. 

Reuters (12/5) reports that the White House on Tuesday left open the possibility that a government shutdown could still occur. White House press secretary Sarah Sanders told reporters, “It is always a possibility but it’s certainly not what we hope for.” The AP (12/5, Fram, Taylor) says Republican leaders along Senate Minority Leader Schumer and House Minority Leader Pelosi will meet with President Trump at the White House Thursday. Sanders said, “The President hopes to be able to have conversations with them to make sure that doesn’t happen.” Meanwhile, the AP reports that GOP leaders sought to address divisions within their party “over the budget and a partisan immigration clash simmered in the background.” In a move that “underscored the clout conservatives wield within the House GOP,” a planned House vote on the temporary spending measure was postponed from Wednesday to Thursday, “buying time to iron out disputes with conservatives seeking tighter budget curbs.” Bloomberg News (12/5, Wasson) describes “a rebellion” in the GOP over the stopgap measure that would expire Dec. 22, as the House Freedom Caucus threatened Monday “to block progress on President Donald Trump’s tax bill unless the group gets support to extend the spending measure to Dec. 30” According to caucus member Jim Jordan, “doing so would give conservatives more leverage over senators who want to add legislation to the stopgap bill.” The Hill (12/5, Marcos) says members of the Freedom Caucus “worry the Dec. 22 deadline would increase the possibility that lawmakers would accept a spending package with extraneous measures, such as immigration and ObamaCare, to end work and return home for the holidays.” Reuters (12/5, Morgan) reports that House Speaker Ryan said the end date of the continuing resolution “would become known when it reaches the House floor.” However, House Rules Chairman Pete Sessions “told reporters his panel would consider a continuing resolution that expires on Dec. 22.” Other Republicans “said members were still debating whether the funding would expire on Dec. 22 or on Dec. 30, after the Dec. 25 Christmas holiday.” The AP (12/5, Taylor) reports that in a bid “to get the attention of House leaders,” Freedom Caucus Chairman Mark Meadows and several members of the caucus “held back their support” during a “vote to send the all-important tax bill to a House-Senate conference committee.” The Washington Post (12/5, Kane) says that as the Freedom Caucus was “looking for a hostage to grab and knew that this one would get everyone’s attention.” The “rebellion,” the Post says, “was meant to remind...Ryan’s leadership team how little faith the conservative wing has in it to negotiate a good deal.” The Washington Post (12/5, O'Keefe, Debonis) says that while Democrats “vowed to assert maximum leverage over talks to keep the federal government open,” they “may not be in sync about what they’re fighting for.” While liberals in “urban districts and coastal states are vowing to withhold support for a must-pass spending bill if Republicans don’t resolve the legal status of young immigrants,” moderates “facing reelection in states President Trump won last year are more focused on boosting funding for children’s health programs, government-backed pensions and programs to combat opioid abuse.” While “Republicans control Congress and the White House,” they “need Democrats to keep the government operating.” However, “with different midterm election priorities in the House and Senate, Democrats are struggling to fight Republicans on a united front.” 

Schumer Downplays Possibility Of A Government Shutdown Over DACA. Schumer on Tuesday “batted down suggestions that a fight over” DACA would result in a government shutdown, The Hill (12/5, Carney) reports. Asked by reporters if Democrats will support the year-end spending bill, Schumer said, “We don’t think we’re going to get to that. There are good negotiations occurring between Democrats and Republicans to come up with a good DACA program, as well as some good border security.” 

## House Republicans Debating Duration Of Continuing Resolution. 

Reuters (12/5, Morgan) reports that on Tuesday, House Republicans discussed how long a continuing resolution to fund the government should last. The House Freedom Caucus “has pressed Republican leaders to consider a spending measure that expires on Dec. 30, eight days later than the Dec. 22 deadline that House and Senate Republicans have been discussing up to now.” 

## Trump Wants Republicans To Address Welfare Reform After Tax Bill. 

The Wall Street Journal (12/5, Radnofsky) reports that with Republicans about to complete work on tax reform legislation, President Trump wants them to tackle welfare reform next. Trump mentioned the issue during a speech in Missouri last week. While he didn’t delve into specifics, the Journal says congressional Republicans have proposed work more stringent work requirements for food stamps and cash assistance. 

## UN Official’s Visit To North Korea Sparks Hope Of Mediation. 

Reuters (12/5, Nichols, Brunnstrom) reports UN political affairs chief Jeffrey Feltman arrived in North Korea Tuesday “for a rare visit that some analysts and diplomats hope could spark a UN-led effort to defuse rising tensions over Pyongyang’s nuclear and missile programs.” During his four-day visit, Feltman is due to meet Foreign Minister Ri Yong Ho to discuss “issues of mutual interest and concern.” UN spokesman Stephane Dujarric said, “This is broadly a policy dialogue with (North Korea). I think we have to wait and see what comes out.” Another Reuters (12/5) report says Feltman “is not carrying any message from the US government...the State Department said on Tuesday.” Spokeswoman Heather Nauert told reporters, “He’s not traveling on behalf of the US government and he’s not traveling – I want to make this clear – with any kind of message from the US government.” David Ignatius writes in his Washington Post (12/5) column that the confrontation with North Korea is “nearing another tense inflection point, with North Korea signaling that it could be ready for negotiations with Washington soon, even as it moves toward becoming a full nuclear-weapons power.” Pyongyang, he says, “seemingly wants negotiations with the United States, but on its own terms. Analysts speculate that to justify keeping its existing stockpile of several dozen nuclear weapons, North Korea might promise not to share its nuclear technology with others and not to attack the United States.” Washington, he argues, should be “wary of such assurances, given Pyongyang’s history of broken promises and proliferation.” 

B-1B Bombers To Join Exercise In South Korea. Bloomberg News (12/5, Sharp) reports the US will deploy B-1B Lancer bombers to the Korean Peninsula Wednesday as part of a joint exercise with South Korea, Yonhap News said, “citing an unidentified source.” The US Pacific Air Forces spokeswoman Lori Hodge issued a statement “saying it wouldn’t discuss future missions for operational security reasons.” 

# Editorial Wrap-Up 

## New York Times. 

“Does President Trump Want To Negotiate Middle East Peace?” A New York Times (12/5) editorial says that while President Trump insists he is committed to achieving the “ultimate” Middle East peace agreement, his decision “to tip the scales toward Israel” by recognizing Jerusalem as Israel’s capital and moving the US embassy there “almost certainly will make an agreement harder to reach by inflaming doubts about America’s honesty and fairness as a broker in negotiations, raising new tension in the region and perhaps inciting violence.” Though “some optimists think that Mr. Trump could lessen the harm of a decision on Jerusalem by making clear he will not prejudge the future of East Jerusalem or other core questions like the borders of a Palestinian state,” the Times says his “track record so far gives little evidence that he has the temperament or skill to navigate such a nuanced position.” 

“Going National With Concealed Guns.” The New York Times (12/5) criticizes a proposed House bill that “would require each state to recognize the ‘concealed carry’ gun permits of all other states.” The Times opines that the bill “fits well with the fantasies of vigilante justice peddled by President Trump in last year’s campaign and enthusiastically embraced by the N.R.A.” The Times concludes by labeling the legislation as a “dangerous attempt to nationalize concealed-carry against the wishes of safety-minded states.” 

## Washington Post. 

“What A Presidential President Would Have Said About The FBI.” The Washington Post (12/5) says in an editorial that “a more presidential president...might have said” that he has “greatest respect for the men and women of the FBI and the Justice Department.” Such a president might have added, “Because I am a subject of [Special Counsel Robert Mueller]’s investigation into Russian interference in the 2016 presidential election, it would be improper for me to comment on the specifics of the special counsel’s work. But in this heated political environment, I feel it’s important to emphasize my faith in the honesty and integrity of federal law enforcement.” 

“Democrats Take A Hard Line On Harassment In Congress. Republicans, Not So Much.” 

In an editorial, the Washington Post (12/5) says, “Some credit for” Rep. John Conyers’ retirement “goes to the Democratic Party, which worked to force” him “out of office after determining” the sexual harassment allegations against him “had merit.” The Post says that Democratic leaders have been similarly tough in their handling of claims of sexual harassment against Rep. Ruben Kihuen and Sen. Al Franken. However, says the Post, “Republicans, sad to say, are sending a very different message” with their reaction to the news that Rep. Blake Farenthold “used $84,000 in taxpayer money to settle a sexual harassment claim against him from his former spokeswoman. ... Where’s the outrage? We gather it’s in the same place Republicans parked their principles when they decided that helping elect an accused child sex predator to the Senate – or giving a pass to a president who boasted about assaulting women – was okay because it served their political purposes.” 

“Two Troubling Elections Threaten The Health Of Latin American Democracies.” AWashington Post (12/5) editorial discusses the absence of a US ambassador in Honduras and lack of a State Department assistant secretary for Latin America as its president continues to erode state institutions by trying to claim victory in last week’s elections, despite indications his opponent had won. The article also mentions Bolivian Supreme Court’s ruling that President Evo Morales could run for a fourth term “despite a constitutional limitation of two terms that was upheld in a referendum last year.” The Post writes that “State was quick to criticize the power grab by the leftist Mr. Morales, but on Honduras it has been circumspect, leading some to suspect the administration is content to see Mr. Hernández retain power by any means. That would only encourage the destabilization of Honduras, along with more attempts to subvert democracy in the Western hemisphere.” 

## Wall Street Journal. 

“No Alternative, No Tax Problem.” In an editorial, the Wall Street Journal (12/5) backs a repeal of the AMT, which it calls inefficient and punitive. 

“The Right Move On Monuments.” A Wall Street Journal (12/5) editorial welcomes President Trump’s decision to reduce the size of two national monuments in Utah, saying it brings an end to federal overreach and restores power to local citizens. 

“Judging Roy Moore.” In an editorial, the Wall Street Journal (12/5) urges Alabama voters not to elect Republican Senate candidate Roy Moore, arguing that if he wins, Moore will be an albatross to GOP candidates running in the 2018 midterms. The Journal also maintains that a Moore loss would be a positive, in that it would serve as a discrediting blow to ex-White House chief strategist Steve Bannon, who is backing that candidate and has vowed to target most every GOP Senate incumbent in 2018. 

# Big Picture 

## Headlines From Today’s Front Pages. 

Wall Street Journal: 

In Wedding-Cake Case, Justices Weigh Clash Between Gay Rights And Religion Mueller Subpoenas Deutsche Bank Records Related To Trump Russia Barred From 2018 Winter Olympics Due To Doping Behind The Murdochs’ Sale Talks: Scale, Price And Family Dynamics 

New York Times: 

US To Recognize Jerusalem As Israel’s Capital, Trump Says, Alarming Middle East Leaders Trump’s Endorsement Of Roy Moore Points Up A GOP Problem: Chaos Russia Banned From Winter Olympics By IOC Weinstein’s Complicity Machine Justices Sharply Divided In Gay Rights Case The CHIP Program Is Beloved. Why Is Its Funding In Danger? Tens Of Thousands Evacuate As Southern California Fires Spread Washington Post: 

Border Arrests Drop To Historic Low, DHS Says “Very Dangerous” Fires Explode In Southern Calif. Trump’s Support For Moore Breaks Another Party Norm Besieged Conyers Ends His Long Tenure Russia Is Banned From Winter Olympics For Doping Program Trump To Order Move Of Embassy To Jerusalem 

Financial Times: 

Saakashvili Freed From Ukraine Police Van Hours After Arrest James Murdoch Tipped For Disney Role In Fox Deal Abbas And Abdullah Warn Trump Against Moving Embassy To Jerusalem Deutsche Bank Sends Trump Financial Details To Mueller Investigation 

Washington Times: 

Team Obama Attempted ‘Stealth Coup’ By Undermining Trump Severe Flu Season Expected With Less-Effective Vaccine Nearly A Century After Deadliest Pandemic How Trump Turned Tide Of Illegal Immigration In First Year: Border Crossing Hits 45-Year Low Iran Nears Completion Of ‘Shiite Crescent’ Across Middle East; Land Bridge To Pose U.S. Challenges Justice Kennedy Sees Merits From Both Sides, Likely To Swing Ruling In Case Of Same-Sex Wedding Cake Roy Moore Gets Praise From Bannon After Endorsements From Trump, RNC 

Story Lineup From Last Night’s Network News: 

ABC: California Wildfires; Trump-Israel; Russia Meddling Investigation; Roy Moore Campaign; Conyers Resigns; IOC-Russia; JFK Airport Close Call; Weather Forecast; SCOTUS-Same-Sex Marriage; Baltimore Home Explosion; Jimmy Kimmel’s Son; Police Rescue. 

CBS: California Wildfires; JFK Airport Close Call; Trump-Israel; IOC-Russia; Conyers Resigns; SCOTUS-Same-Sex Marriage; Roy Moore Campaign; FBI Agent-Hillary Email Statement; Undocumented Immigrants Arrests; BitCoin Investment; Olaf Short Movie; Mars-Round Rocks; Photographer Historian. 

NBC: California Wildfires; Trump-Israel; IOC-Russia; Russia Meddling Investigation; Conyers Resigns; Roy Moore Campaign; SCOTUS-Same-Sex Marriage; Holiday Toy Shopping; Weather Forecast; Baltimore Home Explosion; Space Pizza Delivery; Christmas Celebration. 

Network TV At A Glance: 

California Wildfires – 12 minutes, 55 seconds Trump-Israel – 7 minutes, 5 seconds Conyers Resigns – 5 minutes, 15 seconds Russia Meddling Investigation – 4 minutes, 55 seconds SCOTUS-Same-Sex Marriage – 4 minutes, 20 seconds Roy Moore Campaign – 3 minutes, 30 seconds IOC-Russia – 3 minutes, 20 seconds 

Story Lineup From This Morning’s Radio News Broadcasts: 

ABC: Trump-Israel; Russia Meddling Investigation; California Wildfires; Tax Reform Plan. 

CBS: Trump-Israel; California Wildfires; Roy Moore Campaign; SCOTUS-Same-Sex Marriage; IOC-Russia; Obama-Climate Change. 

FOX: Trump-Israel; UK-Attack Foiled; Roy Moore Campaign; IOC-Russia. 

NPR: California Wildfires; Trump-Israel; Honduras Presidential Election; Wall Street News. Washington Schedule 

## Today’s Events In Washington. 

White House: 

PRESIDENT TRUMP — Holds a Cabinet Meeting; gives a statement on Jerusalem. VICE PRESIDENT PENCE — No public schedule announced. 

US Senate: 9:30 AM Senate Aging Committee hearing on the nation’s aging workforce – Hearing on ‘America’s Aging Workforce: Opportunities and Challenges’, with testimony from AARP Foundation Litigation Senior Attorney Laurie McCann; retrained manufacturing employee Ralph Jellison; and retrained human resources employee Lisa Motta Location: Dirksen Senate Office Building, Rm 562, Washington, DC http://aging.senate.gov/ 10:00 AM Senate Judiciary Committee hearing on firearms and the National Instant Criminal Background Check System – Hearing on ‘Firearm Accessory Regulation and Enforcing Federal and State Reporting to the National Instant Criminal Background Check System (NICS)’ * Follows Las Vegas mass shooter Stephen Paddock’s use of a ‘bump stock’ (which allows semi-automatic weapons to conduct automatic gunfire), and the U.S. Air Force’s failure to report Sutherland Springs, TX, mass shooter Devin Kelley’s ‘bad conduct’ discharge to the FBI Location: Rm 226, Dirksen Senate Office Bldg, Washington, DC http://judiciary.senate.gov/ 10:00 AM Senate Homeland Security Committee hearing on ‘defending the homeland against the evolving international terrorist threat’ – Hearing on ‘Adapting to Defend the Homeland Against the Evolving International Terrorist Threat’, with testimony from Acting Assistant Secretary of Defense for Special Operations/Low-Intensity Conflict Mark Mitchell; National Counterterrorism Center Acting Director for Intelligence Lora Shiao; FBI Deputy Assistant Director for Counterterrorism Nikki Floris; and Acting Deputy Under Secretary of Homeland Security for Intelligence and Analysis Robin Taylor Location: Dirksen Senate Office Building, Rm 342, Washington, DC http://hsgac.senate.gov/ https://twitter.com/SenateHSGAC 10:00 AM Nominations hearing considers R.D. James to be Assistant Secretary of the Army for Civil Works Location: Dirksen Senate Office Building, Rm 406, Washington, DC http://epw.senate.gov/public/ 1:00 PM Bicameral Dems and families of gun violence victims speak out against ‘Arm Anyone’ concealed-carry legislation – Democrats Sens. Richard Blumenthal and Chris Murphy, along with Reps. Elizabeth Esty, Jerrold Nadler, Mike Thompson, and Sheila Lee join family members of gun violence victims from 20 states, and gun violence prevention advocates to speak out against the Concealed Carry Reciprocity Act of 2017, legislation that ‘would allow more dangerous criminals and untrained individuals to carry loaded, hidden guns in public places by forcing states with strong concealed carry laws to honor permits from states with weak or non-existent standards’. Other attendees include Newtown Action Alliance Chair Po Murray, Moms Demand Action for Gun Sense in America founder Shannon Watts, States United to Prevent Gun Violence National Director Victoria Coy, and Brady Campaign to Prevent Gun Violence President Kris Brown * Press conference is held ahead of the Fifth Annual National Vigil for All Victims of Gun Violence at St. Mark’s Episcopal Church in Washington, DC Location: House Triangle, Washington, DC http://www.blumenthal.senate.gov/ https://twitter.com/SenBlumenthal 1:00 PM ITIF releases ‘A Policymaker’s Guide to Developing a National Competitiveness Strategy’ – Information Technology and Innovation Foundation releases ‘A Policymaker’s Guide to Developing a National Competitiveness Strategy’ at a Capitol Hill event, with speakers – Democratic Sen. Chris Coons, Brookings Institution Metropolitan Policy Program Policy Director Mark Muro, McKinsey Global Institute partner Sree Ramaswamy, and George Washington University Research Professor Andrew Reamer – examining the issue of competitiveness, explaining how conventional economic advice leads policymakers astray, and offering specific steps for the federal govt to stem the recent decline in U.S. economic competitiveness Location: U.S. Capitol Visitor Center, SVC-209, Washington, DC www.itif.org https://twitter.com/ITIFdc #ITIFcompetitiveness 2:30 PM Senate Foreign Relations subcommittee hearing on countering terrorism in North Africa – Near East, South Asia, Central Asia, and Counterterrorism Subcommittee hearing on ‘Beyond ISIS: Countering Terrorism, Radicalization, and Promoting Stability in North Africa’, with testimony from State Department Ambassador-At-Large and Coordinator for Counterterrorism Amb. Nathan Sales; and Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern Affairs Joan Polaschik Location: Dirksen Senate Office Building, Rm 419, Washington, DC http://foreign.senate.gov/ 2:30 PM Business Meeting, to consider ‘S. 1870, the Securing Urgent Resources Vital to Indian Victim Empowerment (SURVIVE) Act’ Location: Dirksen Senate Office Building, Rm 628, Washington, DC http://indian.senate.gov https://twitter.com/IndianCommittee 2:30 PM Senate Environment and Public Works subcommittee hearing on cleanup following natural disasters – Superfund, Waste Management, and Regulatory Oversight Subcommittee hearing on ‘Challenges Facing Superfund and Waste Cleanup Efforts Following Natural Disasters’, with testimony from Texas Commission on Environmental Quality Chairman Bryan Shaw; University of Houston Law Center Professor Tracy Hester; and California Environmental Protection Agency Secretary Matthew Rodriquez Location: Dirksen Senate Office Building, Rm 406, Washington, DC http://epw.senate.gov/public/ 2:30 PM Senate Indian Affairs Committee legislative hearing – Legislative hearing on ‘S. 664 Navajo Utah Water Rights Settlement Act of 2017’ and ‘S. 1770 Hualapai Tribe Water Rights Settlement Act of 2017’ Location: Dirksen Senate Office Building, Rm 628, Washington, DC http://indian.senate.gov https://twitter.com/IndianCommittee 4:00 PM Annual Taste of Delaware celebration on Capitol Hill – Delaware State Chamber of Commerce Annual Taste of Delaware celebration (aka Delaware’s ‘Party on the Hill’), honorary co-hosted by Democratic Sen. Chris Coons, with 24 hospitality businesses (restaurants, bakeries, breweries, and wineries) from around the state slated to showcase their produce Location: Russell Senate Office Building, Kennedy Caucus Rm, Washington, DC www.dscc.com https://twitter.com/destatechamber 5:00 PM U.S. Capitol Christmas Tree lighting ceremony – 2017 U.S. Capitol Christmas Tree lit by House Speaker Paul Ryan * The Capitol Christmas Tree has been a tradition since 1964, and this year’s tree was chosen from Kootenai National Forest in Montana Location: U.S. Capitol, Washington, DC http://www.aoc.gov/ https://twitter.com/uscapitol 

US House: 10:00 AM House Energy and Commerce Committee markup hearing – Markup hearing on ‘H.R. 453, Relief from New Source Performance Standards Act of 2017’, ‘H.R. 350, Recognizing the Protection of Motorsports Act of 2017’, ‘H.R. 1119, Satisfying Energy Needs and Saving the Environment (SENSE) Act’, ‘H.R. 1733, To direct the Secretary of Energy to review and update a report on the energy and environmental benefits of the re-refining of used lubricating oil’, ‘H.R. 1917, Blocking Regulatory Interference from Closing Kilns (BRICK) Act of 2017’, ‘H.R. 2872, Promoting Hydropower Development at Existing Nonpowered Dams Act’, ‘H.R. 2880, Promoting Closed-Loop Pumped Storage Hydropower Act’, and a resolution regarding subcommittee membership Location: Rayburn House Office Building, Rm 2123, Washington, DC http://energycommerce.house.gov/ https://twitter.com/HouseCommerce 10:00 AM House Science subcommittee hearing on NSF Innovation Corps – Research and Technology Subcommittee hearing on ‘From Lab to Market: A Review of NSF Innovation Corps’, with testimony from National Science Foundation Assistant Director for Engineering Dr Dawn Tilbury; Stanford University Adjunct Professor of Management Science and Engineering Steve Blank; University of Maryland Associate Vice President for Innovation and Entrepreneurship Dr Dean Chang; and University of California-Santa Cruz Center for Innovation and Entrepreneurial Development Director Dr Sue Carter Location: Rayburn House Office Building, Rm 2318, Washington, DC http://science.house.gov https://twitter.com/HouseScience 10:00 AM House Natural Resources subcommittee legislative hearing – Water, Power and Oceans Subcommittee legislative hearing on ‘H.R. 4465, Endangered Fish Recovery Programs Extension Act of 2017’, with testimony from Republican Rep. John Curtis; Utah Department of Natural Resources Director of Recovery Programs Henry Maddux; The Nature Conservancy Senior Water Policy Advisor Jimmy Hague; and Colorado Springs Utilities Government and Corporate Affairs Manager Andrew Colosimo Location: Longworth House Office Building, Rm 1324, Washington, DC http://naturalresources.house.gov https://twitter.com/NatResources 10:00 AM House Financial Services subcommittee latest hearing on housing finance reform – Housing and Insurance Subcommittee hearing on ‘Sustainable Housing Finance: Private Sector Perspectives on Housing Finance Reform, Part IV’, with testimony from Alliance Bernstein Director of US Multi-Sector and Securitized Assets Michael Canter; University of Pennsylvania Wharton School Professor of Real Estate and Finance Dr Susan Wachter; Guy Carpenter & Company Managing Director Jeffrey Krohn; Arch Capital Group Global Mortgage Group CEO Andrew Rippert; and Mortgage Guaranty Insurance Corporation CEO Patrick Sinks (on behalf of U.S. Mortgage Insurers) Location: Rayburn House Office Building, Rm 2128, Washington, DC http://financialservices.house.gov https://twitter.com/FinancialCmte 10:00 AM House Workforce subcommittee hearing on workplace leave policies – Health, Employment, Labor, and Pensions Subcommittee hearing on ‘Workplace Leave Policies: Opportunities and Challenges for Employers and Working Families’, with testimony from IBM Corporation Vice President for Human Resources and Business Development Barbara Brickmeier (on behalf of U.S. Chamber of Commerce); Independent Women’s Forum President Carrie Lukas; Montgomery County Council (MD) Vice President Hans Riemer; and Safety National Vice President of Human Resources Angela Schaefer (on behalf of Society for Human Resource Management) Location: Rayburn House Office Building, Rm 2175, Washington, DC http://edworkforce.house.gov/ https://twitter.com/EdWorkforce 10:00 AM House Foreign Affairs subcommittee hearing on advancing human rights to combat extremism – Africa, Global Health, Global Human Rights, and International Organizations Subcommittee hearing on ‘Advancing Human Rights to Combat Extremism’, with testimony from Georgetown University Religious Freedom Research Project Director Dr Thomas Farr; The Institute of World Politics founder and President Dr John Lenczowski; and Islamic Society of North America Office of Interfaith and Community Alliances Senior Advisor Dr Sayyid Syeed Location: Rayburn House Office Building, Rm 2172, Washington, DC http://www.hcfa.house.gov https://twitter.com/HouseForeign 12:00 PM House expected to debate short-term govt funding extension – House of Representatives meets for legislative business, with agenda expected to include ‘H.J.Res. 123 – Continuing Appropriations Act, 2018’ and ‘H.R. 38 – Concealed Carry Reciprocity Act of 2017’ Location: Washington, DC http://www.house.gov/ 1:00 PM Bicameral Dems and families of gun violence victims speak out against ‘Arm Anyone’ concealed-carry legislation – Democrats Sens. Richard Blumenthal and Chris Murphy, along with Reps. Elizabeth Esty, Jerrold Nadler, Mike Thompson, and Sheila Lee join family members of gun violence victims from 20 states, and gun violence prevention advocates to speak out against the Concealed Carry Reciprocity Act of 2017, legislation that ‘would allow more dangerous criminals and untrained individuals to carry loaded, hidden guns in public places by forcing states with strong concealed carry laws to honor permits from states with weak or non-existent standards’. Other attendees include Newtown Action Alliance Chair Po Murray, Moms Demand Action for Gun Sense in America founder Shannon Watts, States United to Prevent Gun Violence National Director Victoria Coy, and Brady Campaign to Prevent Gun Violence President Kris Brown * Press conference is held ahead of the Fifth Annual National Vigil for All Victims of Gun Violence at St. Mark’s Episcopal Church in Washington, DC Location: House Triangle, Washington, DC http://www.blumenthal.senate.gov/ https://twitter.com/SenBlumenthal 2:00 PM Richard Gere testifies to House Foreign Affairs subcommittee hearing on Tibet – Asia and the Pacific Subcommittee hearing on ‘U.S. Policy Toward Tibet: Access, Religious Freedom, and Human Rights’, with testimony from International Campaign for Tibet Chair of the Board of Directors Richard Gere; Radio Free Asia Tibetan Service Director Tenzin Tethong; and National Endowment for Democracy President Carl Gershman Location: Rayburn House Office Building, Rm 2172, Washington, DC http://www.hcfa.house.gov https://twitter.com/HouseForeign 2:00 PM House Foreign Affairs subcommittee hearing on Brexit – Europe, Eurasia, and Emerging Threats Subcommittee hearing on ‘Brexit: A Negotiation Update’, with testimony from Heritage Foundation Margaret Thatcher Center for Freedom Director Dr Nile Gardiner; U.S. Chamber of Commerce Vice President for European Affairs and U.S.-U.K. Business Council Executive Director Marjorie Chorlins; and Brookings Institution Center on the United States and Europe Director Dr Thomas Wright Location: Rayburn House Office Building, Rm 2200, Washington, DC http://www.hcfa.house.gov https://twitter.com/HouseForeign 2:00 PM House Space subcommittee hearing on NASA’s next four large telescopes – Space Subcommittee hearing on ‘NASA’s Next Four Large Telescopes’, with testimony from NASA Associate Administrator for the Science Mission Directorate Dr Thomas Zurbuchen; Government Accountability Office Director of Acquisition and Sourcing Management Cristina Chaplain; former NASA Goddard Space Flight Center Director / former Martin Marietta Corporation President and COO A. Thomas Young; Association of Universities for Research in Astronomy President Dr Matt Mountain; and University of California-Berkeley Professor Emeritus of Astronomy Dr Chris McKee (on behalf of National Academies of Sciences, Engineering and Medicine) Location: Rayburn House Office Building, Rm 2318, Washington, DC http://science.house.gov https://twitter.com/HouseScience 2:30 PM Tom Lantos Human Rights Commission hearing on Egypt – Tom Lantos Human Rights Commission hearing on ‘Egypt: Human Rights Seven Years After the Revolution’, with witnesses – Project on Middle East Democracy Deputy Director for Research Amy Hawthorne, Coptic Solidarity President George Gurguis, former Human Rights Watch Middle East and North Africa Division Deputy Director Joe Stork, and Carnegie Endowment for International Peace Middle East Program Director Michele Dunne – presenting testimony addressing the different aspects of the human rights situation in Egypt, and offering recommendations on how the U.S. Govt can more effectively engage the Egyptian Govt on the issues Location: Rayburn House Office Building, Rm 2255, Washington, DC http://tlhrc.house.gov/ https://twitter.com/TLHRCommission 3:00 PM Congressional Black Caucus presents ‘Black Business Owners in the Green Economy’ roundtable – Congressional Black Caucus presents ‘Black Business Owners in the Green Economy’ roundtable discussion, with participants including Democratic Rep. Donald McEachin, U.S. Black Chambers President and CEO Ron Busby, Volt Energy co-founder Gilbert Campbell, Windjammer Environmental CEO Damien Hammond, NspireGreen co-founder and partner Chancee Lundy, Aldelano Corporation COO Nicole Smith, and Bithenergy CEO Robert Wallace Location: Longworth House Office Building, Rm 1539, Washington, DC https://cbc.house.gov/ https://twitter.com/OfficialCBC 3:00 PM House Rules Committee hearing – Hearing on ‘H.R. 477, the Small Business Mergers, Acquisitions, Sales, and Brokerage Simplification Act of 2017’ and ‘H.R. 3971, the Community Institution Mortgage Relief Act of 2017’ Location: U.S. Capitol, H-313, Washington, DC http://www.rules.house.gov/ https://twitter.com/RulesReps 3:00 PM Dem Rep. Nancy Pelosi’s annual Holiday Reception for the Capitol Press Corps – House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi’s annual Holiday Reception for the Capitol Press Corps * Invite only Location: U.S. Capitol, H-207, Washington, DC http://www.democraticleader.gov/ https://twitter.com/NancyPelosi 5:00 PM U.S. Capitol Christmas Tree lighting ceremony – 2017 U.S. Capitol Christmas Tree lit by House Speaker Paul Ryan * The Capitol Christmas Tree has been a tradition since 1964, and this year’s tree was chosen from Kootenai National Forest in Montana Location: U.S. Capitol, Washington, DC http://www.aoc.gov/ https://twitter.com/uscapitol 

Other: 8:00 AM International Religious Freedom conference continues – Order of St. Andrew, Archons of the Ecumenical Patriarchate International Religious Freedom conference continues, with U.S. officials, Greek Orthodox Archdiocese of America, and other Christian groups addressing the persecution of Christians in the Middle East and North Africa. Day three speakers including former White House Chief of Staff Reince Priebus and Republican Sen. Marco Rubio, before Farewell Dinner with remarks from Republican Rep. Ed Royce Location: Trump International Hotel Washington, D.C., 1100 Pennsylvania Ave NW, Washington, DC conference.archons.org https://twitter.com/OrderStAndrew 8:15 AM GOP Sen. Thom Tillis keynotes CFR symposium on ‘hacked elections’ and the ‘threat to democracy’ – ‘Hacked Elections, Online Influence Operations, and the Threat to Democracy’ Council on Foreign Relations Symposium, with speakers discussing the problems facing election cybersecurity, recommendations to protect the integrity of elections from cyber threats, how the U.S. and the tech community can respond to foreign actors’ use of online platforms to propagate disinformation and amplify specific viewpoints, and what foreign policy responses are at the U.S. disposal to respond to Russia’s interference in the 2016 U.S. election. Includes keynote from Republican Sen. Thom Tillis Location: Council on Foreign Relations, 1777 F St NW, Washington, DC www.cfr.org https://twitter.com/CFR_org #CFRLive 9:00 AM Feminist Majority ‘Women Money Power’ summit and luncheon – Feminist Majority / Feminist Majority Foundation ‘Women Money Power’ summit and 30th anniversary luncheon, honoring Democrats Sens. Dianne Feinstein and Mazie Hirono and Reps. Niki Tsongas and Maxine Waters Location: National Press Club, 529 14th St NW, Washington, DC www.feministmajority.org https://twitter.com/FemMajority 2:00 PM Bicameral Dems call on FCC to ‘rescind plan to eviscerate net neutrality’ – Democrats Sen. Ed Markey and Rep. Anna Eshoo call on Federal Communications Commission Chairman Ajit Pai to ‘rescind his proposal to eviscerate the net neutrality protections before the Commission’s vote on 14 Dec’, via press conference with former FCC General Counsel Jon Sallet Location: TBD www.markey.senate.gov https://twitter.com/MarkeyMemo 3:00 PM Global Forum on Asset Recovery Closing Session – Global Forum on Asset Recovery Closing Session and press conference, hosted by the U.S. and the UK with support from the Stolen Asset Recovery Initiative. Participants during event include Attorney General Jeff Sessions, UK Minister for Countering Extremism Baroness Williams of Trafford, Nigerian Attorney General and Minister of Justice Abubakar Malami, Sri Lankan Attorney General Jayantha Jayasuriya, Tunisian Minister of State Domains and Land Affairs Mabrouk Korchid, and Ukrainian Prosecutor General Yuriy Vitaliyovych Lutsenko Location: World Bank IFC, 2121 Pennsylvania Ave NW, Washington, DC star.worldbank.org/star/about-us/global-forum-asset-recovery-gfar https://twitter.com/returningassets #GFAR2017 6:00 PM International LGBTQ Leaders Conference opening reception – International LGBTQ Leaders Conference opening reception, with speakers including Democratic Reps. Jared Polis and Maxine Waters, Florida State Rep. Carlos Guillermo Smith, and Victory Fund and Institute President and CEO Aisha Moodie-Mills Location: AJAX, 1011 4th St NW, Washington, DC www.lgbtleaders.org https://twitter.com/VictoryFund First Lady Melania Trump and Second Lady Karen Pence to Visit Texas for Continued Hurricane Relief – First Lady Melania Trump and Second Lady Karen Pence to Visit Texas for Continued Hurricane Relief. Upon arrival to Corpus Christi, the two will participate in a meet-and-greet with first responders who are part of the Hurricane Harvey recovery effort. They will then travel to Rockport, Texas to meet with a family whose home was destroyed in the hurricane, and tour the home’s remains; see the family’s new Manufactured Housing Unit, provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, which will serve as the family’s temporary residence until they can move into a new, rebuilt home; and then visit a local elementary school, touring classrooms and speaking with faculty and students about the hurricane. The two women will conclude their day in Texas with a stop at a local food bank to meet with volunteers and help sort boxes of donations. Location: TBDc 

# Last Laughs 

## Late Night Political Humor. Stephen Colbert: “But not every Republican is throwing their support behind Moore. GOP Senator Jeff Flake just tweeted out a photo of a check for $100 to Roy Moore’s opponent, Doug Jones, with a memo line that reads, ‘Country over party.’ Wow! I can’t believe that someone still uses checks. Remind me not to get behind Jeff Flake at the grocery store.” 

Stephen Colbert: “Of course, it hasn’t been all defending pedophiles for Donald Trump. He’s also been assaulting Mother Nature. Yesterday, he signed an order slashing the size of Bears Ears and Grand Staircase-Escalante National Monuments. It’s reasonable that he doesn’t care about them. They’re just national monuments. They’re not Confederate monuments. ... But on the bright side, ‘Escalante’ is the first time he’s ever spoken Spanish.” 

Stephen Colbert: “Several Native American tribes are suing, in part because it’s estimated that Bears Ears alone holds more than 100,000 native American cultural and archaeological sites. You know, if Trump goes ahead with this plan, I’m worried that Native Americans will stop trusting the federal government.” 

James Corden: “Russia has been banned from the upcoming Winter Olympics for the use of performance-enhancing drugs. And this is nice. Russia was also banned from participating in the next presidential election.” 

James Corden: “In other news, yesterday, Donald Trump went to Utah and signed proclamations to reduce the size of two protected areas, which are basically like national parks. How dare Donald Trump steal this land from the American people, after they rightfully stole it from the Native American people!” 

James Corden: “Trump lost out on Twitter’s list of the year’s most popular re-tweets. But today, he claimed he still won in the re-tweet electoral college.” 

Jimmy Fallon: “Russia was banned from the Olympics. But Russia doesn’t mind – they said they’ll just invade some other teams.” 

Seth Meyers: “Following multiple allegations of sexual harassment, Representative John Conyers announced today that he would not seek re-election, and endorsed his son to replace him in Congress, while President Trump has endorsed his son to replace him in the Russia investigation.” 

Conan O’Brien: “Russia has been banned from the Winter Olympics. Yeah. But don’t feel bad, Russia, even though you won’t win any gold medals, you did win the US presidential election.” 

Conan O’Brien: “A new report says that Mike Pence’s wife thinks that Donald Trump is totally vile. Yeah. Coincidentally, Donald Trump’s wife thinks Donald Trump is totally vile.”  

> Copyright 2017 by Bulletin Intelligence LLC Reproduction or redistribution without permission prohibited. Content is drawn from thousands of newspapers, national magazines, national and local television programs, radio broadcasts, social-media platforms and additional forms of open-source data. Sources for Bulletin Intelligence audience-size estimates include Scarborough, GfK MRI, comScore, Nielsen, and the Audit Bureau of Circulation. Data from and access to third party social media platforms, including but not limited to Facebook, Twitter, Instagram and others, is subject to the respective platform’s terms of use. Services that include Factiva content are governed by Factiva’s terms of use. Services including embedded Tweets are also subject to Twitter for Website's information and privacy policies. The Department of the Interior News Briefing is published five days a week by Bulletin Intelligence, which creates custom briefings for government and corporate leaders. We can be found on the Web at BulletinIntelligence.com, or called at (703) 483-6100.

# Conversation Contents 

## U.S. Department of the Interior News Briefing for Wednesday, November 29, 2017 

# Bulletin Intelligence <Interior@bulletinintelligence.com> 

## From: Bulletin Intelligence <Interior@bulletinintelligence.com> 

## Sent: Wed Nov 29 2017 04:00:59 GMT-0700 (MST) 

## To: <Interior@bulletinintelligence.com> 

## Subject: U.S. Department of the Interior News Briefing for Wednesday, November 29, 2017  

> Mobile version and searchable archives available here. Please click here to subscribe.
> DATE: WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 29, 2017 6:00 AM EST

# Today's Table Of Contents 

DOI In The News 

• Reuters: Trump To Visit Utah Next Week, Expected To Announce Monument Decision. • Associated Press: Eni Receives Federal Permit For US Arctic Offshore Drilling. • Wall Street Journal: GOP Closes In On Opening Arctic Wildlife Refuge To Drilling. • E&E Publishing: Legal Challenges Mount As Clock Ticks On Elephant Decision. • Great Falls (MT) Tribune: Greater Sage Grouse Management Comment Period Extended. • Ashland (OR) Jefferson Public Radio: Utah Congressman Seeks To Re-Open Area In SW Oregon To Mining. • FedTech: Interior, VA And DOJ Chart The Way Forward On IT Reform. 

Bureau Of Indian Affairs 

• House OKs Calif. Tribe Land Deal With Feds. • DC Circ. Backs Toss Of Calif. County’s Tribal Casino Fight. 

Bureau Of Indian Education 

• Alleged Haskell Rape Victim Settles With Federal Government In Civil Lawsuit. 

Bureau Of Land Management 

• Denver Post: Senate Committee Votes To Block Killing Healthy Wild Horses. • Associated Press: Lawsuit Seeks To Block California Desert Water Project. • Associated Press: Self-Taught Rocket Scientist Eyes Monday For New Launch Date. • Ruidoso (NM) News: County Could Lose $32,020 In Federal Swap For State Trust Land. • Billings (MT) Gazette: Agencies Cooperate To Improve Fence For Wyoming Pronghorns. • Coos Bay (OR) World: Coos Bay Bureau Of Land Management Sells 3 Million Board Feet Of Timber. Bureau Of Ocean Energy Management 

• Cape Wind Fight Spins On. 

Fish And Wildlife Service 

• Associated Press: Threatened Snake Long Gone From Colorado River Re-Appears. • Joplin (MO) Globe: Neosho Fish Hatchery Awaits Ponds Completion. • Lawrence (KS) Journal World: Prairie Park Nature Center Aids In National Efforts To Save Endangered Black-footed Ferret. • New Richmond (WI) News: Erin Baillargeon Earns USFWS Volunteer Of The Year. 

National Park Service 

• Salt Lake (UT) Tribune: Have An Opinion About The Proposed Fee Hikes For Popular National Parks? The Comment Period Has Been Extended. • E&E Publishing: Experiment Puts Mall Rats On Birth Control. • Associated Press: Lawmakers Push For Historic Trail Status For Route 66. • Anniston (AL) Star: Park Service Concerned About Courthouse Sites. • Associated Press: Remains Of Ancient Sea Cow Unearthed On California Island. • Associated Press: Rocky Mountain Park To Expand Native American Representation. • Salt Lake (UT) Tribune: Utah’s Famed Bighorn Sheep Thriving In Zion National Park, So State Plans To Move Some To Bears Ears. • Ocala (FL) Star-Banner: Fort King: Reconstructed. • Santa Rosa (CA) Press Democrat: Future Of Point Reyes Cattle Ranches At Stake In National Park Service Planning Process. • Firehouse: Brian Johnson Named Structural Fire Branch Chief At National Park Service. • Oneida (TN) Independent Herald: Black Creek Fire Tower Added To National Register Of Historic Places. • St. Joseph (MO) News-Press: Benton Club On National Registry Of Historic Places. 

Office Of Insular Affairs 

• St. Thomas Source: WAPA Restores Power To 40 Percent Of Territory More Than Two Months After Hurricanes. • Radio New Zealand: Palau Under Pressure From China Over Taiwan Link. • Saipan (MNP) Tribune: CHCC Is Ready To Apply Green Cards For Its Longtime Nurses. • New Zealand Herald: Marshall Islands: Concrete Dome Holding Nuclear Waste Could Leak. • CNBC: Hawaii To Resume Cold War-era Nuclear Attack Warning Siren Tests Due To The North Korea Threat. • Marianas Variety: Governor: CW Issue Needs US Congressional Action. • Guam Daily Post: Calvo Uses Hearse To Call For Legislature To Hear $125M Borrowing, Tax Increase Proposal For GMH. • Virgin Islands Consortium (VIR): Thousands Of Jobs May Be Headed To St. Croix And Texas Following Trump Deals With Chinese Oil And Gas Giant. • Marianas Variety: More Independents Join GOP. • Virgin Islands Consortium (VIR): VI Republicans Urging Trump And GOP Not To Give Blank Check To VI Government. 

US Geological Survey 

• Washington Post: Bali Volcano Has A History Of Explosive Eruptions And Global Climate Impacts. • Daily Mail: Methane Ecosystem Found In Caves Of The Yucatan Peninsula. 

Opinion Pieces 

• The Trump Judiciary Threatens Federal Public Lands. • Additional Reading. Top National News 

> • NBC: Media Analysis: Most Powerful ICBM Yet Is North Korea’s Response To Trump. • ABC: Media Analyses: Judge’s Ruling On CFPB Head A Victory For Trump. • ABC: Trump Suggests Government Shutdown Possible After Democrats Skip Meeting. • NBC: Tax Bill Closing In On 50 Votes After Trump Meets With Senate Republicans.

Editorial Wrap-Up 

> • New York Times. - “Senate Considers Making A Terrible Tax Bill Even Worse.” • Washington Post. - “What’s One More Bad Thing In The GOP Tax Bill? Ask The Polar Bears.” - “Egypt Answers Terrorism With Familiar Incompetence.” - “Congress, Surprise Us.” • Wall Street Journal. - “A Trigger Warning On Taxes.” - “A Drama Queen Loses Her Head.” - “Fourth Amendment Showdown.”

Big Picture 

> • Headlines From Today’s Front Pages.

Washington Schedule 

> • Today’s Events In Washington.

Last Laughs 

> • Late Night Political Humor.

# DOI In The News 

## Trump To Visit Utah Next Week, Expected To Announce Monument Decision. 

Reuters (11/28, Holland, Rampton, Volcovici) reports that President Trump “is expected to announce his decision on whether to reduce the size of two national monuments” where drilling and mining are currently banned during a visit to Utah on Monday. Environmental groups and Native American tribal organizations are planning to protest Trump’s visit, and legal challenges are expected over the decision. Meanwhile, industry groups like the American Petroleum Institute “have said in the past that both Bears Ears and Grand Staircase-Escalante were unfairly designated as monuments and needed to be reviewed.” The AP (11/28) reports that Sen. Orrin Hatch’s spokesman Matt Whitlock “said Tuesday that the president accepted Hatch’s invitation to visit Utah to discuss Bears Ears and Grand Staircase-Escalante national monuments.” Hatch and Utah Gov. Gary Herbert “say Trump called them in October to announce he would approve Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke’s recommendation to downsize the two monuments protecting more than 3.6 million acres (14,600 square kilometers).” Also reporting are the Washington Post (11/28, Eilperin), the Washington Examiner (11/28, Siegel), the Salt Lake (UT) Tribune (11/29, Burr), the San Juan (UT) Record (11/28), the Deseret (UT) News (11/28, Roche), the Aspen (CO) Times (11/28, Condon), the Colorado Springs (CO) Gazette (11/28, Burr), the Westerner (11/28, DuBois), KSL-TV Salt Lake City Salt Lake City (11/28, Roch), and KNRS-FM Salt Lake City Salt Lake City (11/28). 

## Eni Receives Federal Permit For US Arctic Offshore Drilling. 

The AP (11/28, Joling) reports the Bureau of Safety and Environmental Enforcement has approved an application from Eni to drill exploratory wells in the Beaufort Sea. Drilling could begin next month from Spy Island as Eni plans to use extended-reach drilling methods to hit submerged land. BSEE’s Alaska region director Mark Fesmire said the agency conducted a thorough review of Eni’s well design, testing procedures and safety protocol before approving the plans. Reuters (11/28, Gardner) reports BSEE director Scott Angelle said developing Arctic resources is a “critical component to achieving American energy dominance.” Environmentalists criticized the move, with the legal director for oceans at the Center for Biological Diversity Kristen Monsell saying, “The Trump administration is risking a major oil spill by letting this foreign corporation drill in the unforgiving waters off Alaska.” The Hill (11/28, Henry) reports Eni already owns the leases that it is looking to explore. Angelle also said, “BSEE is committed to working with our Alaskan Native and industry partners by taking a thoughtful and balanced approach to oil and gas exploration, development and production in the Arctic.” The Washington Examiner (11/28, Siegel) reports that this is the first time in two years that the BSEE has approved drilling exploration in the Arctic Ocean. Also reporting are E&E Publishing (11/28), Offshore Engineer (11/28, Boman), E&P Magazine (11/28, Addison), the Alaska Public Radio Network (11/28, Harball), Alaska Dispatch News (11/28, DeMarban), the Spokane (WA) Spokesman-Review (11/28, Joling), CBS News, the Huffington Post (11/28, D'Angelo), and Alaska Dispatch News (11/28, DeMarban). 

## GOP Closes In On Opening Arctic Wildlife Refuge To Drilling. 

The Wall Street Journal (11/28, Puko) reports the GOP is closer to opening the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge as the tax reform bill moves to the Senate floor. Sen. Lisa Murkowski’s Committee on Energy and Natural Resources passed a bill to open ANWR drilling earlier this month and the Budget Committee approved the measure. However, the House has not passed a similar provision, but leaders from both chambers will likely negotiate over whether to include it in the final tax bill. The Seattle Times (11/28, Mapes, Bernton) reports Sen. Maria Cantwell has promised to make every effort to stop the measure. She said, “We are going to have to fight on the floor to try to stop this. ... It’s a backdoor process that only needs 51 votes. They would never get it in the normal process.” The Hill (11/28, Cama) and Vox (11/28, Irfan) also provided coverage. 

## Legal Challenges Mount As Clock Ticks On Elephant Decision. 

E&E Publishing (11/28, Doyle) reports that the Interior Department is “still struggling amid growing legal challenges to work out what to do about elephant trophy imports from Zimbabwe and Zambia.” The decision by President Trump is likely to attract legal challenges. In a suit filed this week, Friends of Animals and the Zimbabwe Conservation Task Force “challenged the Fish and Wildlife Service’s original decision earlier this month to lift the 3-year-old ban on the elephant trophy imports.” And “a reversal of the Fish and Wildlife Service’s extensively studied decision to lift the ban could invite a legal challenge from critics claiming the U-turn was ‘arbitrary and capricious’ and violated the Administrative Procedure Act.” 

## Greater Sage Grouse Management Comment Period Extended. 

The Great Falls (MT) Tribune (11/28, Dettmer) reports that “the public comment period for Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke’s Secretarial Order 3353, an order drafted to look at revisions to land management amendments for the greater sage grouse has been extended by the Bureau of Land Management to Dec. 1, 2017 —giving constituents four more days to provide feedback.” The revisions, Zinke said, are intended to “protect sage-grouse and their habitat while also ensuring conservation efforts do not impede local economic opportunities.” But “groups coming out against Zinke’s proposed amendments say the amendments brings greater sage grouse protections back to square one and undermines the work already put in by stakeholders.” 

## Utah Congressman Seeks To Re-Open Area In SW Oregon To Mining. Ashland (OR) Jefferson Public Radio (11/28, Moriarty) reports that Rep. Rob Bishop “recently sent a letter to Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke and Agriculture Secretary Sonny Perdue, urging them to review the validity of all Obama-era mineral withdrawals, and the Southwestern Oregon Mineral Withdrawal, in particular.” Under Obama, Bishop’s letter says, “millions of acres of Federal land were inappropriately withdrawn from mineral access due to false premises of environmental protectionism and the intentional misuse of statutory authority.” In response, Sens. Jeff Merkley and Ron Wyden, and Rep. Peter DeFazio “wrote a three-page letter to Zinke and Perdue, urging them to disregard what they called Bishop’s ‘flawed’ request for a review.” 

## Interior, VA And DOJ Chart The Way Forward On IT Reform. 

FedTech (11/28, Goldstein) reports that “agencies are still trying to figure out how they will respond” to the Modernizing Government Technology Act “and its promise of working capital funds to modernize IT.” To assist them “chart a course forward, the nonprofit Partnership for Public Service partnered with Accenture and released a blueprint earlier this month to spur improvements in federal technology management.” At an event in Washington earlier this month to discuss the blueprint, “several agency IT leaders discussed how they have put the ideas behind the report into practice in digital transformation initiatives.” At the Interior Department, CIO Sylvia Burns “said the agency got its senior leadership involved in discussions on how to comply with the Federal Information Technology Acquisition Reform Act.” 

# Bureau Of Indian Affairs 

## House OKs Calif. Tribe Land Deal With Feds. 

Law360 (11/28, Macagnone) reports that “the House of Representatives approved a bill Tuesday that would greenlight a land deal between the federal government and the Santa Ynez Band of Chumash Indians that has been the subject of litigation in California.” The bill from Rep. Doug LaMalfa “retroactively recognizes the U.S. Department of the Interior’s decision earlier this year to take more than 1,400 acres of land into trust for the tribe, and passed on a voice vote Tuesday.” 

## DC Circ. Backs Toss Of Calif. County’s Tribal Casino Fight. 

Law360 (11/28, Lidgett) reports that “the D.C. Circuit on Monday backed a lower court’s decision to toss a California county’s suit challenging a U.S. Department of the Interior decision supporting a proposed tribal casino, saying the tribe and the county agreed in a 1987 deal that the tribe would be treated as a federally recognized reservation.” 

# Bureau Of Indian Education 

## Alleged Haskell Rape Victim Settles With Federal Government In Civil Lawsuit. 

The Lawrence (KS) Journal World (11/28, Shepherd) reports that “the U.S. government has paid to settle a lawsuit by a former Haskell Indian Nations University student who said she was raped by two fellow students in a dorm in 2014, her attorney says.” According to court documents, “the remaining portion of Jane Doe H versus Haskell et al was closed Tuesday, after the plaintiff and the federal government agreed to dismiss it with prejudice.” Additional coverage was provided by KCUR-FM Kansas City, MO (11/28, Margolies). 

# Bureau Of Land Management 

## Senate Committee Votes To Block Killing Healthy Wild Horses. 

The Denver Post (11/28, McGhee) reports that the Senate Appropriations Committee’s “vote to block killing healthy wild horses has heartened advocates for the free-roaming mustang herds who fear the Bureau of Land Management wants to eliminate thousands to manage exploding herd populations.” The action on Nov. 20, “followed a July vote by the House Appropriations Committee that would make it possible for the Interior Department’s BLM to euthanize healthy wild horses.” According to the article, “the final decision on the animals’ future will be made during negotiations between the House and the Senate to reach a consensus on the two versions of the spending bill for the Interior Department.” 

## Lawsuit Seeks To Block California Desert Water Project. 

The AP (11/28, Jablon) reports that “environmental activists sued Tuesday to halt a plan to pump water from beneath the Mojave Desert and sell it to Southern California cities and counties.” The lawsuit takes aim at the decision by the Bureau of Land Management “allowing Cadiz Inc. to build a 43-mile pipeline to transfer the water from its desert wells into the Colorado River Aqueduct so it can be sold to water districts.” The BLM “released guidelines during the Obama administration to block construction of the pipeline along an existing federal railroad right of way, but the Trump administration reversed them this year and the project is on a priority infrastructure list.” The lawsuit claims “the new guidelines would illegally permit construction of the pipeline on public land, including the newly created Mojave Trails National Monument, ‘while circumventing laws enacted to protect human health and the environment.’” Also reporting are the Palm Springs (CA) Desert Sun (11/28, Roth), Courthouse News (11/28, Renda), and Law360 (11/28, Crosby). 

## Self-Taught Rocket Scientist Eyes Monday For New Launch Date. 

The AP (11/28, Graham) reports that a man who plans to launch himself in a rocket to prove that the earth is flat has rescheduled his experiment for Monday. Mike Hughes was “scheduled to blast off last weekend, but he didn’t have the proper permits from the Bureau of Land Management.” Hughes has “relocated his launch pad about 4 miles from its original spot so he takes off and lands on private property.” The BLM “said he still needs to fill out the permits.” However, “Hughes contends that shouldn’t be required since he’s flying on private land and has permission.” 

## County Could Lose $32,020 In Federal Swap For State Trust Land. 

The Ruidoso (NM) News (11/28, Stallings) reports that “a proposed land swap between the federal Bureau of Land Management and the New Mexico State Land Office could result in 17,215 acres in Lincoln County switching ownership and the county losing $32,030 in annual compensation dollars for nontaxable federal land.” In exchange, Deputy Land Commissioner Laura Riley “told commissioners last week the state will earn more revenue from the acreage than it did from the land that would be swapped to federal ownership in the Rio Grande Del Norte/Sabinoso Wilderness.” 

## Agencies Cooperate To Improve Fence For Wyoming Pronghorns. 

The Billings (MT) Gazette (11/28, Beckwith) reports that “the Bureau of Land Management Cody Field Office recently collaborated with the Wyoming Department of Transportation, Wyoming Game and Fish Department and Friends of a Legacy to replace the bottom strand of barbed wire with smooth wire on a fence east of Cody along State Highway 32.” The fence is on the eastern edge of the McCullough Peaks Wild Horse Herd Management Area. According to the article, “the bottom wire was also raised to 16 inches off the ground to allow pronghorn, which need space to crawl under fences, to easily pass underneath.” 

## Coos Bay Bureau Of Land Management Sells 3 Million Board Feet Of Timber. 

The Coos Bay (OR) World (11/28) reports that “the Coos Bay District of the Bureau of Land Management sold 3.2 million board feet of timber, worth $450,242.70, at an oral auction on Nov. 17.” Bureau Of Ocean Energy Management 

## Cape Wind Fight Spins On. 

The Cape Cod (MA) Times (11/28, Stening) reports that “opponents of the stalled Cape Wind project have appealed a federal agency’s decision to allow the offshore wind energy developer to maintain its long-term federal lease in Nantucket Sound, where the company had planned to build 130 wind turbines.” The notice of the appeal was filed on Nov. 21 with the Interior Board of Land Appeals. 

# Fish And Wildlife Service 

## Threatened Snake Long Gone From Colorado River Re-Appears. 

The AP (11/29) reports that “a threatened snake that hasn’t been seen along the lower Colorado River in a century has apparently repopulated an area south of Lake Havasu City.” U.S. Fish and Wildlife service spokesman Jeff Humphrey “said Tuesday that biologists first spotted the northern Mexican gartersnake along the Bill Williams River in west-central Arizona.” They later found it on the Colorado River at the Havasu National Wildlife Refuge. 

## Neosho Fish Hatchery Awaits Ponds Completion. 

The Joplin (MO) Globe (11/28, Kagubare) reports that “the Neosho Fish Hatchery is within days of completing its six-month construction project to update three of its six fishing ponds.” Bruce Hallman, environmental education specialist, noted that “the last time the ponds were improved was in the 1930s.” He said, “It will just make everything look better here and more efficient.” 

## Prairie Park Nature Center Aids In National Efforts To Save Endangered Black-footed Ferret. 

The Lawrence (KS) Journal World (11/28, Hlavacek) reports that black-footed ferrets are “making a modest comeback on the prairie they once freely roamed — thanks, in part, to the work of Prairie Park staff and U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service biologists.” Marty Birrell, nature interpretive supervisor at Prairie Park, “feels optimistic after this month’s trip to the 1,100-acre tract in western Kansas, where she and her colleagues helped capture, tag and vaccinate wild-born ferrets.” The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service has “yet to release data from this month’s survey, but Birrell said her team located at least 20 ferrets during her time on the site.” 

## Erin Baillargeon Earns USFWS Volunteer Of The Year. 

The New Richmond (WI) News (11/28, Lindfors) reports that “New Richmond Middle School seventh grade science teacher Erin Baillargeon was presented with the prestigious Volunteer of the Year Award by U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service Wildlife Biologist and Volunteer Coordinator Chris Trosen during a brief ceremony Thursday afternoon, Nov. 16.” Baillargeon, “along with her students, took on the responsibility for care and upkeep of several hundred wild lupine plugs in the middle school’s greenhouse during the school year.” At the end of the school year, Baillargeon, “minus her students’ help, became the sole caretaker for the army of plants.” 

# National Park Service 

## Have An Opinion About The Proposed Fee Hikes For Popular National Parks? The Comment Period Has Been Extended. 

The Salt Lake (UT) Tribune (11/29, Maffly) reports that “in the face of intense public interest, much of it critical,” the National Park Service is has extended the public comment period to “on its controversial proposal to boost entrance fees to $70 per vehicle at its most popular parks.” The NPS is “now accepting comments for a second month, until Dec. 22, as it weighs whether to implement the proposal, amend it or abandon it in favor of solutions that don’t rely so heavily on visitors.” Meanwhile, Arizona Public Media (11/28, Sieg) reports that Arizona Attorney General Mark Brnovich has “joined 10 of his counterparts in other states across the country in opposition to the price hike.” According to the article, “in a letter addressed to the acting director of the National Park Service, the attorneys general quote naturalist John Muir, who once wrote that people need ‘beauty as well as bread.’” 

## Experiment Puts Mall Rats On Birth Control. 

E&E Publishing (11/28, Hotakainen) reports that “under a pilot project set to begin in the coming weeks, a contraceptive bait called ContraPest will be fed to rats around the food kiosk at the Thomas Jefferson Memorial.” The project is “the brainchild of Arizona-based SenesTech Inc., which says it makes more sense to target the reproductive capabilities of rats to try to eliminate them in the long run instead of relying on toxic poisons to kill them immediately.” Mike Litterst, chief of communications for the National Parks Service’s National Mall and Memorial Parks, said, “This has been approved by the EPA and has been used in other metropolitan areas, including Chicago and New York City.” 

## Lawmakers Push For Historic Trail Status For Route 66. 

The AP (11/28) reports that “lawmakers are pushing Congress to give historic trail status to Route 66 to help preserve the iconic roadway, which passes through Missouri and seven other states.” The U.S. House Natural Resources subcommittee considered legislation on Nov. 15. Rep. Darin LaHood, who introduced the bill, said, “The federal government already recognizes the importance of Route 66. If signed into law, it (the bill) will designate Route 66 as a National Historic Trail ensuring that the National Park Service will have the authority to assist and support states and local communities in preserving, promoting and economically developing Route 66 for generations to come.” Additional coverage was provided by the Williams (AZ) Grand Canyon News (11/28, Windes). 

## Park Service Concerned About Courthouse Sites. 

The Anniston (AL) Star (11/28, Cunningham) reports that “the city of Anniston and the National Park Service differ on the best site for a new federal courthouse, but officials with the two bodies say they may yet find common ground.” The NPS, “in a letter commenting on assessments of three proposed downtown sites for the courthouse, said it supports one just west of Zinn Park.” The agency “wrote that it has concerns about two other sites, both near its new Freedom Riders National Monument.” 

## Remains Of Ancient Sea Cow Unearthed On California Island. 

The AP (11/28) reports that “scientists say they’ve unearthed fossil remains of a sea cow that lived in the shallow waters off Southern California’s Channel Islands some 25 million years ago.” The National Park Service announced Tuesday that “the fossil skull and rib cage were discovered this summer on Santa Rosa Island, about 50 miles northwest of Los Angeles.” According to Yvonne Menard of the NPS, “two researchers from the U.S. Geological Survey found the skull and rib cage in a steep ravine while mapping earthquake faults.” Additional coverage was provided by USA Today (11/28, Carlson), Southern California Public Radio (11/28), KTLA-TV Los Angeles Los Angeles (11/28, Bloom), and KNBC-TV Los Angeles Los Angeles (11/28). 

## Rocky Mountain Park To Expand Native American Representation. 

The AP (11/28) reports that Rocky Mountain National Park is “expanding its representation of Native Americans with the help of indigenous-focused University of Colorado groups and tribal representatives.” According to the article, “meetings began in the fall to devise a plan to expand representation of indigenous people’s lives.” The article says that “tribal members from Wyoming and Oklahoma were able to attend, while members from Utah, Colorado and Montana tribes have upcoming meetings with park officials.” 

## Utah’s Famed Bighorn Sheep Thriving In Zion National Park, So State Plans To Move Some To Bears Ears. 

The Salt Lake (UT) Tribune (11/28, Maffly) reports that “a multi-year relocation program” of bighorn sheep in Zion National Park is “set to begin next month after more than three years of study.” In the coming weeks, “state wildlife workers will capture 50 Zion sheep, mostly females, fit them with radio collars and release them in San Juan County, according to Rusty Robinson, Utah Division of Wildlife Resources big game coordinator.” The aim is “to augment Utah’s most imperiled bighorn herd, which inhabits a unit called San Juan North located west of the Abajo Mountains in Bears Ears National Monument and the Needles district of Canyonlands National Park. “ 

## Fort King: Reconstructed. 

The Ocala (FL) Star-Banner (11/28, Cundiff) reports that the grand opening of the newly reconstructed Fort King at the Fort King National Historic Landmark will be held this weekend. Events will “feature a reenactment of the December 1835 attack by Seminole chief Osceola and his men that triggered the Second Seminole War.” 

## Future Of Point Reyes Cattle Ranches At Stake In National Park Service Planning Process. 

The Santa Rosa (CA) Press Democrat (11/28, Kovner) reports that “the future of cattle ranching and herds of tule elk in the Point Reyes National Seashore is at stake in a policy-setting process that will culminate in four years and is already attracting thousands of public comments.” The National Park Service has “received about 2,800 comments on a list of six tentative management alternatives, including one that maintains the status quo for 24 families engaged in beef and dairy cattle ranching and three others that would eliminate or reduce ranching.” 

## Brian Johnson Named Structural Fire Branch Chief At National Park Service. 

The Firehouse (11/28) reports that “Brian Johnson has been named Structural Fire Branch Chief for the National Park Service Division of Fire and Aviation Management. He succeeds Hal Spencer, who retired earlier this year.” 

## Black Creek Fire Tower Added To National Register Of Historic Places. 

The Oneida (TN) Independent Herald (11/28) reports eight properties across Tennessee have added to the National Register of Historic Places. They include the Black Creek Fire Lookout Tower, “a fire lookout tower in Carroll County, the Tennessee War Memorial Building in Nashville, the Mt. Zion Negro School in Gibson County, the Blue Springs Lutheran Church and Cemetery in Greene County, the Farmers and Merchants Bank in Lawrence County, the Harrison Mill Farm in Maury County and Pottsville General Store in Maury County.” 

## Benton Club On National Registry Of Historic Places. 

The St. Joseph (MO) News-Press (11/28, Welch) reports that “the Benton Club of St. Joseph has been added to the National Register of Historic Places by the National Park Service.” 

# Office Of Insular Affairs 

## WAPA Restores Power To 40 Percent Of Territory More Than Two Months After Hurricanes. 

The St. Thomas Source (11/28) reports that “about 40 percent of the Water and Power Authority’s electrical customers, more than 49,000 of them, have been re-energized since Hurricanes Irma and Maria battered the territory in September, officials said Monday at a Government House news conference.” Gov. Kenneth Mapp has “set a target date of Christmas for 90 percent electricity, while Water and Power Authority Executive Officer Julio Rhymer’s estimate was year-end.” That promped Mapp to challenge, “I’m not giving him that extra week.” 

## Palau Under Pressure From China Over Taiwan Link. 

Radio New Zealand (11/28) reports that Taiwan observers are “warning the country’s allegiance with Palau could be disastrous for the Micronesian nation.” Last week, China reportedly “banned its travel agencies from arranging visits to Palau, where Chinese tourists were more than half of its visitors last year.” The Taiwan Strategy Research Association’s Fabrizio Bozzato “said China was partly responding to the visit of Taiwan’s president, Tsai Ing-wen, to several Pacific allies including Palau last month.” 

## CHCC Is Ready To Apply Green Cards For Its Longtime Nurses. 

The Saipan (MNP) Tribune (11/28, Cabrera) reports that “even before U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services made a 3,000 cut in the number of slots for foreign workers in fiscal year 2018, the Commonwealth Healthcare Corp. is already in the midst of plans to apply for permanent residency visas for its long-term nurses.” CHCC CEO Esther Muña “said the corporation is looking for appropriate visa categories for its nurses and staff, either H-1B or EB-2 visas.” Muña “said the Commonwealth Health Center, which CHCC operates, already has a nurse that CHCC had applied for an EB-2 visa. Many of CHC’s nurses are Filipino nationals.” 

## Marshall Islands: Concrete Dome Holding Nuclear Waste Could Leak. 

The New Zealand Herald (11/27, Killalea) reports that “rising sea levels and climate change threaten to unleash highly radioactive plutonium into the Pacific Ocean in a nightmare scenario for those who live in the Marshall Islands where dozens of nuclear blasts took place in the 1940s.” Water has begun to penetrate a massive concrete dome “containing the toxic waste with radioactive material leaking out.” 

## Hawaii To Resume Cold War-era Nuclear Attack Warning Siren Tests Due To The North Korea Threat. 

CNBC (11/28) reports that “Hawaii this week will resume monthly statewide testing of its Cold War-era nuclear attack warning sirens for the first time in about 30 years, in preparation for a potential missile launch from North Korea, emergency management officials said on Monday.” According to officials, “wailing air-raid sirens will be sounded for about 60 seconds from more than 400 locations across the central Pacific islands starting at 11:45 a.m. on Friday, in a test that will be repeated on the first business day of each month thereafter.” 

## Governor: CW Issue Needs US Congressional Action. 

Marianas Variety (11/27, Todiño) reports that Gov. Ralph D.L.G. Torres on Thursday “reiterated the need for U.S. congressional action to address the CNMI’s lack of workers.” Last week, “despite the pleas of the CNMI government and business community to reduce it by only one, the U.S. Department of Homeland Security reduced the number of CW-1 permits for fiscal year 2018 by 3,000 — to 9,998 from 12,998.” Torres “said he will continue to communicate with U.S. Congressman Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan ‘make every effort to introduce’ legislation in the U.S. Congress” 

## Calvo Uses Hearse To Call For Legislature To Hear $125M Borrowing, Tax Increase Proposal For GMH. 

The Guam Daily Post (11/16) reports that Gov. Eddie Calvo’s staff “this morning parked a hearse right at the entrance to the Guam Congress building and posted messages on the vehicle to call for legislature to hear a $125M borrowing and tax increase proposal for Guam Memorial Hospital.” Calvo’s press release said the hearse “symbolizes the consequence of the legislature’s inaction to hold a public hearing on two life-saving GMH bills.” It stated, “The bills, if passed, would fully fund the Guam Memorial Hospital every year. They would modernize medical equipment and facilities so that all the people of Guam, rich and poor, have access to quality healthcare right here at home.” 

## Thousands Of Jobs May Be Headed To St. Croix And Texas Following Trump Deals With Chinese Oil And Gas Giant. 

The Virgin Islands Consortium (VIR) (11/17) reports that “the talk of additional jobs at Limetree Bay Terminals through Sinopec is more promising” following President Trump’s trip to China, “where he worked to broker billions of dollars in energy deals.” According to the article, St. Croix’s economy “could benefit greatly from the hundreds — if not over a thousand — additional job opportunities to be made available at Limetree Bay.” 

## More Independents Join GOP. 

Marianas Variety (11/17, Erediano) reports that “more politicians who previously ran as independents are joining the NMI Republican Party, according to the local GOP chairman, Department of Public Works Secretary James Ada.” Ada noted that “besides House minority bloc member Lorenzo I. Deleon Guerrero, former independent Rep. Roman C. Benavente of Precinct 1 has submitted his letter of intent to run on the GOP slate next year.” Ada added “Sen. Justo S. Quitugua, a former Democrat who ran as an independent in 2014, also wants to seek reelection as a Republican.” 

## VI Republicans Urging Trump And GOP Not To Give Blank Check To VI Government. 

The Virgin Islands Consortium (VIR) (11/15) reported that Republican leaders from the U.S. Virgin Islands were in Washington earlier this month “telling the White House and Congress not to write a blank check to the Government of the Virgin Islands.” According to the article, “in a series of meetings, GOP leadership from the hurricane-devastated islands of St. Croix, St. Thomas and St. John are pushing for greater federal scrutiny of the territorial government, which the GOP says was in shambles before hurricanes Irma and Maria struck.” 

# US Geological Survey 

## Bali Volcano Has A History Of Explosive Eruptions And Global Climate Impacts. 

The Washington Post (11/28, Fritz) reports that “a giant, suffocating ash cloud hovers over the island of Bali in Indonesia, and neither geologists nor local officials know what the simmering volcano will do next.” According to the article, “if Agung’s eruptions become more intense,” it could “alter global temperature for months — maybe years.” The U.S. Geological Survey said, “A pyroclastic flow will destroy nearly everything in its path. With rock fragments ranging in size from ash to boulders traveling across the ground at speeds typically greater than [50 mph], pyroclastic flows knock down, shatter, bury or carry away nearly all objects and structures in their way.” 

## Methane Ecosystem Found In Caves Of The Yucatan Peninsula. 

The Daily Mail (11/28, Borkhataria) reports that “researchers have discovered a methane-fueled ecosystem that feeds bacteria in the underground rivers and flooded caves of Mexico’s Yucatan Peninsula.” The study, “conducted by researchers at Texas A&M University at Galveston, the US Geological Survey and a team of collaborators from Mexico, The Netherlands, Switzerland and other US institutions, claims to be the most detailed ecological study ever for a coastal cave ecosystem that is always underwater.” 

# Opinion Pieces The Trump Judiciary Threatens Federal Public Lands. 

In an op-ed for The Hill (11/28, Leshy, Echeverria), John D. Leshy, a distinguished professor of law emeritus at the University of California, Hastings College of the Law, and John D. Echeverria, a professor of law at Vermont Law School, writes that judges that President Trump appoints to federal courts pose a threat to public land. They point to a Nov. 3 decision handed down by Susan Braden of the U.S. Court of Federal Claims, which said “that cattle ranchers using public lands with the permission of the U.S. Forest Service are entitled to financial compensation from U.S. taxpayers because the government’s efforts to protect endangered species on those lands allegedly took their water rights in violation of the U.S. Constitution.” The professors of law take issue with Braden’s statement of the facts, as well as her legal reasoning, and conclude that “it represents a klaxon alarm about what may be in store for the public lands, the courts and the rule of law under the current president.” 

## Additional Reading. 

Hunting Can Be Good For Lions And Elephants. Wall Street Journal (11/28, Anderson, Downey). 

Zinke Remains Trump Cabinet’s Most Deplorable Member. Newsmax (11/28, Carlson). 

The West Grapples With History Through Its Place Names. High Country (CO) News (11/28, Lydon). 

Are Minnesota’s Public Lands Up For Sale?. St. Cloud (MN) Times (11/28, Zabokrtsky) .

American Horror Show: Trophies From Canned Lion Hunts Continue To Flow Into The U.S. Despite ESA Protection. Wisconsin Gazette (11/27, Pacelle). 

Congress Needs To Treat Wildfires Like The Disasters They Are. Poughkeepsie (NY) Journal (11/28, Mahar). 

Proposed National Park Fees Need Modification. Westminster (CO) Window (11/28, Christopher). 

OUR OPINION: Sign Online Petition In Support Of Historic Tax Incentives. Sioux City (IA) Journal (11/29). 

# Top National News 

## Media Analysis: Most Powerful ICBM Yet Is North Korea’s Response To Trump. 

North Korea’s launch of another Intercontinental ballistic missile garnered extensive media, including the lead stories on all three networks last night. Outlets highlighted that the missile launched Tuesday was the most advanced yet for Pyongyang, and cast the launch as a response to recent comments by President Trump and actions by the Administration. For example, Richard Engel, noting that this was the first launch by the North “in months,” said on NBC Nightly News (11/28, story 3, 2:35, Holt), “Why now? Political payback. President Trump threatened the regime while in South Korea earlier this month. The President followed up with a tweet saying he would never call Kim Jong-Un short or fat.” Likewise, in its lead story, Fox News’ Special Report (11/28) reported that “the latest provocation comes more than a week after President Trump put North Korea back on the state sponsor of terrorism list,” and “after Trump warned North Korea, ‘do not try us,’ in a speech in South Korea earlier this month.” AFP (11/28) calls Tuesday’s launch “a major challenge to...Trump after he slapped fresh sanctions on Pyongyang and declared it a state sponsor of terrorism,” and Bloomberg News (11/28, Kong, Tweed, Wadhams) similarly calls it North Korea’s “first provocation since...Trump labeled the country a state sponsor of terrorism earlier this month.” In its lead story, ABC World News Tonight (11/28, lead story, 2:25, Muir) called the launch a “direct provocation to the US President.” The ICBM tested Tuesday that flew “higher and longer than any [North Korea] has launched before.” The missile flew 2,800 miles, remaining in the air for 50 minutes before falling into the Sea of Japan. Experts “say if angled for distance instead of altitude, the same missile could reach deep into the US mainland, including Washington, DC.” USA Today (11/28, Bacon, Michaels) reports the missile “appeared to have a range of 8,100 miles, the longest tested, and capable of reaching Washington, DC.” The Washington Free Beacon (11/28, Heretik) reports Defense Secretary Mattis told reporters the missile “went higher, frankly, than any previous shot they’ve taken. It’s a research and development effort on their part to continue building ballistic missiles that can threaten everywhere in the world basically.” The AP (11/28, Pennington, Kim) says the “big unknown, however, is the missile’s payload. If, as expected, it carried a light mock warhead, then its effective range would have been shorter, analysts said.” Politico (11/28, Klimas, Morgan) reports that “some experts viewed the latest test as noteworthy because it was conducted in the middle of the night in North Korea,” which made it “harder for the US to track.” The Wall Street Journal (11/28, Cheng) reports Abraham Denmark, a former senior Asia policy official at the Pentagon during the Obama Administration and now a director at the Wilson Center, said, “Firing at night, from a potential mobile missile, demonstrates that North Korea is closer than ever to a credible nuclear deterrent against the United States.” The Los Angeles Times (11/28, Stiles) reports the President, addressing reporters at the White House, “seemed to brush off the significance of the launch,” and the CBS Evening News (11/28, lead story, 2:20, Mason) said that after the North “defied” the US, Trump told reporters, “We will take care of it,” and while “he did not say how,” Secretary of State Tillerson responded to the launch by “call[ing] for stricter enforcement of UN sanctions...including the right to stop, board, and search vessels transporting goods to and from the North.” Politico (11/28, Tamborrino) reports Tillerson condemned the launch in a statement saying, “All nations must continue strong economic and diplomatic measures.” USA Today (11/28, Bacon, Michaels) reports the State Department announced it is launching “an international effort to step up pressure on North Korea that could include interdicting ships carrying goods to and from that country.” Spokeswoman Heather Nauert said, “We have always been very clear that we would be open to talks with North Korea. But North Korea is not showing it is willing to sit down and talk.” Counselor to the President Kellyanne Conway said on Fox News’ Hannity (11/28), “North Korea is everybody’s problem. And anybody who doubted that saw that today. This President in bringing on board and talking to Japan and China and South Korea and...the UN Security Council voting twice unanimously in unprecedented fashion to sanction North Korea shows that the world is responding to Donald Trump’s leadership as President and commander-in-chief.” The Washington Post (11/28, Fifield) reports the “74-day break in missile testing, the longest pause in a year that has been marked by big advances and a steady salvo of launches, had generated some hope that diplomatic efforts could gain traction.” A Washington Post (11/28, Taylor) analysis says Tuesday’s launch “seems to dash the idea that Pyongyang’s lull in weapons testing over the past two months indicated a willingness to negotiate.” Instead, the Post says the “slowdown in testing in the last quarter of each year seems to be due to seasonal changes.” The New York Times (11/28, Choe) reports that “six minutes after the launch, South Korea conducted its own missile test off its east coast, demonstrating its ability to strike North Korean missile launching sites,” and Reuters (11/28, Kim, Stewart) reports the UN Security Council is scheduled to meet on Wednesday to discuss the latest missile launch. Sen. Lindsey Graham said on CNN’s Situation Room (11/28) that the North Koreans are “clearly...not listening to the Chinese.” He also said he does not agree with Trump that Russian President Vladimir Putin can help in dealing with the North. Graham added that he hopes North Korea understands that Trump “is not going to allow” it to have nuclear weapons that can reach the US, because “if we have to go to war to stop this, we will.” Sen. Dan Sullivan said on CNN’s Situation Room (11/28) that he’s “very concerned” about the possibility that North Korea could launch a missile that could hit “not just” Alaska, but the US mainland. Sullivan called for “more sanctions, credible military options” to back up diplomacy, and “more robust missile defense.” Tom Rogan of the Washington Examiner said on Fox News’ Special Report 

(11/28), “What you do see in specific terms here is the North Koreans showing a capability that far exceeds anything we’ve seen up until this point. I think there will be some shock in the White House and the Pentagon and the intelligence community about what has happened. For President Trump now, the critical decision is, do you exert pressure on China, specifically Chinese financial entities, or do you take military action because what we have seen here with this test is the failure of – or the unwillingness I think more likely – of the Chinese government to put the kind of pressure on Kim Jong-un’s regime that would be necessary to force him to the table.” Matt Schlapp of The Hill said on Fox News’ Special Report (11/28), “I don’t blame Donald Trump for this. You can say his diplomatic approach has not worked yet, but he inherited a 20 year problem which was to kick the can down the road. ... He is faced with terrible options and he’s got to do something that takes away this nuclear menace from reaching our allies and maybe even our own shores.” Adam B. Ellick and Jonah M. Kessel of the New York Times (11/28) write, “This is the story of two novice and reckless leaders — one 33 years old, the other 71 years old — taking their countries toward what we fear is a needless collision. The risk of war is greater than the public appreciates,” and “now, with war more likely than ever, talks are even more urgent.” 

Recent Meetings Raise Fresh Concern Over Possible Iran-North Korea Ties. The Washington Times (11/28, Taylor) reports that a “series of recent high-level meetings between Iranian and North Korean officials has prompted fresh concern in US national security circles about the depth of military and ballistic missile technology cooperation between the two American adversaries,” according to the Washington Institute for Near East Policy. The think tank, which is “known for its critical posture toward Iran’s government, says in an analysis that US intelligence has spotted Iranian defense officials in North Korea over the past year — raising the specter that Pyongyang and Tehran might be sharing certain military technological advances with each other.” 

## Media Analyses: Judge’s Ruling On CFPB Head A Victory For Trump. 

In a ruling that is universally cast as a victory for the Administration, a federal judge ruled Tuesday that President Trump can install his own director at the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau. On ABC World News Tonight (11/28, story 7, 0:30), the only network newscast to cover the ruling, David Muir said, “President Trump winning the battle over control of the nation’s top consumer financial watch dog,” while USA Today (11/28, McCoy, Johnson) says US District Judge Timothy Kelly “sid[ed] with the Trump Administration” and “refused to block the appointment of Mick Mulvaney as interim director.” Politico (11/28, Guida) describes “a big victory” for Trump, adding that Kelly “said there was not a substantial likelihood that the case would succeed on its merits.” Reuters (11/28) reports that Kelly “said the agency was part of the executive branch and he saw nothing in the law that prevented budget director Mick Mulvaney from holding the two positions.” The Washington Post (11/28, Hsu, Heath) also says Kelly “refused to block” Mulvaney’s appointment, adding that by denying CFPB deputy director Leandra English’s request for a temporary restraining order, Kelly “acknowledged that the case raised constitutional issues.” The Los Angeles Times (11/28, Puzzanghera) says Kelly, who President Trump nominated this year, “hand[ed] a victory to President Trump and opponents of the independent watchdog agency.” The New York Times (11/28, Rogers, Bernard) reports that Kelly “deliver[ed] a legal victory to the White House,” and gave “a boost” to Trump’s “deregulation push,” while Bloomberg News (11/28, Harris) says Kelly “rebuffed English, who sued to Nov. 26, contending she is entitled to the provisional post,” in an outcome that “cast a shadow over her contention the 2010 Dodd-Frank Wall Street reform legislation controls the line of temporary succession at the agency and not the broader federal statute relied upon by the president to designate Mulvaney.” While the Wall Street Journal (11/28, Clozel) reports that English’s attorney, Deepak Gupta, said she would appeal Kelly’s decision, the New York Post (11/28, Fredericks) reports that the ruling drew praise from the White House. Spokesman Raj Shah said, “The Administration applauds the court’s decision, which provides further support for the president’s rightful authority to designate Director Mulvaney as Acting Director of the CFPB. ... It’s time for the Democrats to stop enabling this brazen political stunt by a rogue employee and allow Acting Director Mulvaney to continue the bureau’s smooth transition into an agency that truly serves to help consumers.” The Washington Times (11/28, Boyer) reports Competitive Enterprise Institute General Counsel Sam Kazman said CEI was “glad to see this attempt at bureaucratic self-perpetuation fail,” and Consumer Bankers Association President and CEO Richard Hunt said his group looks forward “to working with acting CFPB Director Mick Mulvaney to bring transparent and balanced consumer protections to all customers and small businesses.” A USA Today (11/28) editorial casts the dispute as “proof of how desperately Republicans want to defang the aggressive agency,” and says Kelly’s ruling leaves Trump “in position to nominate a new director,” which means “efforts to undermine this strong consumer champion are well underway.” Dana Milbank argues in the Washington Post (11/28) that “under the statute that created the CFPB...it should now be rightfully run by Leandra English.” Nevertheless, “a Trump-appointed federal judge, to nobody’s surprise, ruled in Trump’s favor.” Milbank adds that “ultimately, the ‘coup’ will succeed” because Trump “will eventually be able to install a director who can defang the watchdog – and Wall Street bankers and corporate lobbyists will plant their flag of conquest at another agency.” However, the Wall Street Journal (11/28) takes a different view, editorializing that Kelly’s denial of English’s petition constituted a hilarious development in the ongoing struggle for leadership of the bureau. The Journal mocks English for staging photo-ops with Sen. Elizabeth Warren before the ruling from Kelly, and asserts that she must now decide whether to walk away in embarrassment or stay on as deputy under Mulvaney. 

“Anonymous Donors” Financing English’s Lawsuit. According to the Daily Caller (11/28, Pollock), English’s lawsuit is being financed by “secret donors.” In an interview with CNBC’s Power Lunch (11/27), Gupta “confirmed...that English is not paying for his hourly fees, but rather unknown anonymous donors are.” Gupta “appeared caught off guard when CNBC hosts asked who was financing his effort,” and “stumbled over his words in his first answer and said some form of unidentified ‘structure’ was being put in place to accept funds from anonymous donors.” He said, “Well, uh, it’s, it’s not, um, Miss, um English, um, ah. There are ethics lawyers that we’ve consulted, and we have a structure set up that is with ethics rules and, um, we’ll and we’ll be talking about that once we have that.” Asked “repeatedly...who is paying for the case,” Gupta replied, “It’s just not appropriate for me to be talking about that right now.” 

CBA President: CFPB Should Be Run By A Commission. In an op-ed for USA Today (11/28, Hunt), Richard Hunt, president and CEO of the Consumer Bankers Association, does not address Kelly’s ruling but argues that the CFPB’s mission “is far too vast and far too important for a single director to play both judge and jury for nearly every financial decision Americans make.” Hunt writes that “a sole director at the CFPB is unworkable” and calls on Congress “to fix it with legislation to create a bipartisan, Senate-confirmed commission.” 

WSJournal Sees Hilarity In Court Ruling Against Leandra English. The Wall Street Journal (11/28) editorializes that federal judge Timothy Kelly’s denial of Leandra English’s petition to block Mick Mulvaney from serving as acting director of the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau constituted a hilarious development in the ongoing struggle for leadership of the bureau. The Journal mocks English for staging pho-ops with Sen. Elizabeth Warren before the ruling from Kelly, and asserts that she must now decide whether to walk away in embarrassment or stay on as deputy under Mulvaney. The Journal opines that the controversy has been humiliating for English. 

## Trump Suggests Government Shutdown Possible After Democrats Skip Meeting. 

On ABC World News Tonight (11/28, story 4, 2:10, Muir), Jonathan Karl reported, “It was just a couple of months ago that President Trump was chumming around in the Oval Office with Democratic leaders Chuck Schumer and Nancy Pelosi, striking a temporary spending deal on their terms. ... But today, the President found himself flanked by empty chairs,” with Schumer and Pelosi “boycotting a planned bipartisan sit-down after Trump attacked them on Twitter.” Schumer: “The President said, ‘I don’t see a deal’ three hours before our meeting, before he heard anything we had to say.” Karl: “Schumer and Pelosi said, thanks, but no thanks.” Trump: “They’ve been all talk, and they’ve no action. And now it’s even worse. Now it’s not even talk.” Politico (11/28, McCaskill) reports that Trump “taunted them on Twitter.” At 9:17 a.m., Trump tweeted, “Meeting with ‘Chuck and Nancy’ today about keeping government open and working. Problem is they want illegal immigrants flooding into our Country unchecked, are weak on Crime and want to substantially RAISE Taxes. I don’t see a deal!” On the CBS Evening News (11/28, story 2, 1:10, Mason), Nancy Cordes reported, “They were supposed to discuss government funding, which is set to run out next week. ... You’re never going to stop the President from tweeting, so does this mean that going forward you’re not planning to sit down with him?” Schumer: “All he has to do is say he’s serious and wants to undergo a real negotiation, and we’ll sit down with him.” Breitbart (11/28, Key) reports that Schumer told reporters, “There are serious issues in front of us. We don’t have time to waste. We don’t have games to play. ... If the President reverses course and decides he wants to be a constructive force, working with both sides to forge a bipartisan deal, we’re happy to meet with him anytime, anywhere, any place.” The Hill (11/28, Fabian) reports that Trump “tore into” them for skipping the meeting. USA Today (11/28, Collins) reports that Trump told reporters that “he was ‘not that surprised’” that the Democrats canceled. The Washington Times (11/28, Miller) reports that Trump warned that a government shutdown after December “could be unavoidable, and he blamed Democratic leaders for forcing it.” Breitbart (11/28, Key) reports that Trump said of a shutdown, “I would absolutely blame the Democrats if it happens it’s going to be over illegals pouring into the country, crime pouring into the country, no border wall, which everybody wants. I got elected partially because of a border wall. ... They want high taxes. We want low taxes. So there are a lot of big differences. So we’ll see what happens as to shutdown.” Kellyanne Conway said on Fox News’ Hannity (11/28) that Schumer and Pelosi “are not there representing the opposition party. They are there as the minority leaders of the two chambers in Congress.” The Washington Post (11/28, O'Keefe, Sullivan) reports that the “breakdown in talks between Trump and Democrats will put more pressure” on Senate Majority Leader McConnell and House Speaker Ryan, “who both attended the White House meeting, to find a way forward on spending negotiations while they also race to wield their majorities to try to pass a sweeping tax bill this month.” The Wall Street Journal (11/28, Peterson) reports that a short-term spending measure keeping the government operational through the end of December is expected to pass soon. The Los Angeles Times (11/28, Bennett, Bierman) writes that Trump “runs the risk of alienating partners he needs to move his agenda forward. And he needs Democrats in coming weeks as much as at any time in his presidency.” Senate Majority Whip Cornyn “noted that it will take 60 votes in the Senate to pass the spending bill. ‘We have 52 Republicans. We can’t do it by ourselves,’ he said.” Reuters (11/28), the Washington Times (11/28, Dinan), and Roll Call (11/28, Bennett) also report. 

Trump Says Democrats Holding “Troop Funding Hostage.” Politico (11/28, Lima) reports that in a later tweet, the President accused the Democrats “of holding military funding ‘hostage’ in their end-of-year negotiations to avert a government shutdown.” Trump tweeted, “After North Korea missile launch, it’s more important than ever to fund our gov’t & military! Dems shouldn’t hold troop funding hostage for amnesty & illegal immigration. I ran on stopping illegal immigration and won big. They can’t now threaten a shutdown to get their demands.” 

WPost Analysis: Long Trump-Schumer Relationship Not Enough To Overcome Differences. On the front page of the Washington Post (11/28, A1, Fisher), Marc Fisher looks at the long relationship between Trump and Schumer, who “were never pals,” but “got along fine, two power players who had never quite been accepted in the inner circle of their chosen fields, two sharp-elbowed guys who led with their mouths and won power in part by mastering the art of being in the news.” While “people in both parties thought” that their relationship “might provide a path out of Washington’s political paralysis,” Tuesday’s events revealed “the limits of that relationship.” 

## Tax Bill Closing In On 50 Votes After Trump Meets With Senate Republicans. 

NBC Nightly News (11/28, lead story, 2:40, Holt) opened by reporting that “Senate Republicans made headway” on their tax plan on Tuesday, with the measure passing through committee. President Trump is “putting in face time to try to move the bill forward.” The CBS Evening News (11/28, story 3, 1:20, Cordes) reported that the President lunched with Senate Republicans, “where he sparred with senators who still have concerns about the party’s tax plan. Wisconsin’s Ron Johnson thinks the tax cuts favor corporations at the expense of small businesses.” Johnson: “I thought it was a fine-and-dandy exchange. I didn’t feel threatened at all.” The AP (11/28, Fram, Taylor) reports that the Senate Budget Committee advanced the measure on “a party-line 12-11 vote...as a pair of wavering Republicans – Wisconsin’s Ron Johnson and Tennessee’s Bob Corker – fell into line, at least for the moment. In more good news for the GOP, moderate Sen. Susan Collins of Maine said it was a ‘fair assumption’ that she was likelier to support the bill” after saying that the President had “agreed to make property taxes up to $10,000 deductible instead of eliminating that break entirely.” Reuters (11/28, Morgan, Cornwell) reports that Republicans “rammed forward” the measure. Bloomberg News (11/28, Kapur, Wasson) reports that the outlook for the bill “brightened” after the President “addressed GOP Senate holdouts in a closed-door, lunchtime session. The GOP meeting was ‘somewhat of a lovefest,’ Trump said later Tuesday.” USA Today (11/28, Shesgreen, Fair) reports that GOP leaders “remained optimistic” that the bill would pass “in the next few days, while at the same time acknowledging that the vote will likely be very close.” The Wall Street Journal (11/28, A1, Rubin, Peterson) reports that both Collins and Corker said they are closer to backing the final measure. Politico (11/28, Kim, Becker, Wilhelm) reports that “key GOP swing votes inched closer to backing the legislation” on Tuesday. The Washington Post (11/28, A1, Debonis, Werner, Paletta) reports that though Trump “clashed with Johnson,” he “appeared to make substantial progress toward winning” Collins’ vote. The President “signaled openness to Collins’s demands, which include paying federal subsidies to help lower-income Americans afford health coverage.” Johnson’s opposition “is based on his complaints that the bill would not sufficiently lower taxes for millions of businesses that are effectively taxed through the individual income tax code.” The Los Angeles Times (11/28, Mascaro) reports that Senate Majority Leader McConnell “acknowledged that changes were still being made to win over votes.” He said, “We do have a few members who have concerns and we’re trying to address them. We know we will not be able to go forward until we get 50 people satisfied, and that’s what were working on.” McClatchy (11/28, Clark) reports that third-ranking Senate Republican Sen. John Thune predicted a vote this week “and said leadership was negotiating ‘a path forward’ with Collins and the others.” Sen. Lindsey Graham said on CNN’s Situation Room 

(11/28), “I think they’re very close to a deal.” The New York Times (11/28, A1, Rappeport, Kaplan) writes that “passage of the tax overhaul, which seemed uncertain on Monday, strengthened considerably on Tuesday.” But “several hurdles remain,” including “resolving differences with the House version of the tax bill, which differs in significant ways from that of the Senate. Both bills cut taxes on businesses and individuals, but differ in the scope and timing of those cuts.” The New York Times (11/28) editorializes, “This is how Senate Republicans compromise these days: They could make their enormously unpopular tax bill, which lavishes benefits on corporations and wealthy families, more generous to real estate tycoons and hedge fund billionaires to win over” Johnson and Sen. Steve Daines, “who say the legislation doesn’t do enough for small businesses.” McConnell “is trying to rush the bill to a vote by the end of the week...to give lawmakers and the public as little time as possible to analyze and understand the bill.” The Washington Times (11/28, Sherfinski), The Hill (11/28, Bolton, Weixel), and Roll Call (11/28, McPherson) also have reports. 

Trump Tells Senators That He Backs Alexander-Murray ACA Bill. Bloomberg News (11/28, Kapur) reports that the President told the senators that he backs the Affordable Care Act market stabilization bill offered by Sens. Lamar Alexander and Patty Murray, “which may help bolster support for the tax-cut legislation headed for a vote this week.” However, the Washington Times (11/28, Miller) reports that Trump said that is contingent on passage of “a tax cut bill that eliminates the individual mandate.” 

Fate Of Bill Could Rest With McCain. The New York Times (11/28, Rappeport) reports that “once again, it could all come down to” Sen. John McCain, who was responsible for killing the GOP healthcare bill earlier this year. McCain “has been fairly tight-lipped about his views on the tax overhaul speeding through the Senate, saying he sees some problems with the existing bill but is waiting for a final plan before making a decision.” 

WSJournal Opposes Corker’s Proposed Trigger. In an editorial, the Wall Street Journal (11/28) opposes Corker’s proposal for a trigger to return some rates to current levels six years from now if revenues are lower than expected. The Journal warns that no one can predict when a recession might hit, and forcing such an increase could exacerbate one. 

Vulnerable Democrats Oppose Tax Bill. The Washington Post (11/28, Weigel) reports that though some moderate Democrats up for re-election next year in states won by Trump in 2016 were once viewed as possible yes votes, all 48 members of the Democratic caucus are expected to oppose the plan. Sen. Joe Manchin, “who has voted with the Trump administration more than any other Democrat in Congress, described a repetitive drama that had played out for months. He’d sit for productive conversations with the Trump administration, then watch as none of his ideas appeared in the Republican product.” Sens. Joe Donnelly and Heidi Heitkamp had also been seen as possible supporters. 

GOP, Democratic Senators Debate Bill On CNN. CNN on Tuesday evening hosted a debate on tax reform featuring two Republican senators and two Democratic senators. Sen. Ted Cruz said , “If you’re a taxpayer, this bill benefits you. ... We should be working to cut taxes for every single taxpayer in America.” Sen. Tim Scott said , “Our goal in this tax reform conversation is to deliver your money back in your paychecks. So that as my mother had to struggle paycheck to paycheck, those single mothers struggling paycheck to paycheck will be able to have more of their hard-earned money so that they can take care of their families and, at the same time, create an economy that creates the jobs of the future here in America, here at home. That’s what this tax reform does.” The Democrats took a much different view of the bill. Sen. Bernie Sanders said ,“Mark my words. The day after or soon after this legislation passes, if it does...these guys are going to come back and they are going to say, ‘Oh my goodness, the deficit is soaring. We have got to cut Social Security. We have got to cut Medicare and Medicaid and education and programs that the middle class and working families desperately need.’ This is a disastrous piece of legislation.” Sen. Maria Cantwell said , “Raising taxes on the middle class is wrong. And that’s what this bill does. It is also wrong to cut the cooperate tax rate without having a promise of how that is really going to raise wages and impact productivity.” ABC World News Tonight (11/28, story 3, 2:30, Muir) and NBC Nightly News 

(11/28, story 2, 2:15, Holt) both ran features on the possible impact of the bill on Americans of various income levels. The New York Times (11/28, Casselman) looks at “What The Tax Bill Would Look Like For 25,000 Middle-Class Families” via a chart representing “how big a tax cut (or tax increase)” each of 25,000 household “in the broadly defined middle class...would get under the bill in 2018.” 

Protesters Arrested Outside Senate Budget Committee Hearing. The Hill (11/28, Delk) reports that Capitol Police “arrested 36 people protesting outside a Senate Budget Committee hearing on the GOP tax bill” on Tuesday morning, arresting “all 36 on charges of disrupting Congress in their protest.” 

WPost Opposes ANWR Drilling Measure Added To Tax Bill On Tuesday. In an editorial, the Washington Post (11/28) notes that “on Tuesday, Republicans on the Senate Budget Committee added to their already malformed tax legislation a provision that would open the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge to oil and natural gas drilling. This is a poor idea that senators should resist sneaking into law while most of Washington is preoccupied with a major tax overhaul.” 

# Editorial Wrap-Up 

## New York Times. 

“Senate Considers Making A Terrible Tax Bill Even Worse.” The New York Times (11/28) editorializes, “This is how Senate Republicans compromise these days: They could make their enormously unpopular tax bill, which lavishes benefits on corporations and wealthy families, more generous to real estate tycoons and hedge fund billionaires to win over” Sens. Ron Johnson and Steve Daines, “who say the legislation doesn’t do enough for small businesses.” Majority Leader McConnell “is trying to rush the bill to a vote by the end of the week...to give lawmakers and the public as little time as possible to analyze and understand the bill.” 

## Washington Post. 

“What’s One More Bad Thing In The GOP Tax Bill? Ask The Polar Bears.” In an editorial, the Washington Post (11/28) notes that “on Tuesday, Republicans on the Senate Budget Committee added to their already malformed tax legislation a provision that would open the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge to oil and natural gas drilling. This is a poor idea that senators should resist sneaking into law while most of Washington is preoccupied with a major tax overhaul.” 

“Egypt Answers Terrorism With Familiar Incompetence.” A Washington Post (11/28) editorial says Egyptian President Abdel Fatah al-Sissi’s response to the “merciless attack” on a mosque last Friday was “familiar: an angry television speech promising ‘brute force,’ a showy bombing raid, and attacks on media reporting.” The Post argues Sissi’s government “has used terrorism as a pretext for the most severe political repression in Egypt’s modern history,” offering “a textbook example of how not to respond to Islamist extremism.” The Post notes President Trump nonetheless “remains a fan” of Sissi. Trump “called the strongman after the Sinai attack and tweeted, inexplicably, that it showed the need for ‘the WALL’ and ‘the BAN.’” The Post concludes in saying Trump and Sissi “are partners in obtuseness” in the fight against ISIS in Egypt. 

“Congress, Surprise Us.” .A Washington Post (11/28) editorial says Congress has failed to act on banning bump stocks, so “some states and cities are trying to fill the gap.” The Post notes that this week the Supreme Court “let stand a Maryland law banning the sale of these weapons,” and says, “Hopefully that will encourage more states to take similar action while they wait for Congress to do its job.” 

## Wall Street Journal. “A Trigger Warning On Taxes.” In an editorial, the Wall Street Journal (11/28) opposes Sen. Bob Corker’s proposal for a trigger to return some rates to current levels six years from now if revenues are lower than expected. The Journal warns that no one can predict when a recession might hit, and forcing such an increase could exacerbate one. 

“A Drama Queen Loses Her Head.” The Wall Street Journal (11/28) editorializes that federal judge Timothy Kelly’s denial of Leandra English’s petition to block Mick Mulvaney from serving as acting director of the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau constituted a hilarious development in the ongoing struggle for leadership of the bureau. The Journal mocks English for staging photo-ops with Sen. Elizabeth Warren before the ruling from Kelly, and asserts that she must now decide whether to walk away in embarrassment or stay on as deputy under Mulvaney. The Journal opines that the controversy has been humiliating for English. 

“Fourth Amendment Showdown.” The Wall Street Journal (11/28) editorializes about a case the Supreme Court will hear today, Carpenter v. US, which the Journal claims challenges decades of Fourth Amendment law. In an investigation of a string of armed robberies, investigators obtained location data from a suspect’s wireless carrier. The Journal argues that the collection of such data does not constitute an unreasonable search under the Fourth Amendment, since it does not reveal the content of any communication. The Journal also notes that Congress has created the legal framework for the collection and use of such data, and argues that lawmakers, not the courts, should make these decisions. 

# Big Picture 

## Headlines From Today’s Front Pages. 

Wall Street Journal: 

Senate Tax Revamp Gains Traction Strange Bedfellows: Democrats And Trump Blow Up 20-Year Consensus On Trade Korean Missile Test’s Trajectory Puts Washington In Range Oil Prices Chase $60 After A Year Of Surging Demand Uber Ex-Employee Alleges Covert Tactics To Steal Rivals’ Secrets 

New York Times: 

Republicans Clear Major Hurdle As Tax Bill Advances Trump Feuds With Democrats Ahead Of A Possible Government Shutdown North Korea Fires A Ballistic Missile, In A Further Challenge To Trump Trump Once Said The ‘Access Hollywood’ Tape Was Real. Now He’s Not Sure. Olympic Doping Diaries: Chemist’s Notes Bolster Case Against Russia Pushing New Yorkers Beyond The End Of The Line 

Washington Post: 

Tax Bill Advances In Senate As Skeptics Signal Their Support In Recession-Hit Venezuela, Even Sex Is In Crisis Schumer And Trump Share The Schmooze. Is It Enough? Libyan Found Guilty In 2012 Attacks In Benghazi Missile Launch Appears To Put DC In Range 

Financial Times: 

Pope Avoids Word ‘Rohingya’ As He Calls For Peace In Myanmar Uber Accused Of Running Secret Competitive Intelligence Unit Irish Deputy PM Resigns To Save Government UK Bows To EU Demands With Breakthrough Offer On Brexit Bill 

Washington Times: 

More North Korean Tests Likely To Come After Launch Of Most Sophisticated Missile So Far Iranian-North Korean Talks Raise Specter Of Cooperation On Military, Ballistic Missile Technology Judge Rules In Favor Of Trump In Battle Over CFPB Leadership Benghazi Suspect Convicted On 4 Of 18 Criminal Charges, Acquitted Of Murder Supreme Court Case On Same-Sex Wedding Cakes: Artistic Expression Vs. Civil Rights Democrats Move Toward Showdown By Refusing To Meet With Trump 

Story Lineup From Last Night’s Network News: 

ABC: North Korea Missile Test; Tampa-Serial Killer; Tax Reform Plan-Effects; Government Funding Meeting; Libya US Consulate Attack Trial; Washington Post-Failed Conservative Sting; CFPB Appointment; Prince Harry Engagement; Florida-Missing Teen; Marriage-Dementia; Pets-Bone Product Recall; Wingsuit Jumpers; Climate Change-Polar Bears. 

CBS: North Korea Missile Test; Government Funding Meeting; White House-Tax Reform Plan; John Conyers Sexual Allegations; Roy Moore Campaign; Washington Post-Failed Conservative Sting; Texas Church Shooting-Lawsuit; YouTube-Child Videos; Weinstein-Sexual Allegations; Russia-Celebrity Politician; Prince Harry Engagement. 

NBC: White House-Tax Reform Plan; Tax Reform Plan-Effects; North Korea Missile Test; Ivanka Trump-India Trip; State Dept Turmoil; Libya US Consulate Attack Trial; Prince Harry Engagement; Drones-Flight Danger; Jerusalem-Sacred Site; Indonesia-Volcano Eruption; Grammys Nominations; Climate-Personalities; Holiday Shopping; Young Adults Charity. 

Network TV At A Glance: 

Tax Reform Plan – 8 minutes, 45 seconds North Korea Missile Test – 7 minutes, 20 seconds Prince Harry Engagement – 5 minutes, 35 seconds Washington Post-Failed Conservative Sting – 4 minutes, 50 seconds Government Funding Meeting – 3 minutes, 20 seconds 

Story Lineup From This Morning’s Radio News Broadcasts: 

ABC: North Korea Missile Test; Tax Reform Plan; Government Funding Meeting; CFPB Appointment; Wall Street News. 

CBS: North Korea Missile Test; Tax Reform Plan; John Conyers Sexual Allegations; Tampa-Serial Killer; Pope-Myanmar Visit. 

FOX: North Korea Missile Test; John Conyers Sexual Allegations. 

NPR: North Korea Missile Test; Tax Reform Plan; Rep. Gutierrez Retirement; John Conyers Sexual Allegations. 

# Washington Schedule 

## Today’s Events In Washington. 

White House: 

PRESIDENT TRUMP — Gives remarks on tax reform. VICE PRESIDENT PENCE — No public schedule announced. 

US Senate: 9:30 AM Prosecutors Against Gun Violence hold emergency summit in Washington, DC – Prosecutors Against Gun Violence hold legislation-focused emergency summit in Washington, DC, with topics including the Gun Violence Prevention Order Act and the Concealed Carry Reciprocity Act. Participants include Democratic Sen. Dianne Feinstein, Manhattan District Attorney Cyrus Vance Jr., Los Angeles City Attorney Mike Feuer, district attorneys / county attorneys / prosecutors / city attorneys / state attorneys from New York, Nevada, Missouri, Minnesota, Massachusetts, Indiana, California, Colorado, Washington state, Georgia, Wisconsin, Florida, Michigan, and Pennsylvania, and members of law enforcement Location: Dirksen Senate Office Building, Rm G-11, Washington, DC http://www.prosecutorsagv.org/ 9:30 AM Senate HELP Committee considers HHS secretary nominee – Nominations hearing considers Alex Azar to be Secretary of Health and Human Services * President Donald Trump announced the nomination of the pharmaceutical company executive earlier this month, following the resignation of Tom Price over his use of chartered aircraft * Azar has been criticized over his career, having previously spoken out in defense of drug prices and in support of private companies that audit federal health care programs to locate overpayments to health care providers Location: Dirksen Senate Office Building, Rm 430, Washington, DC http://help.senate.gov/ 10:00 AM Senate Judiciary Committee nominations hearing – Nominations hearing considers Stuart Kyle Duncan to be U.S. Circuit Judge for the Fifth Circuit; David Ryan Stras to be U.S. Circuit Judge for the Eighth Circuit; Fernando Rodriguez Jr. to be U.S. District Judge for the Southern District of Texas; and Andrei Iancu to be Under Secretary of Commerce for Intellectual Property and U.S. Patent and Trademark Office Director * Consideration of the Duncan and Stras nominations has proved controversial, because Committee Chairman Chuck Grassley has gone against the tradition of requiring ‘blue slips’ of approval from the senators of judicial nominees’ states, instead arguing that the slips are a tradition rather than a rule and that most previous chairmen of the committee have not stuck to it strictly Location: Dirksen Senate Office Building, Rm 226, Washington, DC http://judiciary.senate.gov/ 10:00 AM Senate Environment and Public Works Committee Business Meeting – Business Meeting, with agenda including consideration of nominations of Kathleen Hartnett White to be a Council on Environmental Quality member; and Andrew Wheeler to be Environmental Protection Agency Deputy Administrator, as well as 19 General Services Administration resolutions Location: Dirksen Senate Office Building, Rm 406, Washington, DC http://epw.senate.gov/public/ 10:00 AM Congressional briefing on ‘Voices of Women and Girls on Menstruation, Dignity, and the Issue of Access’ – Congressional briefing on ‘Voices of Women and Girls on Menstruation, Dignity, and the Issue of Access’, presented by BRAWS: Bringing Resources to Aid Women’s Shelters in cooperation with Democratic Sens. Tim Kaine and Gerry Connolly and the University of the District of Columbia David A. Clarke School of Law Legislation Clinic. Girls in schools, women and girls in shelters, and women who were formerly incarcerated share their personal experiences with limited or restricted access to menstrual products, with the event highlighting ‘the need for thoughtful public policy solutions to this pervasive problem’ Location: U.S. Capitol Visitor Center, Rm 203-202, Washington, DC http://www.braws.org https://twitter.com/BRAWSorg #MenstruationMatters 10:15 AM Senate Dems on Tax bill and families – The Senate Democrats will call on the Republicans to come back to the negotiating table and work with Democrats on tax reform that will “bring tax relief to the middle class”. Speakers: Senator Bob Casey (D-PA); Senator Mazie Hirono (D-HI); Nina Borgia-Aberle from Tuscon, Arizona; Jamie Davis Smith from Washington, D.C. Cotnacts: Jacklin Rhoads (Casey), (202) 228-6367; Will Dempster (Hirono), (202) 224-9813. Location: LBJ Room U.S. Capitol Building, Room S-211 10:30 AM Nominations hearing considers Barry Lee Myers to be Under Secretary of Commerce for Oceans and Atmosphere Location: Russell Senate Office Building, Rm 253, Washington, DC http://commerce.senate.gov https://twitter.com/SenateCommerce 11:45 AM Domestic violence organizations and law enforcement speak in support of Fix NICS Act – Domestic violence organizations and law enforcement ‘show strong support for the Fix NICS Act – a bipartisan bill that would address the deadly connection between domestic violence fatalities and an abuser’s ability to access firearms’ via press conference. Participants include Fix NICS Act co-sponsors bipartisan Sens. John Cornyn (invited) and Chris Murphy, National Network to End Domestic Violence President and CEO Kim Gandy, domestic and gun violence survivors, and National Sheriffs’ Association Executive Director Jonathan Thompson Location: Senate Swamp, Washington, DC www.nnedv.org https://twitter.com/nnedv 2:00 PM Dem Sen. Ron Wyden and small business owners discuss the tax bill – Democratic Sen. Ron Wyden speaks on Main Street Alliance press call on the Senate tax bill, discussing the long and short-term impacts of the tax bill for small businesses and their communities with Main Street Alliance Legislative Policy Director Sapna Mehta, O’Neill Construction Group Owner Maurice Rahming (Portland, OR), The Coronado and Dark Hall Coffee Co-Owner Emily Spetrino (Phoenix), Good Karma Farms Owner Amy Grant (Belfast, ME), and Popcorn Heaven Owner ReShonda Young (Waterloo, IA Location: TBD mainstreetalliance.org https://twitter.com/mainstreettweets 2:30 PM Senate Veterans’ Affairs Committee Business Meeting – Business Meeting, with agenda including consideration of a committee print of ‘S.XXXXX, Caring for our Veterans Act of 2017’ Location: Russell Senate Office Building, Rm 418, Washington, DC http://veterans.senate.gov/ https://twitter.com/VAChair 3:00 PM Closed Briefing: Intelligence Matters Location: Rm 219, Hart Senate Office Bldg, Washington, DC http://intelligence.senate.gov 

US House: 10:00 AM House Judiciary Committee markup hearing – Markup hearing on ‘H.R. 38, Concealed Carry Reciprocity Act’, ‘H.R. X, Fix NICS Act’, and ‘H.R. 2666, AMBER Alert in Indian Country Act’ Location: Rayburn House Office Building, Rm 2141, Washington, DC http://judiciary.house.gov/ https://twitter.com/HouseJudiciary 10:00 AM House Government Reform subcommittees latest joint hearing on Regulatory Reform Task Forces – Interior, Energy, and Environment Subcommittee and Intergovernmental Affairs Subcommittee joint hearing on ‘Regulatory Reform Task Forces Check-In Part III’ Location: Rayburn House Office Building, Rm 2157, Washington, DC http://oversight.house.gov/ https://twitter.com/GOPoversight 10:00 AM House Financial Services subcommittee latest hearing on housing finance – Housing and Insurance Subcommittee hearing on ‘Sustainable Housing Finance: The Role of Ginnie Mae in the Housing Finance System’, with testimony from Government National Mortgage Association Acting President Michael Bright Location: Rayburn House Office Building, Rm 2128, Washington, DC http://financialservices.house.gov https://twitter.com/FinancialCmte 10:00 AM House Natural Resources Committee oversight hearing on modernizing NEPA – Oversight hearing on ‘Modernizing NEPA for the 21st Century’, with testimony from former Council on Environmental Quality General Counsel Dinah Bear; Longview/Kelso Building and Construction Trades Council President Mike Bridges; Common Good Chairman Philip Howard; and Converse County, WY, Commissioner Jim Willox Location: Longworth House Office Building, Rm 1324, Washington, DC http://naturalresources.house.gov https://twitter.com/NatResources 10:00 AM Oversight and Investigations Subcommittee hearing on ‘Examining VA’s Failure to Address Provider Quality and Safety Concerns’ Location: Cannon House Office Building, Rm 334, Washington, DC http://veterans.house.gov/ https://twitter.com/HouseVetAffairs 10:00 AM House Transportation subcommittee hearing on UAS – Aviation Subcommittee hearing on ‘Unmanned Aircraft Systems Integration: Emerging Uses in a Changing National Airspace’, with testimony from aeronautics and astronautics professor Dr Juan Alonso; Southern Company Executive Vice President and Chief Transmission Officer Billy Ball; AirMap General Counsel William Goodwin; The Association for Unmanned Vehicle Systems International President and CEO Brian Wynne; and Federal Aviation Administration Deputy Administrator Daniel Elwell, and Unmanned Aircraft Systems Integration Office Director Earl Lawrence Location: Rm 2167, Rayburn House Office Bldg, Washington, DC http://transportation.house.gov/ https://twitter.com/Transport 10:00 AM House Science subcommittee hearing on the WOTUS rule – Environment Subcommittee hearing on ‘The Future of WOTUS: Examining the Role of States’, with testimony from Arizona State Land Department Deputy Commissioner Wesley Mehl; Chilton Ranch rancher James Chilton Jr.; American University Washington College of Law Adjunct Associate Professor Ken Kopocis; and Pacific Legal Foundation Senior Attorney Reed Hopper Location: Rayburn House Office Building, Rm 2318, Washington, DC http://science.house.gov https://twitter.com/HouseScience 10:00 AM House Commerce subcommittee hearing on algorithms – Digital Commerce and Consumer Protection Subcommittee hearing on ‘Algorithms: How Companies’ Decisions About Data and Content Impact Consumers’, with testimony from University of Chicago Law School Professor Dr Omri Ben-Shahar; University of Pennsylvania Department of Computer and Information Science Professor Dr Michael Kearns; Yale Law School Information Society Project Resident Fellow Kate Klonick; Georgetown Law Center on Privacy and Technology Deputy Director Laura Moy; University of Maryland Francis King Carey School of Law Professor Frank Pasquale; and MIT Sloane School of Management Distinguished Professor of Management Science and Professor of Marketing Dr Catherine Tucker Location: Rayburn House Office Building, Rm 2123, Washington, DC http://energycommerce.house.gov/ https://twitter.com/HouseCommerce 10:00 AM House Appropriations subcommittee hearing on USDA’s role in disaster recovery – Agriculture, Rural Development, Food and Drug Administration, and Related Agencies Subcommittee hearing on ‘USDA’s Role in Disaster Recovery’, with testimony from Acting Deputy Under Secretary of Agriculture for Farm Production and Conservation Rob Johansson; USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service Acting Chief Leonard Jordan; and USDA Farm Service Agency Acting Administrator Steve Peterson Location: Rayburn House Office Building, Rm 2362-A, Washington, DC http://appropriations.house.gov/ https://twitter.com/HouseAppropsGOP 10:00 AM House Appropriations subcommittee hearing on U.S. Forest Service supplemental budget – Interior, Environment, and Related Agencies Subcommittee hearing on ‘Supplemental Oversight – US Forest Service’, with testimony from U.S. Forest Service Chief Tony Tooke Location: Rm 2007, Rayburn House Office Bldg, Washington, DC http://appropriations.house.gov/ https://twitter.com/HouseAppropsGOP 10:00 AM House Foreign Affairs subcommittee hearing on Saudi Arabia and Lebanon – Middle East and North Africa Subcommittee hearing on ‘The Latest Developments in Saudi Arabia and Lebanon’, with testimony from Council on Foreign Relations Senior Fellow for Middle Eastern Studies Elliott Abrams; Middle East Institute Vice President for Policy Analysis, Research, and Programs Dr Paul Salem; and Brookings Institution Center for Middle East Policy Senior Fellow Dr Tamara Cofman Wittes Location: Rayburn House Office Building, Rm 2172, Washington, DC http://www.hcfa.house.gov https://twitter.com/HouseForeign 10:00 AM House Workforce subcommittee hearing on the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation – Health, Employment, Labor, and Pensions Subcommittee hearing on ‘Financial Challenges Facing the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation: Implications for Pension Plans, Workers, and Retirees’ Location: Rayburn House Office Building, Rm 2175, Washington, DC http://edworkforce.house.gov/ https://twitter.com/EdWorkforce 10:15 AM House Energy subcommittee hearing on financial trading in the electricity markets – Energy Subcommittee hearing on ‘Powering America: Examining the Role of Financial Trading in the Electricity Markets’, with testimony from Red Wolf EnergyTrading CEO Wesley Allen (on behalf of Financial Marketers Coalition); PJM Interconnection Senior Vice President and General Counsel Vince Duane; California ISO Director of Market Monitoring Dr Eric Hildebrandt; Jenner & Block partner Max Minzner; NRG Energy Senior Vice President of Operations Chris Moser; and TPC Energy CEO Noha Sidhom (on behalf of Power Trading Institute) Location: Rayburn House Office Building, Rm 2322, Washington, DC http://energycommerce.house.gov/ https://twitter.com/HouseCommerce 10:30 AM House Democratic Leaders to Hold Post-Caucus Press Conference – Participants: Joe Crowley (D-NY), Chairman of the Democratic Caucus; Linda Sánchez (D-CA), Vice Chair of the Democratic Caucus Location: HVC Studio A — Capitol Visitor Center crowley.house.gov https://twitter.com/repjoecrowley 11:00 AM Congressional briefing on hurricane recovery in Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands – PICO National Network, National Latino Evangelical Coalition (NaLEC), and Democratic Rep. Darren Soto host Capitol Hill briefing on the ongoing humanitarian crisis in Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands following the September hurricanes. Speakers/participants include Ponce, Puerto Rico, Mayor Mayita Melendez, Caguas, Puerto Rico, Mayor William Miranda Torres, representatives from the U.S. Virgin Islands, PICO National Network chief of staff Denise Collazo, and NaLEC president Rev. Dr Gabriel Salguero Location: Cannon House Office Building, Rm 441, Washington, DC www.piconetwork.org https://twitter.com/PICOnetwork 11:00 AM House Small Business Committee hearing on federal regulations on the small trucking industry – Hearing on ‘Highway to Headache: Federal Regulations on the Small Trucking Industry’, with testimony from B.L. Reever Transport President Monte Wiederhold (on behalf of Owner-Operated Independent Drivers Association); True Blue Transportation owner Marty DiGiacomo (on behalf of National Association of Small Trucking Companies); Atlas PyroVision Entertainment Group CEO Stephen Pelkey (on behalf of American Pyrotechnics Association); and National Ready Mixed Concrete Association President Robert Garbini Location: Rayburn House Office Building, Rm 2360, Washington, DC http://smallbusiness.house.gov/ https://twitter.com/SmallBizGOP 12:00 PM House aims to pass bill on mandatory training in workplace rights for everybody in the chamber – House of Representatives meets for legislative business, with agenda including consideration of ‘H.Res. XXXX – Requiring each Member, officer, and employee of the House of Representatives to complete a program of training in workplace rights and responsibilities each session of each Congress, and for other purposes’ under suspension of the rules, as well as ‘H.R. 3905 – Minnesota’s Economic Rights in the Superior National Forest Act’ Location: Washington, DC http://www.house.gov/ 2:00 PM House Oversight subcommittees joint hearing on cybersecurity of voting machines – Information Technology Subcommittee and Intergovernmental Affairs Subcommittee joint hearing on ‘Cybersecurity of Voting Machines’, with testimony from Acting Under Secretary of Homeland Security for National Protection & Programs Christopher Krebs; Louisiana Secretary of State Tom Schedler; Virginia Department of Elections Commissioner Edgardo Cortes; University of Pennsylvania Associate Professor of Computer and Information Science Dr Matthew Blaze; and Brookings Institution Governance Studies Fellow in National Security Law Susan Klein Hennessey Location: Rayburn House Office Building, Rm 2154, Washington, DC http://oversight.house.gov/ https://twitter.com/GOPoversight 2:00 PM House Financial Services subcommittees joint hearing on legislation to counter terrorism and illicit finance – Financial Institutions and Consumer Credit Subcommittee and Terrorism and Illicit Finance Subcommittee joint hearing on ‘Legislative Proposals to Counter Terrorism and Illicit Finance’, with testimony from Webster Bank Executive Vice President and Chief Risk Officer Daniel Bley (on behalf of Mid-Size Bank Coalition of America); Condor Consulting President John Byrne; Bank of America Global Head of Financial Crimes Compliance William Fox (on behalf of The Clearing House); Global Witness US Office Deputy Head Stefanie Ostfeld; and Financial Integrity Network President and co-founder Chip Poncy Location: Rayburn House Office Building, Rm 2128, Washington, DC http://financialservices.house.gov https://twitter.com/FinancialCmte 2:00 PM House Foreign Affairs subcommittee hearing on Alzheimer’s – Africa, Global Health, Global Human Rights, and International Organizations Subcommittee hearing on ‘A Global Update on Alzheimer’s Disease’, with testimony from NIH National Institute on Aging Deputy Director Marie Bernard; NIH Fogarty International Center Director Roger Glass; New York University Alzheimer’s Disease and Related Dementias Family Support Program Research Professor Dr Mary Mittelman; Global Alzheimer’s Platform Foundation Chief Scientific Officer Dr Richard Mohs; and Splaine Consulting Principal Michael Splaine Location: Rayburn House Office Building, Rm 2172, Washington, DC http://www.hcfa.house.gov https://twitter.com/HouseForeign 2:00 PM House Appropriations subcommittee hearing on SBA and GSA supplemental budgets – Financial Services and General Government Subcommittee hearing on ‘Supplemental Oversight – Small Business Administration and General Services Administration’, with testimony from GSA Acting Administrator Timothy Horne; and SBA CFO and Associate Administrator for Performance Management Timothy Gribben Location: Rayburn House Office Building, Rm 2359, Washington, DC http://appropriations.house.gov/ https://twitter.com/HouseAppropsGOP 3:00 PM House Rules Committee hearing – Hearing on ‘H.R. 1699, the Preserving Access to Manufactured Housing Act of 2017’ and ‘H.R. 4182, the Ensuring a Qualified Civil Service Act of 2017’ Location: U.S. Capitol, H-313, Washington, DC http://www.rules.house.gov/ https://twitter.com/RulesReps 4:00 PM House Natural Resources Committee markup hearing begins – Markup hearing begins (Wednesday – Opening Statements Only) on ‘H.R. 1778, To provide that an order by the Secretary of the Interior imposing a moratorium on Federal coal leasing shall not take effect unless a joint resolution of approval is enacted, and for other purposes’, ‘H.R. 2630, La Paz County Land Conveyance Act’, ‘H.R. 3117, Transparency and Honesty in Energy Regulations Act of 2017’, ‘H.R. 3607, To authorize the Secretary of the Interior to establish fees for medical services provided in units of the National Park System, and for other purposes’, ‘H.R. 3979, Keep America’s Refuges Operational Act’, ‘H.R. 4299, To provide for the indefinite duration of certain military land withdrawals, to improve the management of lands currently subject to such withdrawals and to make the management of such lands more transparent, and for other purposes’, and ‘H.R. 4300, Admiral Lloyd R. ‘Joe’ Vasey Pacific War Commemorative Display Establishment Act’ * Concludes tomorrow Location: Longworth House Office Building, Rm 1324, Washington, DC http://naturalresources.house.gov https://twitter.com/NatResources 

Other: 8:45 AM POLITICO Playbook Interview with GOP Sen. Marco Rubio – POLITICO Playbook Interview with Republican Sen. Marco Rubio, hosted by POLITICO’s Anna Palmer and Jake Sherman, with welcome remarks from Financial Services Roundtable CEO Tim Pawlenty Location: The Liaison Capitol Hill, 415 New Jersey Ave, NW, Washington, DC www.politico.com https://twitter.com/POLITICOEvents 10:00 AM Media Equality Project on Congressional harassment and calls for resignations – The Media Equality Project is bringing “Bill Clinton’s victims, other luminaries, including Dr. Alveda King, niece of the late Martin Luther King, and others to Washington to confront Senator Franken,(D-MN) Congressman John Conyers, (D-MI) and Congressman Joe Barton (R) TX”. Media interview requests available. The group is also calling for the resignation of Franken, Conyers and Barton. Contact: aj.publius@gmail.com Location: National Press Club, First Amendment Room, 529 14th Street, NW Washington, D.C. 10:00 AM Cuba Trade magazine releases study on trade benefits with Cuba to U.S. farm states – Cuba Trade Magazine and U.S. Agriculture Coalition for Cuba release new white paper ‘Trade with Cuba: A White Paper on Trade Benefits to U.S. Farm States’, via conference call with participants including Republican Rep. Rick Crawford, U.S. Agriculture Coalition for Cuba Co-Chair Paul Johnson, and Cuba Trade magazine Publisher Richard Roffman and Editor-in-Chief JP Faber Location: TBD http://www.cubatrademagazine.com/ 11:00 AM House Appropriations subcommittee hearing on U.S. Army Corps of Engineers supplemental budget – Energy and Water Development, and Related Agencies Subcommittee hearing on ‘Supplemental Oversight – US Army Corps of Engineers’, with testimony from Acting Assistant Secretary of the Army for Civil Works Ryan Fisher; and U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Deputy Commanding General for Civil and Emergency Operations Maj. Gen. Ed Jackson Location: Rayburn House Office Building, Rm 2362-B, Washington, DC http://appropriations.house.gov/ https://twitter.com/HouseAppropsGOP 11:30 AM AG Sessions and Acting DEA Administrator Patterson announce new tools to combat the opioid crisis – Attorney General Jeff Sessions and Acting Drug Enforcement Administration Administrator Robert Patterson announce new tools to combat the opioid crisis, via press conference Location: Department of Justice, 950 Pennsylvania Ave, Washington, DC www.justice.gov https://twitter.com/TheJusticeDept 1:00 PM NASA discusses science investigations launching on the next SpaceX commercial resupply flight to the ISS – NASA discusses select science investigations launching on the next SpaceX commercial resupply flight to the International Space Station – targeted for launch next week at the earliest – via media teleconference featuring Made in Space president and CEO Andrew Rush, LaunchPad Medical CEO Brian Hess and CFO Grayson Allen, NASA Goddard Space Flight Center project scientist Dong Wu, University of Colorado-Boulder lead scientist Peter Pilewskie, NASA Johnson Space Center principal investigator Joseph Hamilton, and NASA Ames Research Center mission scientist Yasaman Shirazi Location: TBD http://www.nasa.gov https://twitter.com/NASA 6:00 PM Bipartisan Reps. Adriano Espaillat and Mia Love speak at The Hill event – The Hill host ‘Leadership in Action: The Hill’s Newsmaker Series’ event with Democratic Rep. Adriano Espaillat and Republican Rep. Mia Love discussing how to cut through bipartisan gridlock Location: Constitution Hall, 3501 Nebraska Ave NW, Washington, DC thehill.com https://twitter.com/TheHill #TheHillNewsmaker 6:00 PM World Affairs Council Embassy Series event with Singapore Ambassador to the U.S. Amb. Ashok Kumar Mirpuri Location: 3501 International Place, NW, Washington, DC http://www.worldaffairsdc.org https://twitter.com/wac_dc 6:00 PM Norwegian Christmas tree lighting ceremony at Union Station – Annual Norwegian Christmas tree lighting ceremony at Union Station in Washington, DC, featuring Norway Ambassador to the U.S. Amb. Kare Aas and special guests * Tree is a gift from the people of Norway to the people of the U.S. as thanks for assistance during and after World War II and for continued friendship since then Location: Union Station, 50 Massachusetts Ave NE, Washington, DC http://www.norway.org/ https://twitter.com/NorwayUS 7:30 PM Sarah Sanders keynotes APPF Annual Red, White and Blue Gala – American Principles Project Foundation Annual Red, White and Blue Gala, with keynote from Press Secretary Sarah Sanders Location: Mayflower Hotel, 1127 Connecticut Ave NW, Washington, DC www.americanprinciplesproject.org https://twitter.com/approject 

# Last Laughs 

## Late Night Political Humor. 

Trevor Noah: “Republicans have set a goal of passing their tax bill through the Senate this week. This plan would cut taxes for everyone as long as your last name is ‘Corporation.’” 

Jimmy Fallon: “I read that Trump lied about his own heritage for decades, claiming that his family was Swedish to help sell apartments. And he’s still claiming that he’s Swedish so IKEA will build his wall.” 

Jimmy Fallon: “It’s been rough for the President. In fact, his first wife Ivana says he really misses his old life. You remember Trump’s old life, where he played golf, watched ‘Fox & Friends,’ and sent crazy tweets all day.” 

Jimmy Fallon: “Get this, I read that the White House may ban staffers from using their smartphones while at work. In related news, President Trump just resigned from office. ‘That’s it, I quit. That is finally enough.’” 

Seth Meyers: “Newt Gingrich recently said that the best way to communicate with President Trump is through the Fox News shows ‘Fox & Friends’ and ‘Hannity,’ while the worst way to communicate with Trump is to marry him.” 

Seth Meyers: “President Trump commented on North Korea’s missile launch today, saying, quote, ‘We will take care of it.’ That’s it? I have to say, I don’t find it comforting that the President talked about enemy missiles the same way a dermatologist talks about a weird mole.” 

Seth Meyers: “Bernie Sanders was nominated for a Grammy today for the audio book of ‘Our Revolution: Future To Believe In.’ He was nominated in the ‘Shouted Word’ category.” 

Seth Meyers: “Vice President Mike Pence announced today that he will travel to Israel next month to address its legislative body. And this is scary: While he’s out of the country, Trump will be in charge.” Conan O’Brien: “Bernie Sanders has been nominated for a Grammy Award for best audio book. Of course, Bernie supporters are already complaining that the Grammys are rigged so that Hillary will win.” 

Conan O’Brien: “Prince Harry is getting married. That’s exciting news. Genealogy experts say that Prince Harry and his fiancee, Meghan Markle, are actually distant cousins. After hearing they were related, Queen Elizabeth finally gave the couple her blessing.” 

Jordan Klepper: “So Project Veritas floated a fake Roy Moore accuser in front of the Washington Post to see if they’d bite. And they didn’t. They did not. Fishing is not always about catching fish. It’s just about baiting hooks and hanging out with bros and trying to get an honest, God-fearing cowboy into the Senate, regardless of what nine women allege.” 

Copyright 2017 by Bulletin Intelligence LLC Reproduction or redistribution without permission prohibited. Content is drawn from thousands of newspapers, national magazines, national and local television programs, radio broadcasts, social-media platforms and additional forms of open-source data. Sources for Bulletin Intelligence audience-size estimates include Scarborough, GfK MRI, comScore, Nielsen, and the Audit Bureau of Circulation. Data from and access to third party social media platforms, including but not limited to Facebook, Twitter, Instagram and others, is subject to the respective platform’s terms of use. Services that include Factiva content are governed by Factiva’s terms of use. Services including embedded Tweets are also subject to Twitter for Website's information and privacy policies. The Department of the Interior News Briefing is published five days a week by Bulletin Intelligence, which creates custom briefings for government and corporate leaders. We can be found on the Web at BulletinIntelligence.com, or called at (703) 483-6100. • Nooksack Can’t Get Second Look At Toss Of Funding Suit. • Enviros Urge 9th Circ. To Revive Wind Farm Challenge. 

Bureau Of Indian Education 

• Oregon Lawmakers Demand Answers From Interior On Chemawa. 

Bureau Of Land Management 

• Washington Post: Three Years After Nevada Ranch Standoff, Bundy Federal Trial Begins In Las Vegas. • San Bernardino (CA) Sun: Here’s Why Cadiz Company Says It’s Taking ‘a Little Pause’ From Its Desert Water Project. • KSTU-TV Salt Lake City: BLM Seeking Public Feedback On Proposal To Expand Research Into Cosmic Rays. 

Bureau Of Reclamation 

• Walden Hydro Bill Would Lower Farmers’ Power Costs. • Timeline Moved Up On Irrigation Pipeline Project; Southwest Bend Piping Project To Begin Around The End Of The Year. 

Bureau Of Safety And Environmental Enforcement 

• BSEE Director Discusses Gulf Of Mexico E&P Opportunities At Deepwater Operations. • About 75,000 Barrels Per Day Of Gulf Oil Output Still Shut After Shell Fire. 

Fish And Wildlife Service 

• Bozeman (MT) Daily Chronicle: New Medicine Lake Blind Wheelchair Accessible. 

National Park Service 

• KPAX-TV Missoula (MT): Public Comment Period On Raising Fees At 17 National Parks Closing Soon. • WSB-TV Atlanta: Why You May Not Have That Lifetime National Parks Pass You Ordered Yet. • Cronkite News: Backers Hope Route 66 ‘Historic Trail’ Designation Can Drive Tourism. • Chicago Tribune: U.S. Steel Dumps More Toxic Chromium Near Lake Michigan, Faces Lawsuit. • Flathead (MT) Beacon: Glacier Park Visitation Up In October. • Las Vegas Review-Journal: Graffiti In Active Volcano At Death Valley Erased By Park Service. 

Office Of Insular Affairs 

• Houston Chronicle: Wildlife Agencies Meet On Guam To Discuss Brown Tree Snakes. 

Office Of Surface Mining 

• Omar’s Pine Creek 2 Mine Receives Award. 

US Geological Survey 

• Midland (TX) Reporter-Telegram: USGS: Uranium Has Been Found Near Big Spring. • Reuters: Aviat Networks Awarded $3.0 Million Project With USGS. • Associated Press: Former Oklahoma Seismologist Testifies In Earthquake Lawsuit. 

Opinion Pieces 

• Has Congress Already Forgotten Our Last Oil Spill Disaster? • We’re Not Paying Our Fair Share To Visit National Parks. • Additional Reading. 

Top National News 

• NBC: Trump Touts Success Of His Asia Trip, Says It Shows “America Is Back.” • CBS: As House Prepares To Vote On Tax Bill, Johnson Says He Opposes Senate Version. • Associated Press: Democrats Introduce Articles Of Impeachment Against Trump. • New York Times: Bonn Conference Trying To Make Headway Despite US Stance On Paris Deal. 

Editorial Wrap-Up • New York Times. - “Mr. Trump Casts A Shadow Over The AT&amp;T-Time Warner Deal.” - “The Senate Questions The President’s Power To Launch Nukes.” • Washington Post. - “Republicans Turn Their Irresponsible Tax Bill Into Monumentally Unwise Social Policy.” - “What Happens In Zimbabwe Without Mugabe In Power?” - “Don’t Be Relieved Only Five People Died In California. Be Enraged.” • Wall Street Journal. - “The Appeal Of Mandate Repeal.” - “Zimbabwe’s Coup By Any Other Name.” - “Adios, Richard Cordray.” 

Big Picture 

> • Headlines From Today’s Front Pages.

Washington Schedule 

> • Today’s Events In Washington.

Last Laughs 

> • Late Night Political Humor.

# DOI In The News 

## U.S. Senate Panel Advances Quest For Oil In Arctic Refuge. 

Reuters (11/15, Gardiner) reports that oil drilling in the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge “moved a step closer to reality on Wednesday after the US Senate energy and natural resources panel voted 13-10 to open part of the reserve coveted by conservationists.” Alaska Sen. Lisa Murkowski (R), a supporter of the measure and Chair of the Senate Energy and Natural Resources Committee, which has jurisdiction on the issue, “says drilling in the refuge is needed to provide jobs and boost the country’s resource base,” adding that drilling on the reserve will be done “the right way.” The AP (11/15, Daly) reports that “opening the remote refuge to oil and gas drilling is a longtime Republican priority.” It quotes Murkowski saying that allowing drilling on the refuge “will help keep energy affordable, saving families and businesses money every time they pay for fuel — essentially an energy tax cut.” Bloomberg News (11/15, Dlouhy) reports that “the estimated $1.1 billion in federal revenue it will generate over the next decade offsets proposed tax cuts, binding it to the Republicans’ high-priority overhaul effort and setting it up to pass the Senate on a simple majority vote.” The Houston Chronicle (11/15, Dlouhy) reports drilling could provide a new source of oil for the Trans Alaska Pipeline System, helping to sustain its economic viability as production on the North Slope declines. However, it is not clear if energy companies are eager to move into the Arctic. The high cost of operations in the remote region discourage drilling as cheap shale projects in Texas and North Dakota provide a surge of oil. The Alaska Dispatch News (11/15, Herz) reports Alaska would get half the proceeds from the federal leasing program, which the CBO esstimates could total $1.1 billion over the next decade. The Washington Examiner (11/15, Siegel) reports a number of Democratic amendments to the bill failed, as Sen. Maria Cantwell challenged the purpose and process of the legislation. Cantwell said, “It really does turn regular order on its head. ... We are being asked to consider legislation that is different than previous bills [that tried to allow drilling in ANWR], and has not been subject to single hearing. At its core, the [bill] would change current law and turn the refuge into a petroleum reserve.” However, Murkowski said, “When [the refuge] was created, it specifically said this area right here [the 1002 area] is recognized for its potential and if Congress authorizes it, the coastal plane can be developed for oil and gas. We don’t change the purpose for which ANWR itself was created.” The Huffington Post (11/15, D'Angelo) reports Sen. Bernie Sanders said future generations will look at the hearings and say “what world was the United States Senate living in” as it pushed for fossil fuel development “at a time of devastating damage done by climate change.” Sanders said, “You’re talking about raising a billion dollars here. ... I’m talking about the United States government spending hundreds of billions of dollars repairing damage, which, to a significant degree, not totally, had to do with climate change. And the scientists tell us the worst is yet to come.” E&E Publishing (11/15), E&E Publishing (11/15), E&E Publishing (11/15), Natural Gas Intelligence (11/15, Passut), Courthouse News (11/15, Buchman), and KTUU-TV Anchorage (AK) Anchorage, AK (11/15, Polk) also provided coverage. 

## Trophies From Elephant Hunts In Zimbabwe Were Banned In The U.S. Trump Just Reversed That. 

The Washington Post (11/15, Fears, Eilperin) reports the Trump Administration reversed an import ban on the remains of elephants legally hunted in Zimbabwe and Zambia. The Post adds that African elephants are listed as threatened under the Endangered Species Act. The US Fish and Wildlife Service previously determined that Zimbabwe “had failed to prove that its management of elephants enhanced the population.” In its new statement, the agency “did not specify what had changed in that country.” The move follows Interior Secretary Zinke’s establishment of an International Wildlife Conservation Council to advise him on how to increase Americans’ public awareness of conservation, wildlife enforcement and the “economic benefits that result from U.S. citizens traveling abroad to hunt.” The Hill (11/15, Cama) reports that the FWS “said it has determined that hunting African elephants in Zimbabwe and Zambia ‘will enhance the survival of the species in the wild,’ which is the standard by which officials judge whether to allow imports of parts – known as trophies – of the animals.” An FWS spokesman said in a statement late Wednesday, “Legal, well-regulated sport hunting as part of a sound management program can benefit the conservation of certain species by providing incentives to local communities to conserve the species and by putting much-needed revenue back into conservation.” Also reporting are the Washington Examiner (11/15, Siciliano), CNN International (11/15, Wallace), Newsweek (11/15, Meza), the Huffington Post (11/15, D'Angelo), ABC News (11/15, Ebbs), WIMS-AM South Shore (IN) South Shore, IN (11/15), UPI (11/16, Downs), and Gizmodo (11/15, McKay). 

## This Group Thinks Trump Hasn’t Done Enough To Unravel Environmental Rules. 

Here’s Its Wish List. The Washington Post (11/15, Eilperin, Dennis) reports that at a private meeting last week sponsored by the Heartland Institute, activists were “giddy” about “much of what the Trump administration had done to roll back Obama-era environmental regulations,” but also “grumpy” that “it wasn’t nearly enough.” The article notes that while Interior Deputy Secretary David Bernhardt could not “make the meeting in person,” Interior energy policy counselor Vincent DeVito did speak to the gathering. Asked this week why DeVito had chosen to address the group, Interior spokeswoman Heather Swift said in an email, “The summit was an opportunity to communicate the progress the department has made on energy and restoring multiple-use and access to federal lands, as well as share ideas and perspectives on how to achieve energy dominance.” The Post continues that “the institute’s scorecard on energy issues, Swift added, reflected that Interior ‘is making incredible progress on restoring traditional multiple uses and access to public lands and toward cutting costly and job-killing regulations on responsible energy development.’” 

## New Outdoor Advisory Panel Draws Mixed Reviews. 

The Twin Falls (ID) Times-News (11/15, Barker) reports that “representatives of outdoor recreation and conservation groups see both potential and peril” in Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke’s new “Made in America” recreation advisory committee. For instance, Sandra Mitchell of the Idaho Recreation Council “embraced the idea and said the committee could help ensure all user groups, both motorized and non-motorized, are treated equally.” On the other hand, “Paul Sanford, national director of recreation policy for the Wilderness Society at Washington, D.C., said he doesn’t object to the committee, but doesn’t want it to be overpopulated with people who represent recreational vehicles and motorized recreation.” 

## Secretary Zinke Questions His Department’s Loyalty (VIDEO). 

Newsy (11/15, Miller) reports that Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke is “at odds with his own department about loyalty to the Trump administration.” According to the article, “since taking over the department, Zinke has restructured many of the senior positions,” and “a handful of career officials have resigned over these changes.” 

# Bureau Of Indian Affairs 

## Gaming Panel Approves Tribe’s Plan For Casino Near Omaha. 

The AP (11/15, Funk, Press) reports that the National Indian Gaming Commission has “again approved the Ponca Tribe of Nebraska’s plan to build a casino near Omaha, but after a decade of court hearings, the project’s future remains uncertain.” The commission’s decision “this week came nearly 10 years after it first approved the proposed casino in Carter Lake, Iowa.” Ponca Tribal Chairman Larry Wright Jr. lauded “the latest decision because building the casino would give the tribe significant new resources to help its members.” Additional coverage was provided by the Omaha (NE) World-Herald (11/16, Duggan, Moring). 

## Blackfeet Tribal Members In Federal Court Over Water Rights. 

KRTV-TV Great Falls, MT (11/15, DeMarco) reports that “members of the Blackfeet tribe were in federal court in Great Falls on Tuesday requesting legal ownership of tribal natural resources.” In October 2015, “enrolled members of the Blackfeet Tribe filed a complaint against the Bureau of Indian Affairs and the Secretary of the Interior.” Judge John Johnston has “granted an extension in the case so the enrolled members of the Blackfeet Tribe can find a lawyer to help represent them on the complaint.” 

## Leech Lake Band Seeks To Recover 11,000 Acres Of “Allotted Lands” In The Chip. 

The Walker (MN) Pilot-Independent (11/15, DeBoer) reports that “an error by the Bureau of Indian Affairs back in the 1940s or 1950s resulted in about 11,000 acres of ‘allotted lands’ that rightly belonged to the Leech Lake Band of Ojibwe, being wrongly transferred to the Chippewa National Forest.” For the last “two to three years, the Leech Lake Band has been working to get the allotted acres transferred back to Band ownership through ‘secretarial transfers.’” 

## Nooksack Can’t Get Second Look At Toss Of Funding Suit. 

Law360 (11/15, Westney) reports that “a Washington federal judge rejected a bid Tuesday to reconsider his dismissal of a lawsuit by the Nooksack Indian Tribe’s purported council that claimed the Bureau of Indian Affairs wrongly refused funding to the tribe, saying the dismissal appropriately deferred to the agency’s finding that the council wasn’t allowed to bring the case.” 

## Enviros Urge 9th Circ. To Revive Wind Farm Challenge. 

Law360 (11/15, Westney) reports that “a conservation group has asked the Ninth Circuit to overturn a lower court decision tossing claims that the Bureau of Indian Affairs violated environmental law in approving a lease between a wind farm developer and a California tribe, saying the agency failed to do enough to protect golden eagles and other birds.” Bureau Of Indian Education 

## Oregon Lawmakers Demand Answers From Interior On Chemawa. 

KUOW-FM Seattle (11/15, Manning) reports that “the six Democrats in Oregon’s congressional delegation released a letter Wednesday pressing a top official in the Interior Department to answer questions about the Chemawa Indian School in Salem.” The letter “comes in response to a series of stories from OPB that found health, safety and academic problems at the school. Staff have also complained to OPB that administrators would retaliate against anyone who raised concerns about how the school was managed.” The letter specifies four “areas it wants Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary for Indian Affairs John Tahsuda to look into: student safety and health, academic failings and high enrollment fluctuations, whistleblower protections, and overall transparency in decision making.” 

# Bureau Of Land Management 

## Three Years After Nevada Ranch Standoff, Bundy Federal Trial Begins In Las Vegas. 

The Washington Post (11/15, Sottile) reports that “more than three years after Nevada rancher Cliven Bundy and hundreds of militiamen faced off with federal law enforcement officers who had repossessed Bundy’s cattle, the 71-year-old is finally seeing his battle reach a courtroom.” Bundy; “two of his sons, Ryan and Ammon; and militia leader Ryan Payne are facing federal trial here on charges of conspiracy to commit an offense against the United States, conspiracy to impede and injure a federal officer, and extortion, among other charges that, if they result in convictions, could lead to life sentences.” According to the article, “prosecutors argued in opening statements this week that the standoff was an attack on the government; attorneys representing the Bundys say the gathering was an exercise of the family’s right to protest.” The AP (11/15, Ritter) reports that Ryan Bundy “told a federal jury on Wednesday he believes protesters and self-styled militia members saved his life when they arrived in April 2014 after government agents used dogs and stun guns against his family members ahead of a gunpoint showdown that ended a cattle roundup.” Bundy, “who is serving as his own lawyer in the trial in Las Vegas, spent more than an hour speaking with a projected image of his wife and eight children on the courtroom screen.” Bundy”told his family history, declared his belief in states’ rights over limited federal government, and professed his love of family, the land, God, Americans, liberty and freedom.” Also reporting are the AP (11/15, Ritter), Reuters (11/15, Smith), and the Daily Mail (11/15, Miller)/ 

## Here’s Why Cadiz Company Says It’s Taking ‘a Little Pause’ From Its Desert Water Project. 

The San Bernardino (CA) Sun (11/15, Steinberg) reports that after recently receiving “the long-sought federal approval for its massive desert water project, Scott Slater, Cadiz president and CEO, said it’s time for the project to ‘slow down’ a bit.” Slater explained, “We are going to take a little pause…and double our effort to allow people to understand this project. We believe people should support an innovative project like ours.” However, “one environmentalist who has studied and followed the project for years, said pausing at this point strikes an odd note.” David Lamfrom, California Desert and National Wildlife Programs director with the National Parks Conservation Association, “said he believes the pause is really because the California Lands Commission has recently surfaced as a possible stumbling block to the project.” But “Cadiz downplays that notion.” 

## BLM Seeking Public Feedback On Proposal To Expand Research Into Cosmic Rays. 

KSTU-TV Salt Lake City (11/15, Steinbrecher) reports that the Bureau of Land Management seeks input “from the public on a proposal that would quadruple the size of an international scientific study happening near Delta.” According to the article, “using clusters of telescopes and surface detectors on the ground, researchers from the University of Utah and around the world are studying cosmic rays, particularly a phenomenon called the ‘Oh-My-God Particle.’” Researchers propose “to quadruple the size of the project to 750,000 acres, which would allow them to place more detectors on the ground.” The article says that “many of the detectors would go on BLM land, and the Millard County Commission is concerned that will mean less public land is available for other uses like grazing, recreation or economic development.” 

# Bureau Of Reclamation 

## Walden Hydro Bill Would Lower Farmers’ Power Costs. 

The Ripon Advance (11/15) reports that Rep. Greg Walden “on Friday introduced the Klamath Infrastructure Improvement Act, legislation that would serve Klamath County irrigators needing affordable water rates.” H.R. 4329 would “amend the Klamath Basin Water Supply Enhancement Act of 2000 and would bring Klamath Basin hydropower costs in line with those for Bureau of Reclamation projects in other Pacific Northwest areas.” Walden said, “We have 1,000 farms in Klamath County. We have 650,000 acres of farmland in the county. Combined crop and livestock sales annually reach approximately $200 million. Agriculture is essential not only to the lifeblood of Klamath County, and frankly to our entire district.” 

## Timeline Moved Up On Irrigation Pipeline Project; Southwest Bend Piping Project To Begin Around The End Of The Year. 

The Bend (OR) Bulletin (11/16, Hamway) reports that “after talk of major delays last week, a project that would replace a section of canal near the southern edge of Bend with a 3,000-foot irrigation pipeline is back on track to begin around the end of the year.” Craig Horrell, general manager of Central Oregon Irrigation District, “said a $5 million piping project is expected to break ground in December or January, pending the results of a federal environmental analysis.” Edna Rey-Vizgirdas, spokeswoman for the Bureau of Reclamation, said, “We’re trying to accommodate their timeline.” 

# Bureau Of Safety And Environmental Enforcement 

## BSEE Director Discusses Gulf Of Mexico E&P Opportunities At Deepwater Operations. 

Offshore Magazine (11/15) reports that at the Deepwater Operations Conference & Exhibition, BSEE director Scott Angelle emphasized the importance of deepwater Gulf of Mexico E&P. During his keynote presentation, Angelle said, “The offshore oil and gas industry has demonstrated that when faced with challenges in deepwater whether market-based or technology, it continues to innovate and accelerate. ... BSEE must work to ensure that the outer continental shelf is attractive for investment and that all operations are conducted safely and are environmentally sustainable.” World Oil (11/15) reports conference director David Paganie said, “Director Angelle’s remarks at Deepwater Operations were an encouraging reminder that offshore oil and gas has advocates in Washington that seek to galvanize the industry in this challenging market.” 

## About 75,000 Barrels Per Day Of Gulf Oil Output Still Shut After Shell Fire. 

Reuters (11/15, Sims) reports a combined 75,206 bpd of oil and 215,122 mcfd of natural gas production remain offline at four platforms in the Gulf of Mexico in the wake of a fire on Shell’s Enchilada platform. The BSEE said production has been shut in fro Shell’s Enchilada, Salsa and Augers platforms, along with Hess’ Baldpate platform and Conger field. Shell said a plan to repair the damage caused by the fire is underway, while Hess is helping the oil major determine when production can resume. Fish And Wildlife Service 

## New Medicine Lake Blind Wheelchair Accessible. 

The Bozeman (MT) Daily Chronicle (11/14) reports that a new accessible blind was dedicated in Ducks Unlimited volunteer Pat Nolan’s honor in Medicine Lake National Wildlife Refuge. According to the article, “construction of the blind was led by DU volunteer Steve Cunningham, and completed by two sons and five grandsons of Nolan’s, with assistance from refuge staff.” Sean Lofgren, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service project leader at Medicine Lake, “said the blind will be used for hunting, wildlife observation and wildlife photography.” 

# National Park Service 

## Public Comment Period On Raising Fees At 17 National Parks Closing Soon. 

KPAX-TV Missoula, MT (11/15, Miller) reports that the comment period for a proposal to raise fees at 17 popular national parks “will be closing in just about a week.” Due to concerns that the 30-day comment period is not enough time, Sen. Steve Daines on Wednesday “sent a letter to the acting director of the National Park Service asking for an extension of the public comment period.” A spokesman with the National Park Service “says the 30-day comment period isn’t unusual.” 

## Why You May Not Have That Lifetime National Parks Pass You Ordered Yet. 

WSB-TV Atlanta (11/15, Johnson) reports that senior citizens can expect their lifetime passes to national parks to be mailed out “sometime in the next 30 days, according to the AARP.” The National Park Service had “said that seniors rushing to beat a steep price increase on lifetime passes created a logjam so severe that it delayed the processing of the requests.” 

## Backers Hope Route 66 ‘Historic Trail’ Designation Can Drive Tourism. 

Cronkite News (11/15, Windes) reports that lawmakers are considering “a bill that would put Route 66 on the road to becoming a National Historic Trail.” The bill, “heard Wednesday by a House Natural Resources subcommittee, would put the more-than-2,400-mile road under the care of the National Park Service, returning signage to the road and letting it appear on maps as a historic road, among other changes.” 

## U.S. Steel Dumps More Toxic Chromium Near Lake Michigan, Faces Lawsuit. 

The Chicago Tribune (11/14, Hawthorne) reports that “six months after U.S. Steel dumped a plume of toxic metal into a Lake Michigan tributary, the company quietly reported another spill at the same northwest Indiana plant and asked state environmental regulators to keep it secret, according to newly released documents.” According to the article, “the 56.7 pounds of chromium released in late October by the company’s Midwest Plant was 89 percent higher than its water pollution permit allows over 24 hours, U.S. Steel revealed in a letter sent to the Indiana Department of Environmental Management.” The Northwest Indiana Post-Tribune (11/16, Lavalley) reports that officials with the Indiana Dunes National Lakeshore and Indiana American Water Company said they weren’t told about the October leak. Bruce Rowe, public information officer and supervisory ranger in charge at the national lakeshore, said, “Our chief of resource management contacted IDEM (Wednesday) morning to learn more about this, and is going to contact other agencies. We obviously want to protect our resources and our visitors just like that spill six months ago, so we’re taking this very seriously and looking into it.” 

## Glacier Park Visitation Up In October. The Flathead (MT) Beacon (11/15) reports that “monthly visitation in Glacier National Park grew once again in October after a dip due to wildfires.” According to the National Park Service, “an estimated 84,000 people visited the park last month, roughly 9,000 more people than a year ago.” 

## Graffiti In Active Volcano At Death Valley Erased By Park Service. 

The Las Vegas Review-Journal (11/15, Brean) reports that “National Park Service employees had to roll out about 600 feet of hose to erase the latest graffiti at Death Valley.” In late October, unidentified “vandals scratched large letters and symbols into the mud bottom of Ubehebe Crater, at the northern end of the national park about 180 miles northwest of Las Vegas.” After receiving “complaints from visitors about the graffiti, the park dispatched a water tanker and team of seven park employees to the crater Nov. 7.” 

# Office Of Insular Affairs 

## Wildlife Agencies Meet On Guam To Discuss Brown Tree Snakes. 

The AP (11/15) reports that “wildlife agencies are meeting this week on Guam to provide updates on numerous projects targeting the invasive brown tree snake, which has proved detrimental to Guam’s native bird population.” The meetings will focus on “increased inspections, awareness programs and effective baiting methods.” The article notes that “approximately $2.8 million from the Office of Insular Affairs is anticipated to carry out the brown tree snake eradication and control projects for the fiscal year.” 

# Office Of Surface Mining 

## Omar’s Pine Creek 2 Mine Receives Award. 

The Williamson (WV) Daily News (11/15) reports that “Arch Coal’s Coal-Mac LLC Pine Creek 2 Surface Mine, located in Omar, received the Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement 2017 Excellence in Surface Coal Mining Reclamation Award.” The award was presented at the National Mining Association’s awards ceremony in Washington, D.C. on Nov. 6. The mine was recognized for “the development and use of multiple techniques to control threats to water quality, such as selenium pollution, total dissolved solids and conductivity.” 

# US Geological Survey 

## USGS: Uranium Has Been Found Near Big Spring. 

The Midland (TX) Reporter-Telegram (11/16, Hawes) reports that the U.S. Geological Survey announced the discovery of uranium in West Texas this week. The USGS “released preliminary information about the discovery northwest of Big Spring.” According to the article, “the uranium itself is part of a new mineral called finchite, named after longtime USGS uranium scientist Warren Finch.” 

## Aviat Networks Awarded $3.0 Million Project With USGS. 

Reuters (11/15) reports that Aviat Networks Inc. has been awarded a $3.0 million project with the U.S. Geological Survey. The new system is “to be used by earthquake science center to transport geophysical, seismographic data, security video to/from various sites.” 

## Former Oklahoma Seismologist Testifies In Earthquake Lawsuit. 

The AP (11/15) reports that former Oklahoma seismologist Austin Holland, who said he was “pressured by an official at the University of Oklahoma to not link the state’s surge in earthquakes to oil and gas production” gave sworn testimony in a lawsuit filed by residents against oil companies for a 2011 earthquake. Accord to the lawsuit, the earthquake that affected Kansas, Arkansas, Tennessee allegedly caused the residents to sustain damages. Holland testified that he was reprimanded for assisting in publishing a journal article on how to handle man-made earthquakes. 

# Opinion Pieces 

## Has Congress Already Forgotten Our Last Oil Spill Disaster? 

In an op-ed for The Hill (11/15, Super), David A. Super, a professor of law at Georgetown Law, criticizes the proposed SECURE American Energy Act (H.R. 4239). The legislation “would transfer to states the authority to authorize oil and gas drilling on public lands,” but it would not “provide states with any resources to perform this work, which currently costs the Bureau of Land Management well over $100 million a year.” Super claims that “the legislation’s only real effect would be to tie the hands of future Congresses that might wish to reassert the balance between extractive, other economic, recreational, and environmental interests that historically has guided our natural resources policy.” 

## We’re Not Paying Our Fair Share To Visit National Parks. 

In an op-ed for The Hill (11/15, WatkinsOpinion Contributor —), Tate Watkins, a research fellow at the Property and Environment Research Center, defends the Interior Department’s proposal to raise fees at 17 popular national parks. Watkins argues that “if our parks, forests, and wilderness areas are truly national treasures, then outdoor recreationists should have no qualms paying to enjoy — and support — them.” But Watkins also suggests that “managers should have flexibility to set pricing structures that work best for each site—whether that includes peak-season fees, annual passes, day rates, or surcharges for visitors from abroad.” 

## Additional Reading. 

Park Fee Increase Prices Out Families. Jackson Hole (WY) News & Guide (11/15, Iobst). 

Fees Just Part Of Park Solution. Jackson Hole (WY) News & Guide (11/15). 

Accessing Our National Parks Should Not Be A Privilege Afforded Only To The Privileged. 

Bend (OR) Source (11/15). 

Wrong Path On National Park Fees. Concord (NH) Monitor (11/15). 

Veterans Service & Conservation Corps: Career Pathways Through Continued Service. 

Huffington Post (11/15). 

We Need Responsible Energy Development On Public Lands. Montana Standard (11/15, Nyman, Rogers). 

Guest Commentary: Trump Administration Shuns Voices Behind Local Groundwork. 

Aspen (CO) Times (11/15, Newman). 

Thomas Mitchell: Constitution Stretched To The Breaking Point. Elko (NV) Daily Free Press (11/15, Mitchell). 

A Ray Of Hope For American Shad. Narrowsburg (NY) River Reporter. 

Progress In The World’s Fight To Save Elephants, Rhinos, Pangolins And Sharks . . . Backsliding In The Fight To End Trophy Hunting By Americans. Huffington Post (11/15, Greene). 

# Top National News 

## Trump Touts Success Of His Asia Trip, Says It Shows “America Is Back.” 

To widespread media skepticism, the President yesterday celebrated his accomplishments in Asia, claiming credit for crafting a unified front against North Korea and for trade deals worth billions of dollars. Two major network newscasts reported Trump’s remarks. In its story about “what he sees as” the trip’s “accomplishments,” NBC Nightly News (11/15, story 3, 1:30, Welker) said Trump “took a victory lap,” and described him as “clearly frustrated by headlines that suggested he didn’t secure any concrete results.” The CBS Evening News (11/15, story 8, 0:45, Mason), meanwhile, quipped that it “appeared for a time” that Trump’s “account of his Asia trip...might run as long as the 12-day journey itself.” In his speech, USA Today (11/15, Jackson, Korte) reports, “Trump outlined his efforts in a country-by-country rundown,” and “some commentators on Twitter likened” his “methodical recitation to someone showing slides of their summer vacation.” More favorable toward Trump was the Washington Times (11/15, Miller) account, which quotes him as saying, “My fellow citizens, America is back and the future has never looked brighter. ... I swore that in every decision and with every action I would put the best interest of the American people first. ... That is exactly what I have done.” Politico (11/15, Lima), however, says Trump touted the success of his trip “despite a dearth of marquee victories for the White House,” which “seemingly did not draw any major diplomatic concessions from the nations it visited on major issues like North Korea’s nuclear efforts, new trade pacts or human rights.” Townhall (11/15, O'Brien) reported that “trade and commerce” were the issues Trump “spent the most time discussing, clearly enthused by his recent meetings.” But Bloomberg News (11/15, Wayne, Pettypiece) says the trade deals touted by Trump “aren’t contracts and might not be fulfilled. And while the president railed against what he regards as systemic flaws in US trade relationships, he neither publicly requested or received specific assurances by foreign leaders to reduce imbalances or address issues such as market access by US companies and intellectual property theft.” The Washington Post (11/15, Gearan) casts Trump as chafing “at criticism that he did not notch any major accomplishments,” and USA Today (11/15, Jackson, Korte) says he “gave the speech at the White House in the wake of criticism of the trip by some analysts and political foes.” The Los Angeles Times (11/15, Bennett) similarly indicates Trump’s “message was undermined by the lack of significant accomplishments he could point to from the trip,” and the New York Times (11/15, Qiu) runs a “Fact Check” analysis under the headline “Trump’s ‘Tremendous Success’ Abroad Is Overstated.” Another New York Times (11/15, Shear) story similarly describes the trip as having brought “few concrete achievements,” and adds “Trump made no significant announcements in a speech that he had hyped on Twitter as ‘a major statement’ to be delivered upon his return.” The Times goes on to report that “critics say Mr. Trump has abandoned the United States’ status as a global superpower by retreating from trade agreements and backing out of the Paris climate accord.” Trump’s “political rivals accuse him of straining relationships with allies in NATO and elsewhere while embracing despots.” The Wall Street Journal (11/15, Ballhaus) runs a similar story this morning. Jonah Goldberg of National Review said on Fox News’ Special Report 

(11/15),”This was no major announcement. He had teased this as a major announcement – tune in for major announcement. There was no major announcement. At the same time, I’m not sure it matters. The press was mad about it. I’m not sure that matters.” Goldberg added that “it sounded like a successful trip. It looked like a successful trip. He came back and talked about it like a successful trip and just because the reporters in the room didn’t like it, well, welcome to the era of Trump. Reporters in the room often don’t like what he does, but he was reaching out to his audience beyond that and I thought it was probably going to be effective for him.” 

Trump’s Search For Water Bottle Featured Across News Coverage. A significant topic across the coverage of the President’s remarks were the two occasions in which he paused to drink water. The Hill (11/15, Fabian), for example, said “the speech might be remembered for Trump’s two awkward-looking water breaks,” and the New York Times (11/15, Qiu) that the President was “deterred only by a struggle to quench his thirst.” While the subject is mentioned in virtually every story on Trump’s remarks, the CBS Evening News (11/15, story 8, 0:45, Mason) devoted all but one sentence of its 45-second report to explain that the President’s “mouth got so dry he had to stop and search for a bottle of water to quench his thirst. A few minutes later, it happened again.” Added CBS, “You’ll recall Mr. Trump, on the campaign trail, mocked then-rival Marco Rubio for taking a water break as he delivered the GOP response to a state of the union address.” Rubio weighed in on Twitter, writing, “Needs work on his form. Has to be done in one single motion, and eyes should never leave the camera, but not bad for his first time.” The AP (11/15, Thomas) also indicates that “during the 2016 campaign, Trump frequently skewered Rubio...for needing to quench his thirst during speeches,” and USA Today (11/15, Estepa) reports, “Sometimes, you really just need a drink of water. Sen. Marco Rubio knows this.” 

Trump: Xi Agrees “Freeze-For-Freeze” Is Unacceptable. The AP (11/15, Pennington) reports Trump said “the US and China agree that North Korea cannot just freeze its nuclear weapons program in exchange for concessions and that it must eliminate its arsenal.” Trump “was restating a long-standing US position but suggested that China now concurred with Washington that a ‘freeze-for-freeze’ agreement was unacceptable.” Said Trump, “President Xi recognizes that a nuclear North Korea is a grave threat to China, and we agreed that we would not accept a so-called freeze for freeze agreement, like those that have consistently failed in the past.” 

Following Trump Visit, China To Send High-Level Envoy To North Korea. The AP (11/14, Bodeen) reports that “following...Trump’s visit to Beijing, China said Wednesday that it would send a high-level special envoy to North Korea amid an extended chill in relations between the neighbors over Pyongyang’s nuclear weapons and missile programs.” Song Tao, “the head of China’s ruling Communist Party’s International Department, will travel to Pyongyang on Friday to report on outcomes of the party’s national congress held last month, the official Xinhua News Agency said.” The Washington Post (11/15, Denyer) says “it is not clear whether this trip has anything to do with” Trump’s visit, as “Beijing routinely undertakes such trips to fellow Communist states.” 

North Korean Editorial: Trump Should Be Sentenced To Death For Kim Insults. The Washington Post (11/15, Erickson) reports “the ever-escalating war of words between the United States and North Korea got dialed up to 11 on Wednesday, when an editorial in a state-run newspaper called...Trump a coward who deserved the death penalty.” The Post adds that “Rodong Sinmun, a mouthpiece for Kim’s ruling Workers’ Party of Korea, took aim at Trump,” writing, “The worst crime for which he can never be pardoned is that he dared [to] malignantly hurt the dignity of the supreme leadership. ... He should know that he is just a hideous criminal sentenced to death by the Korean people.” 

Murphy: Restraining Trump’s Nuclear Authority Won’t Signal Weakness To North Korea. 

Sen. Chris Murphy, a member of the Foreign Relations Committee, said on CNN’s Situation Room (11/15) that he’s not “alone” in being concerned about President Trump’s ability to pre-emptively launch nuclear weapons at North Korea, arguing that “it’s not a coincidence that the first major hearing that we’ve had on the decision-making process regarding the launch of a nuclear weapon happens at the exact same moment that President Trump is suggesting through his Twitter feed that he might use a nuclear weapon against North Korea without consulting with Congress.” When asked if restraining the President’s nuclear authority signals a “weakness to regimes like North Korea,” Murphy said that’s “nonsense,” adding that no president can engage in a pre-emptive military strike without authorization from Congress. Murphy said he’s “introduced legislation that would clarify that.” In an editorial headlined “The President’s Power To Launch Nukes,” the New York Times (11/15) says “Trump and North Korea have prompted Congress to do something it hasn’t done in more than four decades: formally consider changes to the law that gives American presidents the sole authority to launch nuclear weapons.” The US President “is engaged in a dangerous game of chicken with Kim Jong-un,” and while “the Republican-led Congress, which has shown few signs of pushing back against presidential powers, may end up taking no action...there are hard questions to be addressed, especially now that the American people have been alerted to the scope and potential peril of Mr. Trump’s powers.” Sen. Jeanne Shaheen said on CNN’s The Lead (11/15), “I thought this was a great opportunity to try and further engage Russia in what’s going on with North Korea. One of the things we need to do with North Korea, which is a rogue nation, is to get the international community in support of further sanctions, of keeping pressure on the North Korean regime and Russia is a key player there and he missed that opportunity to engage Putin on that issue.” Shaheen added, “We need to build an international coalition as President Obama did on Iran to get people united in working and keeping the pressure on North Korea. What we don’t need is inconsistent messages on Twitter that...are open to interpretation by Kim Jong-un, who is a very irrational and radical leader. So I think that’s the kind of consistent, stable diplomacy that we need to continue and I think, unfortunately, this administration has fallen short in that score.” 

UCLA Basketball Players Thank Trump For Intervening With China To Win Their Release. 

NBC Nightly News (11/15, story 5, 1:50, Holt) reported three UCLA men’s basketball players are back in the US “after being caught up in a legal drama in China which led...Trump to intervene when they were caught shoplifting and faced up to a decade in prison.” Trump was shown saying, “What they did was unfortunate, and you know you’re talking about very long prison sentences. They do not play games.” The White House says Trump’s words with Chinese President Xi Jinping, “along with diplomatic efforts by the State Department, led to a reduction in charges.” On Wednesday morning, Trump tweeted, “Do you think the three UCLA basketball players will say, ‘thank you, President Trump’ they were headed for ten years in jail.” The CBS Evening News (11/15, story 7, 0:35, Mason) reported the three players apologized on Wednesday for shoplifting, and ABC World News Tonight (11/15, story 8, 1:15, Muir) that the three thanked Trump for his efforts. Fox News’ Special Report (11/15) showed footage of the players thanking the President and the US government. USA Today (11/15, Peter), Reuters (11/15, Carroll), the Washington Post (11/15, Bontemps), Politico (11/15, Lima, Nelson) and the Los Angeles Times (11/15, Bolch), among other news outlets, also report the story. 

In Japan, Bannon Warns Against China’s Plans To “Dominate” World Economy. The Washington Times (11/15, Taylor) reports that Steve Bannon “railed against China’s ‘hegemonic’ ambitions Wednesday, telling a crowd in Tokyo that the West and its Asian allies must wake up to communist Beijing’s plan to ‘dominate’ the world economy.” Bannon said “American ‘elites’ have long believed a ‘false premise’ that China would become more of a liberal democracy and a free market economy as its economy grew,” yet “the exact opposite has happened. ... The Chinese leadership had no intention ever of joining the rules-based international order. They had their own plan, and they executed that plan very rigorously.” 

Trump Takes To Twitter To Blast “Naïve (Or Dumb)” NYTimes, CNN. The Washington Times (11/15, Miller) reports that earlier Wednesday, Trump “took to Twitter with a vengeance...to blast his critics in the news media.” Trump “labeled CNN as ‘Loser!’ and skewered the ‘failing’ New York Times for being ‘naive (or dumb)’ on foreign policy.” Trump said of the Times, “The failing @nytimes hates the fact that I have developed a great relationship with World leaders like Xi Jinping, President of China. ... They should realize that these relationships are a good thing, not a bad thing. The U.S. is being respected again. Watch Trade!” Politico (11/15, Lima) says “it was unclear what specific Times article the president was responding to,” though “earlier Wednesday Times foreign affairs columnist Thomas Friedman penned a piece criticizing” him “for allowing himself to be manipulated by Xi on trade, an issue the president has made a priority in his overseas diplomatic talks.” Under the headline “China Could Sell Trump the Brooklyn Bridge,” Friedman writes in the New York Times (11/14, Friedman) that “Xi has been brilliant at playing Trump, plying him with flattery and short-term trade concessions and deflecting him from the real structural trade imbalances with China.” 

## As House Prepares To Vote On Tax Bill, Johnson Says He Opposes Senate Version. 

With the House set to vote on its tax cut plan Thursday, President Trump tweeted Wednesday evening, “Big vote tomorrow in the House. Tax cuts are getting close!” However, coverage on the network news broadcasts and in print this morning focuses on the Senate bill, suggesting the measure could be in trouble after Sen. Ron Johnson said he will not support it and Sen. Susan Collins said the decision to include a repeal of the ACA’s individual mandate was a mistake. Anthony Mason reported on The CBS Evening News (11/15, story 2, 2:40, Mason) that House Republicans “are set to pass a massive package of corporate and individual tax cuts” Thursday. Chief congressional correspondent Nancy Cordes added that the House plan would “eliminate the deduction for state and local taxes,” which “has angered a handful of GOP House members from high-tax states, but there probably aren’t enough of them to prevent passage in the House.” However, much of the media coverage highlights Johnson’s opposition to the Senate bill as well as the inclusion of the individual mandate repeal and Collins’ criticism of that decision. Johnson told the Wall Street Journal (11/15, Hughes) Wednesday that he opposes the Senate Republican tax bill, arguing that the measure benefits corporations more than other businesses. Johnson told the Journal, “If they can pass it without me, let them. ... I’m not going to vote for this tax package.” The Washington Times (11/15, Sherfinski) reports that in a statement Johnson “said...that it’s important to strike a proper competitive balance between larger corporations and smaller ‘pass-through’ companies that file their taxes as individuals and are often taxed at levels higher than the 35 percent corporate rate.” Said Johnson, “These businesses truly are the engines of innovation and job creation throughout our economy, and they should not be left behind. ... Unfortunately, neither the House nor Senate bill provide fair treatment, so I do not support either in their current versions.” The Washington Examiner (11/15, Lawler) says Johnson is “the first Republican senator to express opposition to the GOP tax bill,” and the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (11/15, Glauber) says his opposition “could prove important since Republicans have only 52 seats in the Senate.” 

Rove: Differences Between House, Senate Bills Can Be Used To Craft A Better Final Version. Karl Rove writes in the Wall Street Journal (11/15) that while much has been made of the differences between the House and Senate bills, their goals are similar, and the areas where they differ can be used to craft a better final bill. Rove adds that Republicans, and President Trump in particular, need to persuade Americans that the corporate tax changes will create jobs and raise incomes, which will help the economy grow. 

## Democrats Introduce Articles Of Impeachment Against Trump. 

In what the AP (11/15, Freking) describes as “a long-shot effort that stands little chance in the Republican-led House,” six House Democrats have introduced articles of impeachment against President Trump, “accusing him of obstruction of justice and other offenses.” The AP adds that “the large majority of Democrats seem intent on having nothing to do with the effort either as lawmakers await the results of special counsel Robert Mueller’s investigation,” and “Democratic leaders have argued that the impeachment campaign riles up Trump’s GOP base, a critical bloc in next year’s midterm elections.” The Washington Times (11/15, Dinan) reports that the Democrats, led by Rep. Steve Cohen, say Trump “has obstructed justice in his dealings with then-FBI Director James Comey, and his businesses are taking money that is illegal under two separate parts of the Constitution.” In addition they say Trump “has undermined the judiciary by using his pardon powers on former Sheriff Joe Arpaio, and that he’s undermined the press corps covering him by berating news outlets or calling them ‘fake.’” 

Podesta: Trump Wants To Run The Justice System “Like A Banana Republic.” In an op-ed for the Washington Post (11/15), John Podesta, who served as chair of Hillary Clinton’s 2016 presidential campaign, writes that reports that “Sessions — in an apparent effort to appease Trump — is considering appointing a special counsel to investigate Clinton’s role in approving the purchase of Uranium One” is proof that Trump “wants to upend 230 years of constitutional history and principle to run the U.S. justice system like a banana republic, or perhaps more aptly like what now passes for the rule of law in the country he aspires to emulate, the Russian Federation.” Podesta argues that “authoritarians and tyrants” use “the instruments of state power, particularly the wrath of the prosecutor, to rain opprobrium down upon citizens with whom they disagree.” 

Sessions To Be Interviewed By House Intelligence Committee. Reuters (11/15) reports a DOJ spokesman said Wednesday that Attorney General Sessions will be interviewed in a closed door session with the House intelligence committee on Nov. 30. The committee is one of several, “along with the Department of Justice’s special counsel Robert Mueller, investigating alleged Russian interference in the 2016 presidential campaign and potential collusion by President Donald Trump’s campaign.” 

Firm Mentioned In Trump Dossier Linked To Internet Pirates. McClatchy (11/15, Hall) reports that the co-called Trump Dossier “got a lot right,” but “the accusation that a company called XBT and its US subsidiary Webzilla hacked the emails of Democratic Party leaders” is “still vexing investigators.” XBT and Webzilla “have long been the targets of lawyers who fight Internet piracy.” McClatchy adds that is review of “more than 1,000 pages of court documents” found that “Webzilla employees were linked through litigation and regulatory filings to two companies accused of large-scale copyright violations involving Hollywood movies and subscription pornography.” The Daily Caller (11/15, Ross) cites “a source familiar” with Glenn Simpson’s testimony to the House Intelligence Committee who said the Fusion GPS founder “acknowledged...that he did not verify information in the uncorroborated and salacious dossier before briefing reporters on its contents during the campaign.” Bloomberg News (11/15, House) reports that “people familiar with his testimony” say Simpson “defended [the dossier’s] credibility” during his testimony. 

Judge Calls For Greater Transparency In Legal Fight Over Fusion Bank Records. 

Politico (11/15, Gerstein) reports that following “a brief hearing in US District Court in Washington, Judge Richard Leon” told lawyers involved in the legal fight between the House Intelligence Committee and Fusion GPS that the dispute over the committee’s demands for Fusion’s bank records “is of major public significance and needs to be handled with greater transparency.” Leon said, “If there were ever a case where [public access] is in the best interest of all concerned, this is one. ... This is not the kind of case, in my judgment, where there should be much if any time behind the [closed] door, unless it’s necessary. … I think the arguments can be made in open court on the nonconfidential, discrete legal questions.” 

Schiff: Parts Of Trump Dossier Have Turned Out To Be True. In an interview with the Wall Street Journal (11/15, Tau) Wednesday, Rep. Adam Schiff, the ranking Democrat on the house intelligence Committee rejected attempts by Republicans to discredit the Dossier, arguing that its claims that Russia sought to help elect Trump proved to be true. 

## Bonn Conference Trying To Make Headway Despite US Stance On Paris Deal. 

The New York Times (11/15, Friedman, Plumer) reports that “few at United Nations climate talks” in Bonn, Germany “are openly showing” any anger they feel at the United States for rejecting the Paris climate change agreement. In private negotiating sessions, career State Department staffers are “making headway on technical issues to strengthen the Paris accord”; many of them “are familiar players in these negotiations and are continuing to pursue longstanding objectives, like greater transparency on emissions cuts from developing countries.” George David Banks, a senior energy adviser to President Trump, said that because the US has “the best negotiating team in the world,” the “other delegations are very supportive of making sure the US delegation is as involved as possible.” However, the State Department official originally leading the talks, Thomas A. Shannon Jr., canceled at the last minute, “leaving the negotiations largely in the hands of lower-ranking colleagues,” and Banks “refers most questions to the State Department.” In contrast, Fox News’ Special Report (11/15) reported that at the conference, “the US is taking heavy criticism over President Trump’s decision to withdraw from the Paris Climate Accord.” One American energy executive “infuriated participants when he said it’s naïve to suggest poor countries can escape poverty through wind and solar when fossil fuel remains a cheaper...alternative.” That remark came as scientists at the conference say they’re anticipating a 2 percent rise in global CO2 emissions for 2017, with Corinne Le Quere of the University of East Anglia shown saying that the CO2 increase is “driven primarily by what’s happening in China with the renewed use of coal.” Meanwhile, a separate American delegation expressed support for the Accord. Washington Gov. Jay Inslee was shown saying, “Donald Trump cannot stop us. This is the most important thing we wanted the world to know.” 

# Editorial Wrap-Up 

## New York Times. 

“Mr. Trump Casts A Shadow Over The AT&T-Time Warner Deal.” The New York Times (11/15) editorializes that “President Trump’s hostility toward the news media, and CNN in particular, has been so extreme that it is calling into doubt whether his appointees at the Department of Justice can fairly evaluate a merger involving the cable news channel’s parent company, Time Warner, and AT&T.” The Justice Department’s Antitrust Division “has reportedly asked AT&T to sell the Turner Broadcasting division of Time Warner, a unit that includes CNN, or sell its DirecTV unit to gain approval for the deal.” While the Times notes that “on its face, this is not an unreasonable request,” it argues that “given Mr. Trump’s repeated attacks on CNN, there’s ample cause to suspect that the Justice Department scheme is a ploy to force a sale of the news organization to owners that will strip away its editorial independence and turn it into a house organ of the Trump administration.” 

“The Senate Questions The President’s Power To Launch Nukes.” In an editorial, the New York Times (11/15) says President Trump and North Korea “have prompted Congress to do something it hasn’t done in more than four decades: formally consider changes to the law that gives American presidents the sole authority to launch nuclear weapons.” The US President “us engaged in a dangerous game of chicken with Kim Jong-un,” and while “the Republican-led Congress, which has shown few signs of pushing back against presidential powers, may end up taking no action...there are hard questions to be addressed, especially now that the American people have been alerted to the scope and potential peril of Mr. Trump’s powers.” 

## Washington Post. 

“Republicans Turn Their Irresponsible Tax Bill Into Monumentally Unwise Social Policy.” A Washington Post (11/15) editorial says by including a provision to repeal the ACA’s individual mandate in their tax bill, Senate Republicans “remade their tax bill into an Obamacare repeal bill.” The provision, the Post argues, “turned a fiscally irresponsible tax plan into a monumentally unwise piece of social policy that would do much more than widen the deficit.” The Post argues that if Republicans believe repealing the mandate “is good health-care policy, they should seek to pass it on its own, with hearings, markups and debate.” 

“What Happens In Zimbabwe Without Mugabe In Power?” In an editorial, the Washington Post (11/15) writes that the “prospects don’t look good” for Zimbabwe. President Mugabe’s “horrific record” did not inspire the coup and Mnangagwa has “a history of brutal behavior” and could lose a fair vote to the opposition leader. However, the Post warns that “a genuine popular mandate” is needed for reforms to revive the economy. The Post calls on the US and other Western governments to “insist on a prompt restoration of constitutional order and a firm commitment by the military to holding internationally supervised elections next year.” The Post concludes this is “a fragile opportunity to rescue” Zimbabwe, should the situation “not lead to the installation of another strongman.” 

“Don’t Be Relieved Only Five People Died In California. Be Enraged.” The Washington Post (11/15) editorializes that observers should not be comforted by the fact that “only” five people died in Tuesday’s shooting at an elementary school. The Post asserts that “what ought to be foremost is rage at the refusal of lawmakers to take action that might prevent these needless tragedies — and a renewed demand for sensible gun-control regulations, including a ban on assault weapons and comprehensive background checks with better enforcement.” 

## Wall Street Journal. 

“The Appeal Of Mandate Repeal.” A Wall Street Journal (11/15) editorial praises Senate Republicans’ decision to include a repeal of the ACA’s individual mandate in their tax bill and argues that Democrats should explain, why, if ACA insurance provides quality coverage at affordable prices, do people have to be coerced into buying it. 

“Zimbabwe’s Coup By Any Other Name.” The Wall Street Journal (11/15) warns in an editorial that Zimbabwe’s coup is motivated by a political power struggle within the ruling Zanu-PF party and not the suffering of the country’s people. The Journal predicts the coup will not lead to improvements, which would require a total overhaul of its governance. 

“Adios, Richard Cordray.” In an editorial, the Wall Street Journal (11/15, Journal) expresses pleasure at Consumer Financial Protection Bureau director Richard Cordray’s exit, writing that he overstepped the mandate of CFPB and went after industries unpopular with progressives. 

# Big Picture 

## Headlines From Today’s Front Pages. 

Wall Street Journal: 

Activist Peltz Narrowly Wins P&G Board Seat, New Count Shows Republican Sen. Ron Johnson Opposes GOP Senate Tax Package Zimbabwe Army’s Power Grab Could Mark End Of Mugabe’s Reign A Specter Is Haunting Europe’s Recovery: Zombie Companies 

New York Times: 

Tax Bill Thrown Into Uncertainty As First GOP Senator Comes Out Against It Four More Women Describe Advances By Roy Moore As Campaign Pushes Back With Mugabe’s Era Ending In Zimbabwe, A Warning Echoes In Africa A Growing Call To Limit Lawyers’ Donations To Prosecutors Deception And Ruses Fill The Toolkit Of Investigators Used By Weinstein Leonardo Da Vinci Painting Sells For $450.3 Million, Shattering Auction Highs 

Washington Post: 

Two More Women Accuse Moore Of Pursuing Them Senate Tax Bill Hits New Snags Zimbabwe Awaits Fate Of Detained Mugabe Crack Of Gunfire Led To School’s Lockdown Museum Of The Bible Is Strictly By The Book 

Financial Times: 

Zimbabwe Army Seizes Power And Holds Mugabe Africa’s Richest Woman Removed As Head Of Angola State Oil Group Russia And Venezuela Agree $3bn Debt Restructuring 

Washington Times: 

Catch-And-Release Of Illegals Restarted In Texas, Border Patrol Agents Say Democrats Introduce Articles Of Impeachment Against Trump Newest Museum In Nation’s Capital Will ‘Tell The Biography Of The Bible’ Zimbabweans Stunned, Uncertain After Military’s ‘Soft Coup’ Of Mugabe Liberals Finally Hold Bill Clinton Accountable For Sexual Misconduct Kurds Seek More Help From Trump Administration To Keep Peace With Iraq 

Story Lineup From Last Night’s Network News: 

ABC: Roy Moore Sexual Misconduct Allegations; Tax Reform Plan-Obamacare Repeal; California Shooting; Tampa-Possible Serial Killer; Congress-Sexual Harassment Policy; Weather Forecast; Zimbabwe-Military Coup; US College Basketball Players Return; Loose Mental Patient Captured; Pilot-Carrying Gun On Board; St. Louis-Car Crash; New Planet Discovery; Adopted Sibling Discovery. 

CBS: Roy Moore Sexual Misconduct Allegations; Tax Reform Plan-Obamacare Repeal; California Shooting; Texas Church Shooting-Gunman; Loose Mental Patient Captured; Zimbabwe-Military Coup; US College Basketball Players Return; Trump-Asia Tour Wrap Up; Ford-SUV Carbon Monoxide Leak; Wilbert Jones Freed; NBA News; Pope-Lamborghini Donation; Da Vinci Painting Auction. 

NBC: Roy Moore Sexual Misconduct Allegations; California Shooting; Trump-Asia Tour Wrap Up; Tax Reform Plan-Obamacare Repeal; US College Basketball Players Return; Tampa-Possible Serial Killer; Schools-Cyber Security; St. Louis-Fire; Amazon-Grocery Business; Treasury Secretary-Dollar Bills Signature; Meteor Sighting; Pope-Lamborghini Donation; Charity Turned Hobby. 

Network TV At A Glance: 

Roy Moore Sexual Misconduct Allegations – 9 minutes, 30 seconds California Shooting – 7 minutes Tax Reform Plan-Obamacare Repeal – 6 minutes, 5 seconds US College Basketball Players Return – 3 minutes, 40 seconds 

Story Lineup From This Morning’s Radio News Broadcasts: 

ABC: Roy Moore Sexual Misconduct Allegations; Trump-Asia Tour Wrap Up; Baltimore Police Officer Shot; California Shooting. 

CBS: Roy Moore Sexual Misconduct Allegations; Tax Reform Plan-Obamacare Repeal; Trump-Asia Tour Wrap Up; Loose Mental Patient Captured; US College Basketball Players Return; Da Vinci Painting Auction. 

FOX: Roy Moore Sexual Misconduct Allegations; Trump-Asia Tour Wrap Up; Baltimore Police Officer Shot; Charles Manson Ill. 

NPR: Roy Moore Sexual Misconduct Allegations; Obamacare Enrollment Rate; Trump Administration-Immigration Policies; Zimbabwe-Military Coup. 

# Washington Schedule 

## Today’s Events In Washington. 

White House: 

PRESIDENT TRUMP — Gives remarks to the House Republican Conference. VICE PRESIDENT PENCE — No public schedule announced. 

US Senate: 10:00 AM Senate Foreign Relations Committee top secret briefing on new counterterrorism guidance – Closed / Top Secret / Sensitive Compartmented Information briefing on ‘New Counterterrorism Guidance’, given by State Department Coordinator for Counterterrorism Nathan Sales, and Assistant Legal Advisor Steven Fabry; and Joint Staff Deputy Director for Special Operations and Counterterrorism Maj. Gen. Albert Elton II Location: U.S. Capitol Visitor Center, SVC-217, Washington, DC http://foreign.senate.gov/ 10:00 AM Senate Judiciary Committee Executive Business Meeting – Executive Business Meeting, with agenda including the nominations of Leonard Steven Grasz to be U.S. Circuit Judge for the Eighth Circuit; Terry Doughty to be U.S. District Judge for the Western District of Louisiana; Terry Fitzgerald Moorer to be U.S. District Judge for the Southern District of Alabama; Mark Saalfield Norris Sr. to be U.S. District Judge for the Western District of Tennessee; Scott Brady to be U.S. Attorney for the Western District of Pennsylvania; and Andrew Lelling to be U.S. Attorney for the District of Massachusetts; as well as ‘S. 2070, Kevin and Avonte’s Law’ Location: Rm 226, Dirksen Senate Office Bldg, Washington, DC http://judiciary.senate.gov/ 10:00 AM Senate Transportation subcommittee hearing on USCG readiness – Oceans, Atmosphere, Fisheries, and Coast Guard Subcommittee hearing on ‘Coast Guard Readiness: How Far Can We Stretch Our Nation’s Only Multi-Mission, Military Force?’, with testimony from U.S. Coast Guard Commandant Adm. Paul Zukunft; Etta Kuzakin of King Cove, AK; Michigan Technological University’s Dr Guy Meadows; and Mississippi Emergency Management Agency’s Lee Smithson Location: Russell Senate Office Building, Rm 253, Washington, DC http://commerce.senate.gov https://twitter.com/ SenateCommerce 10:00 AM Senate Armed Services Committee nominations hearing – Nominations hearing considers John Rood to be Under Secretary of Defense for Policy; and Randall Schriver to be Assistant Secretary of Defense for Asian and Pacific Affairs Location: Dirksen Senate Office Building, Rm G50, Washington, DC http://armed-services.senate. gov/ 11:30 AM MomsRising and other groups visit Capitol Hill to talk about how they are ‘thankful for the immigrants in their lives’ – MomsRising, SEIU, Herd on the Hill, Mormon Women for Ethical Governance, UndocuBlack, and allies visit Capitol Hill to ‘tell Members of Congress why they’re thankful for the immigrants in their lives’ and ‘remind them that the diversity of our nation is what makes us strong, innovative and prosperous – and we’re thankful to live in the United States of America together’. MomsRising’s Donna Norton, SEIU’s Jaime Contreras, Mormon Women for Ethical Governance’s Sharlee Glenn, and DACA recipient and UndocuBlack member Cindy Kolade hold press conference with Democratic Sen. Chris Van Hollen, before advocates deliver Thanksgiving-themed cookies shaped like turkeys to dozens of senators and representatives along with petitions signed by 25,000 people in support of the DREAM Act and protecting Temporary Protected Status recipients Location: U.S. Capitol, S-115, Washington, DC momsrising.org https://twitter.com/MomsRising 2:00 PM Closed Briefing: Intelligence Matters Location: Rm 219, Hart Senate Office Bldg, Washington, DC http://intelligence.senate.gov 

US House: 9:00 AM House expected to vote on Tax Cuts and Jobs Act – House of Representatives meets for legislative business, with agenda expected to include completion of consideration of ‘H.R. 1, The Tax Cuts and Jobs Act’ * The Tax Cuts and Jobs Act would reduce the number of different tax bands, increase the standard deduction, eliminate the Alternative Minimum Tax, largely eliminate the State and Local Tax Deduction, convert corporate tax into a flat rate, and increase the estate tax exemption Location: Washington, DC http://www.house.gov/ 10:00 AM House Commerce subcommittee hearing on 5G – Communications and Technology Subcommittee hearing on ‘The Race to 5G and its Potential to Revolutionize American Competitiveness’, with testimony from Wireless Infrastructure Association President and CEO Jonathan Adelstein; The Brattle Group Principal Dr Coleman Bazelon; Indiana Biosciences Research Institute CEO David Broecker; 5G Americas President Chris Pearson; and City of San Jose Chief Innovation Officer Shireen Santosham Location: Rayburn House Office Building, Rm 2123, Washington, DC http://energycommerce.house.gov/ https://twitter.com/HouseCommerce 1:30 PM Dem Rep. Earl Blumenauer hosts forum on ‘A Call for Reform: Fix the Farm Bill’ – Democratic Rep. Earl Blumenauer hosts forum on ‘A Call for Reform: Fix the Farm Bill’, focusing on ‘the need to create a more visionary, equitable, and cost-effective Farm Bill’. ‘The Omnivore’s Dilemma’ and ‘In Defense of Food’ author Michael Pollan keynotes, followed by a panel discussion featuring ASPCA Farm Animal Campaign Content Director Suzanne McMillan, Environmental Working Group Vice President of Government Affairs Scott Faber, Food Policy Action Executive Director Monica Mills, Humane Society of the United States CEO and President Wayne Pacelle, Taxpayers for Common Sense President Ryan Alexander, and U.S. PIRG Food and Farming Program Director Bill Wenzel * Ahead of the forum, Rep. Blumenauer holds a press conference with Pollan, Mills, Pacelle, Alexander, Democratic Reps. Don Beyer, Rosa DeLauro, Chellie Pingree, and Peter Welch, and Union of Concerned Scientists Food & Environment Program Director Ricardo Salvador Location: U.S. Capitol, Washington, DC blumenauer.house.gov https://twitter.com/repblumenauer 

Other: 

# Last Laughs 

## Late Night Political Humor. 

Jimmy Kimmel: “The President hasn’t weighed in on the biggest story of the week, Roy Moore. Donald Trump’s in a real bind. On one hand, he doesn’t want to support an accused pedophile for Senate. His other hand is grabbing a woman by the...you know what I’m saying.” 

James Corden: “Trump said he accomplished a lot of things on his trip, but North Korea seems to have a different opinion, because yesterday, North Korea state media published a scathing review of President Trump’s trip to Asia. They said Trump displayed his ‘true colors as an old lunatic, mean trickster, and human reject.’ Now you listen here, North Korea, we may not like him either, but that is the President of the United States you’re accurately describing.” 

James Corden: “I can’t believe Trump and Kim Jong-Un are still going back and forth like this. Like the two of them have literally become the characters in every rom-com you have ever seen. They’ve written insulting each other so much you just know they’ll actually end up together. You know what I mean? They’re like, ‘You are an old trickster.’ ‘You a crazy rocket man.’ ‘Yeah, well you, you’re the love of my life.’” 

Trevor Noah: [Referring to the military coup in Zimbabwe] “I think the news is being dramatic here, all right. You don’t overthrow a 93-year-old man, okay? You just don’t wake him up. The generals are probably in the room like, ‘We’re now in power, we rule.’ ‘Shhhh!’ You know how it’s funny how back in the day, Americans would have seen this news and been like, ‘Man, I’m glad that doesn’t happen here.’ And now people are like, ‘Man, wish that happened here.’” 

Trevor Noah: “Oh, and speaking of African dictators, President Trump is back from Asia.” 

Trevor Noah: “Let’s move on to Congress, because people say that Congress never gets anything done. But yesterday, they got more nothing done than I have ever seen before. First, Attorney General Jeff Sessions flew in from the North Pole to explain to the House Judiciary Committee why his memory is perfect. Except when it comes to remembering Russians, he couldn’t remember them at all.” 

Trevor Noah: “Out of nowhere, it came out that the Senate Republican tax plan will now include repealing Obamacare’s individual mandate, which would mean 13 million fewer Americans having health insurance. You’ve got to admit, this is super sneaky. Like, they couldn’t repeal Obamacare outright, so now they’re just going to try to Bill Cosby it. You know, they just slip it into something else so America wakes up the next day like, ‘Wait, what the hell happened to our healthcare?’ ‘What healthcare? You don’t have a plan, and now you’re going to die.’” 

Jimmy Fallon: “I read that Congress is debating if President Trump should have the power to order a nuclear strike. I guess right now, it’s an even split between ‘no’ and ‘hell no.’ ... They have a good plan, though. They’re going to replace the red button on his desk with the one that orders office supplies from Staples.” 

Seth Meyers: “Former White House Communications Director Anthony Scaramucci is reportedly in talks with publishers about a book chronicling his tenure in the White House. A book? You were there for ten days. At best, you could release a fortune cookie.” 

Seth Meyers: “North Korean state media today called President Trump a coward for canceling his visit to the Demilitarized Zone during his trip to Asia. Listen, President Trump is a lot of things, but a coward is just one of those things.” 

Seth Meyers: “Republicans are reportedly hoping that President Trump will pressure Alabama senator candidate Roy Moore to drop out of the race. Roy Moore still might not drop out, but at least he’ll know what it’s like to be pressured by an older man.” 

Copyright 2017 by Bulletin Intelligence LLC Reproduction or redistribution without permission prohibited. Content is drawn from thousands of newspapers, national magazines, national and local television programs, radio broadcasts, social-media platforms and additional forms of open-source data. Sources for Bulletin Intelligence audience-size estimates include Scarborough, GfK MRI, comScore, Nielsen, and the Audit Bureau of Circulation. Data from and access to third party social media platforms, including but not limited to Facebook, Twitter, Instagram and others, is subject to the respective platform’s terms of use. Services that include Factiva content are governed by Factiva’s terms of use. Services including embedded Tweets are also subject to Twitter for Website's information and privacy policies. The Department of the Interior News Briefing is published five days a week by Bulletin Intelligence, which creates custom briefings for government and corporate leaders. We can be found on the Web at BulletinIntelligence.com, or called at (703) 483-6100. 

## --

Zack Gambill Advisor to FWS U.S. Department of the Interior 1849 C Street, NW -- MIB Room 3351 Washington, DC 20240 office: 202-208-4416 

NOTE: Every email I send or receive is subject to release under the Freedom of Information Act. Conversation Contents 

## November 28 -- Greenwire is ready 

# "E&E News" <ealerts@eenews.net> 

## From: "E&E News" <ealerts@eenews.net> 

## Sent: Tue Nov 28 2017 11:06:29 GMT-0700 (MST) 

## To: < @fws.gov> 

## Subject: November 28 -- Greenwire is ready (b) (6) Conversation Contents 

## U.S. Department of the Interior News Briefing for Monday, November 27, 2017 

# Bulletin Intelligence <Interior@bulletinintelligence.com> 

## From: Bulletin Intelligence <Interior@bulletinintelligence.com> 

## Sent: Mon Nov 27 2017 04:04:35 GMT-0700 (MST) 

## To: <Interior@bulletinintelligence.com> 

## Subject: U.S. Department of the Interior News Briefing for Monday, November 27, 2017  

> Mobile version and searchable archives available here. Please click here to subscribe.
> DATE: MONDAY, NOVEMBER 27, 2017 6:00 AM EST

# Today's Table Of Contents 

DOI In The News 

• Associated Press: Candidate To Lead US Land Agency: No Advocate Of Transfers. • NPR: Montana Monument May Expand Under Trump Administration. • Mille Lacs (MN) Messenger: Secretary Of The Interior Ryan Zinke Visits Mille Lacs County. • The Atlantic: Trump Has Raised The Stakes Of The Public-Land Debate. • CNN: Documents Show Involvement Of Zinke’s Wife On Official Trip. • Washington Post: The Energy 202: Internal Watchdog Says Interior Should Focus On Climate Change. It Isn’t. • Huffington Post: Group Lobbying To End Trophy Hunting Ban Is Alarmingly Close With Ryan Zinke. 

Bureau Of Indian Affairs 

• Program Enhances Navajo Language In Tribal Courts. • Native Americans Rewrote The Playbook For Preserving Public Land. • Desecrated In Macabre Ways, The Ancestral Remains Of Catalina’s Native Americans Finally Come Home. • American Indians Strive To Restore Nearly Lost Tribal Food Traditions. • In Indian Country, Honoring Flag Might Mean Different Anthem. • Five Myths About American Indians. 

Bureau Of Indian Education 

• Putting The ‘Education’ Back In Bureau Of Indian Education. 

Bureau Of Land Management 

• Associated Press: Forest Service Weighs Changes To Protections For Sage Grouse. • Salem (OR) Capital Press: BLM Focuses On Productive Partnerships. • Riverside (CA) Press Enterprise: Will A Senate Bill Save Thousands Of Wild Horses, Burros From Being Euthanized? • Associated Press: Public Meetings Scheduled For Burning Man Permit Renewal. • E&E Publishing: New BLM Regime Shifts Energy Landscape In Colo. 

Bureau Of Ocean Energy Management 

• Jerry Brown Has Meeting In Norwary About California’s Offshore Wind Potential. 

Fish And Wildlife Service 

• Associated Press: NRA, Hunting Group Say Grizzly Bear Hunts Needed For Safety. • E&E Publishing: Right And Left Wings Battle Over Migratory Bird Treaty. • Associated Press: EPA Still Weighing Fine For Geese Deaths At Former Mine. • Associated Press: Trappers Ask Court To Throw Out Lawsuit Over US Fur Exports. • Payson (AZ) Roundup: Fish And Wildlife Retracts Opposition To Arizona Project. • San Francisco Chronicle: A World Apart On The Butte Sink Marsh. 

National Park Service 

• Associated Press: State Attorneys General Bash Plan To Hike National Park Fees. • Associated Press: Utah’s Grand Staircase Monument May Face Sharp Reduction In Size. • Associated Press: Carlsbad Caverns National Park Keeps Concessions Contractor. • Associated Press: Johnny Cash Boyhood Home Considered For Historic Nomination. • Associated Press: Smokies Look For Private Money To Replace Emergency Radios. • Associated Press: Renovations Set To Begin At Boulder Beach Campground. • Associated Press: 8 Tennessee Sites Added To Historic Places Register. • CNN: National Park Service Doesn’t Object To Sale Of Trump Wine At Park. 

Office Of Insular Affairs 

• Virgin Islands Consortium (VIR): National Parks Reopen In U.S. Virgin Islands Following Hurricanes. 

US Geological Survey 

• Washington Post: Oil And Gas Industry Is Causing Texas Earthquakes, A ‘Landmark’ Study Suggests. • Associated Press: Earthquake Recorded Off Oregon Coast. 

Opinion Pieces 

• Ryan Zinke’s Missteps On Ivory. • Editorial: Fee Hikes At National Parks Would Limit Access To Wealthy Americans. • Op-ed: The Facts About Multiple Land Use In Utah. • Additional Reading. 

Top National News 

• CBS: Media Analyses: Trump Blasts Jones Again In Implicit Moore Endorsement. • Washington Examiner: Trump To Push Tax Reform On Hill, In Purple State This Week. • Washington Times: As English Files Suit, DOJ Backs Trump’s Appointment Of Acting CFPB Director. • USA Today: Politico Analysis: Pruitt Seeking To Re-Engineer EPA’s Culture. • New York Times: Puerto Ricans Flee Island For US Mainland. • Washington Post: Balz Discusses Study On “Glaring Alarm” Over Trump’s Reliance On Executive Action. 

Editorial Wrap-Up 

• New York Times. - “Cops, Cellphones And Privacy At The Supreme Court.” - “New York City Has Been A Problem Landlord.” • Washington Post. - “Colleges Need To Take On Greek Life Before More People Die.” - “Two Of Trump’s Judicial Nominees Deserve A Much Closer Look.” - “The Fates Of 700,000 ‘Dreamers’ Hang In The Balance. This One Should Not Be Hard For Congress.” • Wall Street Journal. - “Tax Reform, Growth, And The Deficit.” - “Patents And Property At The Supremes.” - “Richard Cordray’s Political Stunt.” 

Big Picture 

> • Headlines From Today’s Front Pages.

Washington Schedule 

> • Today’s Events In Washington.

Last Laughs 

> • Late Night Political Humor.

# DOI In The News 

## Candidate To Lead US Land Agency: No Advocate Of Transfers. 

The AP (11/26, Gruver) reported Karen Budd-Falen, a candidate to lead the Bureau of Land Management, “says environmentalists mischaracterize her as an advocate of” signing over public lands “to state and local governments and private interests when in fact she’s got no opinion on the issue.” Interior spokeswoman Heather Swift “declined to say whether Budd-Falen was still a candidate or when somebody might be nominated for the director job, which has been vacant since January.” The AP noted Bunn-Falen “and her husband, Frank Falen, have a practice with four other attorneys” that focuses “largely on ranchers and property rights – anything from easements to oil and gas leases and how to comply with government regulations.” According to the AP, her past clients included Cliven Bundy. 

## Montana Monument May Expand Under Trump Administration. 

NPR (11/26, Hegyi) reported that this past summer, Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke recommended Montana’s Badger Two-Medicine “become a new national monument, and President Donald Trump is expected to announce decisions about monuments in December.” The designation “would protect more than 200 square miles of federal land from any future oil and gas development.” NPR discusses Zinke’s ties to Montana, saying that while he has “encouraged mining, drilling and reducing the size of national monuments elsewhere in the country, he’s left existing national monuments in Montana alone and he’s urged mining bans near Yellowstone National Park.” The Huffington Post (11/27, Papenfuss) also reports on this story. 

## Secretary Of The Interior Ryan Zinke Visits Mille Lacs County. 

The Mille Lacs (MN) Messenger (11/22, LaMoore) reported Secretary of the Interior Ryan Zinke “made an impromptu visit to the Mille Lacs County area on Thursday and Friday, Nov. 16 and 17, to discuss the current law enforcement crisis.” Zinke told the Messenger that he had never visited northern Minnesota and he wanted to start visiting tribal reservations in this part of the country. Zinke’s visit “comes on the heels of a Nov. 8 letter from the Department of the Interior to Mille Lacs County Attorney Joe Walsh” that “reaffirms the federal government’s position that the Mille Lacs Band of Ojibwe reservation exists.” Zinke said, “Tribal law enforcement within those boundaries needs to be honored. This is a capable law enforcement agency and should be treated as such.” Trump Has Raised The Stakes Of The Public-Land Debate. 

The Atlantic (11/20, Felton) reported on steps the Trump Administration has taken to roll back federal protection of US land. The Atlantic said that this summer, Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke “reviewed and suggested modifying 10 national monuments; Trump reportedly said that he planned to shrink at least two, Bears Ears and Grand Staircase-Escalante; a House bill was introduced that would limit the president’s power to protect land; and a Senate budget resolution could open a wildlife refuge to drilling.” The article details the federal government’s expanding role in land protection in the past 120 years, including President Theodore Roosevelt’s signing of the Antiquities Act in 1906. The Atlantic said that Democratic presidents starting with Jimmy Carter “exercised their land-protection power extensively,” despite Republican claims of federal overreach. 

## Documents Show Involvement Of Zinke’s Wife On Official Trip. 

CNN (11/21, Killough, Wallace) reported the advocacy group Western Values Project, through a Freedom of Information Act request, obtained a batch of government documents and emails that show Department of Interior staffers accommodating a “a last-minute change in Lolita Zinke’s travel itinerary during a May trip to Alaska, Norway and Greenland.” According to the documents, when a staffer learned that Lolita Zinke would be leaving Alaska to return to Washington, DC on a different date from that previously scheduled, the staffer emailed another staffer: “UGH! We have all kinds of planes, trains and automobiles manifests to now scramble with.” In an exchange of emails, aides “also discussed...that Lolita Zinke would need to pay her own way to attend an event hosted by the governor of Alaska, which included a meal.” Multiple emails indicate that Secretary Zinke “acknowledged that he would personally pay for his wife’s meal.” 

## The Energy 202: Internal Watchdog Says Interior Should Focus On Climate Change. It Isn’t. 

An analysis by the Washington Post (11/22, Grandoni) “PowerPost” blog reported the Interior’s Office of the Inspector General listed climate change among the “most significant management and performance challenges” facing the department in an a report released last week. The Trump Administration, however, “has taken few – if any – steps to address the emerging threat.” Rather, under the leadership of Secretary Ryan Zinke, the department “has reoriented its mission around boosting the extraction of fossil fuels and other resources on the more than 500 million acres under its management as part of the Trump administration’s sweeping ‘energy dominance’ agenda.” The Post analysis also said the Bureau of Indian Affairs “has scrubbed mentions of climate change from the website of its Tribal Climate Resilience Program (now just ‘Tribal Resilience Programs’), which helped tribes study climate change impacts.” 

## Group Lobbying To End Trophy Hunting Ban Is Alarmingly Close With Ryan Zinke. 

The Huffington Post (11/23, D'Angelo) reported on the relationship between Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke and Safari Club International (SCI), which donated thousands of dollars to Zinke’s congressional campaigns. The Huffington Post said the “appropriateness of the relationship has come into question after the Interior Department lifted Obama-era bans on importing elephant and lion trophies from Zimbabwe and Zambia.” Additionally, SCI said on its website that its Director of Litigation, Anna Seidman, “had a prime spot” at a recent signing ceremony for a pair of secretarial orders to overturn a pair of hunter-focused secretarial orders. 

# Bureau Of Indian Affairs 

## Program Enhances Navajo Language In Tribal Courts. 

The AP (11/23, Smith) reported on steps taken by the Navajo National Judicial Branch to “enhance the Navajo language in tribal courts.” The program, a collaboration between the branch and Navajo Technical University, “has students learning court transcription and interpretation in Navajo and English.” According to the AP, the “program was funded by a $150,000 grant from Tribal Justice Support under the U.S. Department of the Interior.” 

## Native Americans Rewrote The Playbook For Preserving Public Land. 

The Los Angeles Times (11/26, Schneider) reports that former President Obama’s Proclamation 9558, which conserves “over 100,000 Native American archaeological and cultural sites within the newly established 1.35-million-acre Bears Ears National Monument,” is now under attack by the Trump Administration. Utah’s Republican congressional delegation “immediately vowed to amend the Antiquities Act to strip its authority for presidents to act on their own to protect large expanses of federal land.” The passage of a bill sponsored by Rep. Rob Bishop (R-UT) “would mark a decided tilt in favor of industrial and political forces that have worked for decades in the West to dismantle safeguards for federal land and the environment.” However, President Trump’s “antipathy to the antiquities law and the new monument has galvanized Native American groups, who see the standoff as another test of their strength a year after the confrontation over the Dakota Access pipeline in North Dakota.” 

## Desecrated In Macabre Ways, The Ancestral Remains Of Catalina’s Native Americans Finally Come Home. 

The Los Angeles Times (11/22, Sahagun) reported on steps taken by the Gabrielino-Tongva Tribe to retrieve Native American remains that “sat in storage for decades” following the closure of a museum in 1950 and give them “a proper burial.” The Times said that a “in a private ceremony in July 2016, the remains of 200 ancestors...were reburied on a bluff in the heart of Catalina, surrounded by green hills essentially unchanged from when the Gabrielino-Tongva roamed the 76-square-mile island.” According to the Times, the reclaimed remains “tell a story that mirrors a broader trend as local tribes use their growing political influence and the legal authority of the Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act to take back remains and artifacts held by museums and universities for proper care and burial.” 

## American Indians Strive To Restore Nearly Lost Tribal Food Traditions. 

The San Francisco Chronicle (11/22, Duggan) reported that Thanksgiving is the annual time of the year when “American Indians are recognized by the wider American society, albeit usually in caricature. To present modern ideas of indigenous food that also recognize precolonial traditions, native chefs from across the continent are flying to New York City over Thanksgiving weekend to participate in a series of pop-up dinners.” Additionally, a young generation of American Indians “are working to reintroduce native food ways to their tribes” by organizing “intertribal events to share ideas and reconnect with their culture.” However, Northern California tribes continue to “struggle for the right to gather foods like acorns, mussels and surf fish that have sustained their tribes for thousands of years” as newer generations “have been cut off from ancestral hunting and gathering grounds, and those grounds have compacted as wild salmon and other vital foods dwindle.” 

## In Indian Country, Honoring Flag Might Mean Different Anthem. 

The AP (11/25, Fonseca) reported that Native Americans have a “unique take” on the debate on “taking a knee” during the national anthem “as the ethnic group with the highest military-service rate, and an enduring regard for warriors.” Many tribes “have their own national anthems known as flag songs that focus on veterans.” Reverence that some tribes display toward veterans “is almost sacred,” as warriors are “blessed through ceremonies before they encounter enemies, and welcomed back with parades, giveaways, eagle feathers, cleansing ceremonies and songs.” 

## Five Myths About American Indians. Kevin Gover, director of the Smithsonian’s National Museum of the American Indian, debunked five myths about American Indians in the Washington Post (11/21, Gover), which he attributes to centuries of “narratives, novels, short stories, textbooks, newspapers, art, photography, movies and television” perpetuating old stereotypes or creating new ones. He says that a singular Native American culture does not exist, explaining that “lumping all Native Americans into an indiscriminate, and threatening, mass continued during the era of western expansion, as settlers pushed into tribal territories in pursuit of new lands on the frontier.” Gover wrote that “vast differences – in culture, ethnicity and language – exist among the 567 federally recognized Indian nations across the United States.” 

# Bureau Of Indian Education 

## Putting The ‘Education’ Back In Bureau Of Indian Education. 

Sue Parton, president of the Federation of Indian Service Employees, writes in the Oklahoman (11/26, Parton) that for too long, the Bureau of Indian Education, the Department of the Interior, Congress, “and other agencies have neglected the very real problems that have done a disservice to Native students in their schools, including off-reservation Indian boarding schools.” Parton says that BIE schools “continue to wrestle with low student achievement; punitive, ineffective ways to address discipline and safety issues; a lack of social, emotional and health care services; staff turnover and poor morale; retaliation against whistleblowers; opaque rather than transparent decision making; and a lack of true accountability.” To overcome these obstacles, Parton proposes community schools, which “educate the whole child, working with community partners that provide programs and services to take on not just educational improvements but the complex problems that hinder good outcomes.” 

# Bureau Of Land Management 

## Forest Service Weighs Changes To Protections For Sage Grouse. 

The AP (11/22, Ridler) reported the US Forest Service said Tuesday that it is working with the US Bureau of Land Management regarding “protection plans for sage grouse in six Western states after a U.S. court agreed with mining companies and others that the agency illegally created some safeguards in Nevada.” Forest Service spokesman John Shivik “said the coordinated review makes sense two years after federal officials decided the chicken-sized bird shouldn’t receive endangered-species protections.” The agency is accepting public comments in Idaho, Montana, Nevada, Utah, Colorado, and Wyoming through Jan. 5. 

## BLM Focuses On Productive Partnerships. 

The Salem (OR) Capital Press (11/22, Dumas) reported that Kathy Benedetto, senior adviser to BLM, “told ranchers at the Idaho Cattle Association annual convention” last week that Interior Secretary has developed a plan for the department to be more a more productive partner with public-lands users. She said Zinke has been defining his priorities over the past nine months,”including restoring a regulatory balance, expanding access to public lands, restoring trust and being a good neighbor.” There is also a renewed focus at BLM “on shared conservation stewardship, including efforts to try outcome-based grazing, revisit sage grouse conservation plans and reconsider the land-use planning process.” 

## Will A Senate Bill Save Thousands Of Wild Horses, Burros From Being Euthanized? 

The Riverside (CA) Press Enterprise (11/24, Horseman) reported that advocates for wild horses applauded an “explanatory statement on the Senate Appropriations Committee’s $32.6 billion Interior spending bill for fiscal 2018” that calls for “humane and politically viable options” to deal with wild horse overpopulation on federal land. This contrasts with a “similar bill passed by the House Appropriations Committee in July” that “allows horses to be euthanized as a means of population control.” Bureau of Land Management officials have “said that the current wild horse population, estimated at 73,000, is more than the land can sustain and the population doubles every four years and that not enough horses are being adopted to keep pace with population growth.” Nevertheless, Suzanne Roy, executive director of the American Wild Horse Campaign, said in a news release, “The Senate has heard the voice of the Americans loud and clear and rejected the killing of our nation’s iconic wild horses and burros.” 

## Public Meetings Scheduled For Burning Man Permit Renewal. 

The AP (11/23) reported the Bureau of Land Management and the organizers of the annual Burning Man counterculture festival will host “a series of meetings next month to get the public’s input regarding the proposed renewal of the event’s permit.” The meetings are scheduled for Dec. 4 to 6 in Gerlach, Reno, and Lovelock. The formal permit renewal process is expected to starting March. 

## New BLM Regime Shifts Energy Landscape In Colo. 

E&E Publishing (11/22, King) reported that environmental advocates support the North Fork Alternative Plan, a proposal to close off 75 percent of the North Fork Valley’s federal lands to energy leasing. However, the North Fork Valley plan, “which BLM’s Uncompahgre Field Office in western Colorado is considering as part of its latest resource management plan (RMP), is hotly contested by fossil fuel developers.” 

# Bureau Of Ocean Energy Management 

## Jerry Brown Has Meeting In Norwary About California’s Offshore Wind Potential. 

The San Diego Union-Tribune (11/24, Nikolewski) reported Gov. Jerry Brown, during his trip to Europe earlier this month, met “with executives from one of the world’s biggest energy companies to discuss the possibilities of developing the first offshore wind project in California.” He met “with Bjørn Otto Sverdrup, senior vice president for corporate sustainability for Statoil in Norway, according to the news website Axios.” There are no offshore wind farms on the West Coast and there is just one that “has been completed in the U.S. – off the shores of Block Island in Rhode Island.” The Union-Tribune mentioned that in May 2016, Brown caleld on the US Department of the Interior “to establish a state task force in coordination with Bureau of Ocean Energy Management to identify promising areas for wind energy off California’s coastline.” Brown said to Axios, “It’s great, all that wind blowing, if we can get it, if the price is right, if the technology is there, if we can get through appropriate analysis. ... I think it may have real potential, but there’s lots of issues there.” 

# Fish And Wildlife Service 

## NRA, Hunting Group Say Grizzly Bear Hunts Needed For Safety. 

The AP (11/25, Brown) reported the National Rifle Association and Safari Club International have “want to ensure their members can hunt grizzly bears in the three-state region around Yellowstone National Park after the animals lost U.S. protections.” In response to conservation groups suing the US Fish and Wildlife Service for revoking the species’ threatened status in July, the NRA and SCI “asked U.S. District Judge Dana Christensen to let them intervene in the case.” The hunting groups argued in “affidavits submitted by their attorneys that hunting would help the region’s economy, allow states to better manage the animals and improve public safety.” 

## Right And Left Wings Battle Over Migratory Bird Treaty. 

E&E Publishing (11/22, Doyle) reported that federal officials may be banned from “pursuing companies whose operations incidentally kill migratory birds, under a two-pronged maneuver now advancing publicly on Capitol Hill and quietly inside the Interior Department.” The Migratory Bird Treaty Act “prohibits the unauthorized taking of more than 800 species of migratory birds.” The US Fish and Wildlife Service “currently contends this includes killing that is ‘incidental’ to industrial or commercial activities, regardless of the corporate actors’ intentions.” Rep. Liz Cheney (R-Wyo.) is “leading one effort to steer the law in industry’s direction” by adding an amendment into the “SECURE America Energy Act” that specifies accidental or incidental take was not covered by the MBTA. A “related effort” could also “be afoot in the office of Interior’s solicitor. There, attorneys appointed in the Trump administration are second-guessing a key legal opinion issued by their predecessors” regarding the MBTA. 

## EPA Still Weighing Fine For Geese Deaths At Former Mine. 

The AP (11/24) reported the Environmental Protection Agency said it has not yet decided whether to fine the companies responsible for polluting the waters of a former open pit copper mine, killing at least 3,000 snow geese last year. However, EPA project manager Nikia Greene “told the Montana Standard that the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, which has jurisdiction over migratory birds, won’t fine Montana Resources and BP-owned Atlantic Richfield Company over the bird deaths at the Berkeley Pit in Butte.” A FWS spokeswoman declined to comment. 

## Trappers Ask Court To Throw Out Lawsuit Over US Fur Exports. 

The AP (11/23, Brown) reported that attorneys for fur trappers are asking a federal judge to throw out a lawsuit against the US Fish and Wildlife Service to block the export of bobcat pelts from the United States. The AP said FWS “regulates trade in animal and plant parts according to the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species, or CITES, which the U.S. ratified in 1975.” The plaintiffs “allege the government’s export program doesn’t protect against the accidental trapping of imperiled species such as Canada lynx.” However, the fur trappers’ attorneys argued that the lawsuit would “do away with the CITES export program.” 

## Fish And Wildlife Retracts Opposition To Arizona Project. 

The Payson (AZ) Roundup (11/25, Shogren) reported the US Fish and Wildlife Service “last month lifted its longstanding objections to the construction of a city-sized development that threatens the last free-flowing major river in the arid Southwest.” The agency had twice in recent years “warned that a key federal permit to build 28,000 homes, golf courses and other amenities near the San Pedro River in southern Arizona would have ‘appreciable’ effects on” some 400 species of migratory birds that are sustained by the river. Yet last month, FWS, “under pressure from the developer and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers,” reversed itself and “agreed that the federal permit to allow a developer to fill in 51 acres of desert washes for roads and building pads would not adversely impact endangered or threatened species.” The Roundup said the “reversal comes as President Donald Trump has repeatedly ordered agencies to roll back environmental protections to facilitate business interests.” 

## A World Apart On The Butte Sink Marsh. 

The San Francisco Chronicle (11/26, Stienstra) reports on duck hunting “in the Butte Sink marsh, nestled at the foot of the Sutter Buttes about 60 miles north of Sacramento.” About a million ducks are located in the area, as just two weeks ago, 700,000 were counted at adjacent Gray Lodge Wildlife Area. The article mentions that “if 10 percent of bird watchers would buy the $25 Federal Duck Stamp, according to one report from the Department of the Interior, it would raise $125 million per year for wetlands purchases and protection.” 

# National Park Service State Attorneys General Bash Plan To Hike National Park Fees. 

The AP (11/22, Mulvihill) reported a group of attorneys general from 10 states and the District of Columbia sent a letter on Wednesday urging “the National Park Service to scrap its proposal to more than double the entrance fee at 17 popular national parks.” They said in a letter to NPS’ acting director, “We cannot let the most popular and awe-inspiring national parks become places for the wealthy.” According to the AP, the signers are all Democrats except for Arizona’s Mark Brnovich, a Republican. The NPS “estimates that higher fees will generate an additional $70 million a year,” but the AGs “say the increase actually could reduce the number of visitors and revenue.” The Sacramento (CA) Bee (11/22, Hart) reported that in the letter, California Attorney General Xavier Becerra “offered a glimpse at his legal theory, saying the National Park Service proposal does not adequately take into account the impact of the fee increase on park visitors. He argued the agency has not done the necessary outreach to those who could be affected, and slammed it for not undertaking an economic analysis, saying the fee increases are ‘unlikely’ to achieve the stated purpose of addressing deferred maintenance backlog.” San Francisco (CA) Chronicle (11/23, Alexander) reported that since NPS introduced the rate plan last month, over “65,000 people have logged comments about the hikes, most with concerns about people being priced out of such iconic spots as the Grand Canyon and Yellowstone.” According to the Chronicle, “If the concerns laid out in the letter are not addressed, Becerra’s office said litigation would follow.” Also reporting on this story are the Los Angeles (CA) Times (11/22, Ulloa), Porterville (CA) Recorder (11/24), Orange County (CA) Register (11/22, Fisher), and KTAR-FM Glendale (AZ) Glendale, AZ (11/22). 

## Utah’s Grand Staircase Monument May Face Sharp Reduction In Size. 

The AP (11/25) reported that Kane County officials “suggested to Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke that the 1.9 million acre Grand Staircase-Escalante National Monument in southern Utah could be shrunk to about one-tenth the size, according to maps obtained by a Salt Lake City newspaper.” The maps suggest the monument could be reduced to about 200,000 acres covering two separate areas. The Salt Lake Tribune “obtained a version from state public lands officials through a second request for public records.” According to the AP, the “announcement of reductions to Grand Staircase-Escalante National Monument and the new Bears Ears National Monument is expected to be made by President Donald Trump when he visits the state early next month.” 

## Carlsbad Caverns National Park Keeps Concessions Contractor. 

The AP (11/25) reported Carlsbad Caverns National Park has signed a new 10-year contract with Carlsbad Caverns Trading Co., LLC, “the company that has provided concessions at the southern New Mexico tourist destination for the last decade.” The National Park Service’s “commercial services program administers more than 500 concession contracts across the country with gross receipts totaling about $1 billion annually.” 

## Johnny Cash Boyhood Home Considered For Historic Nomination. 

The AP (11/23) reported the Arkansas Historic Preservation Program’s review board is considering the boyhood home of country music icon Johnny Cash and 13 other state properties for inclusion on the National Register of Historic Places. The Cash home “was built in 1934 in Dyess in northeastern Arkansas, about 30 miles (48 kilometers) northwest of Memphis, Tennessee.” 

## Smokies Look For Private Money To Replace Emergency Radios. 

The AP (11/26) reports Great Smoky Mountains National Park law enforcement officials are “turning to private fundraisers to try to find enough money to replace their outdated hand-held radios.” Officials said the park “needs $1.3 million to replace the radios and $1.2 million to fix repeaters and transmitters to make sure signals reach throughout the rugged national park and surrounding jurisdictions.” According to the AP, a nonprofit group “is trying to raise $1.5 million for the radios with the federal government paying the rest.” 

## Renovations Set To Begin At Boulder Beach Campground. 

The AP (11/24) reported the National Park Service said a five-month, $3.4 million renovation project at Boulder Beach Campground will begin Monday. Lake Mead National Recreation Area superintendent Lizette Richardson “says the campground has been recognized as one of the top 50 in the West.” 

## 8 Tennessee Sites Added To Historic Places Register. 

The AP (11/22) reported the Tennessee Historical Commission announced Tuesday the additions of eight state properties to the National Register of Historic Places. The AP said the “newly listed sites are the Leach Fire Lookout Tower in Cedar Grove; the Tennessee War Memorial in Nashville; Mt. Zion Negro School near Bradford; Blue Springs Lutheran Church and Cemetery in Mosheim; Farmers and Merchants Bank in Ethridge; Hardison Mill Farm and the Pottsville General Store, near Columbia; and the Black Creek Fire Lookout Tower in Robbins.” 

## National Park Service Doesn’t Object To Sale Of Trump Wine At Park. 

CNN (11/22, Wallace) reported the National Park Service does not object to selling bottles from Trump Winery at a gift shop in Shenandoah National Park. National Park Service spokesman Jeremy Barnum explained the gift store is managed by a private company. Barnum said, “The concessioner has been selling wine from the distributor of this particular winery in Virginia for years.” While NPS decides what types of products the shops may sell, the agency “does not specify what brands of these products should be sold.” 

# Office Of Insular Affairs 

## National Parks Reopen In U.S. Virgin Islands Following Hurricanes. 

The Virgin Islands Consortium (VIR) (11/22) reported the Department of the Interior announced Tuesday that the “Christiansted National Historic Site and Buck Island Reef National Monument on the island of St. Croix, and Trunk Bay Beach at Virgin Islands National Park on the island of St. John have reopened following lengthy closures because of damage wrought on the parks by Hurricanes Irma and Maria.” Interior Secretary Zinke said, “I couldn’t be more proud of the hard work of National Park Service staff, volunteers, and their partners in the Virgin Islands. Their commitment to the park and to the community is inspiring. I’ve heard many stories of staff tending to the needs of the park and their neighbors before even taking care of themselves.” Governor Kenneth Mapp said, “The reopening of Buck Island Reef National Monument, Trunk Bay Beach, and Christiansted National Historic Site represents another significant milestone in the recovery of the U.S. Virgin Islands.” 

# US Geological Survey 

## Oil And Gas Industry Is Causing Texas Earthquakes, A ‘Landmark’ Study Suggests. 

The Washington Post (11/24, Guarino) reported that a new study was published Friday in the Science Advances journal over the increased rate of earthquakes occurring in Texas and whether humans are in any way responsible. The study was performed by a team from the US Geological Survey and the study’s author, Southern Methodist University Associate Professor of Geophysics Maria Beatrice Magnani. Magnani commented on the pattern of earthquakes that led to the study and said “it’s been a head-scratching period for scientists.” The reasearchers were attempting to understand “what has been causing the rash of Texas quakes.” USGS geophysicist and the study’s co-author Michael Blanpied said, “the main approach has been to correlate the location to where there has been human activity.” 

## Earthquake Recorded Off Oregon Coast. 

The AP (11/24) reported the US Geological Survey recorded a “a 4.7-magnitude earthquake in the Pacific Ocean off the coast of Oregon” Friday morning. The earthquake “occurred at a depth of 6.2 miles (10 kilometers).” 

# Opinion Pieces 

## Ryan Zinke’s Missteps On Ivory. 

In an editorial, the Boston Globe (11/24) wrote that Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke has, in a span of just eight months, “made so many missteps that Donald Trump himself tweeted out a policy reversal late last week.” The Globe criticized several aspects of Zinke’s leadership, including his “part of an embarrassing travel scandal” and his links to the now-scuttled Whitefish Energy Holdings deal to rebuild Puerto Rico’s power grid after Hurricane Maria. However, even President Trump “distanced himself from Zinke, last week, after the US Fish and Wildlife Service moved to overturn an Obama administration ban on importing elephant trophies.” 

## Editorial: Fee Hikes At National Parks Would Limit Access To Wealthy Americans. 

In an editorial, the San Francisco Chronicle (11/24) criticized the plan to “charge a whopping $70 to enter some of America’s most beloved national parks.” The proposed fee increases “have come under fire by nature enthusiasts, outdoors groups and, now, California Attorney General Xavier Becerra and 10 of his counterparts from other states.” The attorneys general challenged the “backdoor math” of how the “punitive math” will help the parks’ financial situation. According to the Chronicle, “the crux of their argument is a simple one. The national parks belong to all Americans, not only the wealthy ones.” Instead of raising fees, the Chronicle calls on Congress to appropriate much-needed funds to the park service. 

## Op-ed: The Facts About Multiple Land Use In Utah. 

Don Peay, founder of Sportsmen for Fish and Wildlife, wrote in the Deseret (UT) News (11/26, Paey) that “we are grateful that President Trump and Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke are coming to Utah, to hopefully restore multiple use status to our great public lands — lands and herds we want to pass on in abundance for future generations.” Peay claims hunting and fishing a $2.3 billion Utah industry, and with “careful management and hundreds of millions of investment, we have proven we can have it all, energy, mining, ranching, camping, hiking, hunting, fishing and tourism.” According to Peay, the “Grand Staircase and Bears Ears monuments have been damaging to habitat restoration projects, and fortunately these herds were established before monument status.” He also criticizes out-of-state “environmental groups” for not contributing “one dime to restore Utah’s herds or improve our great state and federal lands.” 

## Additional Reading. 

Bears Ears Perfects America’s Best Idea By Including Tribes. San Francisco (CA) Chronicle (11/22, Jarvis) 

There Is No Good Time To Lift The Ban On Elephant Trophy Hunting In Zimbabwe. 

Washington (DC) Post (11/24, Liss) 

Hiking National Parks Good; Hiking Entry Fees Bad. Tacoma (WA) News Tribune (11/25) 

A Curious Decision By The Interior Department. Greene County (PA) Observer-Reporter (11/23) 

# Top National News Media Analyses: Trump Blasts Jones Again In Implicit Moore Endorsement. 

In two tweets on Sunday, President Trump again weighed in on the Alabama Senate race, blasting ex-US Attorney Doug Jones ahead of the Dec. 12 special election. Trump said across the two tweets, “The last thing we need in Alabama and the U.S. Senate is a Schumer/Pelosi puppet who is WEAK on Crime, WEAK on the Border, Bad for our Military and our great Vets, Bad for our 2nd Amendment, AND WANTS TO RAISES TAXES TO THE SKY. Jones would be a disaster! I endorsed Luther Strange in the Alabama Primary. He shot way up in the polls but it wasn’t enough. Can’t let Schumer/Pelosi win this race. Liberal Jones would be BAD!” While Trump did not mention scandal-plagued ex-state Supreme Court Justice Roy Moore in either tweet, coverage casts the President’s comments – much as it did his remarks last week – as an implicit endorsement of the GOP candidate. On the CBS Weekend News (11/26, story 3, 1:50, Quijano), Errol Barnett reported that “Trump, who last week defended Roy Moore, repeated that stance on Twitter today. ‘Moore’s opponent Doug Jones would be disaster,’ he said, reminding that he initially backed Moore’s opponent.” On NBC Nightly News (11/26, story 3, 0:55, Snow), Kelly O’Donnell reported that “Trump pushed for Roy Moore’s victory without naming Moore. ‘Can’t let Schumer/Pelosi win this race. Liberal Jones would be bad.’ Some Republicans have urged President Trump to persuade Roy Moore to leave the race. But he has ignored that pressure. He cites Roy Moore’s denial of any wrongdoing. So President Trump is indirectly endorsing Roy Moore.” Alabama Live (11/26, Gore) reported that with the tweets, Trump “is doubling down on his criticism of” Jones, pressing “for Republican support while” not mentioning Moore. USA Today (11/26, Estepa) reports that Trump “doubled down on his insistence that a Democrat shouldn’t win Alabama’s Senate seat, once again appearing to back” Moore. The New York Times (11/26, Caron) also says that Trump “doubled down on his criticism of...Jones, and reiterated his support for...Moore.” The Washington Post (11/26, Kane, Nakamura) says that Trump “continued his lonely campaign to boost” Moore, criticizing Jones “as other GOP lawmakers continued to oppose their party’s nominee over sexual misconduct allegations.” The Post says that while Trump didn’t mention Moore in his tweets, the President criticized Jones “in a way that made clear that Trump supported the controversial Republican nominee.” Politico (11/26, Nussbaum) reported, “The tweets come as Trump has become increasingly vocal about the charged Alabama Senate race, which just weeks ago was seen as a lock for Republicans. But in the wake of a slew of accusations against Moore – including that he molested a 14-year-old girl when he was in his 30s – many Republican leaders called on Moore to drop out of the race, though Moore vehemently denied the accusations.” Under the headline “Trump Chooses Legislative Agenda Over GOP Repulsion Of Moore,” the AP (11/26, Colvin) reports that with his tweets, Trump made “clear the success of his legislative agenda outweighs widespread GOP repulsion at the prospect of seating...Moore, who is dogged by allegations of sexual misconduct.” The Hill (11/26, Savransky) reported that Trump “last week appeared to throw his support behind...Moore,” telling reporters, “We don’t need a liberal person in [the Senate seat], a Democrat.” Newsweek (11/26, Silverstein) reported on its website that Trump “has still not said if he believes Moore’s accusers are lying and he has not formally endorsed the former judge’s campaign. He said he would decide this week whether he’s going to campaign for Moore ahead of the Dec. 12 vote.” The Daily Caller (11/26, Crowe) headlined its report “‘Jones Would Be A Disaster’ – Trump Issues Backhanded Endorsement Of Moore.” On NBC Nightly News (11/26, story 4, 1:30, Snow), political analyst Mark Murray said of the Alabama Senate race, “This is really turning into a no-win situation for Republicans. If Roy Moore does end up winning, you will see Democrats trying to label the Republican Party as the party of Donald Trump and Roy Moore, as we head into the 2018 mid-term elections. If Roy Moore ends up losing, then Republicans will find a situation where Democrats are one seat closer to a potential Senate majority in 2018, if there is a wave.” Michael Bender of the Wall Street Journal said on CNN Inside Politics (11/26), “I think what we’ve seen from President Trump and his political calculations, it’s very short-term. He’s not worried about the long-term brand of the Republican Party, like Mitch McConnell would be, or the long-term implications for the legislative agenda over the next 18 months. He’s focused on the near term. He wants immediate wins. We’ve seen that repeatedly. He talked about these major legislative issues that can take years of singular focus. He expects them to be done right away. He wants Roy Moore in the Senate for a vote on a tax reform plan. It’s almost as simple as that.” Correspondent Ellison Barber said on Fox News MediaBuzz (11/26) that Trump gave Moore “a non-endorsement endorsement. Initially, you had the White House saying...that if these allegations are true, he should step down. And then they repeatedly said that President Trump wants the voters of Alabama to decide. He had noticeably not said anything about it until those comments [last week] on the South Lawn. ... Then you had him tweet again today that it is better than a Pelosi or a Schumer puppet. There is only so much they can push back at some point. The White House can say as much as they want that he wants the voters of Alabama to decide. ... It doesn’t really matter when President Trump comes out and then says what he has said, I think you have to take his words more than anything from the press secretary.” Fox News’ “The Five” co-host Juan Williams said on Fox News MediaBuzz (11/26), “I think you have to put this in political context and the political context is this. Remember, President Trump did not back Judge Moore in the Republican primary in the state of Alabama. He picked the incumbent, the appointee Luther Strange. So what you get is a situation where then once Roy Moore won the seat, there was pressure on him. I think he felt somewhat, ‘Maybe I made the wrong call earlier. My base is with Judge Moore.’” 

Report Examines Jones’ Positions On Issues Highlighted By Trump. Meanwhile, Alabama Live (11/26, Gore) offers “a look at Jones’ stances on the issues highlighted by” Trump, such as the President’s claims that “the former federal prosecutor is ‘weak on crime, weak on the border and bad for the military.’” For example, of Trump’s claim that Jones “is ‘weak on crime,’” Alabama Live says that the Democrat, “a former US Attorney for the Northern District of Alabama and assistant U.S. attorney in Birmingham, has touted his law enforcement background, including the prosecution of two Ku Klux Klan members for the decades old bombing at the 16th Street Baptist Church.” 

ABC News: President Was Unhappy With Ivanka Trump’s Criticism Of Moore. On ABC World News Tonight (11/26, story 3, 2:50, Llamas), Lana Zak reported on Trump’s Sunday tweets criticizing Jones, and highlighted the President saying last week of the allegations about Moore, “Well, he denies it. Look, he denies it. You’re talking about, he said 40 years ago this did not happen.” Zak added that Trump’s “comments [stand] in sharp contrast to those of his daughter and adviser, Ivanka Trump, who earlier told the AP, ‘There’s a special place in hell for people who prey on children. I’ve yet to see a valid explanation, and I have no reason to doubt the victims’ account.’ Now, ABC News has learned the President was not happy by Ivanka’s quick reaction.” 

On Sunday Shows, GOP Senators Press For Moore’s Exit From Race. Bloomberg News (11/26, Talev, Niquette) reports that Trump “didn’t join fresh suggestions to abandon Moore, made by” GOP Sens. Rob Portman (OH), Tim Scott (SC), and John Thune (SD) during “separate Sunday talk show appearances.” Portman, appearing on NBC’s “Meet the Press,” said “it would be ‘best’ if Moore stepped aside.” And Thune, appearing on “Fox News Sunday,” said, “If Roy Moore wins and he comes into the Senate in January, there’s going to immediately be an ethics investigation, which is going to be a cloud that he’ll be operating in. It’s going to be a distraction for us and for our agenda.” Scott, appearing on ABC’s This Week (11/26, Raddatz), said, “It is pretty clear to me that the best thing that Roy Moore can do for the country is to move on,” and added that “the reality of it is, the allegations are strong and credible.” The Wall Street Journal (11/26, Nunn) quotes Scott as saying, “In my opinion, and in the opinion of many Republicans and conservatives in the Senate, it is time for us to turn the page, because it is not about partisan politics.” The Huffington Post (11/26, Fang) reported that Scott, “as he repeated his call for Moore” to step aside, said, “I want to be on the side of right when history writes this story.” However, under the headline “Trump Continues To Implicitly Endorse Roy Moore,” the New York Post (11/26, Moore, Schultz) reports that Scott “declined to criticize Trump’s defense of Moore. Asked if the president had compromised his moral authority by defending Moore, Scott replied ‘I don’t think so.’” The Hill (11/26, Beavers) quoted Thune as saying, “I would like to see the president come out and do what we’ve done, saying Moore should step aside.” The Washington Times (11/26, Swoyer) reports that GOP Sen. Lindsey Graham (SC), appearing on CNN’s “State of the Union,” “said Sunday that...Trump is throwing a lifeline to...Moore and warned that a victory by Mr. Moore would be baggage for the” GOP. Said Graham, “The moral of the story is don’t nominate somebody like Roy Moore. From a party perspective, we got to look long term not short term.” The Hill (11/26, Shelbourne) quoted Graham as saying of Trump’s tweets, “Well, that’s a political decision by the president and he’s definitely trying to throw a lifeline to Roy Moore.” The Washington Examiner (11/26, Siegel) reported that GOP Sen. Jeff Flake (AZ), in a Sunday tweet, “warned fellow Republicans not to ‘succumb’ to ‘political tribalism’ by supporting...Moore.” Said Flake, “After what we know, for Republicans to support Roy Moore over Doug Jones is political tribalism at its worst. We shouldn’t succumb to it.” The Hill (11/26, Samuels) reported that Flake, “who has announced he will not seek reelection in 2018, has been an outspoken critic of Trump and of Moore.” In another report, The Hill (11/26, Shelbourne) said, “The remarks from the Republican senators contrast with Trump’s attitude toward Moore,” as the President argues that “the GOP cannot afford to lose the Alabama seat vacated by Attorney General Jeff Sessions.” 

RNC Chair Says Voters To Serve As Moore’s “Judge And Jury.” The Hill (11/26, Bowden) reported that RNC chief Ronna Romney McDaniel, in an interview over the weekend with John Catsimatidis on AM 970 in New York, said “that Alabama voters will have to be the ‘judge and jury’ on whether” Moore wins. Said McDaniel, “The allegations were obviously very concerning, concerning to the degree that we [the RNC] pulled our resources. [But] Roy Moore cannot be replaced on the ballot. He is the candidate. The Alabama [Republican] Party has stood by that. Now the Alabama voters are going to have to be the judge and jury on this.” 

WPost Analysis: Moore Allegations Present Suburban Women With “Awkward Choice.” 

The Washington Post (11/26, Weigel) reports that with the special election rapidly approaching, “a battle is emerging for...white suburban women who typically support GOP candidates but, unlike many of their male counterparts, have become uneasy about Moore. Each side, relying at times on the candidates’ wives to make their case, is presenting female voters with an awkward choice regarding their vote Dec. 12: stand by a man accused of making unwanted sexual advances toward teenage girls when he was in his 30s, or vote for a Democrat with liberal views on abortion and other issues and whose victory could imperil the Senate’s Republican majority.” 

## Trump To Push Tax Reform On Hill, In Purple State This Week. 

The Washington Examiner (11/26, Feldscher) reports President Trump “announced his arrival back in the nation’s capital” with a tweet “urging the Senate to pass tax reform, which he promised would benefit all Americans.” Trump tweeted, “Back in D.C., big week for Tax Cuts and many other things of great importance to our Country. Senate Republicans will hopefully come through for all of us. The Tax Cut Bill is getting better and better. The end result will be great for ALL!” CNN (11/26, Schatz) reported on its website that Trump will travel to Capitol Hill on Tuesday “to meet with Senate Republicans at their luncheon” in a bid to help the Republican tax bill across the finish line. Trump will also “speak with the so-called ‘Big Four’: House Speaker Paul Ryan, House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi, Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell and Senate Minority Leader Chuck Schumer.” In addition, Michael Bender of the Wall Street Journal told CNN Inside Politics that Trump is “using a familiar page from his playbook: persuasion in his own words.” Said Bender, “His team now is drafting a speech to be delivered this week in a purple state where, unsurprisingly, a Democratic senator is seeking re-election in 2018. ... But to find success with this, watch for two things: Can Trump avoid the kind of unforced errors that normally cause him needless distractions? And can he show the kind of discipline and follow through in the days and weeks to come that are necessary? The fate of this party’s last best chance to pass major legislation this year hangs in the balance. “ 

## As English Files Suit, DOJ Backs Trump’s Appointment Of Acting CFPB Director. 

The Washington Times (11/26, Dinan) reports that the Justice Department said in a ruling Saturday that President Trump “acted quickly enough to install his own acting director” of the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, which “appears to give the White House the upper hand in a developing battle with anti-Trump forces.” However, it is not clear “whether the ruling will be enough to head off a brewing constitutional crisis, with two different people now claiming to be the rightful acting director of the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau.” In a move the Times says was “tinted with anti-Trump politics,” former director Richard Cordray “announced a new deputy director Friday then sped up his own resignation, which would normally make the deputy director, Leandra English, the acting director.” However, Trump “countered...by quickly naming his own chief manager, Office of Management and Budget Director Mick Mulvaney, as acting head of the CFPB.” The Wall Street Journal (11/25, Hayashi) quotes an unnamed senior White House official who accused Cordray of “provoking” a fight with the appointment. Meanwhile, a front-page story in the Wall Street Journal (11/26, A1, Hayashi) reports that the night before CFPB was to reopen with two temporary leaders, English has sued the Administration to block Mulvaney from taking control. The Washington Post (11/26, Merle) says English filed suit in the US District Court of DC, calling “herself the ‘rightful acting director’ of the CFPB and asked for a temporary restraining order to prevent Trump from appointing” Mulvaney. The suit says, “The President’s purported or intended appointment of defendant Mulvaney as Acting Director of the CFPB is unlawful.” The Washington Times (11/26, Boyer, Dinan) says English’s suit argues that “the federal vacancy law doesn’t apply if another later statute sets out a different process for a board’s succession.” The New York Times (11/26, Cowley) quotes English as saying in her suit, “The President’s attempt to appoint a still-serving White House staffer to displace the acting head of an independent agency is contrary to the overall statutory design and independence of the bureau.” Reuters (11/26) reports that Senate Minority Whip Durbin told CNN’s “State of the Union” that Trump’s move would violate the Dodd-Frank law. Durbin told CNN “that he did not believe the Trump administration had the authority to appoint Mulvaney under the 2010 Dodd-Frank law, which created the agency.” Durbin said, “I read the provision. ... It says that when the director steps aside, the deputy director shall be in charge of the agency – not may – shall be in charge, and so now there’s an effort by Mick Mulvaney and the attorney general to really push him into this position so he can take away their power.” However, on the same program, Sen. Lindsey Graham “disputed the notion that the White House lacked authority,” saying, “I think the president’s on good ground here to appoint somebody under the vacancy statute.” A Wall Street Journal (11/26) editorial raises the possibility that Cordray sought to create chaos on Monday when CFPB opens. The Journal says that while the Administration will ultimately prevail under the law, if English refuses to vacate what she argues is her office, she will have to be escorted out which Cordray and Democrats will exploit for political gain. The AP (11/26, Condon) says the dispute may end in a court fight. Senate Republican Conference Chairman John Thune told Fox News Sunday that he expects that Mulvaney “will be on the job and he’ll be calling the shots over there” on Monday. But, he added that “ultimately, this may end up in court.” Thune also said that with Mulvaney running the agency, he hopes to see “reforms to that agency, which has essentially very little accountability to the Congress or anybody else.” The CBS Weekend News (11/26, story 4, 0:30, Quijano) reported Sen. Elizabeth Warren said Trump “is creating chaos and supports this dispute being settled in the courts.” 

CFPB Lawyer Backs DOJ’s Ruling. Politico (11/26, Woellert) reports that CFPB general counsel Mary McLeod has “sided with the Justice Department” over the appointment, “adding further confusion to the leadership battle over the controversial watchdog agency.” In a Nov. 25 memo obtained by Politico, “McLeod said Trump had the legal authority to name an acting director to the bureau under the Federal Vacancies Reform Act.” McLeod wrote, “As General Counsel for the Bureau, it is my legal opinion that the President possesses the authority to designate an Acting Director for the Bureau. ... I advise all Bureau personnel to act consistently with the understanding that Director Mulvaney is the Acting Director of the CFPB.” 

## Politico Analysis: Pruitt Seeking To Re-Engineer EPA’s Culture. 

USA Today (11/26, King) reports that EPA Administrator Pruitt is “on a mission to re-engineer the agency’s culture by returning power to states and away from the Washington bureaucrats and coastal elites he said have led it astray.” Pruitt has “adopted a ‘red team/blue team’ model designed to challenge climate change assumptions that global warming is occurring and humans are the primary cause.” This “has raised some of the loudest alarm bells among his many critics who consider it an attack on settled science.” USA Today adds that Pruitt arrived at EPA “under a mutual cloud of hostility,” having sued it “14 times on behalf of Oklahoma challenging a variety of regulations and billing himself as ‘a leading activist against EPA’s activist agenda.’” After nearly a year at the agency, “Pruitt still feels the resistance from employees.” 

## Puerto Ricans Flee Island For US Mainland. 

The New York Times (11/26, Rojas) reports that in the aftermath of Hurricane Maria’s devastation, and in the midst of a sluggish recovery on the island, tens of thousands of Puerto Ricans have left the island to settle on the US mainland, with some planning to stay only for a while but many making plans to stay permanently. Many University of Puerto Rico law students have accepted an offer from Touro Law Center to complete their semester at the school’s campus in New York. The decisions of these individuals to leave have been received with mixed reactions from the remaining residents in Puerto Rico, from support to envy or even feelings of betrayal. 

Chef Jose Andres Has Served More Than Three Million Meals To Hurricane Victims In Puerto Rico. On CBS’ 60 Minutes (11/26), Anderson Cooper reported on the efforts of chef Jose Andres, who, along with “an army of chefs and volunteers,” has “served more than three million meals to the hungry people of Puerto Rico” since Hurricane Maria. 

## Balz Discusses Study On “Glaring Alarm” Over Trump’s Reliance On Executive Action. 

In an analysis for the Washington Post (11/25, Balz), Dan Balz writes that in the “most recent issue of the Forum, a nonpartisan journal of ideas and political analysis,” Sidney M. Milkis and Nicholas Jacobs of the University of Virginia argue that President Trump’s “deployment of what they call ‘executive-centered partisanship’ is both in keeping with the modern presidency and a potentially damaging shift in our politics.” Balz says that “on the arena of executive action, he is pursuing a model established by his recent past predecessors, with worrisome consequences to constitutional governance.” To Milkis and Jacobs, “what began in other presidencies has become ‘a glaring alarm during Trump’s presidency,’” and refer to “the ‘false illusion’ that the executive ‘can truly function as a representative democratic institution.’” 

# Editorial Wrap-Up 

## New York Times. 

“Cops, Cellphones And Privacy At The Supreme Court.” The New York Times (11/26) editorializes that the Supreme Court should revise its so-called third-party doctrine, which “was developed in the 1970s and holds that people have no expectation of privacy when information has been voluntarily shared with a third party, like a cellphone service provider,” when it considers a case involving the issue this week. The Times opines that the doctrine is no longer compatible with the realities of the digital age, when people frequently share data automatically generated by third parties in the course of everyday activities 

“New York City Has Been A Problem Landlord.” The New York Times (11/26) editorializes that “the news that the New York City Housing Authority falsely certified for years that it had inspected apartments for lead paint is a stark sign of how powerless public housing tenants can be and how much the system has eroded.” The Times asserts that “the city needs to do more to show 400,000 residents of public housing that their conditions matter.” One public housing resident quoted in the editorial believes that the city only cares about whether money is paid on time, while mold has been in her apartment for years with no response. 

## Washington Post. 

“Colleges Need To Take On Greek Life Before More People Die.” The Washington Post (11/26) editorializes that, while banning Greek life at many US universities may not be realistic, universities must establish a “new normal” involving “students committing to changes in behavior and university officials not looking away until someone dies.” The Post cites the recent deaths of four young men because of initiation events or parties at fraternities, along with reports of other troubling behavior at both sororities and fraternities nationwide. The Post opines that the heavy promotion of partying and “the ability of these groups to discriminate and reward privilege is — or should be — antithetical to the mission of universities.” 

“Two Of Trump’s Judicial Nominees Deserve A Much Closer Look.” The Washington Post (11/26) editorializes that the Senate must reassert its duty “to ‘advise and consent’ on judicial nominees, rather than ramming through whomever the president selects.” The Post specifically criticizes the nominations of Brett Joseph Talley, who the American Bar Association unanimously found to be unqualified, and Thomas Farr, who was involved in a racially-based voter suppression campaign while working for a senator’s reelection campaign. The Post criticizes Judiciary Committee Chairman Charles Grassley’s decision to “no longer honor all requests by senators to block unpalatable nominees from their home state.” 

“The Fates Of 700,000 ‘Dreamers’ Hang In The Balance. This One Should Not Be Hard For Congress.” The Washington Post (11/26) editorializes that as about 700,000 young, undocumented immigrants in the US face the termination of legal protections that they have relied on since 2012, lawmakers in Washington have turned the problem into a partisan bargaining chip. Democrats threaten to shut down the government unless a spending bill is amended to fix the problem, while Republicans demand concessions on border enforcement in exchange for crafting a solution. The Post opines that “the haggling over dreamers is Washington at its dysfunctional worst.” 

## Wall Street Journal. 

“Tax Reform, Growth, And The Deficit.” A Wall Street Journal (11/26) editorial says Senators have to decide whether the tax reform bill will be an overall benefit to the nation. The Journal argues it will because it is a sign of confidence that better policies can rebuild the country’s economic strength. 

“Patents And Property At The Supremes.” The Wall Street Journal (11/26) editorializes that the policy of inter partes review that was established by Congress via the 2011 America Invents Act had good intentions, but is damaging to constitutional principles and should be changed. The Supreme Court will review the policy on Monday in Oil States Energy v. Greene’s Energy; Oil States claims that inter partes review violates Article III and the Seventh Amendment of the Constitution. 

“Richard Cordray’s Political Stunt.” A Wall Street Journal (11/26) editorial raises the possibility that by resigning unexpectedly and appointing his chief of staff Leandra English as deputy director, former CFPB Director Richard Cordray sought to create chaos on Monday when CFPB opens. The Journal says that while the Administration will ultimately prevail under the law, if English refuses to vacate what she argues is her office, she will have to be escorted out which Cordray and Democrats will exploit for political gain. 

# Big Picture 

## Headlines From Today’s Front Pages. 

Wall Street Journal: 

CFPB Deputy Chief Sues Trump Over Agency Leadership Inside The Wal-Mart Vs. Amazon Battle Over Black Friday The Economy Is Humming, But Businesses Aren’t Borrowing A Self-Made Star Shows One Way To Crack The Gen Z Code 

New York Times: 

Congress Returns To Intense Pressure To End Secrecy Over Sex Harassment In Tax Debate, Gift To Religious Right Could Be Bargaining Chip Long Divided, Iran Unites Against Trump And Saudis In A Nationalist Fervor Myanmar General’s Purge Of Rohingya Lifts His Popular Support Added To The Storm’s Toll, Guilt And Heartache For Puerto Ricans Who Fled Battle For Control Of Consumer Agency Heads To Court 

Washington Post: 

Urgent Agenda Awaits On Hill An Apex Predator Returns Some Women Leave Caliphate But Vow To Fight On For ISIS High Court Case Could Burst Dam On Sports Betting Pressure On Congress To Move On Harassment 

Financial Times: 

Dark Sky Over Bali Volcano Cancels Flights Saudi Crown Prince Pledges To Rid World Of Islamist Terror Agustín Carstens Urges US To Maintain Leadership In World Economy Corporate Japan Hit By Severe Labour Shortages 

Washington Times: 

Trump Vs. Cordray Fight Over CFPB Chief Goes To Court In Hiroshima, Japan’s Military Debate Over Pacifist Constitution Hits Home Democrats Use Testimony Of Former Bodyguard In Quest To Prove Trump Activities With Prostitutes Pope Francis To Visit Myanmar, Carefully Confront Rohingya Muslim Crisis Energy Advocates, Environmentalists Look For Murkowski’s Vote On ANWR Oil Drilling 

Story Lineup From Last Night’s Network News: 

ABC: Al Franken-Sexual Misconduct; John Conyers-Sexual Misconduct; Trump-Roy Moore Campaign; FBI-Russian Hacking Notification; High school Car Murder; Florida-Road Rage; Egypt-Mosque Attack; US Navy-Plane Crash; Holiday Travel; Weather Forecast; Indonesia-Volcano Eruption; Holiday Shopping; Newark Airport-Scary Landing; Nightclub Floor Collapse; Prince Harry Engagement; Homeless Veteran; Cancer Survivor Pianist. 

CBS: Al Franken-Sexual Misconduct; Massage Company-Sexual Allegations; Trump-Roy Moore Campaign; Consumer Financial Protection Bureau Appointment; Egypt-Mosque Attack; Holiday Travel; Holiday Shopping; CBS Evening News New Anchor; Black Friday Gun Sales; Longest Living US President; Indonesia-Volcano Eruption; Syria Civil War-Volunteer Doctor; NYC-Self Driving Cars; School Lunch Charity. NBC: Al Franken-Sexual Misconduct; John Conyers-Sexual Misconduct; Roy Moore Campaign; Roy Moore Campaign-Expert Comment; Holiday Shopping; Florida-Road Rage; Saudi Arabia-Crown Prince; Tobacco New Advertisements; Time Magazine Deal; Recycling Ideas; Indonesia-Volcano Eruption; Meteor Sighting; WW2 Veteran Marathon; Bike Business Charity. 

Network TV At A Glance: 

Trump-Roy Moore Campaign – 7 minutes, 5 seconds Al Franken-Sexual Misconduct – 5 minutes, 55 seconds Indonesia-Volcano Eruption – 1 minute 

Story Lineup From This Morning’s Radio News Broadcasts: 

ABC: Consumer Financial Protection Bureau Appointment; Congress Sexual Allegations; Holiday Travel; Tobacco New Advertisements; 

CBS: Congress Sexual Allegations; Trump-Roy Moore Campaign; Holiday Shopping; Indonesia-Volcano Eruption; Miss Universe Pageant. 

FOX: Consumer Financial Protection Bureau Appointment; Congress Sexual Allegations; Indonesia-Volcano Eruption. 

NPR: Consumer Financial Protection Bureau Appointment; Congress Sexual Allegations; Russian Meddling Investigation-Kushner; Trump-Roy Moore Campaign. 

# Washington Schedule 

## Today’s Events In Washington. 

White House: 

PRESIDENT TRUMP — Has lunch with Vice President Mike Pence and Members of the Senate Finance Committee; hosts an event honoring the Native American code talkers; meets with Secretary of Defense James Mattis. VICE PRESIDENT PENCE — No public schedule announced. 

US Senate: 11:00 AM GOP Sen. James Lankford release federal govt waste report – Republican Sen. James Lankford releases his annual report on federal govt waste and solutions, this year entitled ‘Federal Fumbles: 100 ways the government dropped the ball’, identifying new examples of waste, inefficiency, and duplication in govt, along with solutions to resolve each fumble Location: U.S. Capitol, S-325, Washington, DC http://www.lankford.senate.gov/ https://twitter.com/SenatorLankford 4:00 PM Senate resumes consideration of U.S. district judge nominee – Senate convenes and resumes consideration of the nomination of Dabney Langhorne Freidrich to be U.S. District Judge for the District of Columbia Location: Washington, DC http://www.senate.gov/ 

US House: No votes in the House of Representatives today 

Other: No relevant event scheduled. 

# Last Laughs 

## Late Night Political Humor. 

No late-night talk show aired on Sunday night.  

> Copyright 2017 by Bulletin Intelligence LLC Reproduction or redistribution without permission prohibited. Content is drawn from thousands of newspapers, national magazines, national and local television programs, radio broadcasts, social-media platforms and additional forms of open-source data. Sources for Bulletin Intelligence audience-size estimates include Scarborough, GfK MRI, comScore, Nielsen, and the Audit Bureau of Circulation. Data from and access to third party social media platforms, including but not limited to Facebook, Twitter, Instagram and others, is subject to the respective platform’s terms of use. Services that include Factiva content are governed by Factiva’s terms of use. Services including embedded Tweets are also subject to Twitter for Website's information and privacy policies. The Department of the Interior News Briefing is published five days

a week by Bulletin Intelligence, which creates custom briefings for government and corporate leaders. We can be found on the Web at BulletinIntelligence.com, or called at (703) 483-6100. Conversation Contents 

## Conservation and Hunting Ban Issues - Africa (Zimbabwe) 

# Pete Fick <petefick@gatorzw.com> 

## From: Pete Fick <petefick@gatorzw.com> 

## Sent: Thu Nov 23 2017 21:57:40 GMT-0700 (MST) 

## To: @fws.gov>, <exsec@ios.doi.gov> 

## CC: "'Charles Davy'" <charles.m.davy@gmail.com>, "'Mazunga Safaris'" <mazunga@mazsaf.com> 

## Subject: Conservation and Hunting Ban Issues - Africa (Zimbabwe) 

Dear Secretary Zinke and Deputy Director Sheehan For us in Africa we remain extremely concerned about foreign politics negatively affecting our conservation efforts of our wild life, so hopefully we can open up direct dialogue with both of you to furnish all facts pertaining to hunting and conservation in Zimbabwe. The Bubye Valley Conservancy will also be forwarding you relevant data on that area, as I will be doing too. Please let us know whatever you need from our end. Below is one of the various emails I sent to USFWS during mid 2016 (copied to various embassies) – they never acknowledged receipt of such or opened up any form of dialogue. Most distressing, they would not accept the thorough elephant survey completed by experts within Zimbabwe, which categorically showed a population of over 82 000 elephant, even though not all areas were surveyed. I myself spent 7 years within the Zimbabwe Department of National Parks during the early to mid 1980 `s – back then highly experienced biologists/scientists worked out, after thorough research, that the entire country could handle a maximum of 35 000 elephant. There is less land available today than 30+ years ago for elephant. How much more factual and scientific evidence do we need to ? As many of the key role players in conservation and hunting from Africa will be travelling to the United States in January, would it not be possible to arrange a meeting at your convenience with you between the Dallas and SCI conventions ? I expect that this could clear up many issues that you may have. I could get various role players from around Africa on board with this so please let me know. Kind regards Pete Fick      

> From: Pete Fick [mailto:petefick@gatorzw.com]
> Sent: Wednesday, 15 June 2016 8:32 AM
> To: Tim Van Norman (tim_vannorman@fws.gov)
> Cc: mazunga@mazsaf.com; John.Culley@fco.gov.uk; 'PlemonsKL@state.gov'; 'CorkeyCT@state.gov'; 'Amanda.Mcgregor@international.gc.ca'; 'Severin.MELLAC@eeas.europa.eu'; 'Joel.Mcgregor@dfat.gov.au'; 'Michele.SHCIVO@eeas.europa.eu'; 'Tom.Oppenheim@fco.gov.uk'; 'PlemonsKL@state.gov'; 'Patrice.Laguerre@international.gc.ca'; 'MeyersRL@state.gov'
> Subject: Lion Trophy Ban Bubye Valley Conservancy (BVC.) USFWLS BAN.

Director USFWLS Dear Tim Please can you advise how far USFWS has got regarding the uplifting of the lion trophy ban ? We want to inform our US clients accordingly that are scheduled for hunts. Further the BVC needs to take a very serious look at our over populated lion numbers (last year`s count by Dr. Byron Du Preez was (b) (6) approximately 530 lion and no doubt many more have been born since then.) Sadly, since we posted on social media that we are looking for suitable homes for 200 excess lions the only suitable areas that could take lions are a couple of million acres mostly in Mozambique. However, these are hunting areas (that operators have done a great job in protecting and bringing the wild life back. One of these areas in the Zambezi Delta is flourishing with game but there no longer exists a single lion in the area). All have stated they would love to have lions but due to the ban are no longer interested, for obvious reasons. How ironic too that not one of the anti-hunting organizations such as Born Free, Lion Aid etc. have not contacted us to see if they could help – this really makes one wonder. I am personally very concerned for the future of our lion population on the BVC – the area cannot afford to keep so many lions when there is zero monetary value on them. It is very obvious to us that our lions have killed 50% + of our giraffes (we used to have one of the largest giraffe populations in the country) and huge numbers of other species have been affected too, such as eland, sable, buffalo, cheetah, nyala etc.) It has and always will be BVC policy to manage the area to the best of our ability for all our wild life species (not just lions or rhinos). Regrettably the loss of income from lion and elephant hunts is drastically affecting our rhino poaching operations (we have never lost an elephant to poaching and instead yearly we have more elephant breaking in rather than leaving our sanctuary, this year an extra 39 elephant have come in so far.) We have lost 5 rhino this year + another two were wounded. Last year we lost 32 rhino even though the BVC itself spent $500K+ trying to save them . How sad too that no organizations/countries are coming forward offering us funds lost to combat the critical rhino poaching issue, especially the very countries that have affectively taken this income away from us. As you are aware, the Zimbabwe Department of National Parks have implemented a very strict lion hunting policy that will effectively control any abuse of such species. A board consisting of various role players and scientists will ensure this is in fact controlled properly for the wellbeing of all our wild lions. You are further aware that our ZimParks main income is derived from sustainable and ethical hunting (certainly not ecotourism) so their own efforts to conserve the Parks areas are vastly hampered due to huge loss of income caused by these bans – not to mention the poor rural folks that suffer the most. How interesting that every reporter/journalist that was anti-hunting prior to visiting the BVC have all seen the light and changed their stance totally once having seen the area first hand. I sincerely hope that the powers that may be in the US and other countries put their personal emotional and political agendas to the side and do the right thing for the actual wild life itself in our part of the world. It`s a very sad fact that many of the people/governments that keep preaching their own ideals to save Africa`s vast wild life species have actually become the largest threat to our wild life. Sadly many of the true conservationists on the ground are being penalized for having accomplished amazing conservation successes. Tim, I would really appreciate it if you could advise us accordingly, regardless of USFWLS final decisions. Respecfully Pete Fick BVC Zimbabwe 

“There’s no substitute for honesty, ethics and fair chase.” 

c/o Mazunga Safaris 8 Norfolk Road Hillside Bulawayo Zimbabwe Office Telephone Number: +263-9-241425 Mobile Number: +263-772 278 779 Conversation Contents 

## November 22 -- Greenwire is ready 

# "E&E News" <ealerts@eenews.net> 

## From: "E&E News" <ealerts@eenews.net> 

## Sent: Wed Nov 22 2017 11:05:44 GMT-0700 (MST) 

## To: @fws.gov> 

## Subject: November 22 -- Greenwire is ready (b) (6) Conversation Contents 

## U.S. Department of the Interior News Briefing for Wednesday, November 22, 2017 

# Bulletin Intelligence <Interior@bulletinintelligence.com> 

## From: Bulletin Intelligence <Interior@bulletinintelligence.com> 

## Sent: Wed Nov 22 2017 04:01:29 GMT-0700 (MST) 

## To: <Interior@bulletinintelligence.com> 

## Subject: U.S. Department of the Interior News Briefing for Wednesday, November 22, 2017 

Mobile version and searchable archives available here. Please click here to subscribe. 

DATE: WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 22, 2017 6:00 AM EST 

# Holiday Message 

In observance of the U.S. Thanksgiving holiday, we will not publish on Thursday, November 23, 2017 and Friday, November 24, 2017. Service will resume on Monday, November 27, 2017. We wish our readers a safe and happy holiday. 

# Today's Table Of Contents 

DOI In The News 

• The Hill: Zinke: ‘The Only Thing I’ve Hunted In Africa Is Terrorists’. • Marine Corps Times: Marine Corps War Memorial Finally Commemorates Iraq, Afghanistan. • American Security News: Petty Tapped For Interior Department Post On Water And Science. • Politico: FEC Probes Discrepancies At Former Zinke PAC. • CNN: National Historic Site In Puerto Rico Reopens After Hurricane. • St. Thomas Source: V.I. National Parks Reopen. • WWBT-TV Richmond (VA): Richmond Congressman, Interior Secretary Tackle Sexual Harassmen. • Government Executive: Senate Seeks Much Smaller Spending Cuts Than Trump And The House, At Some Agencies. • CBS News: How Trump’s National Monuments Decision Could Affect Massive Deposit Of Fossils. • U.S. News & World Report: Yellowstone Mining Opponents Press Gianforte To Join Cause. • Casper (WY) Star-Tribune: Forest Service Will Consider Changes To Sage Grouse Protections. Bureau Of Indian Affairs 

• Tribal Leaders Take Aim At Oil And Gas Development. • Calif. County Asks 9th Circ. To Rehear Tribal Casino Row. 

Bureau Of Land Management 

• Natural Gas Intelligence: Trump Administration, Enviros Urge Court To Leave BLM Frack Ruling Intact. 

Bureau Of Reclamation 

• Las Vegas Children Study Birds On International Migratory Bird Day. 

Bureau Of Safety And Environmental Enforcement 

• Investment In Partnership Is Good For Energy Dominance. 

Fish And Wildlife Service 

• Brush (CO) News-Tribune: Colorado Parks & Wildlife To Receive $100K Grant. • Arizona Republic: How A Border Wall Could Drive The Jaguar Extinct In America. 

National Park Service 

• The Hill: Park Service Expands Comment Period For Proposed Entry Fee Price Hike. • The Hill: National Park Store Sold Trump Wine, Says Feds Weren’t Involved. • Washington Post: Silence Again Surrounds A Police Shooting In Fairfax County, This Time By U.S. Park Police. • U.S. News & World Report: JFK Birth Centennial Ending On Assassination Anniversary. • Salt Lake (UT) Tribune: Arches Road Construction Nears End, Will Take A Break For Thanksgiving Weekend. • Pensacola (FL) News Journal: Gulf Islands National Seashore Road Closures Cause Travel Headaches. 

Office Of Insular Affairs 

• Saipan (MNP) Tribune: Over 460 Coconut Rhino Beetles, Larvae Collected. 

Office Of Surface Mining 

• Conservation Groups Argue Peabody Leases Were Improperly Approved. 

US Geological Survey 

• U.S. News & World Report: NASA’s Discovery Of ‘Water’ On Mars Might Actually Be Sand, New Study Finds. • Additional Reading. 

Opinion Pieces 

• The Voice Missing From The Elephant Trophy Debate? Africans. • Realini: National Monuments Inspire Entrepreneurs. • Congress Must Fix Wildfire Funding Problem. • Additional Reading. 

Top National News 

• NBC: Media Analyses: Trump Tacitly Endorses Moore. • Reuters: Trump: AT&T Purchase Of Time Warner “Not A Good Deal For The Country.” • Politico: Murkowski Backs Individual Mandate Repeal’s Inclusion In Tax Bill. • Washington Times: Senate Security Spending Bill Includes Funds For Border Wall. • Los Angeles Times: FCC Chairman Proposes Repeal Of Net Neutrality Rules. • Washington Free Beacon: Gallup Poll Finds Worry About Economy At Lowest Level In 18 Years. • New York Times: Whitefish Suspends Puerto Rico Work Over Unpaid Bills. 

Editorial Wrap-Up 

• New York Times. - “Who To Blame For Your Subway Nightmare.” • Washington Post. - “The United States Torments Its Poorest Neighbor.” - “Jeff Sessions Keeps Waging His Failing War Against Sanctuary Cities.” - “Why Would Trump Choose This Academic To Lead The Census Bureau.” • Wall Street Journal. - “Trump’s Dubious Trust-Busting.” - “Keystone XL On The Cusp.” - “China’s Burma ‘Solution.’” 

Big Picture 

> • Headlines From Today’s Front Pages.

Washington Schedule 

> • Today’s Events In Washington.

Last Laughs 

> • Late Night Political Humor.

# DOI In The News 

## Zinke: ‘The Only Thing I’ve Hunted In Africa Is Terrorists’. 

The Hill (11/21, Samuels) reports that Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke on Tuesday “pushed back against a photo circulating on the internet that purported to show him with a hunted elephant amid backlash on a decision to lift a ban on importing elephant trophies.” Zinke tweeted, “The only thing I’ve hunted in Africa is terrorists.” The article notes that “Zinke is not the man in the image, and the photo was first posted in 2016.” The Washington Examiner (11/21, Yilek) reports that “Snopes, a fact-checking website, has rated the claim as false. The man in the photo is actually Ian Evans, a Scottish farmer.” Additional coverage was provided by the Independent Journal Review (11/21, Fink). 

## Marine Corps War Memorial Finally Commemorates Iraq, Afghanistan. 

The Marine Corps Times (11/21, Schogol) reports that a ceremony was held Tuesday at the U.S. Marine Corps War Memorial to unveil new engravings that recognize the Afghanistan and Iraq campaigns. The Washington Times (11/21, Harper) reports that Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke said, “As the Deputy Commander of Special Forces in Iraq and retired Navy SEAL, I saw the commitment, patriotism, and fortitude that American service members and their families display while serving our country. Our warriors who serve in Iraq and Afghanistan see more frequent deployments as our nation has been at sustained combat for longer than in any previous point in our nation’s history. The Iraq and Afghanistan veterans are warriors in the field and leaders in the community. I salute them and am grateful for their service.” Local TV coverage was provided by Raleigh-Durham (NC) Spectrum News ,

KNVN-TV Chico, CA (11/21), and WRLH-TV Richmond, VA (11/21). 

## Petty Tapped For Interior Department Post On Water And Science. 

American Security News (11/21) reports that Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke lauded the selection of Timothy Petty as the next assistant secretary for water and science at the Interior Department. Zinke said, “Dr. Tim Petty brings years of quality service and experience to the team at the department, and we could not be happier with the President’s choice for the position. Dr. Petty has served as the acting assistant secretary and deputy assistant secretary for Water and Science at the department before, and we are excited to put him back to work for the American people in the [President Donald] Trump Administration.” FEC Probes Discrepancies At Former Zinke PAC. 

Politico (11/21, Lefebvre) reported that the Federal Election Commission is requesting “a leadership PAC previously affiliated with Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke to provide more details about its direct mail spending and to account for a $200,000 discrepancy in its account, among other issues in its most recent campaign finance report. SEAL PAC, which Zinke launched after winning his first congressional race in 2014, has until Dec. 26 to address the issues identified by the FEC, according to a request sent Monday” that “also asks about incomplete information related to some donors, excess contributions and potentially misclassified spending, some of which occurred after Zinke’s affiliation with the leadership PAC ended when he joined President Donald Trump’s Cabinet in March.” Additional coverage was provided by the Washington (DC) Examiner (11/21, Siegel). 

## National Historic Site In Puerto Rico Reopens After Hurricane. 

CNN (11/21, Green) reports that “by next week, two important areas of a national historic site in San Juan, Puerto Rico, damaged by Hurricane Maria will be open to visitors and back to normal operations.” The National Park Service announced Tuesday that “public tours resumed Tuesday at the Castillo San Cristóbal area of San Juan National Historic Site, and officials expect Castillo San Felipe del Morro to reopen as early as next week.” Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke said, “For over 400 years, Castillo San Felipe del Morro has stood as guardian and symbol of Puerto Rico’s heritage, and it’s also a major tourism attraction for visitors from all over the world. I’m incredibly proud of the National Park Service and entire Interior family, who have been working nonstop to reopen this important cultural and tourism attraction. Part of rebuilding communities means rebuilding revenue streams so folks can get back to work, earn a living and care for their families. The National Park Service will continue to work closely with the people of Puerto Rico to restore life into this vibrant community.” 

## V.I. National Parks Reopen. 

The St. Thomas Source (11/21) reports that “Christiansted National Historic Site and Buck Island Reef National Monument on St. Croix and Trunk Bay Beach at V.I. National Park on St. John all reopened Monday, the U.S. Interior Department announced.” Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke said , “I couldn’t be more proud of the hard work of National Park Service staff, volunteers, and their partners in the Virgin Islands. Their commitment to the park and to the community is inspiring. I’ve heard many stories of staff tending to the needs of the park and their neighbors before even taking care of themselves.” He added, “We have a long way to go, but every day we make progress toward getting these parks fully functional to visitors and back to providing important economic support to these communities as they return to normal.” 

## Richmond Congressman, Interior Secretary Tackle Sexual Harassmen. 

WWBT-TV Richmond, VA (11/21, Sullivan) reports on the sexual harassment complaints among employees in the National Park Service. Congressman Don McEachin has “joined other lawmakers in demanding the National Park Service put a stop to it.” He has “called for another hearing on the issue,” saying to Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke during a budget hearing in June, “You have declared a zero-tolerance policy with the promise of updating policies, including new training requirements and new reporting procedures, but I would suggest to you that that is not enough.” 

## Senate Seeks Much Smaller Spending Cuts Than Trump And The House, At Some Agencies. 

Government Executive (11/21, Katz) reports that “Senate Republicans are poised to fund several key agencies at significantly higher levels than the Trump administration requested, though Democrats are still decrying what they see as overly harsh reductions.” Notably, “at the Interior Department, a Senate measure unveiled on Monday would cut spending from current levels by just 1 percent.” The cutback “would be $370 million less severe than the House proposal and $470 million less than the administration’s request.” The article notes that “while the House bill also included language supporting separation incentives at Interior, such provisions were not included in the Senate bill.” Also, “at components such as the National Park Service, the Senate actually proactively spoke out against any workforce cuts.” 

## How Trump’s National Monuments Decision Could Affect Massive Deposit Of Fossils. 

CBS News (11/21) reports that scientists are raising concerns that a decision to downsize the Grand Staircase-Escalante National Monument “could damage one of the richest deposits of dinosaur bones in the world.” The article notes that “in the two decades since the 1.9 million-acre patch of desert was designated a national monument, 25 new species of dinosaurs have been discovered in its sands.” Paleontologist Andy Farke said, “There’s a possibility that fossils may be lost or destroyed. Things like fossil theft and vandalism. Once that record of our planet’s history is gone, you know, we’ve lost something from the American story.” 

## Yellowstone Mining Opponents Press Gianforte To Join Cause. 

The AP (11/21, Brown) reports that “opponents of two gold mines proposed near Yellowstone National Park pressed Tuesday for Montana’s lone U.S. House member to seek federal legislation to withdraw public lands near the park from future mining.” According to the article, “after a measure stalled in the Senate, businesses and conservation groups said the support of U.S. Rep. Greg Gianforte is crucial to making permanent a temporary mining ban enacted last year on 47 square miles (121 square kilometers) of land north of Yellowstone.” Gianforte “said in a statement Tuesday that he intends to introduce legislation on the issue but did not specify when that would happen or offer details on its contents.” 

## Forest Service Will Consider Changes To Sage Grouse Protections. 

The Casper (WY) Star-Tribune (11/21, Richards) reports that the Forest Service is “considering changes to sage grouse management in the West, a charge led by the Interior Department since earlier this year due to what the Interior Secretary described as Western ‘anger’ about federal overreach.” In Wyoming, the Forest Service plans may focus on “grazing rights, a key complaint from ranchers.” A spokesman for the Forest Service “said opening up the plans in light of the BLM decision to do the same was ‘prudent’ so that practices are manageable for ranchers, industry and others.” Additional coverage of the sage grouse issue was provided by the Powell (WY) Tribune (11/21, Davis). 

# Bureau Of Indian Affairs 

## Tribal Leaders Take Aim At Oil And Gas Development. 

The AP (11/21, Bryan) reports that “Native American activists and tribal leaders from around New Mexico are joining the chorus of environmentalists who have been fighting for years to stop oil and gas development.” According to the article, “they are part of a groundswell as tribes across the U.S. organize around land issues, from a pipeline in North Dakota and the disputed boundaries of a national monument in Utah to concerns about the encroachment of energy development in an area of the Southwest dotted with archaeological sites tied to a civilization that gave rise to many of the region’s modern tribes.” 

## Calif. County Asks 9th Circ. To Rehear Tribal Casino Row. 

Law360 (11/21, Lidgett) reports that “a California county on Monday urged the Ninth Circuit to rethink a panel ruling backing a lower court’s support of the U.S. Department of the Interior’s decision to take land into trust for a proposed Ione Band of Miwok Indians casino.” Amador County “asked the panel to review en banc an October decision that upheld the DOI’s lower court win in a case in which the county argued the tribe’s casino project near Sacramento shouldn’t have been greenlit.” 

# Bureau Of Land Management 

## Trump Administration, Enviros Urge Court To Leave BLM Frack Ruling Intact. 

Natural Gas Intelligence (11/21, Passut) reports the Trump Administration and environmental groups are arguing on the same side, albeit for different reasons, over an Obama-era rule governing hydraulic fracturing on public and tribal lands. In separate filings, attorneys for the environmental coalition and the BLM ask the US Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit Court to reject calls from four western states, two industry groups, and an Indian tribe for a rehearing over the rule. The BLM is looking to keep the rule intact so it can rescind the regulation, perhaps as early as January. Environmental groups want the court to issue a mandate to officially vacate the district court ruling, which would temporarily revive the regulation. 

# Bureau Of Reclamation 

## Las Vegas Children Study Birds On International Migratory Bird Day. 

The Las Vegas Review-Journal (11/21, Erickson) reports that “about 30 other local children gathered at Tuesday’s International Migratory Bird Day event, a collaboration by Clark County Parks and Recreation and local environmental groups to teach children about bird migration.” According to the article, “experts showed children different bird eggs and nests, led games and passed out coloring books with pictures of birds.” Nathan Lenon, a biologist with the Bureau of Reclamation, “helped a little girl with pigtails and big, black sunglasses look for birds through binoculars.” 

# Bureau Of Safety And Environmental Enforcement 

## Investment In Partnership Is Good For Energy Dominance. 

The World Oil (11/21) reports that Bureau of Safety and Environmental Enforcement Director Scott A. Angelle “participated in meetings with BSEE staff, industry, Air Force leadership, and other stakeholders Tuesday and Wednesday in California.” Angelle said, “BSEE continues to develop partnerships with all stakeholders, all in an effort to enhance the Nation’s energy program while not backing away from the requirements for safe and environmentally-sustainable operations. We need robust energy production from the OCS and it must be safe and environmentally-sustainable.” 

# Fish And Wildlife Service 

## Colorado Parks & Wildlife To Receive $100K Grant. 

The Brush (CO) News-Tribune (11/21) reports that the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service announced that it plans “to award a $100,000 cooperative agreement to the Colorado Parks and Wildlife for the restoration of Gunnison Sagegrouse habitat.” The project “includes mechanically treating (mowing) areas of encroaching pinyon-juniper trees that currently have healthy established sagebrush understory within Gunnison sage-grouse habitat.” Also, “the treatment will remove remnant tree skeletons that remain from fire where current understory exhibits sagebrush reestablishment.” 

## How A Border Wall Could Drive The Jaguar Extinct In America. 

The Arizona Republic (11/21, Loomis) reports that “the jaguar’s fate could hinge on the fate of President Donald Trump’s border-wall proposal.” Biologists and wildlife advocates believe “jaguars could pair off north of the border someday, if Americans leave the trail open and if a female follows it.” However, building “an impenetrable wall” would mean “the species will go extinct in this country.” 

# National Park Service 

## Park Service Expands Comment Period For Proposed Entry Fee Price Hike. 

The Hill (11/21, Henry) reports that the National Park Service is “giving the public an extra month to comment on its proposal to hike entry fees at popular parks.” The public comment period for the proposal was extended “Tuesday to allow for another month of input, according to the Park Service website.” The NPS was “originally due to take comments through Thanksgiving, but its new deadline is Dec. 22.” The AP (11/21) reports that “the Park Service said it wanted to accommodate interest from Congress and the public. More than 65,000 comments already have been submitted.” Also reporting are the Washington Examiner (11/21, Siegel), the Seattle Times (11/21, Mapes), the Sacramento (CA) Bee (11/21, Harris), the Loveland (CO) Reporter-Herald (11/21), and KTVH-TV Helena, MT (11/21). 

## National Park Store Sold Trump Wine, Says Feds Weren’t Involved. 

The Hill (11/21, Cama) reports that “a store in Virginia’s Shenandoah National Park sold wine produced by the Trump Winery as recently as September.” According to the article, “the stores are operated by Delaware North Cos., which agrees to pay fees to the National Park Service (NPS) based on the annual revenues of its operations on park property.” Mark Leach, “who manages the Shenandoah stores for Delaware North, said NPS and park managers had no role in the wine purchase decisions.” NPS spokesman Jeremy Barnum “stressed that it was Delaware North that decided to sell the wine, not the park.” Barnum said, “The National Park Service authorizes concessioners to sell categories of retail goods and products like t-shirts, baseball hats, and in this case wine. However, the NPS does not specify what brands of these products should be sold.” 

## Silence Again Surrounds A Police Shooting In Fairfax County, This Time By U.S. Park Police. 

On Tuesday morning, the Washington Post (11/21, Jackman) reported that the U.S. Park Police “shot a man in Fairfax County, Va., on Friday night.” The Post add: “The man is in critical condition. And that’s about all we know.” According to the Post, “The Park Police refuse to identify the man they shot. Or the officer who shot him. Or why the officer shot him.” On Tuesday night, the Washington Post (11/21, Weil) reported that the FBI said it is investigating the shooting. According to the Post, “Two Park Police officers opened fire after pursuing a car that they said was connected with a hit-and-run crash in Alexandria. The chase ended in the the Mount Verrnon area of the county at Fort Hunt Road and Alexandria Avenue.” 

## JFK Birth Centennial Ending On Assassination Anniversary. 

The AP (11/22) reports that “a year of events marking the 100th anniversary of President John F. Kennedy’s birth is drawing to a close exactly 54 years after his assassination.” National park rangers at the John Fitzgerald Kennedy National Historic Site will “lay a wreath outside Kennedy’s childhood home in Brookline, Massachusetts, and a 21-gun salute by an honor guard will follow.” 

## Arches Road Construction Nears End, Will Take A Break For Thanksgiving Weekend. 

The Salt Lake (UT) Tribune (11/21, Wharton) reports that Arches National Park officials say a road construction project that “included resurfacing, restoring and rehabilitating 23 miles of roads and pullouts” is nearing competition. According to the article, “with favorable weather, the project could be completed by the end of November or early December.” 

## Gulf Islands National Seashore Road Closures Cause Travel Headaches. 

The Pensacola (FL) News Journal (11/21, Gabriel) reports that “ongoing roadwork in Gulf Islands National Seashore prompted 167 people to cancel campground reservations for the Thanksgiving holiday, the National Park Service said.” Brent Everitt, a spokesman for Gulf Islands National Seashore, “said the park service was working to reopen the two roads as soon as possible.” 

# Office Of Insular Affairs 

## Over 460 Coconut Rhino Beetles, Larvae Collected. 

The Saipan (MNP) Tribune (11/22) reports that “combined efforts to eradicate the coconut rhinoceros beetle infestation on Rota have successfully thwarted over 439 grubs and 39 adult beetles.” Ray Roberto, coordinator for the DLNR Invasive Species, “said that personnel have been tracking the CRB count since the beginning of October and that grubs have been collected and destroyed.” Roberto said, “We are very appreciative of the combined efforts of our agencies and extend our gratitude to the grant funding that was recently awarded by the Office of Insular Affairs to continue these efforts.” 

# Office Of Surface Mining 

## Conservation Groups Argue Peabody Leases Were Improperly Approved. 

Wyoming Public Radio (11/21, McKim) reports that “conservation groups WildEarth Guardians and the Sierra Club recently filed a complaint with the Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement, OSMRE, over two coal leases approved in 2012.” The groups claim “Peabody Energy’s North and South Porcupine leases, which expanded the North Antelope Rochelle mine in the Powder River Basin, were improperly approved and that the company should no longer be allowed to mine there.” The complaint urges “OSMRE to investigate the leases, which were signed by a district manager of the Bureau of Land Management rather than a state manager.” 

# US Geological Survey 

## NASA’s Discovery Of ‘Water’ On Mars Might Actually Be Sand, New Study Finds. 

The U.S. News & World Report (11/21, Newman) reports that “the water that NASA revealed might be on Mars is most likely sand, according to a new U.S. Geological Survey study.” In 2015, NASA scientists “confirmed they had strong evidence that dark streaks – known as ‘recurring slope lineae’ – cascading down mountainsides on the red planet were caused by water.” However, “on Monday, the journal Nature Geoscience published a study conducted by a team of researchers from the U.S. Geological Survey, the Planetary Science Institute, the University of Arizona and Durham University in England that revealed the darker streaks were more likely grains of sand and dust rather than seeping water.” USGS scientist and lead author Colin Dundas said in a statement, “We’ve thought of RSL as possible liquid water flows, but the slopes are more like what we expect for dry sand. This new understanding of RSL supports other evidence that shows that Mars today is very dry.” Also reporting are the Los Angeles Times (11/21, Khan), Fox News (11/21, Cofield), Newsweek (11/21, Osborne), and the Economic Times (IND) (11/21). 

## Additional Reading. 

The Real Science Behind The Unreal Predictions Of Major Earthquakes In 2018. Washington Post (11/21, Kaplan). 

U.K. Water Companies Sometimes Use Dowsing Rods To Find Pipes. NPR (11/21, Domonosk). 

Parts Of A Deer With Chronic Wasting Disease Entered Oregon. Oregonian (11/21, Monroe). 

Geologists Keep Finding More Northwest Earthquake Faults. Oregon Public Broadcasting (11/21, Banse). 

Finding Fault(s): Geologists Keep Finding More Nearby Earthquake Makers. Ashland (OR) Jefferson Public Radio (11/21, Banse). 

# Opinion Pieces 

## The Voice Missing From The Elephant Trophy Debate? Africans. 

Rosie Cooney, chair of the International Union for Conservation of Nature’s Sustainable Use and Livelihoods Specialist Group, writes in the Washington Post (11/21) that the debate over US elephant trophy imports from Zimbabwe and Zambia lacks voices from those living alongside the elephants. Cooney argues that the “first step” to resolving the issue “is to recognize that outrage from afar never solved a local problem. We need to hear the voices of local people. Well-meaning people in the West need to stop shouting and start listening.” 

## Realini: National Monuments Inspire Entrepreneurs. 

In an op-ed for the Durango (CO) Herald (11/21, Realini), Carol Realini, a member of the Conservation for Economic Growth Coalition, supports “the protection of public lands for the quality of life they provide as well as their economic importance.” According to Realini, “not only do protected public lands like national parks and monuments support robust recreation and tourism industries, they also act like magnets for economic activity – drawing companies and talented employees alike, that seek out these incredible places.” Realini claims that the Trump Administration’s “attack on our national monuments is an affront to entrepreneurs who choose to live and work near America’s greatest asset: our protected public lands.” 

## Congress Must Fix Wildfire Funding Problem. 

In an op-ed for the Tallahassee (FL) Democrat (11/21, Morgan), Temperince Morgan, the executive director for The Nature Conservancy in Florida, urges Congress to “provide funding for fire suppression and change the way the U.S. pays to fight wildfires.” Morgan notes that “when the U.S. Forest Service and Department of the Interior do their annual budgeting, they have to plan for costs based on past fire seasons, but fires are increasing.” According to Morgan, “fighting fires drains the agencies’ budgets of money that could go toward making sure forests are healthy and provide the benefits expected of our nation’s public lands.” As a result, “they are forced to borrow funds from programs like recreation and forest health to make up shortfalls.” 

## Additional Reading. 

President Trump Puts His Indifference To The Environment On Hold For Elephants. 

Huffington Post (11/21, D'Angelo). 

Don’t Trim Grand Staircase. If Anything, Expand It.. High Country (CO) News (11/22, Worthy). 

National Parks Belong To American People. Montana Standard (11/22, Abbey). 

Monument Expansion Result Of A Faulty Process. Eugene (OR) Register-Guard (11/22, Roberts). 

Elephants’ Reprieve: How About The Rest Of The Animal Kingdom? The Baltimore Sun (11/21). 

Lifting Of Wildlife Trophy Ban Would Be Unacceptable. Palm Springs (CA) Desert Sun (11/21, Chumbley). 

Editorial: Study Of Surface Mining, Health Issues Should Resume. Williamson (WV) Daily News (11/21). 

Lindblom: Western Wildfires Hurt Virginia, Too, But Congress Can Help. Martinsville (VA) Bulletin (11/22, Lindblom). 

Drones Intrude On The Outdoor Experience. High Country (CO) News (11/21, McEachern). 

No Drilling In North America’s Serengeti. Coastal View News (CA) (11/21, Graham). 

Protecting An Endangered Species. Keyser (WV) Mineral Daily News Tribune (11/21, Sanerib). 

A Troubling Look At The Human Toll Of Mountaintop Removal Mining. Yale University (CT) Environment 360 (11/21, Schiffman). 

# Top National News 

## Media Analyses: Trump Tacitly Endorses Moore. 

Addressing reporters at the White House on Tuesday, President Trump publicly spoke for the first time about allegations that Alabama Senate candidate Roy Moore sexually assaulted teenage girls decades ago, saying that the Republican has denied the accusations. Trump also blasted the Democrat in the Dec. 12 special election, ex-US Attorney Doug Jones. Coverage casts Trump as having tacitly endorsed Moore. On NBC Nightly News (11/21, story 2, 2:50, Holt), Lester Holt reported that Trump is “ending his silence, acknowledging Moore’s denial [of the allegations] and extending him backhanded endorsement by urging voters not to support” Jones. NBC’s Kristen Welker added, “About face. President Trump initially distanced himself from...Moore. But today, all but endorse[d] him. Is an accused child molester better than a Democrat?” Trump was shown saying, “He totally denies it. He says it didn’t happen. You have to listen to him, also. You are talking about, he said 40 years ago, this did not happen.” In the lead segment for the CBS Evening News (11/21, lead story, 2:40, Mason), Anthony Mason flatly asserted that “Trump has decided it is better to have an accused serial sexual predator in the Senate than a Democrat.” CBS broadcast a clip of Trump saying, “I can tell you one thing for sure, we don’t need a liberal person in there, a Democrat.” CBS’ Margaret Brennan added that Trump “voiced support for...Moore, who is facing multiple sexual misconduct allegations, including with teen-aged girls when he was in his 30s.” Trump: “Well, he denies. I mean, Roy Moore denies it. And by the way, he gives a total denial. And I do have to say 40 years is a long time. He has run eight races, and this has never come up.” USA Today (11/21, Jackson) reports that Trump “all but endorsed” Moore, telling reporters that “he doesn’t want another Democrat in the US Senate and” emphasizing the GOP candidate’s “denials of multiple allegations of sexual misconduct involving teenage girls. ‘I can tell you one thing for sure: We don’t need a liberal person in there, a Democrat,’ Trump” said. And of the accusations, Trump said, “Roy Moore denies it; that’s all I can say.” Under the headline “Trump Backs Roy Moore For Senate Seat Despite Sex Allegations,” Bloomberg News (11/21, Sink) reports that Trump “effectively backed” Moore and “attacked Jones, a former federal prosecutor, declaring, ‘You don’t need somebody who’s soft on crime, like Jones.’ Trump also said Jones was ‘bad on borders, bad with the military, bad for the Second Amendment.’” The New York Times (11/21, Shear) reports that “Trump’s defense of Mr. Moore and his rejection of” Jones “in the race were tantamount to an endorsement of Mr. Moore, who has been abandoned by nearly all of the Republican establishment in Washington.” The Hill (11/21, Fabian, Hagen) reported, “With Moore refusing to exit the race, Trump has apparently decided to give a tacit endorsement to the embattled candidate in the hopes that a victory in Alabama will keep his agenda on track. It’s a departure from just two weeks ago, when the White House sought to distance itself from Moore and even suggested he might need to step down.” The Washington Post (11/21, Nakamura) reports that Trump “appeared to offer support” for Moore, “saying the former state judge ‘totally denies’ allegations that he sexually molested underage girls years ago.” Trump also blasted Jones “as being ‘terrible on crime, terrible on borders.’” Reuters (11/21, Mason) reports that Trump “defended” Moore, telling reporters the candidate “had denied allegations of sexual misconduct and emphasizing that he did not want” Jones “to win. Trump has previously said that Moore should step aside if the allegations were true.” The AP (11/21, Miller) says that Trump “discounted allegations of sexual assault against...Moore,” addressing “the swirling controversy...for the first time since top Republican leaders called on Moore to step aside more than a week ago.” Trump “noted that the allegations concerned behavior alleged to have happened decades ago. ‘Forty years is a long time,’ Trump said, questioning why it took so long for Moore’s accusers to come forward.” The AP adds that White House press secretary Sarah Sanders “had said only that Trump ‘thinks that the people of Alabama should make the decision on who their next senator should be.’” Under the headline “Trump Backs Moore, Saying Candidate ‘Totally Denies’ Allegations By Women,” the Washington Times (11/21, Boyer) reports that Trump “stood up for” Moore, while the Los Angeles Times (11/21, Bierman) says the President “even left the door open for campaigning on behalf of Moore. ‘I’ll be letting you know next week,’ he said.” The Washington Examiner (11/21, Westwood) says that Trump “seemingly sided with Moore” in saying “he believed the former state supreme court judge’s denials.” The Wall Street Journal (11/21, Radnofsky, Hook), New York Post (11/21, Fredericks), Breitbart (11/21, Spiering), Townhall (11/21, Brown), Politico (11/21, Tamborrino), and Roll Call (11/21, Bennett) are among the media outlets offering similar reports on Trump’s remarks. In an online “analysis” for CNN (11/21, Cillizza), Chris Cillizza said that Trump’s remarks about Moore are “only likely to add to his party’s growing problems in the race.” Cillizza added, “Everything Trump said...about Moore and the Alabama Senate race runs directly opposite of what the leaders within the national GOP have said in recent weeks. Literally everything. The boost Moore will get from Trump’s comments will make it that much harder to remove the controversial judge from the race or to organize a serious write-in campaign against him.” In another online analysis for CNN (11/21, Zeleny), Jeff Zeleny said that Trump’s “decision to embrace” Moore “was rooted in several factors, but one of the biggest: the noise and confusion from a recent tidal wave of sexual harassment and misconduct allegations from Hollywood to media to politics. ‘(It) made it easier and easier to stick with Moore,’ a Republican source close to the White House said.” Zeleny added that Trump’s comments “also reflect precisely what he has been arguing in the West Wing for the last few days: Moore is denying the charges. He isn’t wavering. So who are we to try and step in? Two Republicans familiar with the President’s thinking offered that explanation about his comments.” Rep. Don Beyer (D-VA) said on CNN’s Situation Room (11/21), “It’s not surprising that Donald Trump would really defend all of Roy Moore’s denials, because he’s been denying all the 16 women that have come forward already. These are both men with long histories of women coming forward with these allegations.” Rep. Mike Quigley (D-IL) said on CNN’s Situation Room (11/21), “To paraphrase [Trump’s] own daughter, there’s a special place in hell for those who back a child abuser for the United States Senate. There is absolutely no worse place we can go from here. It’s just unimaginable. ... Let’s just remember, this is a candidate, Trump, who has a lot of women alleging the same sorts of thing about him, so I think in his own mind this is okay, especially if time has passed.” CNN political director David Chalian said on CNN’s Situation Room (11/21), “What is astonishing is that [Trump] has now basically endorsed an accused child molester for the United States Senate. He is going to go down there, perhaps, if he does, and...he’s going to help Roy Moore. ... The core Trump supporters who overlap a lot with the core Moore supporters are going to be feel energized to have the President on board with this campaign.” Rep. Charlie Dent (R-PA) said on MSNBC’s Morning Joe (11/21) that “Moore would be a terrible addition to the Senate. He should not be elected. He was disqualified before the recent allegations of sexual misconduct. He should not be elected. I would never support a man like that.” Amy Walter of the Cook Political Report said on Fox News’ Special Report 

(11/21), “What’s remarkable about the way that Roy Moore has been running the campaign is he’s been focused solely on Roy Moore and he has spent very little time talking about Doug Jones. Today, his campaign [is] going out and defending themselves, going after the credibility of these women. ... If you are Roy Moore and you’re spending more time trying to defend and discredit women than you are talking about policies or about your opponent, that is not a great place to be a couple weeks out form Election Day.” 

Politico: In Private Talks, Trump Expressed Doubt About Moore Accusers’ Allegations. 

Politico (11/21, Isenstadt) reported that Trump’s “near-endorsement” of Moore came after “days of behind-the-scenes talks in which he vented about Moore’s accusers and expressed skepticism about their accounts. During animated conversations with senior Republicans and White House aides,” Trump “said he doubted the stories presented by Moore’s accusers and questioned why they were emerging now, just weeks before the election, according to two White House advisers and two other people familiar with the talks. The White House advisers said the president drew parallels between Moore’s predicament and the one he faced just over a year ago when, during the final weeks of the 2016 campaign, Trump confronted a long line of women who accused him of harassment” – allegations Trump “adamantly denied.” 

Poll: Moore Leads Jones 47%-45%. In an “exclusive,” WBRC-TV Birmingham, AL (11/21, Journey) reported on its website that a Raycom News Network/Strategy Research poll of 3,000 likely Alabama voters shows Moore leading Jones 47%-45%, with 5% undecided and 3% saying they intended to write in a candidate. The report did not indicate when the new poll was in the field, but WBRC-TV said, “The new poll suggests allegations against Moore have chipped away at his lead, which was [11 points] in a November 8th Raycom News Network poll conducted by Strategy Research.” 

Poll By Firm That Has Worked For Moore: Moore Leads By Six Points. Breitbart (11/21, Boyle) reported that a WT&S Consulting (R) poll of 11,641 Alabama likely voters, taken Nov. 18-20, shows Moore leading Jones 46.4%-40.%, with 13% undecided. The poll “includes 60.9 percent Republicans and 39.1 percent Democrats – approximately the margins by which President Donald Trump defeated failed 2016 Democratic presidential nominee Hillary Rodham Clinton in Alabama.” Breitbart said that WT&S Consulting “has done some work for the Moore campaign this election cycle, but before the runoff in the GOP primary where Moore” unseated appointed Sen. Luther Strange. 

Nationwide Poll: 60% Say Moore Should Be Expelled From Senate If Elected. The Hill (11/21, Delk) reported that in a Quinnipiac University national poll of 1,415 US voters, taken Nov. 15-20, 60% of those surveyed said “Moore should be expelled from the chamber if he wins” the Dec. 12 election, while 28% said he “should not. Republicans were the only voter group in the survey to say Moore should not be expelled from the Senate, 49 to 33 percent, while the majority of voters in every other category of political party, gender, and education level said the Senate should remove him from office.” Under the headline “Nearly Half Of Republicans Do Not Want Roy Moore Expelled If He Wins: Poll,” the Washington Times (11/21, Persons) quotes Quinnipiac’s Tim Malloy as saying, “Roy Moore may make it to the Senate chambers, but an overwhelming majority of American voters would like to rip the welcome mat out from under him and send him packing back to Alabama.” 

Jones Ad Invokes Ivanka Trump, Sessions, Shelby. Politico (11/21, Strauss) reported that the Jones campaign is “airing two new television ads aimed at winning over Republicans who could be persuaded to cross over and vote for the Democrat. One ad, called ‘Voices,’ began airing Monday night and highlights Ivanka Trump, Sen. Richard Shelby (R-Ala.), and Attorney General Jeff Sessions saying they have no reason to doubt the accusations of a number of women who have accused Moore of pursuing them romantically while he was in his 30s and they were teenagers.” The Washington Post (11/21, Weigel, Scherer) reports that in that ad, the President’s “daughter is quoted saying of the Moore allegations: ‘There’s a special place in hell for people who prey on children.’ Sessions is quoted from a congressional hearing where he was asked about the Moore story: ‘I have no reason to doubt these young women.’ Shelby, who has been critical of Moore, is quoted on his plan to write in another name on the ballot.” The Hill (11/21, Greenwood) reported that in the spot, a narrator adds, “Conservative voices putting children and women over party – doing what’s right.” 

Woman In UAB Sex Abuse Case: Jones A Hypocrite For Stance On Moore Accusers. 

Alabama Live (11/21, Yurkanin) reported that Brittany Benefield, “who sued her university in 2001 over sexual abuse she allegedly suffered as a 15-year-old,” says that “Jones questioned the timing and motivation of her accusations while defending employees of the University of Alabama at Birmingham in a $40 million lawsuit. ... Jones has said he finds Moore’s accusers credible. ‘I find it to be the height of hypocrisy that he sets his campaign to be on the moral high ground against Roy Moore,’ said Benefield. In public statements about the case, in his role defending university officials, Jones cast doubt on her claim that the university officials were responsible. ‘The charges against UAB administrators and coaches are entirely without merit and represent nothing more than a cynical attempt to extort money by slandering this institution and its employees,’ Jones said at the time.” 

Moore Camp Offers “New Evidence” Undermining Accusers’ Claims. The Washington Examiner (11/21, Morrongiello) reported that supporters of Moore “offered several pieces of ‘new evidence’ on Tuesday that they claimed should discredit the two women who accused” Moore “of sexual assault.” For example, ex-Moore chief of staff Ben Dupree “said Leigh Corfman...was lying when she claimed” Moore “would pick her up around the corner from her mother’s house when she was barely a teenager and take her back to his home. ‘Corfman claims that Moore picked her up around the corner from her house. However, according to public records, we’ve been able to find that Corfman’s supposed pick-up place was more than a mile away from her mother’s house,’ Dupree said, claiming that Corfman was living with her father at the time.” 

## Trump: AT&T Purchase Of Time Warner “Not A Good Deal For The Country.” 

President Trump on Tuesday “stood by his criticism” of AT&T’s deal to buy Time Warner, Inc., Reuters (11/21, Bartz) reports. As he left the White House for Florida, Trump said, “I’m not going to get involved in litigation, but personally I’ve always felt that that was a deal that’s not a good deal for the country. ... I think your pricing’s going to go up, I don’t think it’s a good deal for the country.” The Justice Department has sued to stop the deal, and Reuters says the case will get more attention than other merger challenges “because Trump has been a vocal critic of Time Warner’s CNN, and opposed AT&T’s purchase of Time Warner on the campaign trail last year.” A Wall Street Journal (11/21) editorial takes a negative view of the DOJ lawsuit, arguing that whether or not Trump inspired it, the suit misunderstands markets and undercuts the rule of law. The Hill (11/21, Greenwood) reports that that DOJ “allegedly demanded earlier this month that AT&T sell off CNN’s parent company from Time Warner as a condition for regulatory approval of the sale,” which “immediately prompted questions about whether it was politically motivated, given Trump’s frequent criticism of CNN.” Bloomberg News (11/21, Sink) reports that during the campaign, Trump said his Administration would not allow the merger, and “he’s tweeted repeated criticism of CNN since assuming office. Lawyers for the two companies may argue that Trump’s statements indicate undue political influence over regulators considering the merger.” The Wall Street Journal (11/21, Radnofsky, Fitzgerald) also reports on Trump’s comments. 

## Murkowski Backs Individual Mandate Repeal’s Inclusion In Tax Bill. Politico (11/21, Diamond) reports that Sen. Lisa Murkowski wrote in an op-ed for the Alaskan newspaper Daily News-Miner that she supports efforts to repeal the ACA’s individual mandate. Murkowski wrote, “I have always supported the freedom to choose. ... I believe that the federal government should not force anyone to buy something they do not wish to buy, in order to avoid being taxed.” Murkowski’s support “may be a boon for Senate Republicans’ tax legislation, which includes mandate repeal and is expected to be taken up on the Senate floor next week.” However, a Murkowski spokesperson “told POLITICO that the comments should not be construed as support for the tax bill, which does not yet appear to have sufficient support to pass the chamber.” 

## Senate Security Spending Bill Includes Funds For Border Wall. 

The Washington Times (11/21, Dinan) reports that the new homeland security bill released by Senate Republicans this week includes “$1.6 billion for the first installment of President Trump’s border wall.” The measure does not use the term “wall” but “calls for $1.6 billion in funding for ‘physical barriers’ and border roads – matching Mr. Trump’s original request for money to build or repair fencing along 74 more miles of the U.S.-Mexico line.” A House security spending bill “with the money included” has already passed. 

WPost Analysis: Administration Building A “Bureaucratic Wall” To Limit Immigration. 

The Washington Post (11/21, Sacchetti, Miroff) reports that while Trump’s vision of a wall along the US-Mexico border “may never be realized, and almost certainly not as a 2,000-mile physical structure spanning sea to sea,” in “a systematic and less visible way, his administration is following a blueprint to reduce the number of foreigners living in the United States – those who are undocumented and those here legally – and overhaul the US immigration system for generations to come.” According to the Post, “federal officials are wielding executive authority to assemble a bureaucratic wall that could be more effective than any concrete and metal one.” The Administration has “moved to slash the number of refugees, accelerate deportations and terminate the provisional residency of more than a million people, among other measures.” The White House, the Post adds, “is attempting to shift the country back toward the tighter controls on immigration in place before the 1960s.” 

## FCC Chairman Proposes Repeal Of Net Neutrality Rules. 

FCC Chairman Ajit Pai on Tuesday proposed repealing net neutrality rules, a move that media reports largely case as a victory for large Internet service providers like AT&T, Comcast, and Verizon. The Los Angeles Times (11/21, Puzzanghera) says the move set up “a vote next month to roll back the controversial Obama-era initiative,” and “triggered another round in a fight dating to 2003 over whether the government should be actively involved in assuring the unfettered flow of information on the internet or leave it to market forces.” While Republicans, “who now have a 3-2 majority on the FCC, are poised to win this latest battle,” marking “a significant victory in the party’s deregulatory push since Trump took office,” the fight “is probably headed to courts, assuming the FCC repeals the rules as expected in a vote on Dec. 14.” Pai, the AP (11/21) reports, believes the net neutrality rules “discourage the ISPs from making investments in their network that would provide even better and faster online access.” Pai said in a statement, “Under my proposal, the federal government will stop micromanaging the internet.” The New York Times (11/21, Kang) takes a decidedly negative tone toward Pai’s proposal, saying it “clear[s] the way for companies to charge more and block access to some websites.” The Times adds that the “clear winners” will be “the giant companies that provide internet access to phones and computers, which have fought for years against broadband regulations.” To the Wall Street Journal (11/21, McKinnon, Knutson), the plan is a victory for cable and wireless companies that will make way for deals between ISPs and online media and other services. Similarly, the Washington Post (11/21, Fung) says Pai’s move “hands a win to broadband companies such as AT&T, Verizon and Comcast.” Reuters (11/21, Shepardson) also calls the plan “a victory for big internet service providers such as AT&T Inc, Comcast Corp and Verizon Communications,” and USA Today (11/21, Snider) reports that while passage of the plan “would be seen as a victory for big telecom and cable companies such as AT&T, Comcast and Verizon,” consumer advocates and Net media companies “including Facebook, Google and Netflix are concerned that telecom and cable companies could give preferential benefit to their own services and content.” Similarly, The Hill (11/21, Neidig) says that while the move “is a win for companies like Verizon, Comcast and AT&T,” to “net neutrality supporters, repealing the rules means giving those companies a free pass to block, slow or favor certain internet content.” Politico (11/21, McGill) reports that the plan was “quickly blasted” by the FCC’s two Democrats, Jessica Rosenworcel and Mignon Clyburn. Rosenworcel called it “ridiculous and offensive” to Americans and Clyburn “said it is a giveaway to the country’s largest communications companies.” The plan also drew fire from congressional Democrats. Rep. Frank Pallone and Sens. Ron Wyden, Ed Markey and Brian Schatz “all slammed the announcement, with Markey calling for a ‘firestorm of opposition.’” to the plan. Bloomberg News (11/21, Shields) says House Minority Leader Pelosi blasted the proposal, saying in an email that it is “an all-out assault on the entrepreneurship, innovation and competition at the heart of the internet. ... The administration is moving to destroy the openness and dynamism of the internet.” Meanwhile GOP Reps. Greg Walden and Marsha Blackburn praised Pai’s plan, saying it shows the FCC “understands the importance of making sure the internet continues to flourish under a light-touch regulatory regime,” The Washington Times (11/21, Richardson) describes “outrage” over the plan from “Democrats, progressives and celebrities who have made net neutrality a cause celebre.” In addition to lawmakers, actor and comedian Patton Oswalt “posted a tweet calling on supporters to ‘bombard’ Mr. Pai, listing his email and phone number.” NARAL Pro-Choice America said the proposal “would make it harder to get information on how & where to access abortion. And it will make it harder for activists to organize against Trump’s anti-choice, racist, extremist agenda.” ABC World News Tonight (11/21, story 11, 0:25, Muir) briefly reported on the proposal Tuesday evening. A New York Times (11/21, Saba) analysis says the Administration is “scrambling its media signals” as DOJ sued to block the merger at the same time the FCC “intends to scrap rules that force internet providers to treat web traffic equally.” The Times says Trump Administration “watchdogs...roaming all over the field,” stands “in contrast to President Barack Obama’s tenure, when the F.C.C. and the Justice Department looked to the same lodestar for guidance on competition.” Meanwhile the Trump Administration’s “confused approach makes for a blurry regulatory picture.” In an op-ed for Roll Call (11/21), Sen. Ted Cruz and FCC Commissioner Michael O’Rielly write that the Obama Administration “made the decision to set aside decades of bipartisan agreement and enact a radical proposal that reclassified the internet as a regulated public utility.” Those regulations “give federal bureaucrats new authority to regulate pricing and terms of service and eventually even collect billions in new taxes.” Pai “seeks to repeal the so-called Open Internet Order and return the internet to its original classification as an information service, which allowed the internet to flourish.” However, there are already “scores of politicians and state and local regulators who have indicated an interest in replicating the Obama administration’s fatally flawed rules at the state and local level,” which is why “it is imperative that the FCC establish a strong deregulatory federal framework for broadband regulations and preempt state and local regulators from having the opportunity to implement the next internet power grab.” 

## Gallup Poll Finds Worry About Economy At Lowest Level In 18 Years. 

The Washington Free Beacon (11/21, Meyer) reports that a new Gallup poll found “Americans’ worry about the economy are at the lowest level seen in 18 years, according to a poll from Gallup.” According to the poll, “only 15 percent of Americans see the economy as a top problem facing the United States.” However, Americans “are increasingly seeing poor government as a major problem.” Twenty-three percent “say they are dissatisfied with government, which is a response that rates higher than any other issue and has remained the top problem for every month this year.” 

## Whitefish Suspends Puerto Rico Work Over Unpaid Bills. 

The New York Times (11/21, Robles) reports that Whitefish Energy Holdings, the power company hired to help restore power to Puerto Rico, will be “standing down” because of the tens of millions of dollars it is owed for several weeks of work. Despite being fired last month “after widespread criticism and multiple investigations of a $300 million contract it received to help repair the island’s power grid,” Whitefish and the workers it employed “were supposed to stay on the job until the end of the month.” Whitefish “has billed about $103 million – and $83 million is still outstanding.” 

# Editorial Wrap-Up 

## New York Times. 

“Who To Blame For Your Subway Nightmare.” The New York Times (11/21) editorializes that the failure within New York’s subway system “has plenty of fathers: governors and mayors who, one after another, siphoned money from mass transit to pay for whatever else suited their budgetary fancy.” The Times ridicules the current system as featuring cars that “now wheeze along at the mercy of warped tracks, frayed cables and a signal system that was state of the art, maybe, when Americans were dancing the jitterbug.” The Times points to George Pataki’s tenure as New York governor as the beginning of a streak of elected officials who have been willing to divert money away from the system in favor of other priorities. 

## Washington Post. 

“The United States Torments Its Poorest Neighbor.” The Washington Post (11/21) editorializes that the Administration’s decision “to expel nearly 60,000 Haitians who have lived legally in the United States since a massive earthquake devastated their homeland in 2010” means that “the world’s richest and most powerful country is intentionally giving the Western Hemisphere’s poorest and most vulnerable nation a gratuitous kick in the rear end.” The Post calls DHS assertions that the number of displaced Haitians has decreased significantly and that Haiti can receive normal levels of returned citizens both “unsubstantiated” and “specious.” The Post concludes by labeling the decision “a beggar-thy-neighbor policy unworthy of a great power and unsuited to a nation with a tradition of compassion.” 

“Jeff Sessions Keeps Waging His Failing War Against Sanctuary Cities.” A Washington Post (11/21) says that while the Trump Administration “is on an impressive judicial losing streak” against sanctuary cities, it “remains undeterred, as the Justice Department girds for more battles whose stakes – a few million dollars in federal funds withheld from offending cities – make a mockery of the dire rhetoric deployed by officials in Washington.” The Post argues that the Administration “has no valid legal justification for its insistence that state and local law enforcement officers act as proxies for federal immigration agents and no basis for threatening to withhold funding if they refuse.” 

“Why Would Trump Choose This Academic To Lead The Census Bureau.” The Washington Post (11/21) editorializes that Thomas Brunell, President Trump’s reported preferred candidate for the role of deputy director of the Census Bureau, would be a poor choice for the position. The Post points to Brunell’s “political affiliations and previous work” as factors that could “harm perceptions of the bureau’s integrity, an institution in which Americans must have complete faith.” The Post asserts that Census Bureau leaders should be “seasoned in government operations and ready to take on a huge management challenge” due to the perennially underfunded nature of the bureau. 

## Wall Street Journal. 

“Trump’s Dubious Trust-Busting.” A Wall Street Journal (11/21) editorial takes a negative view of DOJ’s lawsuit to block AT&T’s acquisition of Time-Warner, arguing that whether or not President Trump inspired it, the suit misunderstands markets and undercuts the rule of law. 

“Keystone XL On The Cusp.” The Wall Street Journal (11/21) editorializes that the risks presented by the proposed Keystone XL pipeline are more than justified because of the project’s economic benefits. The Journal opines that the true agenda of critics of the pipeline is to keep oil from being removed from the ground at all, which the Journal finds to be an unrealistic goal. The Journal also asserts that pipelines are the safest way to deliver crude oil. 

“China’s Burma ‘Solution.’” A Wall Street Journal (11/21) editorial says that as international calls for action against the Burmese army over the Rohingya humanitarian crisis intensify, Chinese Foreign Minister Wang Yi proposed a solution that would likely encourage the Burmese government to continue mistreating the Muslim minorities. The Journal says Wang’s remarks signal that Beijing’s support for the Burmese army remains steadfast, threatening to accelerate Burma’s shift toward extreme nationalism. 

# Big Picture 

## Headlines From Today’s Front Pages. 

Wall Street Journal: 

FCC Plans To End Net Neutrality In Win For Cable, Wireless Firms Waking Up Alone: How Elite Plotters Toppled Mugabe’s 37-Year Reign Mueller Probes Jared Kushner’s Contacts With Foreign Leaders Uber Reveals Data Breach And Cover-up, Leading To Two Firings Harvard Faces DOJ Probe Over Affirmative-Action Policies 

New York Times: 

FCC Plans Net Neutrality Repeal In A Victory For Telecoms How Trump’s Hands-Off Approach To Policing Is Frustrating Some Chiefs Trump Defends Roy Moore, Citing Candidate’s Denial Of Sexual Misconduct Democrats Move Swiftly Against Conyers Amid Latest Harassment Charges Toronto Transit Chief Is Tapped To Run New York’s Ailing Subways They Stayed Put, but Their City Disappeared Robert Mugabe Resigns As Zimbabwe’s President, Ending 37-Year Rule ‘Hi, Drumstick.’ President Trump Pardons A Turkey, And Likes It. 

Washington Post: 

Trump Boosts Moore In Ala. FCC Moves To End Net Neutrality Standard Zimbabwe’s Longtime Leader Steps Down Airbnb Takes Up Residence In DC’s Debate On Gentrification How Trump Is Building A Wall Of Bureaucracy 

Financial Times: 

Robert Mugabe Steps Down As President Of Zimbabwe Apple’s iPhone X Assembled By Illegal Student Labor Harassment In The Workplace: FT Readers Share Their Experiences EU And UK Aim To Strike Brexit Divorce Deal Within 3 Weeks 

Washington Times: 

Courts Use Trump’s Pontificating To Rule Against His Policies Progressives Erupt Over FCC Proposal To Repeal Obama-Era Net Neutrality Rules Pakistan’s Islamic Schools Rife With Child Sex Abuse That Goes Unpunished Putin’s Plan To End Syrian War Strengthens Russian Influence In Middle East South Korean Party Leader Choo Sees Promise In Trump’s Hawkish Stand On North Korea Brazil Nears Constitutional Ban On Abortion With No Exceptions Story Lineup From Last Night’s Network News: 

ABC: Trump-Roy Moore; Charlie Rose Fired; Michigan Rep-Sexual Harassment Settlement; Holiday Travel Rush; Weather Forecast; Russia-Syria Meeting; Border Patrol Agents Attacked; Zimbabwe Dictator Resigns; Black Friday Shopping; Alabama-Escapee Manhunt; FCC-Net Neutrality Roll Back; HBO Cyber Attack Suspect Charged; Thanksgiving-American Turkey. 

CBS: Trump-Roy Moore; Charlie Rose Fired; Charlie Rose Fired-CBS; Cleveland Rape Crisis Center; Michigan Rep-Sexual Harassment Settlement; Immigration Policy-Protected Status; Zimbabwe Dictator Resigns; TSA-New Screening Procedure; Uber-Security Breach; WH-Turkey Pardon; Workplace Harassment. 

NBC: Uber-Security Breach; Trump-Roy Moore; Charlie Rose Fired; Michigan Rep-Sexual Harassment Settlement; Border Patrol Agents Attacked; Argentine Missing Sub; Holiday Travel Rush; Generic Drug Price; Harvard-Discrimination Lawsuit; Alaska-Northern Lights; WH-Turkey Pardon; High School Principal-Charity. 

Network TV At A Glance: 

Charlie Rose Fired – 11 minutes, 40 seconds Trump-Roy Moore – 8 minutes, 45 seconds Michigan Rep-Sexual Harassment Settlement – 3 minutes, 35 seconds 

Story Lineup From This Morning’s Radio News Broadcasts: 

ABC: David Cassidy Dies; Uber-Security Breach; Trump-Roy Moore; Michigan Rep-Sexual Harassment Settlement. 

CBS: David Cassidy Dies; Trump-Roy Moore; Charlie Rose Fired; Uber-Security Breach; Black Friday Shopping. 

FOX: Michigan Rep-Sexual Harassment Settlement; Trump-Roy Moore; Charlie Rose Fired; David Cassidy Dies. 

NPR: Trump-Roy Moore; Michigan Rep-Sexual Harassment Settlement; Federal Reserve Appointment; David Cassidy Dies; FCC-Net Neutrality Roll Back. 

# Washington Schedule 

## Today’s Events In Washington. 

White House: 

PRESIDENT TRUMP — No public events scheduled. VICE PRESIDENT PENCE — No public schedule announced. 

US Senate: On recess until 27 November. 

US House: On recess until 27 November. 

Other: No relevant event scheduled. 

# Last Laughs 

## Late Night Political Humor. 

Stephen Colbert: “First Cosby, then Weinstein, now Charlie Rose. Who’s next? Yoda? ‘Mmm, tense you seem, shoulders I will rub. Reported to HR I am.’” 

Stephen Colbert: “But of all the recent sexual abuse allegations, the creme de la creep is Alabama Senate candidate and founder of ‘take daughter from school day,’ Roy Moore.” 

James Corden: “It was announced that the Donald J. Trump Foundation, the Trump family’s charity, is shutting down. He’s shutting down his charity right before Christmas. If Trump wasn’t going to be visited by three ghosts on Christmas Eve before, he definitely is now. Apparently, Trump said he’s closing the foundation because he already has his hands full with too many other charity cases like Eric, Donald Junior, Ivanka. Not Tiffany, she’s out on her own, and she knows that.” 

James Corden: “The Attorney General says they can’t shut down the charity because it’s currently being investigated. I guess when they heard Trump was doing something nice for other people, they were, like, ‘This sounds suspicious. We need to investigate.’” 

James Corden: “The President pardoned two turkeys today and then immediately criticized them on Twitter for not being grateful enough.” 

James Corden: “Yesterday, Melania Trump welcomed the official White House Christmas tree. Take a look. That poor, lifeless thing, standing behind the tree.” 

Jimmy Fallon: “Today, the White House held its annual turkey pardon, and President Trump pardoned a turkey named Drumstick, which was nice until he told the turkey, ‘Okay, now you pardon me.’ No, sorry, he didn’t mean that. That’s not how it works.” 

Jimmy Fallon: “CBS just fired Charlie Rose after allegations of sexual harassment. Yep. They told him to clear out his desk, put on some pants, and leave.” 

Jimmy Fallon: “If all the sexual assault allegations coming out of the entertainment industry or news agency have got you down, you can take a break and distract yourself with the sexual assault allegations coming out of Washington.” 

Seth Meyers: “An Alabama pastor expressed his support for accused Senate candidate Roy Moore in a recent interview and said, quote, ‘There are some 14-year-old who, the way they look, could pass for 20.’ He’s the pastor of the First Church of the Virgin Mary, according to her, anyway.”  

> Copyright 2017 by Bulletin Intelligence LLC Reproduction or redistribution without permission prohibited. Content is drawn from thousands of newspapers, national magazines, national and local television programs, radio broadcasts, social-media platforms and additional forms of open-source data. Sources for Bulletin Intelligence audience-size estimates include Scarborough, GfK MRI, comScore, Nielsen, and the Audit Bureau of Circulation. Data from and access to third party social media platforms, including but not limited to Facebook, Twitter, Instagram and others, is subject to the respective platform’s terms of use. Services that include Factiva content are governed by Factiva’s terms of use. Services including embedded Tweets are also subject to Twitter for Website's information and privacy policies. The Department of the Interior News Briefing is published five days a week by Bulletin Intelligence, which creates custom briefings for government and corporate leaders. We can be found on the Web at BulletinIntelligence.com, or called at (703) 483-6100.

# Conversation Contents 

## U.S. Department of the Interior News Briefing for Tuesday, November 21, 2017 

# Bulletin Intelligence <Interior@bulletinintelligence.com> 

## From: Bulletin Intelligence <Interior@bulletinintelligence.com> 

## Sent: Tue Nov 21 2017 04:00:20 GMT-0700 (MST) 

## To: <Interior@bulletinintelligence.com> 

## Subject: U.S. Department of the Interior News Briefing for Tuesday, November 21, 2017  

> Mobile version and searchable archives available here. Please click here to subscribe.
> DATE: TUESDAY, NOVEMBER 21, 2017 6:00 AM EST

# Today's Table Of Contents 

DOI In The News 

• Los Alamos (NM) Daily Post: ‘Finally!’ Secretary Zinke Welcomes Confirmation Of Reclamation Nominee Brenda Burman. • Politico: ‘UGH!’: Zinke’s Wife’s Travel Caused Headaches For Interior Staff. • Palm Springs (CA) Desert Sun: Ryan Zinke Extends Comment Deadline. • Washington Post: The Energy 202: New ‘Acting Director’ At Interior Office Worries Public Lands Advocates. • Salt Lake (UT) Tribune: What Does Kane County Want In A Redrawn Grand Staircase-Escalante Monument? • Washington Times: Navy SEALs Remember Christian Lambertsen, Humble Beginnings Of Swimmer-commandos. • Daily Caller: US Forest Service Internal Review Finds 34 Cases Of Sexual Harassment. • Snopes: Is This Ryan Zinke Posing With A Dead Elephant? • Minneapolis Star Tribune: Additional Coverage: Mille Lacs Band Rallies For Police. 

Bureau Of Indian Affairs 

• DOI Still Seeking Cobell Claimants As Deal Deadline Looms. 

Bureau Of Indian Education 

• Chemawa Staff, Students Question Hiring Practices And Non-Native Administration. 

Bureau Of Land Management 

• Law360: BLM Tells 10th Circ. No Need To Revisit Frack Rule Decision. • KNPR-FM Las Vegas: Burning Man, BLM To Study Festivals Impact On Black Rock Desert. Bureau Of Ocean Energy Management 

• Panel’s Approval Of Offshore Drilling Bill Could Threaten Ban Off Florida. 

Fish And Wildlife Service 

• The Hill: Greens Sue Trump Over Elephant Trophy Decision. • U.S. News & World Report: Before Elephants, US Loosened Limits On Lion Trophies. • Anderson (SC) Independent-Mail: Docks To Be Expanded At Green Pond Landing Before Bassmaster Classic. 

National Park Service 

• WATE-TV Knoxville (TN): Sevier County Wildfires: Lessons Learned. • Omaha (NE) World-Herald: ‘A Great Gift To America’: After Long Journey, Tractor Belonging To Last Homesteader Is On Display In Nebraska. • Fresno (CA) Bee: Giant Sequoias: Trees Suffered In California Drought. • Clark County (WA) Columbian: Vancouver Barracks Renovation Underway. • Government Video: GV Expo: Staying Within The Budget When Creating Video. 

Office Of Insular Affairs 

• New York Times: Small Island Nations Losing Faith In Global Efforts Against Climate Change. • NPR: Tourists Are Returning To The U.S. Virgin Islands As Recovery Is Still Happening. • Virgin Islands Daily News: Mapp Makes Case For $7.5 Billion To Senate Committee. • Virgin Islands Consortium (VIR): Medical Evacuees And Their Caretakers Say They’ve Been Neglected By Mapp Administration. • Saipan (MNP) Tribune: CW-1 Cap Delay 2nd-Longest In Program’s History. • U.S. News & World Report: Wildlife Agencies Meet On Guam To Discuss Brown Tree Snakes. • Washington Post: Spend A Day With The Longest Serving Ambassador To The U.S. He’s From Palau. 

US Geological Survey 

• Washington Post: The Case For Flowing Water On Mars Is Drying Up. • Additional Reading. 

Opinion Pieces 

• Tribune Editorial: Bring The Government To The People? • Kudos To Air Force, Donors For Operation Christmas Drop: Our View. • Additional Reading. 

Top National News 

• Bloomberg News: Trump Names North Korea A State Sponsor Of Terrorism. • Associated Press: Trump Promises Tax Reform By Christmas. • Associated Press: Yellen To Resign From Federal Reserve Board. • Associated Press: Nebraska PSC Approves Alternative Keystone XL Route. 

Editorial Wrap-Up 

• New York Times. - “Justice At Last For The Youngest Inmates?” - “‘Only Morons Pay The Estate Tax.’” • Washington Post. - “Children Are Starving In Yemen. This White House Should Intercede.” - “Time For Republicans To Denounce This Tax Nonsense.” - “A Judge Makes The Right Call On Trump’s Would-Be Transgender Ban.” • Wall Street Journal. - “Have They Got A Bond For You.” - “North Korea, Terror Sponsor.” - “Angela Merkel’s Failing Center.” Big Picture 

> • Headlines From Today’s Front Pages.

Washington Schedule 

> • Today’s Events In Washington.

Last Laughs 

> • Late Night Political Humor.

# DOI In The News 

## ‘Finally!’ Secretary Zinke Welcomes Confirmation Of Reclamation Nominee Brenda Burman. 

The Los Alamos (NM) Daily Post (11/20) reports that the U.S. Senate last Friday confirmed Brenda Burman as the Commissioner of the Bureau of Reclamation. Burman is “the first woman to ever lead the Bureau.” Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke said, “Finally! After more than 142 days, I’m excited to welcome Brenda Burman to lead the Bureau of Reclamation. Brenda is a veteran of the Bureau and her extensive experience on water projects across the country will be an incredible asset for the Department. After senseless and unprecedented hold-ups in the Senate, we can finally move forward with key water projects across the country.” Arizona Public Media (11/20, Maxedon) reports that Burman said, “The men and women of Reclamation have helped the West work through our most difficult water issues for more than 100 years. I look forward to working with Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke.” Additional coverage was provided by the Klamath Falls (OR) Herald And News (11/20, Dillemuth) and Federal News Radio (DC) (11/20, Wing). 

## ‘UGH!’: Zinke’s Wife’s Travel Caused Headaches For Interior Staff. 

Politico (11/20, Lefebvre) reports new records – which the “liberal watchdog group” The Western Values Project says “uncover the potential misuse of government resources” – show that Lola Zinke, wife of Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke, “has frustrated department staffers by saddling them with extra work when she traveled with him on official business.” The records last-minute show requests by Mrs. Zinke “to join high-level dinners and additions to the guest list for a conservative group’s event near the couple’s home in Southern California earlier this year.” Politico adds that “the documents shed new light on the outsize profile Lola Zinke has established compared with the typical Cabinet secretary’s spouse.” The AP (11/19) reports that the Interior Department “denied any wrongdoing.” The department said Mrs. Zinke “pays her own way when she accompanies her husband on trips, and the travel is approved by ethics officials in advance.” Also reporting are the Washington Post (11/20, Eilperin), the Washington Examiner (11/20, Siegel), and Raw Story (11/20, AL-SIBAI). 

## Ryan Zinke Extends Comment Deadline. 

The Palm Springs (CA) Desert Sun (11/20, Roth) reports that the Trump Administration has “given the public an extra month to comment on its proposal” to raise fees popular national parks. Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke “originally set a comment deadline of Thanksgiving Day, November 23, giving the public just one month to weigh in.” However, “as of Monday evening, the public comment page on the National Park Service’s website had been updated to show a deadline of December 22 at 11:59 p.m.” 

Cantwell: Upping National Park Admission Fee To $70 Is ‘Unconscionable’. The Seattle Post-Intelligencer (11/20, Connelly) reports that a proposal to raise fees at popular national parks was panned by Sen. Maria Cantwell on Monday. Cantwell said, “The outdoor economy has been an unbelievable juggernaut as it has reached 201,000 jobs in the state of Washington, $7.6 billion in wages, $28 billion in consumer spending, and $2.3 billion in state and local tax revenue.” She added, “To me, this price increase is unconscionable.” 

Additional Coverage. Also reporting on the proposal are the Bellingham (MA) Bulletin (11/20, Johnson) and WVLA-TV Baton Rouge (LA) Baton Rouge, LA (11/20, Scheidt). 

## The Energy 202: New ‘Acting Director’ At Interior Office Worries Public Lands Advocates. 

The Washington Post (11/20, Grandoni) reports that the Interior Department’s pick to temporarily run the Bureau of Land Management has “raised eyebrows among public land advocates.” Last week, Interior named Brian Steed to be interim BLM director. The article notes that “before that appointment, Steed was chief of staff for Rep. Chris Stewart (R-Utah), an advocate for land transfer who co-founded a congressional caucus called the Federal Land Action Group, intent on crafting legislation to put federal holdings under local control.” But “in an email, an Interior Department spokeswoman, Heather Swift, said Zinke has not wavered in his stance on public lands.” Swift wrote, “The Secretary’s position is unchanged.” 

## What Does Kane County Want In A Redrawn Grand Staircase-Escalante Monument? 

The Salt Lake (UT) Tribune (11/20, Maffly) reports that it obtained a version of a map “indicating roughly 200,000 acres that county officials believe are worthy of monument status” for the Grand Staircase-Escalante National Monument presented by Kane County staff to Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke. Officials had “refused to release it, arguing it’s an incomplete draft that could mislead the public.” According to the article, “the map offers a glimpse into how Zinke may have arrived at his recommendations, which remain shrouded in secrecy, to the frustration of local businesses and pro-monument groups.” 

## Navy SEALs Remember Christian Lambertsen, Humble Beginnings Of Swimmer-commandos. 

The Washington Times (11/20, Boylan) reports that “prominent former SEALs,” including Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke, last week gathered at the Omni Shoreham Hotel above Rock Creek Park to mark the 75th anniversary of a “top-secret World War II-era experiment” that was “the critical opening chapter in the evolving history of the U.S. Navy SEALs.” 

## US Forest Service Internal Review Finds 34 Cases Of Sexual Harassment. 

The Daily Caller (11/20, Volpe) reports that “after decades of denying it, the US Forest Service has finally acknowledged it has systemic problems with sexual harassment.” The agency said, “Since implementing an updated anti-harassment policy in September 2016, the agency has carefully reviewed and resolved over 400 cases of alleged harassment.” The agency added that of the 400 cases, 83 have been substantiated. 

## Is This Ryan Zinke Posing With A Dead Elephant? 

Snopes (11/20, Evon) examines whether a photograph purportedly showing Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke posing with a dead elephant is true. The website concludes that “image is genuine,” but it does not show Zinke. Rather, the man is identified as Ian Evans. 

## Additional Coverage: Mille Lacs Band Rallies For Police. 

Additional coverage of Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke’s visit to the Mille Lacs Indian Reservation last Friday was provided by the Minneapolis Star Tribune (11/19, Smith), the Grand Forks (ND) Herald (11/20, Davis), and the Worthington (MN) Daily Globe (11/20, Davis). Bureau Of Indian Affairs 

## DOI Still Seeking Cobell Claimants As Deal Deadline Looms. 

Law360 (11/20, Lidgett) reports that “with a looming deadline for Native American tribal members to make a claim for a bite of the landmark Cobell settlement over the alleged mismanagement of tribal trust funds, the federal government said on Friday it is still looking to identify thousands of possible claimants.” The Interior Department “said in an announcement that it is in the final stages of identifying where about 17,000 Native American individuals who could make claims for settlement compensation are before a court-imposed Nov. 27 deadline.” Additional coverage was provided by the Farmington (NM) Daily Times (11/21, Smith) and the Pierre (SD) Capital Journal (11/21). 

# Bureau Of Indian Education 

## Chemawa Staff, Students Question Hiring Practices And Non-Native Administration. 

Continuing its series on problems at the Chemawa Indian School, Oregon Public Broadcasting (11/20, Schick, Manning) reports that “in interviews, emails and court documents, Chemawa staff members said they have observed nepotism and favoritism over the past several years within the Bureau of Indian Education that formed a roadblock to accountability.” They claim “it also raised doubts about whether the federal government’s hiring processes are truly designed to ensure the most qualified staff are in place to serve the students who arrive at Chemawa.” Meanwhile, “as Chemawa retained a largely non-Native administration, students have questioned why a school for Native youth has so few examples of Native people in positions of leadership.” 

# Bureau Of Land Management 

## BLM Tells 10th Circ. No Need To Revisit Frack Rule Decision. 

Law360 (11/20, Rodriguez) reports that the Bureau of Land Management on Monday “urged the Tenth Circuit not to grant four states’ request that it revisit its rejection of their challenge to an Obama-era hydraulic fracturing rule for federal and Native American lands.” 

## Burning Man, BLM To Study Festivals Impact On Black Rock Desert. 

KNPR-FM Las Vegas (11/20) reports that “the organizers of Burning Man will assist the federal Bureau of Land Management in conducting an environmental impact study of the event’s impact on the Black Rock Desert.” The study is “part of the process of applying for a new ten-year permit to continue holding the event.” The new analysis will “evaluate the potential impact on Black Rock of possible changes in the size of Burning Man.” 

# Bureau Of Ocean Energy Management 

## Panel’s Approval Of Offshore Drilling Bill Could Threaten Ban Off Florida. 

The Fort Myers (FL) News-Press (11/20, King) reports that Florida Republican Rep. Francis Rooney said he’s concerned about a new House proposal to open offshore drilling along Florida’s Gulf Coast. Rep. Rooney is hoping to rally support among fellow lawmakers in Florida to back an amendment making the moratorium on drilling within 125 miles of Florida’s coast permanent, saying, “We cannot have drilling in the Eastern Gulf. It will destroy our tourist economy.” Meanwhile, American Petroleum Institute President and CEO Jack Gerard said, “The eastern Gulf is in close proximity to existing production and infrastructure, and opening it would most quickly spur investment and economic activity, which could create thousands of jobs and provide billions of dollars in government revenue.” The Naples (FL) Daily News (11/20, King) also carried the story. 

# Fish And Wildlife Service 

## Greens Sue Trump Over Elephant Trophy Decision. 

The Hill (11/20, Cama) reports that the Center for Biological Diversity and Natural Resources Defense Council on Monday filed a lawsuit against the Trump Administration “over its decision to allow hunters to import trophies from hunting African elephants and lions in Zimbabwe.” The lawsuit claims that the Fish and Wildlife Service “violated the Endangered Species Act when it reversed Obama administration policies banning hunters from bringing into the U.S. heads or other body parts from elephants and lions they killed in the southern African country.” Also reporting are Reuters (11/20, Simpson), Reuters (11/20, Simpson), Politico (11/20, Gerstein), the Washington Examiner (11/20, Siegel), the New York Post (11/20, Musumeci), and Courthouse News (11/20, Solis). Additional coverage of the controversy was provided by the Washington Post (11/20, Fears), the Washington Post (11/20, Medina), the Washington Post (11/20, Ingraham), Bloomberg News (11/20, Wallbank), the Sunshine State (FL) News (11/20, Derby), and The Hill (11/20, Samuels). 

## Before Elephants, US Loosened Limits On Lion Trophies. 

The AP (11/20, Biesecker) reports that “one month before the Trump administration sparked outrage by reversing a ban on trophies from threatened African elephants, federal officials quietly loosened restrictions on the importation of heads and hides of lions shot for sport.” The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service “began issuing permits Oct. 20 for lions killed in Zimbabwe and Zambia between 2016 and 2018.” The FWS is “also currently studying whether to add three additional countries to the list – Mozambique, Namibia and Tanzania.” 

## Docks To Be Expanded At Green Pond Landing Before Bassmaster Classic. 

The Anderson (SC) Independent-Mail (11/20, Brown) reports that “Anderson County officials announced Monday that they have received $650,000 in federal money for improvements at Green Pond Landing and Event Center, which will host the Bassmaster Classic next year.” The Sports Fish Restoration Act funding from the Fish and Wildlife Service will “cover the bulk of the $866,000 cost for expanding courtesy docks at the Lake Hartwell venue.” The rest of the funds “for the dock expansion will come from accommodations tax revenues, according to a statement issued by the county Monday.” 

# National Park Service 

## Sevier County Wildfires: Lessons Learned. 

WATE-TV Knoxville, TN (11/20) reports that “an extensive after-action review completed by the Interior Department found that, while no wrongdoing was found by Great Smoky Mountains National Park crews, there were ‘weaknesses in the park’s response.’” The park is “now embarking on a $2.5 million effort to replace park communications to allow officials to not only more effectively communicate within the park, but also speak to emergency responders outside of park boundaries.” Cassius Cash, the Great Smoky Mountains National Park superintendent, said, “We did assign some of our ground folks to ride around together and make decisions, but that’s not the most effective way you do that under these kind of dark conditions.” 

## ‘A Great Gift To America’: After Long Journey, Tractor Belonging To Last Homesteader Is On Display In Nebraska. 

The Omaha (NE) World-Herald (11/20, Hendee) reports that “homesteader Ken Deardorff’s 1945 Allis Chalmers Model C tractor joined the collections of Americana preserved by the National Park Service when it went on permanent exhibit Monday at Homestead National Monument of America near Beatrice.” A crowd of about 160 people witnessed “the unveiling of America’s most famous tractor at its balcony perch overlooking the museum.” A National Park Service team “financed by the Friends of Homestead National Monument recovered the tractor from the western interior of Alaska in mid-June.” 

## Giant Sequoias: Trees Suffered In California Drought. 

The Fresno (CA) Bee (11/20, Calix) reports that a “study shows California’s Giant Sequoia trees may not survive severe droughts and warming temperatures much longer.” The article says that “while the historically resilient trees managed to largely withstand the die-off that was prevalant in California forests, they did so at a price: depleting their underground water storage, according to a study conducted by the U.S. National Park Service, the Sierra Nevada Research Institute at UC Merced and the Chinese Academy of Sciences and Sun Yat-sen University.” Koren Nydick, a coauthor of the study and the science coordinator at Sequoia and Kings Canyon National Parks, said, “Giant Sequoias have this mystique, that once they reach maturity, they are practically immune to the forces that kill other trees. But during and just after the recent severe drought, we’ve seen a small number of sequoias die, at least in part to the dry conditions. It’s an important wake-up call.” 

## Vancouver Barracks Renovation Underway. 

The Clark County (WA) Columbian (11/20, Vogt) reports that five historic buildings at Vancouver Barracks are undergoing renovation. Alex Patterson, facility manager at Fort Vancouver National Historic Site, explained that means “a nice, tight roof and exterior” for the structures. The total contract cost is $485,820. 

## GV Expo: Staying Within The Budget When Creating Video. 

The Government Video (11/20, Scutt) reports that Mathew John, “an audiovisual production specialist with the National Park Service, will address Government Video Expo attendees at 10:15 a.m. on Wednesday, Nov. 29.” His session “National Park Service Centennial — Thinking Outside the Box With a Low or No Budget” will “take a look at how he created the signature video to celebrate last year’s NPS Centennial on a very tight budget and share strategies for other institutions to do the same.” In an interview, John talked “about his work with the National Park Service.” 

# Office Of Insular Affairs 

## Small Island Nations Losing Faith In Global Efforts Against Climate Change. 

The New York Times (11/17, Plumer, Friedman) reported that small island nations “are among the smallest contributors to climate change, producing less than 1 percent of global greenhouse gas emissions,” but they “are among the most vulnerable nations to global warming.” Leaders of small islands say the industrialized world “owes some recompense for the disasters these vulnerable nations will suffer in the years ahead,” but as the United Nations climate talks “on bolstering the Paris agreement draw to a close, island leaders say” the island décor in the conference hall “seems a cruel taunt.” Hopes among island nation leaders that they “will see a major increase in financial support to help address the consequences of climate change” also are waning, as are efforts “to expand ways for nations to adapt to future disasters.” As a result, some island officials, including those in Seychelles, “frustrated by the slowness of the United Nations process, have decided to take matters into their own hands.” 

## Tourists Are Returning To The U.S. Virgin Islands As Recovery Is Still Happening. 

NPR (11/17) reports the U.S. Virgin Islands “welcomed back the first cruise ships since Hurricanes Irma and Maria tore through.” The article says that “tourists are coming back, but there are other parts where recovery efforts are still moving slowly.” In an interview, Gov. Kenneth Mapp discussed the recovery efforts. 

## Mapp Makes Case For $7.5 Billion To Senate Committee. 

The Virgin Islands Daily News (11/16, O'CONNOR) reports that Gov. Kenneth Mapp “worked to dispel criticism of past WAPA actions and bring senators around to supporting disaster funding for the territory at a U.S. Senate hearing on Tuesday.” Appearing before the Senate Energy and Natural Resources Committee, Mapp and Puerto Rico Gov. Ricardo Rosselló “made the case for not just repairing the infrastructure of both territories to where it was pre-storm – as mandated by the Stafford Act, the central disaster recovery law of the United States – but also improving it.” Mapp said, “We cannot squander this opportunity to rebuild a better and stronger and more resilient Virgin Islands to simply rebuild it quickly. If we do, we will only compound the suffering that so many of our citizens have endured. With your support, that won’t happen.” 

## Medical Evacuees And Their Caretakers Say They’ve Been Neglected By Mapp Administration. 

The Virgin Islands Consortium (VIR) (11/17) reports that “over two months following Hurricanes Irma and Maria, and medical evacuees from the U.S. Virgin Islands keep pouring into the state of Georgia at various facilities, including hotels, for medical care.” However, “medical evacuees and their caretakers, a number of whom recently made contact with The Consortium, continue to complain about the lack of communication from the Mapp administration relative to their wellbeing and, importantly, a timeline on when they will be returning home.” 

## CW-1 Cap Delay 2nd-Longest In Program’s History. 

The Saipan (MNP) Tribune (11/17, Encinares) reports that the U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services has “yet to release a numerical limit on the CNMI’s foreign workforce fiscal year 2018.” The article notes “that makes it the second-longest delay in the program’s history since 2013.” According to a previous statement from the administration of Gov. Ralph DLG Torres, “the delay is possibly due to the White House’s investigation on the CNMI economy.” 

## Wildlife Agencies Meet On Guam To Discuss Brown Tree Snakes. 

The AP (11/15) reported that wildlife agencies were meeting last week on Guam “to provide updates on numerous projects targeting the invasive brown tree snake, which has proved detrimental to Guam’s native bird population.” Among the main topics of discussion were “increased inspections, awareness programs and effective baiting methods.” 

## Spend A Day With The Longest Serving Ambassador To The U.S. He’s From Palau. 

A video posted by the Washington Post (11/16), highlighted the service of Palauan Ambassador Hersey Kyota, who has been “representing his island nation for two decades.” 

# US Geological Survey 

## The Case For Flowing Water On Mars Is Drying Up. 

The Washington Post (11/20, Kaplan) reports that “in 2015, NASA announced that it had ‘the best evidence yet’ for water flowing on the surface of Mars: Dark, apparently damp streaks spotted on the Red Planet contained salts associated with liquid water.” However, “in a study published Monday in the journal Nature Geoscience,” U.S. Geological Survey scientists says “hat those promising streaks are merely marks made by flowing sand or dust.” Lead author Colin Dundas said, “This new understanding . . . supports other evidence that shows that Mars today is very dry.” Also reporting are CNN (11/21, Strickland), CNET News (11/20, Kooser), Stuff (NZL) (11/21, Kaplan), the Australian Broadcasting Corporation (11/21, Smith), ABC Radio Australia (11/21, Smith), and SlashGear (11/20, Roston). 

## Additional Reading. 

Finding Fault(s): Geologists Keep Finding More Nearby Earthquake Makers. KUOW-FM Seattle (11/20, Banse). 

Magnitude 6 Earthquake Strikes Off Samoa, American Samoa. AP (11/20). 

Will The World Shake With More Large Earthquakes In 2018? Time Will Tell. Popular Science (11/20, Griggs). 

# Opinion Pieces 

## Tribune Editorial: Bring The Government To The People? 

In an editorial, the Salt Lake (UT) Tribune (11/20) argues that a proposal to relocate the agencies in the Interior Department to the West should receive serious consideration. The paper points out “with modern communication technology, there is not the need there was 200 years ago to have all the executive agencies in close physical proximity to one another and to Congress.” The editorial also acknowledges that “the risk” is that “even with the latest in online teleconferencing, we might reach an out-of-sight-out-of-mind situation where Congress — and the national press — would begin to neglect their oversight responsibilities.” In conclusion, the paper think the idea is “reasonable” and the pros and cons should be carefully weighed. 

## Kudos To Air Force, Donors For Operation Christmas Drop: Our View. 

In an editorial, the Pacific (GUM) Daily News (11/17) lauds Operation Christmas Drop, “the Department of Defense’s longest-running humanitarian airlift operation.” The paper notes that “air drops are made to more than 50 islands in the Commonwealth of the Northern Marianas, Federated States of Micronesia and Republic of Palau.” It commends “the Air Force for its continued commitment to Operation Christmas Drop for the past 65 years, and hope to see it continue for many years to come.” 

## Additional Reading. 

Why Trump’s Right On Banning Elephant Trophies. New York Post (11/20, Lowry). 

Editorial: A Welcome Retreat On Elephant Trophies. Richmond (VA) Times-Dispatch (11/20). 

Trump’s Best Decision So Far: Doubling Down On Banning Elephant Trophies. Los Angeles Times (11/20, Hall). 

Donald Trump & Trophy-Hunting Ban – Trump Is Right To Keep The Ban. National Review (11/21, Lowry). 

Don’t Hunt Elephants, Hunt These 5 Animals In America Instead. Washington Examiner (11/20, Rogan). 

# Top National News 

## Trump Names North Korea A State Sponsor Of Terrorism. 

Media reports cast President Trump’s announcement Monday that he will designate North Korea a state sponsor of terrorism as symbolic, but still likely to further increase tensions with Pyongyang. Bloomberg News (11/20, Sink), for example, says the move “at least symbolically ratchets up the roiling standoff between the US and North Korea,” and USA Today (11/20, Jackson, Shesgreen) says it comes as the President “seeks to ratchet up the pressure on North Korea over its nuclear weapons program.” Speaking during a Cabinet meeting, Trump said, “In addition to threatening the world by nuclear devastation, North Korea has repeatedly supported acts of international terrorism including assassinations on foreign soil.” He also said the designation “should have happened a long time ago.” All three networks reportedly briefly on the move. NBC Nightly News (11/20, story 4, 1:10, Holt) called it “a major reversal in US policy,” but Kristen Welker noted that former President George W. Bush “lifted the terror designation to foster diplomatic talks over its nuclear program. That effort failed. So will this attempt work, or is it purely a symbolic move?” On the CBS Evening News (11/20, story 5, 1:05, Mason), Margaret Warner said the action “has no direct link to North Korea’s nuclear program.” The Washington Post (11/20, Nakamura) reports Trump called it “a very critical step” that “should’ve happened a long time ago,” and vowed Pyongyang will face further sanctions that will amount to the “highest level of sanctions by the time it’s finished.” According to the Los Angeles Times (11/20, Bierman, Wilkinson), Trump said the designation would include “a very large” new sanction on Tuesday and “increase in intensity over the next two weeks.” The New York Times (11/20, Shear), however, says that it is still “unclear whether the terror designation will provide the president with new and powerful leverage to force nuclear negotiations or will simply deepen the rhetorical war of words” between Trump and North Korean leader Kim Jong-un. In the lead story for Fox News’ Special Report (11/20), Kristin Fisher reported the designation is “accompanied by a sweeping set of sanctions,” but North Korea is “already so heavily penalized by the United States” that Secretary of State Tillerson “acknowledged this new designation can only do so much.” The AP (11/20, Pennington, Miller) reports Tillerson said the designation was a “very symbolic move” with limited practical effects, although it could close a “few loopholes” in existing sanctions. The AP says the move is also “likely to exacerbate sour relations between Washington and Pyongyang.” Reuters (11/20, Mason, Brunnstrom) reports that “experts say the designation will be largely symbolic...a reality that...Tillerson seemed to acknowledge.” Said Tillerson, “The practical effects may be limited but hopefully we’re closing off a few loopholes with this.” In the lead story for CNN’s Situation Room ’s (11/20) first hour, Jeff Zeleny said that Tillerson called the move a “peaceful pressure campaign,” and ABC World News Tonight (11/20, story 7, 0:20, Muir) reported briefly that he also said the “two-month pause since North Korea’s last missile test shows there is still hope for diplomacy.” Politico (11/20) too says the move “could exacerbate tensions among North Korea, its neighbors and the US amid escalating concern about the isolated nation’s nuclear ambitions.” The Washington Times (11/20, Miller) reports that in making the announcement, Trump referenced the regime’s assassination of leader Kim’s half brother and the death of American Otto Warmbier, who was held in North Korea for 17 months and died after suffering severe brain damage. House Foreign Affairs Committee Chairman Ed Royce “applauded the President’s move.” The Hill (11/20, Fabian) quotes Royce as saying, “Over the past year alone, Kim Jong Un and his regime brazenly assassinated his brother with a chemical weapon and brutally tortured Otto Warmbier, leading directly to his tragic death. These aren’t isolated incidents, but are examples of a consistent pattern of terror.” The Wall Street Journal (11/20, Schwartz, Cheng) reports the move was welcomed by Republican lawmakers, including Royce. The Daily Caller (11/20, Pickrell) notes the President “mulled relisting” North Korea as a state sponsor of terror during his recent trip to Asia, and had announced he would make a decision upon his return. The Washington Post (11/20, Taylor), meanwhile, notes that “this isn’t North Korea’s first time on the list. The country was designated a state sponsor of terrorism in 1988 and stayed on the list until it was removed in 2008.” A Wall Street Journal (11/20, Board) editorial also welcomes the move by the Administration, which it says rights a wrong made by the Bush Administration when it removed North Korea from the list in 2008. Steve Hayes of the Weekly Standard said on Fox News’ Special Report (11/20), “It is a significant action and it’s long overdue in my view. President Bush was wrong what he said in June of 2008 about North Korea’s actions.” Hayes added, “If you look at North Korea’s activities since they been taken off the list,” it is “not a country that’s behaved as if it wants to stay off the terror list.” Mara Liasson of NPR said on Fox News’ Special Report (11/20), “What’s interesting about the move today, I think it is symbolic. That’s what Rex Tillerson said on a rare visit to the White House briefing room. He also said that as a practical matter, it might not make that much difference since North Korea already is the subject of so much tough sanctions, but it does send a signal that the US is going to be tough about this and it’s just one more punishment that we can put on North Korea.” 

North Korean Nuclear Tests Pose Radiation Threats. Deutsche Welle (11/20, Kretschmer) reports North Korea has conducted six nuclear tests since 2006 in Punggye-ri. The latest test in September “marked a significant upgrade of the nation’s nuclear program” and has sparked concerns about nuclear contamination. Suh Kyun-ryul, professor of nuclear engineering at Seoul National University, warns, “If the North Koreans continue to test similarly heavy nuclear bombs on the same site, sooner or later they will lead to a premature collapse, where radioactive material could reach and contaminate both the groundwater and the surface of the earth.” 

Kim Disciplines Top Military Organization. The New York Times (11/20, Choe) reports North Korean leader Kim Jong-un is “disciplining the leadership of his country’s most powerful military organization, the latest sign of his efforts to tighten his grip on party elites and the armed forces,” South Korea’s intelligence agency said Monday. During a closed-door parliamentary briefing Monday, South Korea’s National Intelligence Service told lawmakers that the North’s General Political Bureau was being “audited” by the country’s leadership for the first time in 20 years, and that the organization’s director, Vice Marshal Hwang Pyong-so, and his deputies were “punished.” South Korean intelligence officials said the organization was being audited for “impure attitude.” 

## Trump Promises Tax Reform By Christmas. 

The AP (11/20, Superville) reports that in remarks for a Cabinet meeting Monday, President Trump “promised a tax overhaul by Christmas,” saying, “We’re going to give the American people a huge tax cut for Christmas – hopefully that will be a great big, beautiful Christmas present.” His comments came “a day after the White House signaled its willingness to strike” a repeal of the ACA’s individual mandate from the legislation if it hinders passing it. The repeal “has emerged as a major sticking point for Republican Sen. Susan Collins of Maine, whose vote the White House needs.” However, removing the provision “would blow a big hole in the senators’ tax cut plan, leaving them $338 billion short of their revenue goal over the next 10 years.” NBC Nightly News (11/20, story 5, 1:05, Welker) reported that tax reform was “front and center at the cabinet meeting,” but Kristen Welker added that “with a razor-thin majority in the Senate, the President could be imperiling the tax bill by waging wars with his fellow Republicans on Twitter.” At least five Republicans “have expressed skepticism about the tax plan,” and they “can only afford to lose two votes to pass the legislation. A senior official says the President will work the phones to try to win over votes.” The Washington Times (11/20, Miller) says Trump on Monday “scolded Democratic lawmakers for their lockstep opposition to the GOP tax reform plans,” saying, “With the Democrats giving us no votes on tax cuts for purely political reasons – obstructionism – it will be up to the Republicans to come through for America. ... I think they will, I hope they will, it’s up to the Senate.” Counselor to the President Kellyanne Conway said on Fox News’ Fox & Friends 

(11/20), “We feel very confident, but it is up to those legislators who for years, if not decades, have been promising their constituents they are going to get meaningful tax cuts and tax overhaul. And we are very happy that the House and Senate have come up with what I call Trump speed, not swamp speed, in getting their bills to the floor fairly quickly. We feel really great that both bills adhere to the President’s four core principles for tax cuts and tax relief: repatriation, simplification, middle-class tax cut, and reducing that corporate cut tax rate so that we’re below the average for developed countries instead of the highest in the entire OECD.” 

Attention Turns To Group Of Undecided GOP Senators. The New York Times (11/20, Kaplan) reports that Republican tax reform efforts rest “in the hands of a small number of fence-sitting senators with disparate concerns, like how small businesses are taxed and whether health insurance costs will spike after the repeal of the Affordable Care Act’s requirement to have coverage or pay a penalty.” If Democrats are unified against the bill, Senate Majority Leader McConnell “can afford only two defections.” Currently, undecided Republicans include Sens. Jeff Flake, Ron Johnson, Susan Collins, and Lisa Murkowski. 

Trump: Healthcare, Infrastructure, Welfare Reform Will Follow Tax Overhaul. Reuters (11/20, Mason) reports that Trump “said he plans to take up healthcare, infrastructure and welfare reform issues soon after Republicans’ tax overhaul is finalized, which the party has pledged to complete by the end of the year.” He said, “We’ll be submitting plans on healthcare, plans on infrastructure and plans on welfare reform, which is desperately needed in this country, soon after taxes.” White House press secretary Sarah Sanders said Monday that the Administration will provide details of its welfare reform plan in the first weeks of 2018, Reuters (11/20, Oliphant) reports. Sanders said, “This is something that the president has a great deal of interest in and I think you can count on probably the first part of next year seeing more specifics and details come out on that.” 

## Yellen To Resign From Federal Reserve Board. 

The AP (11/19, Crutsinger) reports that “Janet Yellen submitted her resignation from the Federal Reserve board to President Donald Trump on Monday, announcing that she will leave when her successor is sworn in as Fed chairman.” The move “gives Trump in his first year in office the chance to fill five positions on the Fed’s seven-member board, in addition to picking Powell to be the next Fed chairman.” Yellen called serving in the Fed system for more than three decades a “great privilege and honor.” 

## Nebraska PSC Approves Alternative Keystone XL Route. 

The AP (11/20) reports that on Monday the Nebraska Public Service Commission voted and approve a route for TransCanada’s Keystone XL oil pipeline. Although a route was approved, it is “five miles longer” than the company’s preferred path and also requires another pumping station. In a statement, TransCanada CEO Russ Girling said the company will be studying “how the decision would impact the cost and schedule of the project.” The 3-2 PSC decision will likely face a legal challenge and may also require another route analysis performed for federal approval. The only Democrat in the PSC, Crystal Rhoades said that the company did not show how the project was in the public interest. Rhoades also expressed concerns over the alternative route that was approved as it relates to landowners. Meanwhile, TransCanada will now be able “to gain access to the land of holdout landowners through eminent domain proceedings.” Reuters (11/20, O'Hanlon, Lou) reports that the Nebraska PSC has lifted “the last big regulatory obstacle for the long-delayed project that U.S. President Donald Trump wants built.” Nebraska Democratic Party Chair and Bold Alliance President Jane Kleeb said “we are going to fight like hell to make sure this pipeline never gets built.” The PSC’s decision leaves it “unclear whether the alternative route lacks any state or federal permits that the preferred route had already obtained, a situation that could drag out the regulatory process.” In response to the PSC decision, Alberta Premier Rachel Notley said the project “will mean greater energy security for all North Americans.” The AP (11/20) also reports that, following the Nebraska PSC decision, Sisseton Wahpeton Oyate Tribal Chairman Dave Flute “said Monday his tribe will stand with other tribal nations to oppose pipelines.” Keystone XL opponents say that approving the alternative route provides more legal “actions that could indefinitely block the project.” The attorney for environmental groups Ken Winston said the vote “opens up a whole new bag of issues that” can be raised. The AP (11/20) reports that South Dakota’s Republican Gov. Dennis Daugaard said he hopes those choosing to exercise their First Amendment rights following the Nebraska PSC decision should do so peacefully. Daugaard said he is planning to support the project so “long as it can be built and operated safely.” Meanwhile, the Republican US Sen. Mike Rounds of South Dakota said that he is concerned about last week’s 210,000 gallon oil spill although he still supports Keystone XL and other pipelines. CNN (11/20, Hackney, Yan) reports that Kleeb said “TransCanada did not get their preferred route which means years of new review and legal challenges are now on the table.” The proposed project would start in Hardisty, Alberta and reach to Steele City, Nebraska. CNBC (11/20, DiChristopher) reports that groups opposing the project are able to “appeal the commission’s decision in state district court.” In a statement, Oil Change International Executive Director Stephen Kretzmann said that “today the Nebraska PSC chose to stand with Trump, climate denial, and Big Oil.” Kretzmann added “good luck with that.” Also in a statement, Association of Oil Pipe Lines CEO and President Andy Black said that “Nebraska recognizes the Keystone XL pipeline is in the public interest bringing good paying jobs and more affordable energy for U.S. consumers.” Bloomberg News (11/20, Harris, Vamburkar, Orland) reports that the alternative route “could throw more uncertainty into the mix for the long-delayed” pipeline. Moody Investors Service VP Gavin MacFarlane said that “while today’s Keystone XL pipeline approval is an important milestone, it does not provide certainty that the project will ultimately be built and begin operating.” MacFarlane added that “pipeline construction would negatively affect TransCanada’s business risk profile through increased project execution risk, and would likely put pressure on financial metrics.” Bloomberg News (11/20) website posts a video of Bloomberg anchor David Weston’s discussion with NextGen Climate founder Tom Steyer on the Keystone XL pipeline project approval. Steyer said the decision is a “tragic mistake.” Steyer added that “this kind of decision, where it will lead to the old fashioned kind of pollution, is also incredibly short sighted and just plain dumb.” Bloomberg News (11/20, Vamburkar, Harris) reports that a lawyer for landowners opposing TransCanada Brian Jorde said the Nebraska PSC decision was actually “an incredible victory” and said that “they won nothing.” Jorde also said the approved route is one that TransCanada said is an inferior path. Meanwhile, the landowners who are now affected by the alternative route could argue due process “before the state commission, said Katie Bays, an analyst at Height Securities LLC in Washington.” Bay added that “by making this a due process issue, you can involve a federal court” where a there is a chance for a more favorable panel. Bold Alliance issued a statement that said they might petition for a rehearing before the PSC within 10 days or file an appeal in Nebraska within 30 days. The Los Angeles Times (11/20, Schneider) reports that during a conference call this month, Girling discussed the Keystone XL pipeline and said that “production of Canadian heavy oil continues to grow, and the need for new pipeline transportation capacity remains high.” Meanwhile, some analysts are projecting “that even with the Nebraska go-ahead, the pipeline will not be built.” Regarding the financial feasibility of the project, Institute for Energy Economics and Financial Analysis Director of Finance Tom Sanzillo said “there is no economic rationale, no validity to the investment calculation, no positive bottom line.” Sanzillo added, “our view is that TransCanada is unlikely to build it.” The Washington Times (11/20, Wolfgang) reports that American Petroleum Institute President and CEO Jack Gerard reacted to the Nebraska PSC decision and said the commission “set an example for how to carefully evaluate critical energy infrastructure projects, even in the face of strongly held views and opinions.” UPI (11/20, Graeber) reports that the decision from the Nebraska PSC said that “after careful evaluation and consideration of all the evidence adduced, and the careful weighing of all the issues, factors and aspects of the proposed routes of the Keystone XL pipeline, we find that the alternative mainline route is in the public interest and shall be approved.” The Washington Post (11/20, Mufson) reports that in the dissenting opinion by Commissioner Rhoades, she said “all human-made infrastructure degrades and fails over time.” Rhoades also wrote that “no infrastructure ever designed has lasted for eternity and there is no reason to believe this pipeline will be an exception.” The Canadian Press (11/20) reports that project opponents “say the pipeline would pass through the Sandhills, an ecologically fragile region in Nebraska of grass-covered sand dunes, and would cross the land of farmers and ranchers who don’t want it.” Politico (11/20, Lefebvre) reports that Kleeb said a legal challenge will be raised and also said “we will challenge a foreign corporation being given eminent domain in the county courts, with every intent to bring it to the Supreme Court if needed.” The Wall Street Journal (11/20, Matthews, Monga), E&E Publishing (11/20, Gilmer), BBC News (UK) (11/20), NPR (11/20, Dwyer), the Daily Caller (11/20, White), Vox (11/20, Irfan), the Washington Examiner (11/20, Siegel), the Omaha (NE) World-Herald (11/20, Hammel), Voice of America (11/20), the York (NE) News-Times (11/20, Wilkinson), the Daily Intelligencer (NY) (11/20, Hart), WOWT-TV Omaha, NE (11/20), Columbus News Team (NE) (11/20, Jordan) also report. 

State Department May Need To Reapprove Keystone XL Pipeline. The Washington Examiner (11/20, Siegel) reports that “the State Department is considering whether it needs to reapprove the Keystone XL pipeline” following Monday’s decision. State Department spokesperson Vincent Campos said, “we won’t know about any impacts until we learn precisely the extent of any changes, something we are currently engaged in.” The Hill (11/20, Henry) reports that as the Nebraska PSC decided to approve the Keystone XL pipeline’s alternative route, “the State Department is reviewing its cross-border permit” for the project. Meanwhile, two federal agencies must “still...approve permits for” the Keystone XL project. 

Rogan: Celebrate Nebraska PSC Decision. In a column for the Washington Examiner (11/20, Rogan), Tom Rogan suggests that “you should celebrate the Nebraska Public Service Commission’s decision Monday to approve the Keystone XL pipeline.” Rogan argues that although the PSC did not approve the preferred route, it “was the last major regulatory hurdle standing in the way of the oil pipeline’s construction.” While liberals suggest “that conservative energy policies are bad for the environment,” they “ignore the fact that technologies like fracking offer far more sustainable (I.E. not economy destroying) carbon-reduction potential than the Paris accord Ponzi schemes endorsed by China and Germany.” 

Withering Supplies From Venezuela, Mexico Strengthens Argument For Keystone XL. 

Bloomberg News (11/20, Nussbaum) reports that one of the strongest arguments to support the building of the Keystone XL pipeline is the “withering supplies of heavy crude from Venezuela and Mexico” that is “making U.S. Gulf Coast refineries more dependent on the thick, sticky bitumen that Keystone XL would” provide from Canada’s oil sands. Refineries have been built to process the thicker grades “and adapting them to the light grades that are pumped from American shale fields requires costly revamping work.” According to Bloomberg’s compiled data, “since the start of the decade, U.S. imports of heavy crude have fallen by more than a third from Venezuela, and by almost half out of Mexico.” The Houston Chronicle (11/20, Osborne) reports that Wood Mackenzie Refining and Oil Markets Research Analyst Zachary Rogers said that “the pipeline’s commercial viability is strengthened as declining heavy oil production in Mexico and ongoing Venezuelan risk has recently tightened the heavy-crude market in the Gulf Coast.” 

# Editorial Wrap-Up 

## New York Times. 

“Justice At Last For The Youngest Inmates?” The New York Times (11/20) editorializes that the Supreme Court should categorically ban sentences of life-without-parole for juveniles when it considers the matter on Tuesday. The Times approves of the recently “developing awareness that young people are ‘constitutionally different’ from adults — less in control of their emotions and more able to change over time — and should be punished differently.” The Times warns that if the Court does not act, prosecutors in a few states will still adhere to the older view of those types of sentences and ignore the so-called “mitigating qualities of youth.” “‘Only Morons Pay The Estate Tax.’” A New York Times (11/20) editorial argues against repealing the estate tax, saying it “would provide a tax windfall of more than $3 million apiece for the top 0.2 percent of earners, and more than $20 million for the wealthiest Americans,” but would offer “nothing for middle-class people, except more evidence of Mr. Trump’s and Republicans’ bad faith.” 

## Washington Post. 

“Children Are Starving In Yemen. This White House Should Intercede.” AWashington Post (11/20) editorial urges the Administration to “act immediately” and compel Saudi Arabia to end its land, sea, and air blockade on Yemen. The Post concedes Yemen was already “suffering from the world’s worst humanitarian crisis” when the blockade was imposed, but cautions that the situation is rapidly deteriorating, “and yet the Saudis persist with their siege.” The Post notes the State Department “has objected to the ongoing blockade and called for ‘unimpeded access’ for humanitarian supplies,” but adds that “many in Yemen suspect, with some reason, that the White House is tolerating, if not encouraging, the crime.” The Post argues that “the White House has the leverage to put a stop” to its indulgence of the Saudi leadership, and if it does not, “it will be complicit in a crime against humanity.” 

“Time For Republicans To Denounce This Tax Nonsense.” In an editorial, the Washington Post (11/20) says OMB Director Mulvaney on Sunday said that Republicans “are trying to ‘game the system’ by pretending that expensive tax cuts will expire in several years, arguing that the pretense is necessary to ‘shoehorn the bill into the rules’ of the Senate.” The Post calls this “a gut-check moment for any senator who has ever claimed to care about the debt,” and calls on senators “from whom the public should expect more – such as Susan Collins (R-Maine), Bob Corker (R-Tenn.), Jeff Flake (R-Ariz.), John McCain (R-Ariz.) and Lisa Murkowski (R-Alaska)” to “finally denounce this nonsense.” 

“A Judge Makes The Right Call On Trump’s Would-Be Transgender Ban.” The Washington Post (11/20) editorializes that a recent federal court ruling against President Trump’s proposed ban on transgender people in the US military “is a welcome blow to this pointless and cruel policy.” The Post applauds the US District Court for the District of Columbia’s ruling’s assertion that “there’s little evidence to support Mr. Trump’s declaration that the ‘medical costs and disruption’ of transgender service necessitated the ban.” The Post concludes by opining that if James Mattis’ review of the policy “is fair, he will conclude that there is no reason these men and women should not continue to serve.” 

## Wall Street Journal. 

“Have They Got A Bond For You.” The Wall Street Journal (11/20) editorializes that investors who invest in Chicago’s sales-tax bonds, set to be issued next month, or Connecticut’s new bonds secured by state income taxes shouldn’t be surprised if the investments don’t pay off later. The Journal points out that Chicago might be authorized to declare bankruptcy at some point, and Connecticut may seek to renegotiate some of its debt, making both bonds risky in the editorial board’s opinion. 

“North Korea, Terror Sponsor.” A Wall Street Journal (11/20, Board) editorial welcomes the Administration’s designation of North Korea as a state sponsor of terrorism, which it says rights a wrong made by the Bush Administration when it removed North Korea from the list in 2008. 

“Angela Merkel’s Failing Center.” The Wall Street Journal (11/20) editorializes that the collapse of German Chancellor Angela Merkel’s talks to form a coalition government is a good thing, in part because the parties involved in the negotiations are starkly divided on a number of issues. The Journal says that German voters had hoped for more political competition in September’s election, and the establishment of a tenuous coalition is not the preferred way to assuage those voters and meet their desires. 

# Big Picture Headlines From Today’s Front Pages. 

Wall Street Journal: 

US Files Lawsuit Challenging AT&T-Time Warner Deal US To Label North Korea As ‘State Sponsor Of Terrorism’ Takeovers Roar To Life As Companies Hear Footsteps From Tech Giants Germany’s Political Impasse Will Stymie Further European Change 

New York Times: 

Trump Returns North Korea To List Of State Sponsors Of Terrorism Germany Plunged Into Political Crisis After Coalition Talks Fail US Sues To Block AT&T-Time Warner Merger After Late Help For Elephants, A Question: Why? Trump Administration Ends Temporary Protection For Haitians Charles Manson Dies At 83; Wild-Eyed Leader Of A Murderous Crew 

Washington Post: 

8 Women: Charlie Rose Harassed Us US Sues Over AT&T’s Bid For Time Warner Trump Relists N. Korea As A Terrorism Sponsor US Ending 60,000 Haitians’ Provisional Residency Status 597 Days. And Still Waiting. 

Financial Times: 

Merkel Refuses To Resign Despite Breakdown Of Coalition Talks Robot Army Is Transforming The Global Workplace Uber To Buy 24,000 Volvo Cars For Driverless Fleet 

Washington Times: 

Higher Cable Bills, Less Innovation: Justice Department Says AT&T Decision Not Trump’s Haitians Get Notice Of End To Protected Status, Must Go Back Home By July 2019 Navy SEALs Remember Christian Lambertsen, Humble Beginnings Of Swimmer-Commandos Merkel’s Failure To Form German Government Puts Chancellorship In Serious Doubt Nebraska’s Approval Of Keystone XL Route Is No Guarantee Of Pipeline’s Completion 

Story Lineup From Last Night’s Network News: 

ABC: Roy Moore Campaign; Al Franken Sexual Misconduct Allegations; Charlie Rose Sexual Misconduct Allegations; NYC-Factory Explosion; US Border Patrol Ambushed; Argentine Submarine Missing; Trump-North Korea; AT&T-Time Warner Merger Blocked; Freed Taliban Hostage Family Mother; Charles Manson Dies; Black Friday Shopping; Weather Forecast; Pesticide Company Ruling; Della Reese Dies; Georgia Dome-Demolition; Girls-Charity Race. 

CBS: US Border Patrol Ambushed; Charlie Rose Sexual Misconduct Allegations; Roy Moore Campaign; Russia Meddling Investigation; Trump-North Korea; AT&T-Time Warner Merger Blocked; Argentine Submarine Missing; Charles Manson Dies; Uber-Driverless Car; Della Reese Dies; Georgia Dome-Demolition; British Queen-Anniversary. 

NBC: Charlie Rose Sexual Misconduct Allegations; Roy Moore Campaign; Al Franken Sexual Misconduct Allegations; Trump-North Korea; WH-Tax Reform Plan; Argentine Submarine Missing; Charles Manson Dies; NYC-Factory Explosion; US-Afghanistan Deployment; Black Friday Shopping; Della Reese Dies; Georgia Dome-Demolition; WH-Turkey Pardon; Thanksgiving Charity. 

Network TV At A Glance: 

Roy Moore Campaign – 8 minutes, 15 seconds Charlie Rose Sexual Misconduct Allegations – 6 minutes, 35 seconds Charles Manson Dies – 5 minutes, 50 seconds Argentine Submarine Missing – 4 minutes, 5 seconds Trump-North Korea – 2 minutes, 35 seconds 

Story Lineup From This Morning’s Radio News Broadcasts: 

ABC: Trump-North Korea; Sanctuary Cities-California Court; Immigration Policy-Protected Status; Roy Moore Campaign; Charlie Rose Sexual Misconduct Allegations. 

CBS: Al Franken Sexual Misconduct Allegations; Charlie Rose Sexual Misconduct Allegations; Roy Moore Campaign; Trump-North Korea; Russia Meddling Investigation; Della Reese Dies. 

FOX: Las Vega Shooting-Hotel Lawsuit; Trump-North Korea; Charlie Rose Sexual Misconduct Allegations; Al Franken Sexual Misconduct Allegations. 

NPR: Trump-North Korea; Immigration Policy-Protected Status; AT&T-Time Warner Merger Blocked; Charlie Rose Sexual Misconduct Allegations. 

# Washington Schedule 

## Today’s Events In Washington. 

White House: 

PRESIDENT TRUMP — Meets with the President of the National Turkey Federation; participates in the National Thanksgiving Turkey Pardoning Ceremony. VICE PRESIDENT PENCE — Participates in a phone call with EU High Representative and Vice President Federica Mogherini. 

US Senate: 11:00 AM Senate convenes for a pro forma session 1:15 PM Senate Veterans’ Affairs Committee field hearing on VA services in Ohio – Field hearing on ‘The State of VA Services in Ohio’, with testimony from Ohio Department of Veterans Services Director Chip Tansill; Veterans of Foreign Wars Commander-in-Chief Keith Harman; Benjamin Fitzgerald of Westlake, OH; James Powers of Massillon, OH; Melissa Twine of Batavia, OH; Veterans Benefits Administration Assistant Deputy Under Secretary for Field Operations Ronald Burke, and Education Service Director Robert Worley; and Veterans Health Administration Deputy Executive Director of Provider Relations and Services Dr Kameron Matthews, and Veterans Integrated Service Network 10 Director Robert McDivitt Location: Columbus Metropolitan Library, 96 S Grant Ave, Columbus, OH Columbus http://veterans.senate.gov/ https://twitter.com/VAChair Senate on recess until 27 November. 

US House: 11:00 AM House of Representatives meets for a pro forma session House on recess until 27 November. 

Other: 11:00 AM New Afghanistan and Iraq engravings on the U.S. Marine Corps War Memorial shown via press conference – Press conference held to give a first look at the newly-carved engravings of the Afghanistan and Iraq campaigns on the U.S. Marine Corps War Memorial – the first campaigns to be added since 1996. Participants include Secretary of the Interior Ryan Zinke, U.S. Marine Corps Commandant Gen. Robert Neller, The Carlyle Group co-CEO David Rubenstein, National Park Service Acting Director Michael Reynolds, National Park Foundation President and CEO Will Shafroth, and George Washington Memorial Parkway Superintendent Alex Romero Location: U.S. Marine Corps War Memorial, (Iwo Jima), Arlington, VA Arlington www.nps.gov https://twitter.com/NatlParkService 

# Last Laughs 

## Late Night Political Humor. 

Stephen Colbert: “You might remember that while [President Trump] was in China, Trump asked China’s President Xi Jinping to release three UCLA players who had been arrested for shoplifting from a Chinese mall? Easily, the most scandalous thing to happen in a mall that didn’t involve Roy Moore.” Stephen Colbert: “[President Trump] tweeting, ‘Now that the three basketball players are out of China and saved from years in jail, Lavar Ball, the father of LiAngelo, is unaccepting of what I did for his son and that shoplifting is no big deal. I should have left them in jail!’ Mr. Trump, maybe now’s not the best time to be implying that someone’s kid should go to jail for what their dad did.” 

Stephen Colbert: “[Sen. Jeff] Flake was caught on camera dissing his own party. ‘If we become the party of Roy Moore and Donald Trump, we are toast.’ Senator Flake, that’s a little too hard on toast. May I remind you, sir, toast doesn’t cruise the mall looking for dough that hasn’t risen yet.” 

James Corden: “This weekend, President Trump lashed out at NFL running back Marshawn Lynch after photos showed Lynch at a game in Mexico where he was standing during the Mexican national anthem, but sitting during the US national anthem. By the way, ‘Marshawn Lync stood for the Mexican anthem’ is also the sentence that will start 70 percent of your Thanksgiving fights this year. No question. I mean, I’m surprised Donald Trump could even see Marshawn sitting down in Mexico, through that big border wall he built. Oh wait, that’s right, it doesn’t exist.” 

James Corden: “Trump, of course, shot back [at Sen. Jeff Flake] on Twitter, saying, ‘Sen. Jeff Flake(y), who is unelectable in the great state of Arizona, was caught (purposely) on ‘mike saying bad things about your favorite President.’ Favorite President? Jeff Flake said bad things about Rutherford B. Hayes?” 

James Corden: “Trump also attacked a man named Lavar Ball, the father of one of the UCLA basketball players arrested for shop lifting in China, after Ball failed to recognize Trump’s role in his son’s release. Trump tweeted he ‘is unaccepting of what I did for his son. I should have left them in jail!’ And there he is. America’s favorite President, ladies and gentlemen. ‘I should have left them I jail!’ At which point, Paul Manafort and the rest of Trump’s campaign staff were like, ‘Haha, okay, let’s not talk about leaving people in jail.’” 

Jimmy Fallon: “It came out that national security adviser H.R. McMaster called President Trump an idiot, and said he had the intelligence of a kindergartner. And Trump said, ‘Oh, yeah? Then why am I reading at a first-grade level?’” 

Jimmy Fallon: “This weekend, Trump sent a tweet where he criticized Senator Jeff flake for saying bad things about ‘Your favorite President.’ People were like, ‘He said bad things about Obama?’” 

Jimmy Fallon: “Meanwhile, [Sen.] Al Franken said that he isn’t resigning, but will spend the next few days reflecting. Reflecting is a political term meaning, ‘Hoping someone else gets busted and this whole thing blows over.’” 

Seth Meyers: “The White House has announced that President Trump will pardon two turkeys at a ceremony tomorrow, despite the fact that both turkeys lied under oath about meeting with Russian officials.” 

Seth Meyers: “The flagship location of Macy’s in New York this year will require children to schedule an appointment to sit on Santa’s lap. ‘No line to sit on this lap,’ said a man running for Senate.” 

Seth Meyers: “Today, a second woman came forward to accuse Franken of inappropriately touching her, telling CNN that he grabbed her buttocks while taking a photo at the Minnesota state fair. She said, ‘You just feel gross like, ew, I wanna wash that off me.’ And you know it’s bad when you’re the grossest thing at a state fair. That’s where they deep fry Twinkies.” Seth Meyers: “Today, White House counselor Kellyanne Conway went on Fox to slam Moore’s Democratic opponent, Doug Jones. And while she didn’t explicitly say it, she seemed to be urging people to vote for Moore. ... So according to Kellyanne Conway, there’s now a lower bar of entry for the Senate than a mall in Alabama. ‘Hey, creep we told you. You’re not welcome in this mall.’ ‘Well, then I guess I’ll be off to Washington, DC, where people aren’t so picky.’” 

Copyright 2017 by Bulletin Intelligence LLC Reproduction or redistribution without permission prohibited. Content is drawn from thousands of newspapers, national magazines, national and local television programs, radio broadcasts, social-media platforms and additional forms of open-source data. Sources for Bulletin Intelligence audience-size estimates include Scarborough, GfK MRI, comScore, Nielsen, and the Audit Bureau of Circulation. Data from and access to third party social media platforms, including but not limited to Facebook, Twitter, Instagram and others, is subject to the respective platform’s terms of use. Services that include Factiva content are governed by Factiva’s terms of use. Services including embedded Tweets are also subject to Twitter for Website's information and privacy policies. The Department of the Interior News Briefing is published five days a week by Bulletin Intelligence, which creates custom briefings for government and corporate leaders. We can be found on the Web at BulletinIntelligence.com, or called at (703) 483-6100. President Trump reversed course on allowing elephant trophy imports from Africa. Calle v H/Wikimedia Commons 

President Trump's abrupt U-turn on elephant trophy imports could undermine his own appointees, break standard practice and all but invite a legal challenge from his customary allies. Already, the president's move has sent Fish and Wildlife Service officials scrambling to figure out how they might unwind a decision that was painstakingly vetted and formally published. The officials must also handle hunters who may have already received trophy permits. "In my experience, it's unprecedented for a final decision to be put on hold and reversed by the White House," former Fish and Wildlife Service Director Dan Ashe said in an interview today. Citing the confusion, the Center for Biological Diversity and Natural Resources Defense Council sued the Trump administration today in a bid to keep the initial ban in place. "Trump's abrupt backpedaling after public outcry, while appreciated, shows how arbitrary this deplorable decision was. These incredibly imperiled creatures need a lot more than vague promises," said Tanya Sanerib, a senior attorney with the Center for Biological Diversity. The mess follows Trump's second-guessing of the service's elephant trophy import decision that had officially been made public Thursday and published early Friday in the 

Federal Register (Greenwire , Nov. 17). Citing a detailed 39-page assessment , the agency declared it could "make a determination that the killing of trophy animals in Zimbabwe, on or after January 21, 2016, and on or before December 31, 2018, will enhance the survival of the African elephant." With the so-called enhancement finding, and a similar 23-page one for Zambia, Fish and Wildlife announced it would resume issuing trophy import permits for the two African countries. Each assessment examined what officials termed a "number of factors." Within hours, facing heat, Trump said on Twitter that he would put the decision "on hold" so he could "review all conservation facts." He then retweeted commentators who praised him, and yesterday foreshadowed what he's going to do. "Big-game trophy decision will be announced next week but will be very hard pressed to change my mind that this horror show in any way helps conservation of Elephants or any other animal," Trump wrote. Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke said in a statement that he and Trump had talked and "as a result, in a manner compliant with all applicable laws, rules, and regulations, the issuing of permits is being put on hold as the decision is being reviewed." It's extraordinary for an administration, let alone a president, to immediately put on hold an agency decision that had gone through routine procedures including final publication in the Federal Register ."I never experienced anything like that," said Ashe, who served 22 years with Fish and Wildlife — nearly six of them as director — and now is president and CEO of the Association of Zoos & Aquariums. Potentially, a legal challenge could be mounted by hunting proponents claiming that the reversal violated the federal Administrative Procedure Act. Safari Club International and the National Rifle Association cited this same law in a 2014 suit challenging the earlier import ban. The Fish and Wildlife Service in 2014 had banned the trophy imports from Zimbabwe, after concluding that it could not make the finding that sport killing of the Zimbabwe elephants "would enhance survival of the species," as the law requires. "Federal defendants ... violated APA rulemaking procedures by abruptly suspending the ability of Safari Club members to import their African elephant trophies from Zimbabwe, without first giving the public advance notice and the opportunity to comment and without providing data," the 2014 lawsuit stated. Summoning the words that can kill a federal agency's decisionmaking, the hunting advocates in their 2014 suit further termed Fish and Wildlife's earlier import ban "arbitrary and capricious" and "an abuse of discretion." The lawsuit is now on appeal. In a weekend statement, Safari Club International decried the "shrill, negative reactions" from "hysterical anti-hunters and news media outlets" and urged hunters to contact the White House and Interior Department. The Fish and Wildlife Service has revised upward Zimbabwe's estimated elephant population, citing in its new notice a 2014 aerial survey called the Great Elephant Census that pegged the number at 82,304 individuals. 

Want to read more stories like this?  

> Click here to start a free trial to E&E -- the best way to track policy and markets.

ABOUT GREENWIRE – THE LEADER IN ENERGY AND ENVIRONMENT NEWS 

> Greenwire is written and produced by the staff of E&E News. The one-stop source for those who need to stay on top of all of today's major energy and environmental action with an average of more than 20 stories a day, Greenwire covers the complete spectrum, from electricity industry restructuring to Clean Air Act litigation to public lands management. Greenwire publishes daily at 1 p.m.

E&E News 122 C Street NW 7th Floor Washington, DC 20001 Phone: 202-628-6500 Fax: 202-737-5299 www.eenews.net 

All content is copyrighted and may not be reproduced or retransmitted without the express consent of Environment & Energy Publishing, LLC. Click here to view our privacy policy. Conversation Contents 

## U.S. Department of the Interior News Briefing for Monday, November 20, 2017 

# Bulletin Intelligence <Interior@bulletinintelligence.com> 

## From: Bulletin Intelligence <Interior@bulletinintelligence.com> 

## Sent: Mon Nov 20 2017 04:01:50 GMT-0700 (MST) 

## To: <Interior@bulletinintelligence.com> 

## Subject: U.S. Department of the Interior News Briefing for Monday, November 20, 2017  

> Mobile version and searchable archives available here. Please click here to subscribe.
> DATE: MONDAY, NOVEMBER 20, 2017 6:00 AM EST

# Today's Table Of Contents 

DOI In The News 

• Politico: Trump Says Decision On Elephant Hunting Trophies To Come This Week. • Washington Post: Zinke Rocked Moccasins To Celebrate Native Cultures. But Tribes Are Focused On His Plans To Rock Bears Ears. • Brainerd (MN) Daily Dispatch: Interior Secretary Visits Mille Lacs, Discusses Law Enforcement Crisis. • St. Thomas Source: Mapp Meets Interior Secretary Zinke In D.C. • U.S. News & World Report: Transmission Line From Oregon-To-Idaho Gets Approval. • Salt Lake (UT) Tribune: Congress Pushes Back On Interior Plan That Would More Than Double National Park Fees. • Austin (TX) American Statesman: Susan Combs Hits A New Hurdle In Her Path To Washington Post. • Federal News Radio (DC): House Committee Backs Westward Move For Interior Employees. • Grand Junction (CO) Daily Sentinel: BLM Advisory Councils Are Free To Meet Again After Initial Review. • CNN: Additional Coverage: Poor Record-Keeping Hindering Zinke Travel Investigation, IG Says. 

Bureau Of Indian Affairs 

• Program Helps Tribal Court Employees Increase Navajo Language Skills. 

Bureau Of Land Management 

• Casper (WY) Star-Tribune: The Powder River Basin Is Poised For Another Boom, But Some Say The Feds Are In The Way. • Grand Junction (CO) Daily Sentinel: BLM Picks Up Tab For Plugging Old Wells Near Douglas Pass. 

Bureau Of Ocean Energy Management 

• Mark Sanford Opposes Energy Bill Championed By GOP Leaders. • BOEM Looks For Comments On Hilcorp’s Liberty Development. • Louisiana May See More Offshore Oil Money Under Cassidy Budget Amendment. 

Bureau Of Reclamation 

• Wash. Reps Float Bill To Speed Up DOI Water Project Reviews. 

Fish And Wildlife Service 

• USA Today: Congress Moves To ‘Drill, Baby, Drill’ In Alaska’s ANWR Refuge. Here’s What You Should Know. • High Country (CO) News: Fish And Wildlife Retracts Opposition To Arizona Project. • Palm Beach (FL) Post: How A Neon Green Fern Sparked An Environmental Showdown. • U.S. News & World Report: With Dam Cleared From Creek, Endangered Fish Expand Range. 

National Park Service 

• Roll Call: Proposal Restricting National Mall Access A ‘Game Changer’ For Hill Athletes. • WRC-TV Washington: Beach Boys, Wynonna To Play National Christmas Tree Lighting. • U.S. News & World Report: Fort Sumter Seeks Comment On New Plan For Disabled Access. • U.S. News & World Report: Grand Teton Park Increases Fees To Camp, Boat, Get Married. • Omaha (NE) World-Herald: Last Homesteader’s Tractor Goes On Display At Homestead National Monument. • Arizona Daily Star: Saguaro National Park, Open Space Highlight Debate Over New Fry’s. • Harrison (AR) Daily Times: $5K Grant For Compton VFD. • Marin (CA) Independent Journal: Point Reyes Ranch Plan Comment Period Extended. • KOMO-TV Seattle: Man Gets Prison Time For 2001 Sex Assault Of Child In Olympic National Park. 

Office Of Insular Affairs 

• Saipan (MNP) Tribune: Snake Program Obtains Two New ‘Sniffer’ Dogs. 

Office Of Surface Mining 

• West Virginia Retraining Program Provides Unemployed Coal Miners With Computer Skills. • Powder River Basin Mines Earn Awards For Land Management Efforts. 

US Geological Survey 

• San Francisco Chronicle: Danger Endures In Wine Country As Fight Shifts From Fires To Mudslides. • Additional Reading. 

Opinion Pieces 

• Trump Does The Right Thing For Elephants. He Shouldn’t Back Down Now. • Trump Bags Another Anti-Obama Trophy: Dead Elephants. • Commentary: Assault On ESA Endangers Utah Coffers. • Additional Reading. 

Top National News 

• Washington Post: Media Analyses: Officials Send Mixed Signals On Keeping ACA Mandate Repeal In Tax Bill. • New York Post: Trump Says He Should Have Left UCLA Players “In Jail.” • Washington Post: Trump Touts Economy, Promotes Tax Reform. • Associated Press: STRATCOM Commander Says Would Refuse Nuclear Strike Order If Illegal. • New York Times: White House Requests $44 Billion In Additional Disaster Relief. • New York Times: Puerto Rico Power Authority CEO Resigns Amid Prolonged Post-Hurricane Blackout. • Associated Press: Officials Say Keystone Leak Will Not Factor Into Monday’s Expansion Vote. • Los Angeles Times: LATimes Analysis: Strong Economy A “Lifeline” For Trump’s “Embattled Presidency.” • New York Times: NYTimes Analysis: Trump Still Facing Challenges In Push For Faster Infrastructure Projects. • Washington Times: Administration Officials Say “Administrative State” Is Being Rolled Back. • Associated Press: Paris Climate Signatories Agree On Path Forward To Reduce Greenhouse Gas Emissions. 

Editorial Wrap-Up 

• New York Times. - “The Trump Administration Is Making War On Diplomacy.” • Washington Post. - “The House Tax Bill Unleashes A Dangerous Avalanche Of Campaign Cash.” - “The White House’s Much-Needed Rebuke To A Country Smothering Democracy.” - “A School Volunteer Abused At Least 23 Children. Officials Ignored It.” • Wall Street Journal. - “Germany’s Green Energy Meltdown.” - “A Blue Slip – Not A Franken Veto.” - “The Menendez Mistrial.” 

Big Picture 

• Headlines From Today’s Front Pages. 

Washington Schedule 

• Today’s Events In Washington. 

Last Laughs 

• Late Night Political Humor. 

# DOI In The News 

## Trump Says Decision On Elephant Hunting Trophies To Come This Week. 

Politico (11/19, Griffiths) reports President Trump tweeted Sunday a final decision would come this week on whether to maintain a ban on importing elephant hunting trophies from Zimbabwe and Zambia, “indicating he was leaning toward keeping the Obama-era rules in place.” Trump wrote, “Big-game trophy decision will be announced next week but will be very hard pressed to change my mind that this horror show in any way helps conservation of Elephants or any other animal.” The Washington Post (11/19, Gearan) says it was “not immediately clear whether the reference to ‘any other animal’ might mean he is also reconsidering his administration’s separate lifting of import bans on lion trophies last month.” Also reporting are The Hill (11/19, Beavers), the Washington Examiner (11/19, Feldscher), CNN (11/19, Graef, Green), and the AP (11/19). 

Trump Decision To Delay Repeal Of Elephant Trophy Import Ban Prompts Praise. 

Roxana Saberi of the CBS Weekend News (11/18, story 4, 2:00, Ninan) reported, “Faced with growing outrage over a move that would have lifted a ban on imports of elephant trophies from two African countries,” President Trump on Friday tweeted he is putting the decision “on hold until such time as I review all conservation facts.” The decision initially “sparked backlash from celebrities, including Ellen DeGeneres,” and the “anger spread online through the #bekindtoelephants. Animal rights groups argue the ban has helped protect Africa’s endangered elephants. And The Humane Society of the United States found that after the ban was put in place in 2014, imports of elephant trophies from Zimbabwe fell dramatically.” HSUS President Wayne Pacelle “is welcoming President Trump’s announcement to delay a decision on lifting the ban, but says the ban should be permanent.” Pacelle argued that a live elephant can generate more than $1 million in tourist revenues, compared to only $20,000 for its tusks. The New York Times (11/17, Cochrane) reports Trump’s “evening Twitter message reversed a decision by his own administration that was announced this week and promoted as recently as Friday afternoon by the White House press secretary, Sarah Huckabee Sanders.” The Washington Post (11/18, Eilperin, Gearan) says the “public and private pressure prompted President Trump to overturn his administration’s...move to allow elephants shot for sport in Zimbabwe and Zambia to be imported back to the United States as trophies, according to interviews with several individuals briefed on the decision.” The Post adds that the announcement “marked animal welfare activists’ first federal victory since the president took office in January, and came just hours after” White House press secretary Sarah Huckabee Sanders “defended the trophy import authorization, saying it resulted from a review by ‘career officials’ that began in 2014 under former president Barack Obama.” While the Post acknowledges Career Fish and Wildlife Service officials did make the decision, “political appointees at Interior did press for resolution of the issue, which is a top priority for hunting industry allies of” Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke, who said following Trump’s announcement that “the issuing of permits is put on hold as the decision is being reviewed.” Prior to the President’s announcement, ABC World News Tonight (11/17, story 7, 1:30, Muir) reported on the growing “outrage” over “a decision by the Trump Administration lifting a ban on importing trophies of elephants hunted in Africa.” Correspondent David Wright said the African elephant is still “a ‘threatened’ species, but as of today, big game hunters who kill these creatures in Zambia or Zimbabwe will be allowed to get their trophies through US Customs.” President Trump himself “is not a big game hunter, but his sons are.” Wright said the Administration’s “announcement is sparking outrage across the political spectrum, from Fox News commentator Laura Ingram to, just today, Ellen DeGeneres.” The White House has pushed back against the criticism, “saying this action comes after a study by professionals of the Department of Fish and Wildlife. Still, conservationists are not convinced.” Meanwhile, the Wall Street Journal (11/18, Stokols) reports the President on Saturday morning retweeted comments by cable television hosts Greta Van Susteren and Piers Morgan expressing their thanks for his decision. Additional coverage was provided by the AP (11/17, Cassata), the Washington Post (11/17, Parker, Eilperin), the Washington Post (11/17, Parker, Eilperin), the Washington Post (11/18, Wootson), the Washington Post (11/17, Ingraham), the Washington Examiner (11/17, Siciliano), the Los Angeles Times (11/17, Pearce), Bloomberg News (11/17, Marois), Reuters (11/17, Shepardson, Beech), Reuters (11/17, Herskovitz), Reuters (11/17, Shepardson, Beech), Politico (11/17, Lacy), The Hill (11/17, Cohn), USA Today (11/17, Cummings), USA Today (11/18, Walker, Welle), Newsweek (11/17, Valencia), the Christian Science Monitor (11/17, Biesecker), the Huffington Post (11/17, D'Angelo), Fox News (11/17), CNN (11/17, Diaz), CNN (11/18, Green), CBS News (11/17), NBC News (11/17, Silva), NBC News (11/18, Helsel), ABC News (11/17, Keneally), ABC News (11/17, Ebbs), CNBC (11/18), CNBC (11/17, Wilkie), the Washington Times (11/17, Miller), MarketWatch (11/18, Coffey), MarketWatch (11/17, Linnane), the Daily Intelligencer (NY) (11/18, Danner), the New York Post (11/17, Tacopino), the Boston Herald (11/18), the San Francisco Chronicle (11/17, Boucher), the New York Daily News (11/17, Scott-Reid), the Arizona Republic (11/17, Cummings), the Independent (UK) (11/18, Francisco), BBC News (UK) (11/18), BBC News (UK) (11/18), The Guardian (UK) (11/17, Wong, Helmore), the Telegraph (UK) (11/18, Riley-Smith), UPI (11/17, Haynes), and Townhall (11/18, Meads). Also reporting are The Hill (11/17, Byrnes), the AP (11/17, Cassata), and the New York Daily News (11/17). 

## Zinke Rocked Moccasins To Celebrate Native Cultures. But Tribes Are Focused On His Plans To Rock Bears Ears. 

The Washington Post (11/17, Fears, Eilperin) reports that while Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke this week “proudly showed his support for the worldwide Native American and indigenous peoples cultural celebration, sporting a pair of beaded moccasins over star-spangled socks,” Western tribes “remain upset over a larger Indian symbol that the secretary plans to rock to its foundation: the 1.35 million-acre Bears Ears National Monument in southern Utah.” According to the Post, “outraged representatives of the tribes involved with Bears Ears said Friday that they will lose a key part of their cultural heritage if the monument, designated last December by President Barack Obama, is reduced to a small fraction of its current size.” 

## Interior Secretary Visits Mille Lacs, Discusses Law Enforcement Crisis. 

The Brainerd (MN) Daily Dispatch (11/18) reports that Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke arrived on the Mille Lacs Reservation “for an impromptu visit” Thursday and Friday “to discuss the current law enforcement crisis.” Chief Executive Melanie Benjamin “described the meeting as very positive,” saying, “Secretary Zinke wanted to hear from us about this issue and listened intently, and promised to do what he can to help.” Following the meeting, Zinke and his staff “joined about 800 Mille Lacs Band members for the annual Community Feast.” 

## Mapp Meets Interior Secretary Zinke In D.C. 

The St. Thomas Source (11/18) reports that Gov. Kenneth Mapp met with Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke on Thursday “to discuss hurricane response and recovery in the U.S. Virgin Islands.” Zinke said, “Recovering from natural disasters requires a team effort, and the Department of the Interior is absolutely committed to helping the Virgin Islands return to normal. Our Insular Affairs team has been working around the clock to provide relief to those ravaged by hurricane, and we will continue these efforts in the weeks and months to come.” 

## Transmission Line From Oregon-To-Idaho Gets Approval. 

The AP (11/17) reports that the Bureau of Land Management has “signed off on a right-of-way that will allow Idaho Power to build a 293-mile transmission line from Oregon to Idaho.” The Interior Department announced the approval the Boardman-to-Hemingway project on Friday, “saying it will create nearly 500 jobs.” The Ontario (OR) Argus Observer (11/19, Meyer) reports that Katherine MacGregor, acting assistant secretary of land and mineral management, said in a statement, “This project will help stabilize the power grid in the Northwest, while creating jobs and carrying low-cost energy to the families and businesses who need it.” Also reporting are The East Oregonian (11/17, Plaven), KNDU-TV Yakima (WA) Yakima, WA (11/17), and KTVZ-TV Bend (OR) Bend, OR (11/17). 

## Congress Pushes Back On Interior Plan That Would More Than Double National Park Fees. 

The Salt Lake (UT) Tribune (11/17, Burr) reports that Congress is “pushing back on an Interior Department proposal to more than double entrance fees at some national parks during peak times and could look at legislation to halt any increases.” Rep. Rob Bishop, chairman of the House Natural Resources Committee, “says he will hold hearings on the park-fee proposal and look at legislation to prohibit an agency from raising fees without consulting Congress.” Bishop said, “It is very difficult to allow an agency to raise money by itself. That’s troublesome to me. Raising fees should have congressional input.” Rep. Mia Love is “also pushing back, arguing that the fee increases would hurt Utah families and the Interior Department should be looking to charge international tourists more money than Americans who own the system.” Love “noted the opposition isn’t partisan...and although Love supports most of Zinke’s efforts at the Interior Department, she said, ‘I’ve got to fight him on this.’” Additional coverage of the proposal was provided by the Boulder (CO) Daily Camera (11/17, Bear), the St. George (UT) News (11/17, Wadsworth) and the St. George (UT) News (11/17, Wadsworth). 

## Susan Combs Hits A New Hurdle In Her Path To Washington Post. 

The Austin (TX) American Statesman (11/17, Recio) reports that “former Texas Comptroller Susan Combs has hit yet another roadblock on the way to a U.S. Senate vote for a top position at the Interior Department.” Sen. Dick Durbin has “put a ‘hold’ on Combs and another Interior Department nominee – blocking them from getting a Senate vote – until he gets ‘clarification’ of the agency’s plans to re-designate environmentally sensitive public lands known as national monuments.” 

## House Committee Backs Westward Move For Interior Employees. 

Federal News Radio (DC) (11/17, Wing) reports that Republican leaders on the House Natural Resources Committee have written to President Trump “in support of an Interior Department re-organization.” Committee Chairman Rob Bishop and “six of his colleagues from Western states urged the White House to strongly consider moving some Interior offices out of Washington and closer to the people they serve.” 

## BLM Advisory Councils Are Free To Meet Again After Initial Review. 

The Grand Junction (CO) Daily Sentinel (11/19, Webb) reports that “after a suspension for an Interior Department review, Resource Advisory Councils (RACs) to the Bureau of Land Management and other similar advisory groups ‘are free to meet according to normal procedures.’” That’s following “completion of the initial phase of the review process, Interior spokeswoman Heather Swift said in an email Friday.” 

## Additional Coverage: Poor Record-Keeping Hindering Zinke Travel Investigation, IG Says. 

Additional coverage of Inspector General Mary Kendall’s Wednesday memorandum on the “poor” record-keeping hindering the watchdog’s investigation of Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke’s travel expenses was provided by CNN (11/17, Wallace) and Vanity Fair (11/17, Levin). 

# Bureau Of Indian Affairs 

## Program Helps Tribal Court Employees Increase Navajo Language Skills. 

The Farmington (NM) Daily Times (11/19, Smith) reports on a program that helps tribal court employees increase Navajo language skills. The program, a collaboration between the Navajo Nation Judicial Branch and Navajo Technical University, “funded by a $150,000 grant from Tribal Justice Support under the U.S. Department of the Interior.” 

# Bureau Of Land Management 

## The Powder River Basin Is Poised For Another Boom, But Some Say The Feds Are In The Way. 

A 1,600-word Casper (WY) Star-Tribune (11/18, Richards) analysis highlighted opinion that the Powder River Basin (PRB) “is poised for a boom Wyoming desperately needs,” but industry observers say the Bureau of Land Management is “slowing down opportunities and hampering development, while environmentalists say Wyoming needs federal regulations to avoid disaster when a bust inevitably strikes.” US Rep. Liz Cheney (R-WY) “has floated a number of bills that establish the right for states to take over more of the oil and gas permitting process on federal land, or with federal minerals,” but these proposals have been stalled by divided opinion. 

## BLM Picks Up Tab For Plugging Old Wells Near Douglas Pass. 

The Grand Junction (CO) Daily Sentinel (11/18, Webb) reports that the Bureau of Land Management is “busy plugging six oil and gas wells that a company left unplugged in the Douglas Pass area, a project that apparently will cost the agency far more money than it recovered in bond funds from the operator.” BLM spokesman David Boyd said “the wells were on five leases operated by Diamond Oil and Gas or Diamond Operations Group LTD.” He explained that “the BLM’s Northwest District in Colorado asked for funding from the agency’s national office to plug the wells and received $550,000 to complete the work, although the actual cost likely will end up being lower.” 

# Bureau Of Ocean Energy Management 

## Mark Sanford Opposes Energy Bill Championed By GOP Leaders. 

The Miami Herald (11/17, Dumain) reports that Rep. Mark Sanford (R-S.C.) said he opposes aspects of a proposed House bill aimed at expanding domestic energy production because it would promote offshore drilling. Rep. Sanford “plans to form a coalition of Republicans and Democrats to formally ask for changes to the bill.” The bill includes a controversial provision to partially rollback the 1972 Marine Mammal Protection Act, which has been “endorsed by powerful industry lobbyists such as the American Petroleum Institute.” Opponents to the rollback say the Marine Mammal Protection Act “is effectively the last remaining law in place preventing indiscriminate drilling and testing for oil and natural gas in the Atlantic Ocean.” 

## BOEM Looks For Comments On Hilcorp’s Liberty Development. 

UPI (11/17, Graeber) reported the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management is looking for comments about a draft environmental impact statement on Hilcorp Alaska’s plan to build artificial islands to drill in the Beaufort Sea. Lois Epstein, the Arctic program director for the Wilderness Society, expressed several concerns about the development. She said Hilcorp has a record of pipeline releases in the state, the last of which needed intervention from Gov. Bill Walker. 

## Louisiana May See More Offshore Oil Money Under Cassidy Budget Amendment. 

The New Orleans Times-Picayune (11/17, Schleifstein) reported Sen. Bill Cassidy said Louisiana’s share of Gulf of Mexico offshore revenue may increase by $100 million during 2020 and 2021. The senator attached an amendment to the legislation opening the Alaska National Wildlife Refuge for drilling to offset an expected shortfall in revenue from the Gulf of Mexico Energy Security Act. Cassidy’s amendment would alter the way money from the GOMESA is shared between the federal government, Louisiana, Texas, Mississippi and Alabama. 

# Bureau Of Reclamation 

## Wash. Reps Float Bill To Speed Up DOI Water Project Reviews. 

Law360 (11/17, Westney) reports that “two Republican lawmakers introduced a bill Thursday meant to speed up the environmental planning and review of water projects by two U.S. Department of the Interior agencies and to advance a specific water management project for the Yakima River in Washington state.” Reps. Dan Newhouse and Dave Reichert “put forward H.R. 4419, the Bureau of Reclamation and Bureau of Indian Affairs Water Project Streamlining Act of 2017.” 

# Fish And Wildlife Service 

## Congress Moves To ‘Drill, Baby, Drill’ In Alaska’s ANWR Refuge. Here’s What You Should Know. 

USA Today (11/19, Collins) reports that “Congress may be on the verge of finally handing” backers of oil and gas drilling in the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge permission to do so. The Senate Energy and Natural Resources Committee voted last week “to approve a bill that would allow oil and gas exploration in the refuge’s 1.5-million-acre coastal plain. The measure will be added to the Senate’s tax-reform package.” NPR (11/18, Detrow) reported thatSen. Maria Cantwell opposes the drilling and said, “The fact our committee’s contribution to that deal is about 7/100th of one percent of the Republicans’ increased deficit spending shows that this is not a serious budget proposal. It’s a cynical effort to open up the heart of the Artic Wildlife Refuge for oil.” Sen. Lisa Murkowski defended the proposal saying, “Alaskans will do this the right way. ... We will protect the environment while providing substantial economic benefits all across America.” 

## Fish And Wildlife Retracts Opposition To Arizona Project. 

The High Country (CO) News (11/17, Shogren) reports that tthe U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service “last month lifted its longstanding objections to the construction of a city-sized development that threatens the last free-flowing major river in the arid Southwest.” The FWS “had twice in recent years warned that a key federal permit to build 28,000 homes, golf courses and other amenities near the San Pedro River in southern Arizona would have ‘appreciable’ effects on wildlife.” However, “last month, the Fish and Wildlife Service reversed itself, according to an Oct. 26 letter obtained by High Country News through a Freedom of Information Act request.” 

## How A Neon Green Fern Sparked An Environmental Showdown. 

The Palm Beach (FL) Post (11/17) reports on the dispute “between the South Florida Water Management District and the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service concerning a 65-year relationship that required the federal government to control invasive species in the popular Arthur R. Marshall Loxahatchee National Wildlife Refuge.” This month, the water management district’s governing board gave the approval “to finalize a new 20-year lease on the land with Fish and Wildlife.” The agreement “puts the onus for invasive cleanup on the district, but the wildlife service agreed to pay at least $1.25 million annually to the district for the effort.” 

## With Dam Cleared From Creek, Endangered Fish Expand Range. 

The AP (11/19) reports that “populations of an endangered fish have been found in new areas of an Alabama creek, upstream of where a dam was removed four years ago in an effort to expand the fish’s range.” The vermilion darter “needs clear, free-flowing streams to survive and had been blocked from moving upstream by the old dam.” The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service “partnered with the Freshwater Land Trust to remove the nearly 100-year-old Shadow Lake dam in 2013, and this month confirmed the darters have expanded their range upstream of the old dam site.” 

# National Park Service 

## Proposal Restricting National Mall Access A ‘Game Changer’ For Hill Athletes. 

Roll Call (11/17, Connolly) reports the National Park Service “held meetings last week with leagues from across the city — including the House softball league — informing them that it planned to permanently close access” on the National Mall, “from Third Street to 17th Street, to ‘organized sports.’” Also, “the park service plans to raise permit fees from as little as $7 for an entire season to $70 per two-hour period on the Mall fields west of the Washington Monument.” Those meetings were “preliminary, informal efforts to give those stakeholders background information about the possible changes, including modifications to the reservation system/process and fees, as well as locations available for use by organized sports,” park service spokesman Mike Litterst said in a statement Wednesday. Additional coverage was provided by Fox News (11/17, Weber). 

## Beach Boys, Wynonna To Play National Christmas Tree Lighting. WRC-TV Washington (11/17, Vesoulis) reports that “the Beach Boys, Wynonna and The Texas Tenors will play the White House’s National Christmas Tree Lighting Ceremony, National Park Service officials said.” The tree will “arrive in Washington Monday, and it will be illuminated Nov. 30 on the Ellipse at President’s Park, also known as the White House.” 

## Fort Sumter Seeks Comment On New Plan For Disabled Access. 

The AP (11/19) reports that the Fort Sumter National Monument is seeking public input “on a proposal to add ramps and an enclosed elevator for the disabled.” The monument currently has “inoperable accessibility chairlifts.” According to the article, “the proposed design includes a ramp leading from the parade ground of Fort Sumter to the lower level of Battery Huger which will provide access to restrooms and water.” Additional coverage was provided by the Charleston (SC) Post and Courier (11/19, Petersen). 

## Grand Teton Park Increases Fees To Camp, Boat, Get Married. 

The AP (11/19) reports that Grand Teton National Park will “increase fees for various permits, including backcountry camping, weddings and motor boats.” According to park spokesman Andrew White, “the fee adjustment is part of the park’s annual review of programs.” White said, “It’s not a response to any sort of budget issue. We’re just making sure we’re recovering the cost associated with these programs.” 

## Last Homesteader’s Tractor Goes On Display At Homestead National Monument. 

The Omaha (NE) World-Herald (11/19, Hendee) reports that “the tractor used on the nation’s last homestead will be unveiled Monday at Homestead National Monument of America near Beatrice, Nebraska.” According to Superintendent Mark Engler, “the tractor represents the end of America’s epic homestead movement,” He said, “When most people think of homesteading, they have an image in their minds of a single-bottom plow being pulled by a team of horses. This tractor will show the size and scope of homesteading ... (and) the relevancy of this law that transformed our nation.” 

## Saguaro National Park, Open Space Highlight Debate Over New Fry’s. 

The Arizona Daily Star (11/18, Davis) reports that “for the second time in six months, Saguaro National Park is in the middle of a development dispute, with the National Park Service fighting a proposed project near its boundaries.” The first project was “the 178-home, gated Lazy K Bar housing on 138 acres near Saguaro Park-West in Marana that was approved this spring after a nearly three-year dispute.” Now, “it’s a much smaller project – a Fry’s supermarket, two smaller stores and a nine-pump gas station – on 16.3 acres, lying across town, near Saguaro National Park-East.” 

## $5K Grant For Compton VFD. 

The Harrison (AR) Daily Times (11/17) reports that “the Compton Volunteer Fire Department received a $5,000 National Park Service Rural Fire Assistance Program grant from Buffalo National River at a ceremony at Compton on Monday, Nov. 13.” While presenting the grant to members of the department, Buffalo National River deputy superintendent Laura Miller said, “This grant will be used to purchase much needed firefighting equipment and personal protective gear.” 

## Point Reyes Ranch Plan Comment Period Extended. 

The Marin (CA) Independent Journal (11/18, Prado) reports that “the comment period dealing with the roiling issue of the future of ranching in the Point Reyes National Seashore has been extended by the National Park Service.” According to the article, “a 30-day comment period on the alternatives was to run through Nov. 15, but because of the interest, it has been extended through Wednesday.” Melanie Gunn, Point Reyes National Seashore spokeswoman, said, “We had multiple requests for an extension to this first comment period. Although we are working under a tight timeline for the General Management Plan Amendment, we are able to extend this comment period for an additional week with an interest in robust public engagement.” 

## Man Gets Prison Time For 2001 Sex Assault Of Child In Olympic National Park. 

KOMO-TV Seattle (11/17) reports that “a Port Angeles man was sentenced to eight years in federal prison this week after he was convicted of sexually assaulting a child back in 2001 in Olympic National Park.” Charles Jason Butcher “admitted the assault in a recorded phone call with his victim in 2016.” The Peninsula (WA) Daily News (11/19, Gottlieb) reports that Butcher “pleaded guilty to the charge in May, denying that he sexually assaulted a second minor in 2001.” 

# Office Of Insular Affairs 

## Snake Program Obtains Two New ‘Sniffer’ Dogs. 

The Saipan (MNP) Tribune (11/20) reports that “the Division of Fish and Wildlife and the CNMI Brown Tree Snake program recently welcomed two new detector canines from Oklahoma.” The dogs, named Greta and Zing’r, “took 60 hours to travel from Aachen Dutch Shepherds in Oklahoma to Saipan via Micronesia Air Cargo Services, with an overnight stop in both Hawaii and Guam.” Acting Lands and Natural Resources secretary Augustin Kaipat said, “I extend a well-deserved thank you to everyone who assisted in the procurement of our two new canines here at the BTS program as well as funding provided by the Office of Insular Affairs.” 

# Office Of Surface Mining 

## West Virginia Retraining Program Provides Unemployed Coal Miners With Computer Skills. 

The CBS Weekend News (11/18, story 9, 2:05, Ninan) reported on a West Virginia retraining program for unemployed coal miners, an industry that has seen its workforce shrink by over 40 percent in recent years. Correspondent Weijia Jiang says the “free training program called ‘Mined Minds’ that teaches former coal miners to become computer coders, creating apps, websites, and games. Founder Amanda Laucher started the nonprofit in Pennsylvania in 2015 because her younger brother was worried about losing his coal mining job.” West Virginia Sen. Joe Manchin (D) “helped Mined Minds establish headquarters near West Virginia’s capital with federal grants.” Manchin said the program “gives us a chance to diversify ourselves and be something that people think we’re not.” 

## Powder River Basin Mines Earn Awards For Land Management Efforts. 

The Gillette (WY) News Record (11/19) reports that “four of the Powder River Basin’s largest coal producers have been named winners of the Good Neighbor Award by the federal Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement (OSMRE).” Arch Coal, Cloud Peak Energy, Kiewit Mining Group and Peabody Energy were “recognized for working with the local community while completing their mining and reclamation operations, according to a press release announcing the awards.” According to Travis Deti, executive director of the Wyoming Mining Association, “by singling out more than half of the mines in the Powder River Basin, which produces more than 30 percent of the coal burned in U.S. coal-fired power plants, OSMRE sends a message that mining coal can be done in a way that respects the environment.” 

# US Geological Survey 

## Danger Endures In Wine Country As Fight Shifts From Fires To Mudslides. 

The San Francisco Chronicle (11/19, Alexander) reports that “with hundreds of square miles littered with trees and stripped of vegetation in the wake of the Northern California fires, mudslides are a near certainty as winter rains arrive.” The article notes that “a huge effort among federal, state and local agencies is working to tame the threat.” Notably, the U.S. Geological Survey has “mapped areas where damaging flows are most likely to strike.” 

## Additional Reading. 

Alaskan Town’s Polar Bear Problem Leads To Tourism Boom. ABC News (11/18, Robach, Crawford, Dawson, Vollmayer, Effron). 

Strong Earthquake Rattles Tibet But Only Minor Damage Reported. Reuters (11/17, Blanchard). 

Strong Earthquake Strikes East-northeast Of Tadine, New Caledonia: USGS. Reuters (11/19, Von Ahn). 

# Opinion Pieces 

## Trump Does The Right Thing For Elephants. He Shouldn’t Back Down Now. 

Washington Post (11/19) editorial says African elephants are “a species in crisis, and the US government should not do anything that could endanger them further.” The Post welcomes Trump’s intervention Friday to put hold a decision by the Interior Department. It argues that the “threat of an import ban creates a large incentive for African countries seeking tourist dollars from American safari hunters to ensure their hunts are sustainable.” 

## Trump Bags Another Anti-Obama Trophy: Dead Elephants. 

In an editorial, the New York Times (11/17) says the Trump Administration’s decision this week to lift a ban on importing elephant trophies from Zimbabwe “is a gift to the big game trade from Ryan Zinke, the interior secretary, who’s apparently not satisfied with scrapping environmental and species protections on just one continent.” The Times argues the move will not only “endanger gains made by governments and environmental groups to protect elephants from illegal trade in ivory and other body parts,” but also send “yet another message that this is an administration in service of itself and its cronies.” 

## Commentary: Assault On ESA Endangers Utah Coffers. 

In an op-ed for the Salt Lake (UT) Tribune (11/18, Feral, Harris), Priscilla Feral, the President of Friends of Animals, and Michael Harris, the director of Friends of Animals’ Wildlife Law Program, criticize five bills making hteir way “through Congress aimed squarely at dismantling the Endangered Species Act piece by piece.” The authors warn that the bills “should matter to Utah residents, as the state is ground zero for legal assaults against the act.” They warn that Rep. Rob Bishop’s “attempt to disembowel the ESA not only imperils Utah’s unique wildlife but more than one thousand species across the U.S. as well as state coffers.” 

## Additional Reading. 

Elephant Trophies? Seriously? This Is What Washington Is Spending Its Time On? Fox News (11/20, Velicovich). 

Why Can’t We Protect Elephants? New York Times (11/18, Shipstead). 

The Beauty Of Bears Ears And Of Protecting It. Boston Globe (11/16, Nash). 

Stop The Assault On U.S. National Monuments. Baltimore Sun (11/17). 

Trump Threatening National Marine Monuments. Marin (CA) Independent Journal (11/17, Martin). 

Push Back Against Joshua Tree National Park Fee Increase. Palm Springs (CA) Desert Sun (11/18, Schneider). Editorial Board: Respect Local Compromise On Sage Grouse. Casper (WY) Star-Tribune (11/19). 

Opening Sabinoso A Major Gain For New Mexico. Santa Fe New Mexican (11/18, Heinrich). 

We Must Strive To Be Responsible Stewards Toward Our Wild Places. Albuquerque (NM) Journal. 

Development And Conservation Go Hand In Hand In New Mexico. Albuquerque (NM) Journal (11/19). 

Another Look At BLM Gas Flaring Rules. Montana Standard (11/19, Freeman). 

The Forefront Of Renewable Power. Kokomo (IN) Perspective (11/18, Floyd). 

EDITORIAL: Bid To Ban Offshore Leases Shortsighted. Waynesboro (VA) News Virginian (11/19). 

Editorial: Military Can Learn To Live With Energy Exploration In The Atlantic. Richmond (VA) Times-Dispatch (11/18). 

Study Needed: Mountaintop Removal Mining Deserves Scrutiny. Parkersburg (WV) News and Sentinel (11/20). 

Editorial: If The Blues And The County Want The Public’s Help, They Should Play It Straight. St. Louis Post-Dispatch (11/19). 

My Freedom Is On The Line To Fight Climate Change, More Will Follow. The Hill (11/17, Ward). 

# Top National News 

## Media Analyses: Officials Send Mixed Signals On Keeping ACA Mandate Repeal In Tax Bill. 

OMB Director Mulvaney told CNN’s State Of The Union Sunday that if repealing the ACA’s individual mandate becomes an “impediment” to passing tax reform legislation, the White House is open to removing that provision from the legislation, the Washington Post (11/19, Sullivan) reports. Mulvaney said, “If we can repeal part of Obamacare as part of a tax bill and have a tax bill that is still a good tax bill, that can pass, that’s great. ... If it becomes an impediment to getting the best tax bill we can, then we are okay with taking it out.” However, he added that “he does not think it is currently an impediment,” and House and Senate negotiators would have to determine whether to include the provision in the final bill. Similarly, Mulvaney told CBS’ Face The Nation (11/19, Dickerson) that the Administration is looking for the “best tax bill that can pass,” even if that means removing the mandate repeal. Politico (11/19, McCaskill) quotes Mulvaney as telling CNN, “If they do get rid of this penalty, the folks who benefit from that are predominantly folks who make less than $50,000 or $100,000 a year. ... There’s actually a benefit if the repeal goes away, but it’s up to the House and Senate to hammer through those details.” The Washington Times (11/19, Wolfgang) also reports on Mulvaney’s comments, as does Reuters (11/19, Mutikani, Volcovici). In a separate story, Reuters (11/19) reports that Treasury Secretary Mnuchin told Fox News Sunday that repealing the mandate was not a “bargaining chip” in negotiations. Mnuchin said, “This is all about getting this passed in the Senate. This isn’t a bargaining chip, the President thinks we should get rid of it and I think we should get rid of it. ... It’s an unfair tax on poor people.” The Washington Post (11/19, Sullivan, Paletta) reports on Mulvaney’s comments under the headline, “As Clock Ticks On Tax Bill, White House Signals A Compromise.” However, the AP (11/19, Superville) says Administration officials “sent mixed signals Sunday,” citing Mulvaney’s comments and comments from White Director of Legislative Affairs Marc Short, who told ABC’s This Week (11/19) that the White House “is very comfortable with the House bill,” which does not include the repeal, but sees the mandate as a tax and “we like the fact that the Senate has included it in its bill.” The New York Post (11/19, Moore) also says Administration officials “gave conflicting signals” about the mandate. Sen. Susan Collins said CNN’s State Of The Union (11/19, Tapper), “I hope the Senate will follow the lead of the House and strike it. If not, I think we need to fix it, by passing two bills: the Alexander-Murray bill, which will help to stabilize markets and reduce premiums; and the bill I have introduced with Bill Nelson of Florida that would create high-risk pools that would protect people with preexisting conditions and also help to reduce premiums by 20 percent.” USA Today (11/19, Slack) reports that Collins said removing the mandate could cause premium increases and “cancel out the tax cut that they would get.” The Wall Street Journal (11/19, Torry, Rubin) reports that Collins also said that the Senate bill should lower the corporate rate to 22 percent instead of 20 percent and use the additional revenue to keep the so-called SALT deduction, which the Senate bill currently eliminates. 

NYTimes Analysis: Savings From Mandate Repeal Could Be Less Than Republicans Anticipate. A New York Times (11/19, A1, Zernike, Goodnough) analysis says Republicans, who are relying on the mandate repeal “to free up hundreds of billions of dollars to pay for an array of tax cuts to corporations and individuals,” are “assuming that without a mandate, many people would no longer buy insurance, so the government would spend billions of dollars less on” subsidies to help people pay for premiums. However, “polling data, analysis from a private forecasting agency and interviews with people who buy coverage through the Affordable Care Act marketplaces suggest the savings could be far less, largely because many people who qualify for the subsidies will still want to take advantage of them.” A Kaiser Family Foundation survey “found that just 7 percent of people who buy insurance on the individual market said they would go without coverage if the mandate were no longer enforced,” and “a majority said the mandate was not a reason they bought insurance.” 

## Trump Says He Should Have Left UCLA Players “In Jail.” 

Media reports describe President Trump as lashing out via Twitter Sunday at LaVar Ball, the father of LiAngelo Ball, one of the UCLA basketball players caught shoplifting in China, after the elder Ball downplayed both Trump’s role in his son’s release and the seriousness of the accusations his son was facing. Sunday afternoon, Trump tweeted, “Now that the three basketball players are out of China and saved from years in jail, LaVar Ball, the father of LiAngelo, is unaccepting of what I did for his son and that shoplifting is no big deal. I should have left them in jail!” The New York Post (11/19, Moore) reports that “shortly before 7 p.m.,” Trump tweeted, “Shoplifting is a very big deal in China, as it should be (5-10 years in jail), but not to father LaVar. ... Should have gotten his son out during my next trip to China instead. China told them why they were released. Very ungrateful!” The Washington Examiner (11/19, Cohen) reports that Trump “fired back at LaVar Ball,” while The Hill (11/19, Samuels) says Trump “lashed out” at Ball, and ABC World News Tonight (11/19, story 10, 0:30, Llamas) described a “brewing battle” between Trump and Ball. The Daily Caller (11/19, Caruso) also reports on Trump’s tweet as does the Wall Street Journal (11/19, Rubin). The Los Angeles Times (11/19, King) says Trump’s Sunday morning tweet “drew a quick backlash on social media,” with “many” expressing “incredulity that a sitting US president would publicly regret having come to the aid of American citizens being held by an authoritarian government.” Rep. Adam Schiff was “among Trump’s sharper critics,” tweeting, “How can someone in such a big office be so small?” A report (11/19, Thompson) on Trump’s tweet on the sports website Deadspin was headlined, “Donald Trump Wishes He’d Left UCLA Teens in Chinese Prison Because His Feelings Are Hurt.” The New York Times (11/19, Hoffman) says Trump “made it clear on Twitter that he expected the players to thank him for his involvement, claiming they faced 10 years in jail, though many legal experts weighed in to say it was unlikely the charges would have been that serious.” All three did thank the President once they returned to the US, and “apparently satisfied with their level of thanks,” Trump “took to Twitter to acknowledge their gratitude.” Townhall (11/19, Meads) reports that after the player “promptly said thank you,” it “seemed as if the saga was over.” But, Politico (11/19, Griffiths) says LaVar Ball’s comments in an interview with ESPN, “seemed to catch his attention again.” Bloomberg News (11/19) reports that in the interview, Ball “minimized Trump’s involvement in winning the players’ release.” USA Today (11/19, Schad) says Ball was asked about Trump’s involvement in his son’s release and replied, “Who? ... What was he over there for? Don’t tell me nothing. Everybody wants to make it seem like he helped me out.” He added, “Like I told him, ‘They try to make a big deal out of nothing sometimes.’ ... I’m from L.A. I’ve seen a lot worse things happen than a guy taking some glasses.” 

## Trump Touts Economy, Promotes Tax Reform. 

Washington Post (11/17, Bump) correspondent Philip Bump says “it’s rare when President Trump lays bare the contradiction at the heart of his push for tax reform so specifically,” but on Friday he did so in a pair of tweets. The President tweeted, “Great numbers on Stocks and the Economy. If we get Tax Cuts and Reform, we’ll really see some great results!” Trump added, “If Democrats were not such obstructionists and understood the power of lower taxes, we would be able to get many of their ideas into Bill!” Meanwhile, Politico (11/17, Haberkorn, Bresnahan) reports Sens. Lindsey Graham, Lamar Alexander, Susan Collins, and Bill Cassidy on Thursday had “personally lobbied...Trump to support a bill to shore up Obamacare markets while repealing the law’s individual mandate as part of tax reform, according to GOP sources.” A White House spokesman said Trump and the lawmakers “discussed the ongoing efforts to pass historic tax reform and other legislative objectives.” 

Mnuchin Touts Benefits Of Tax Reform. Bloomberg News (11/17, McGregor) reports Treasury Secretary Mnuchin in an interview on Fox News said Friday that the Republican tax reform plan will “benefit” New York’s economy “by lowering the corporate tax to 20 percent.” Mnuchin added, “That’s a huge boom for the financial services industry – they can hire more people, they can pay more people, they can create more jobs, they can be competitive.” Meanwhile, the Washington Times (11/17, Persons) reports Mnuchin conceded, “There will be people who make more than $1 million, in high-tax states, who will be paying more.” Mnuchin added, “As the president has said, this is not a tax plan to cut taxes for rich people. This is a plan to make businesses competitive.” Reuters (11/17, Johnson) reports that in an interview with CNBC, he also insisted “the majority of small businesses and non-corporate enterprises known as ‘pass-throughs’ would see a significant tax cut under the Republican tax plan.” Mnuchin said 98 percent “of the number of pass-throughs have $500,000 or less of income. ... Those people will get substantial reductions.” 

Hassett: “Not Economically Rational” To Argue Tax Cuts Will Increase Deficit. 

Bloomberg News (11/17, Voskuhl) reports Kevin Hassett, Chairman of the White House Council of Economic Advisers, during a White House briefing on Friday argued “it’s just not economically rational” to assume Republican tax reform proposals will increase the deficit in the long term. However, Bloomberg asserts “independent studies have reached differing conclusions.” Bloomberg says “the conservative-leaning Tax Foundation, a Washington policy group, said earlier this month that the House’s tax bill would cost $1.98 trillion over a decade – compared with current law” while the Penn Wharton Budget Model at the University of Pennsylvania “found that, after accounting for larger economic effects, the House bill would ‘reduce revenues between $1.5 trillion and $1.7 trillion’ over 10 years. The Senate plan would reduce revenue by $1.4 trillion to $1.7 trillion, the model found.” 

Bureau of Labor Statistics: Unemployment Rate Has Fallen To Record Low In 13 States This Year. The Hill (11/17, Wilson) reports that according to the monthly Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) report released Friday, “the unemployment rates in Alabama, Hawaii, Maine, Mississippi, Tennessee, Texas and Washington all met or beat their lowest rates ever” while “California, Colorado, Idaho, North Dakota and Oregon also hit new lows earlier this year.” The Hill adds that “nationally, the unemployment rate sits at 4.1 percent, the lowest level since December 2000, when it hit 3.9 percent.” 

Washington Examiner: Cutting Corporate Tax Rates Benefits Everyone. In an editorial, the Washington Examiner (11/17) criticizes Democratic opposition to cutting the corporate tax rate, adding that doing so “is neither corporate welfare nor a massive giveaway to the wealthy.” According to the Examiner, the cut “is a fair and even-handed way of reducing economic distortions, making American businesses more competitive worldwide, and encouraging them to reinvest overseas profits in jobs and growth back home.” What’s more, corporations will have less incentive to pass costs on to taxpayers by raising prices, paying lower wages, and issuing smaller dividends. 

## STRATCOM Commander Says Would Refuse Nuclear Strike Order If Illegal. 

The AP (11/18, Gillies) reports that at the Halifax International Security Forum on Saturday, Air Force Gen. John Hyten, the commander of US Strategic Command, said that if he received orders from President Trump to launch nuclear weapons, and if such a strike would be illegal, then he would refuse the order. Hyten said he has discussed such a scenario with the President, adding, “If it’s illegal, guess what’s going to happen. I’m going to say, ‘Mr President, that’s illegal.’ And guess what he’s going to do? He’s going to say, ‘What would be legal?’” Hyten said he would then provide Trump “with options with a mix of capabilities to respond to whatever the situation is, and that’s the way it works.” Reuters (11/18, Brunnstrom, Stone) reports Hyten also “said running through scenarios of how to react in the event of an illegal order was standard practice, and added: ‘If you execute an unlawful order, you will go to jail. You could go to jail for the rest of your life.’” Reuters says some lawmakers are pursuing legislation aimed at restricting the president’s nuclear authority, and on Tuesday, a Senate committee “held the first congressional hearing in more than four decades on the president’s authority to launch a nuclear strike.” 

LATimes: Bill To Restrict President’s Nuclear Authority Jeopardizes Means To Deter Aggression. The Los Angeles Times (11/18) editorializes that while it is “dismayed” by “President Trump’s bellicose statements and impulsive governing style,” it cannot “support the Restricting First Use of Nuclear Weapons Act of 2017 proposed by Sen. Ed Markey of Massachusetts and Rep. Ted Lieu of Torrance.” The Times says its “principal concern about this bill is that it would make it harder for a president not just to use nuclear weapons, but also to deter aggression by leaving adversaries in doubt about whether and when such weapons might be used.” The Times reiterates that it shares concerns over Trump’s rhetoric, but notes “the president has deferred to the advice of his national security team, including on nuclear strategy.” As such, the Times concludes, “Congress shouldn’t attempt to legislate a drastic change in the president’s authority to defend the nation.” 

## White House Requests $44 Billion In Additional Disaster Relief. 

The New York Times (11/17, A1, Kaplan) reports on its front page that the White House on Friday asked Congress “for $44 billion in additional relief in response to this year’s devastating hurricanes, but facing rising budget deficits and pushing a tax cut that could cost $1.5 trillion, the administration also suggested that lawmakers make spending cuts to offset disaster costs.” According to the Times, “Administration officials laid out a menu of options for budget cutting, totaling $59 billion, from small nicks like $8 million from a rural energy program to far larger options, such as $3.9 billion from student financial aid and $1 billion from transportation infrastructure funds.” Budget Director Mulvaney asserted “the administration believes it is prudent to offset new spending.” However, the Times acknowledges “some of those proposals were sure to raise eyebrows” and lawmakers “swiftly dismissed [the request] as inadequate.” The Wall Street Journal (11/17, Peterson, Andrews) highlights the bipartisan criticism to the aid proposal. Senate Majority Whip John Cornyn in a hearing Thursday condemned the proposal as “wholly inadequate” while Rep. Nita Lowey, the ranking member on the House Appropriations Committee, in a statement said Friday that the request “does not come close to what local officials [in Puerto Rico] say is needed.” 

## Puerto Rico Power Authority CEO Resigns Amid Prolonged Post-Hurricane Blackout. 

The New York Times (11/17, Robles) reports Ricardo L. Ramos, CEO of the Puerto Rico Electric Power Authority, resigned yesterday “amid a two-month island-wide blackout and weeks of bruising public outcry over a costly contract to restore service.” According to the article, “The governor, Ricardo A. Rosselló, told reporters that he accepted the resignation because Mr. Ramos had become a distraction,” and “a spokeswoman for Mr. Rosselló said the governor had not asked for Mr. Ramos to step down.” The Washington Post (11/17, Mufson, Hernández) reports Rosselló said, “The executive director is a professional. He has worked hard to restore the system in Puerto Rico but understands that this is a context that has greatly distracted from what could be recovery.” Bloomberg News (11/17, Levin, Spalding) reports Ramos’’s resignation “made clear” that Rosselló “wants to remain in charge of the battered island’s recovery.” USA Today (11/17, Stanglin) reports San Juan Mayor Carmen Yulin Cruz called the resignation the “right thing.” She added, “That he helped destroy the credibility of the PR government is a disgrace.” The Hill (11/17, Henry) reports “less than 45 percent of power has been restored to Puerto Rico since Hurricane Maria swept across” the island. The Washington Examiner (11/17, Siegel) reports PREPA and Ramos “have been especially criticized for signing a $300 million contract with small Montana firm Whitefish Energy to restore the island’s power.” The Daily Caller (11/17, White) and the AP (11/18, Coto) also provide coverage of Ramos’ resignation. 

WPost: Puerto Rico Still Faces Enormous Problems. The Washington Post (11/17) writes in an editorial that despite depictions the departure from Puerto Rico of the Army general tasked with leading the military’s response to Hurricane Maria is “a sign the island is no longer in crisis mode but instead is transitioning to long-term recovery,” there are clearly enormous problems on the island still. Considering this, the Post argues that “more than ever, the people of Puerto Rico must not be forgotten,” and that “those charged with rebuilding the island need to show they are up to the task and not repeat the mistakes that marked the initial response to the catastrophic storm.” 

## Officials Say Keystone Leak Will Not Factor Into Monday’s Expansion Vote. 

The AP (11/17, Schulte, Nord) reports that despite the seemingly poor timing of the Keystone pipeline leak, officials “say state law does not allow pipeline safety to be a factor” in their decision on whether to expand the system. The Nebraska Public Service Commission is scheduled to vote Monday on whether to allow the Keystone XL expansion proposed by TransCanada. The decision “will hinge on testimony and documents generated from public hearings over the summer and from more than 500,000 public comments, Nebraska Public Service Commission spokeswoman Deb Collins said.” A state law passed in 2011 “prevents the commission from factoring pipeline safety or the possibility of leaks into its decisions.” Opponents of Keystone XL “are incensed that the leak won’t be considered.” Meanwhile, the New York Times (11/17, Smith) reports the images of “South Dakota grassland blemished by 210,000 gallons of leaked Canadian crude oil could not have come at a worse time for the Keystone Pipeline’s operator, TransCanada.” The Times adds that a preliminary report filed with the state “listed ‘equipment failure’ as the cause.” The company had about 75 TransCanada workers and contractors at the site on Friday, “along with federal and state regulators, to begin a lengthy cleanup that will include the excavation of part of the pipeline.” 

## LATimes Analysis: Strong Economy A “Lifeline” For Trump’s “Embattled Presidency.” 

A Los Angeles Times (11/19, Lauter) analysis reports that the economy “has become a lifeline” for President Trump’s “otherwise embattled presidency.” Increasingly, the President has “tout[ed] low unemployment, record high stock market values and healthy economic growth rates in speeches and his ubiquitous tweets,” and the reaction from voters, “even some who are otherwise skeptical of the president, show how the economy’s strong performance has bolstered Trump’s standing.” The Times cites a focus group conducted by Democratic pollster Peter Hart which found that “even participants who voted for Trump last year sharply criticized his administration,” but “when the subject turned to the economy, opinions of Trump noticeably warmed.” 

## NYTimes Analysis: Trump Still Facing Challenges In Push For Faster Infrastructure Projects. 

The New York Times (11/18, Meier) examines President Trump’s pledge to accelerate the review process for completing major construction projects, including his goal for agencies to complete environmental reviews in two years. The centerpiece of President Trump’s plan gives an office within the White House called the Council on Environmental Quality “the authority to coordinate actions and direct how environmental reviews are performed. Much of the plan’s inspiration lies in a report, ‘Two Years Not Ten Years,’ issued in 2015 by Common Good, a nonpartisan research and advocacy group.” The Trump Administration’s recent budget proposal included “a six-page fact sheet about infrastructure funding, including private investment,” but “several recent projects illustrate the pitfalls new proposals confront and the challenge Mr. Trump faces in breaking the logjams,” including maintenance at Penn Station in Manhattan and construction to build the proposed Northern Corridor. 

## Administration Officials Say “Administrative State” Is Being Rolled Back. 

The Washington Times (11/19, Richardson) reports that at the Federalist Society’s national convention this weekend, “top-ranking members of the Trump administration...share[d] their progress rolling back the administrative state.” White House Counsel Donald McGahn said, “The President is making fundamental changes to how the regulatory state interacts with the people, and he is selecting judges who will enforce the law as written and respect the separation of powers.” HHS Office for Civil Rights Director Roger Severino similarly said, “The project of regulatory roll-back is well underway under this Administration.” He cited several of what he called “great developments for shutting down the regulatory state.” 

## Paris Climate Signatories Agree On Path Forward To Reduce Greenhouse Gas Emissions. 

The AP (11/18, Jordans) reported that the Bonn climate talks ended Saturday after an “all-night negotiating session” and progress toward “creating a comprehensive rule book for fighting global warming.” Fiji’s Prime Minister Frank Bainimarama, who presided over the meeting, said “notable achievements” were made regarding agriculture, ocean protection, indigenous people’s rights and the launch of a new system to help people in poor countries get insurance against the effects of climate change. Reuters (11/18, Chestney, Doyle) reported that despite the Trump administration’s decision to withdraw from the Paris climate accord, nearly 200 nations remain committed to keeping the global agreement on track. Delegates “agreed to launch a process in 2018 to start reviewing existing plans to limit greenhouse gas emissions as part of a long-term effort to ratchet up ambition,” which will be known to as the “Talanoa Dialogue.” Politico (11/18, Holden) reported that the White House “goaded activists at the international climate talks by pushing coal and other fossil fuels,” although behind closed doors, “U.S. negotiators stuck to their Obama-era principles on the 2015 Paris deal.” Observers at the conference “said the U.S. made no effort to disrupt the talks,” but that “Washington was ‘not in the negotiations with the same credibility as before.’” Bloomberg News (11/17, Shankleman) reported that Trump has “weakened” the Paris deal, according to Christian Ehler, a German member of the European Parliament, who said, “the U.S. was creating a huge vacuum, so now you see people trying to fill it up. There’s a leadership gap, and I think now the interests are falling apart in a way.” 

Future Success Of Paris Accord Unclear After UN Climate Talks. The New York Times (11/18, Plumer) reported that on Wednesday at the United Nations climate talks in Bonn, German Chancellor Angela Merkel declared that “climate change is an issue determining our destiny as mankind.” She then conceded that because of Germany’s continued reliance on coal energy, her own nation will likely miss its own greenhouse gas emissions reduction goals, delivering “a stark reminder that the real action on global warming does not unfold in international venues.” Ultimately, the Times says, the Paris climate accord is “a giant bet on the power of peer pressure – with the future of the planet at stake.” The biggest unknown centers on “whether this whole process will translate into meaningful further action to cut emissions,” says the Times. In Bonn, however, “there were a few signs peer pressure is working and that some countries are indeed feeling compelled to take stronger action.” 

Small Island Nations Losing Faith In Global Efforts Against Climate Change. The New York Times (11/17, Plumer, Friedman) reported that small island nations “are among the smallest contributors to climate change, producing less than 1 percent of global greenhouse gas emissions,” but they “are among the most vulnerable nations to global warming.” Leaders of small islands say the industrialized world “owes some recompense for the disasters these vulnerable nations will suffer in the years ahead,” but as the United Nations climate talks “on bolstering the Paris agreement draw to a close, island leaders say the décor seems a cruel taunt.” Hopes among island nation leaders that they “will see a major increase in financial support to help address the consequences of climate change” are also waning, as are efforts “to expand ways for nations to adapt to future disasters.” As a result, some island officials, like those in Seychelles, “frustrated by the slowness of the United Nations process, have decided to take matters into their own hands.” 

# Editorial Wrap-Up 

## New York Times. 

“The Trump Administration Is Making War On Diplomacy.” In an editorial, the New York Times (11/18) says Secretary of State Tillerson “has shown that business experience isn’t easily transferable to government,” as he is “widely seen as ill suited to diplomatic leadership and determined to dismantle his own department.” The Times explains the State Department “is being undermined by budget cuts, a failure to fill top jobs, an erratic president and a secretary who has called reorganization, rather than policy, his most important priority.” The timing of the State Department’s redesign “could hardly be worse,” the Times says, in light of “the aggressive behavior of North Korea, Russia and China.” Ultimately, the Times concludes, Tillerson’s tenure will be based on his efforts to “forestall war with North Korea, manage the rise of China, check Russia’s efforts to undermine democracy, lay the groundwork for postwar stability in Syria and Iraq, and protect America’s international standing.” 

## Washington Post. 

“The House Tax Bill Unleashes A Dangerous Avalanche Of Campaign Cash.” In an editorial, the Washington Post (11/18) argues against a provision in the Republican tax bill that would roll back the Johnson Amendment, which would permit “churches, charities and foundations to engage in candidate-specific politicking and enable donors to reap tax breaks for political contributions.” The Post warns that churches and church-affiliated groups have lax filing requirements and could be used to completely mask donors, making them the “latest vessels for dark-money politics.” The Post concludes that this change is unwanted, and would only serve to make churches “servants of special interests seeking to further warp the nation’s electoral politics.” 

“The White House’s Much-Needed Rebuke To A Country Smothering Democracy.” AWashington Post (11/18) editorial says that at the ASEAN summit last week, Cambodian Prime Minister Hun Sen, “who has been slowly squeezing the life out of democracy in Cambodia, delivered a fawning tribute to President Trump” and even “expressed delight” about Trump’s pledge to abstain from other nations’ internal affairs. The Post argues that the President’s “declaration in his inaugural address that ‘we do not seek to impose our way of life on anyone’ was an invitation to potentates such as Hun Sen to smother liberty.” On Thursday, however, the White House delivered “a much-needed rebuke to Hun Sen,” potentially signaling that “the Trump administration is waking up, belatedly, to the reality that the United States can’t ignore the internal affairs of other nations when democracy is under siege.” 

“A School Volunteer Abused At Least 23 Children. Officials Ignored It.” In an editorial, the Washington Post (11/18) blasts Prince George’s County school officials for ignoring red flags that school volunteer Deonte Carraway sexually abused at least 23 minors “during school hours and on school property.” The Post says, “School officials have not been forthcoming, but information revealed in a lawsuit against the system provides troubling answers. Not only were there warning signs – lots of them – but they were ignored.” The Post calls for “a complete, public accounting of exactly what went wrong at this school and who was responsible.” 

## Wall Street Journal. 

“Germany’s Green Energy Meltdown.” The Wall Street Journal (11/17) editorializes that Germany has admitted it will fall short of its 2020 carbon emissions-reduction goal, and its 2030 goal is almost certainly out of reach as well. The Journal says the failure of Chancellor Angela Merkel, who herself championed the now-failing energy revolution, to form a coalition government will come at significant price, and if she again recommits to dirty-coal and high-cost energies at the expense of clean energy, she should expect voters to once again rebel in 2021. 

“A Blue Slip – Not A Franken Veto.” The Wall Street Journal (11/17) discusses in an editorial the news that as Sen. Al Franken faces calls for him to resign, Senate Judiciary Committee Chairman Chuck Grassley said earlier this week he will move ahead with a confirmation hearing for Minnesota Supreme Court Justice David Stras, ending a veto by Franken on the issue. The piece concludes by lauding Grassley for restoring Senate courtesy to its rightful purpose. 

“The Menendez Mistrial.” The Wall Street Journal (11/17) writes in an editorial that the corruption charges against Sen. Robert Menendez were thin, in light of the news that a jury failed to convict the senator, resulting in a mistrial. The Journal argues that while Menendez is not a model public servant, it is not clear that his actions amounted to criminal activity. The editorial concludes that although prosecutors will likely move to retry the senator to vindicate their initial charges, it would be more prudent to simply drop the case. 

# Big Picture 

## Headlines From Today’s Front Pages. 

Wall Street Journal: 

GE Housecleaning Will Alter Board’s Makeup German Coalition Talks Collapse Trump Administration Tightens Scrutiny Of Skilled Worker Visa Applicants How China’s Acquisitive HNA Group Fell From Favor 

New York Times: 

Behind Mugabe’s Rapid Fall: A Firing, A Feud And A First Lady Will Cutting The Health Mandate Pay For Tax Cuts? Not Necessarily He Took On The Voting Rights Act And Won. Now He’s Taking On Harvard. In Race Against Roy Moore, Democratic Candidate Is Mostly On His Own Mel Tillis, Country Star Known For His Songs And His Stutter, Dies At 85 Washington Post: 

Kitchen Nightmares Mugabe Declines To Step Down West Wing Aides Split On Russia Inquiry As Business Booms, A Tax Cut Is Seen As ‘Overdue’ Fake Opioid Pills Are Flooding Into The US — With Lethal Results 

Financial Times: 

Mugabe Defies Calls To Step Down As Zimbabwe President Banks Prepare To Settle With Brussels Over Forex Cartel Probe Companies Face High Cost To Meet New EU Data Protection Rules Beijing Vies For Greater Control Of Foreign Universities In China 

Washington Times: 

Doug Jones, Roy Moore’s Opponent In Alabama, Campaigns As A Political Bridge-Builder Roy Moore Focuses Battle On Establishment Republicans Lerner, Paz Say They Fear Physical Harm From Enraged Public, Want IRS Testimony Sealed Permanently ‘Year Of The Woman’ Senators Condemn Sexual Harassment, Campaigned For Ted Kennedy Democrats Give Dubious Credit To Trump-Russia Dossier Despite Public Information Debunking Claims 

Story Lineup From Last Night’s Network News: 

ABC: Severe Weather; Weather Forecast; Argentina-Missing Submarine; Police Shooters-Manhunt; Roy Moore Campaign; Russia Meddling Investigation; Nursing Home Mismanagement; Black Friday Shopping; Jeffrey Tambor Sexual Misconduct Allegation; Trump-Lavar Ball Twitter War; NASCAR News; Challenger Incident Memorial. 

CBS: Roy Moore Campaign; Roy Moore Campaign, Tax Reform Bill-Expert Comment; Hollywood Sexual Misconduct Allegations; Keystone Pipeline Spill; Zimbabwe-Military Coup; Argentina-Missing Submarine; NASCAR News; Britain-New Royal Portrait; Puerto Rico Recovery; Teens-International Charity. 

Network TV At A Glance: 

Roy Moore Campaign – 4 minutes, 50 seconds Hollywood Sexual Misconduct Allegations – 2 minutes, 40 seconds Argentina-Missing Submarine – 2 minutes, 20 seconds 

Story Lineup From This Morning’s Radio News Broadcasts: 

ABC: Russia Meddling Investigation; Argentina-Missing Submarine; Country Music Star Dies. 

CBS: Tax Reform Plan; Roy Moore Campaign; Country Music Star Dies; Wall Street News. 

FOX: Roy Moore Campaign; Trump-Lavar Ball Twitter War. 

NPR: Zimbabwe-Military Coup; Puerto Rico Recovery; Argentina-Missing Submarine; Kenya-Political Instability; Morocco-Stampede. 

# Washington Schedule 

## Today’s Events In Washington. 

White House: 

PRESIDENT TRUMP — Holds a Cabinet Meeting; has lunch with Vice President Mike Pence and Secretary of Housing and Urban Development Ben Carson; meets with Secretary of State Rex Tillerson and US Ambassador to the United Nations Nikki Haley. VICE PRESIDENT PENCE — Joins the President to participate in a Cabinet Meeting; joins the President for lunch with Secretary of Housing and Urban Development Ben Carson. 

US Senate: 9:30 AM Senate Finance subcommittee field hearing on NAFTA – International Trade, Customs, and Global Competitiveness Subcommittee field hearing on ‘Modernization of the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA)’, with testimony from Office of the U.S. Trade Representative General Counsel Stephen Vaughn; Alliance of Automobile Manufacturers CEO and President Mitch Bainwol; Border Trade Alliance Chair Paola Avila; San Antonio Chamber of Commerce CEO and President Richard Perez; Texas Association of Business CEO Jeff Moseley; Texas Farm Bureau President Russell Boening; and Texas Oil and Gas Association President Todd Staples Location: San Antonio Marriott Plaza Hotel, 555 S Alamo St, San Antonio, TX San Antonio http://finance.senate.gov Senate on recess until 27 November. 

US House: House of Representatives on recess until 27 November. 

Other: 2:00 PM Spain Ambassador to the U.S. speaks at Potomac Institute – Potomac Institute Inter-University Center for Terrorism Studies Ambassador’s Forum on ‘Spanish-U.S. Strategic Partnership’, with Spain Ambassador to the U.S. Amb. Pedro Morenes and former U.S. Marine Corps Commandant Gen. (Ret.) Alfred Gray Location: Potomac Institute for Policy Studies, 901 N Stuart St, Arlington, VA www.potomacinstitute.org https://twitter.com/PotomacInst 

# Last Laughs 

## Late Night Political Humor. 

No late-night talk show aired on Sunday night.  

> Copyright 2017 by Bulletin Intelligence LLC Reproduction or redistribution without permission prohibited. Content is drawn from thousands of newspapers, national magazines, national and local television programs, radio broadcasts, social-media platforms and additional forms of open-source data. Sources for Bulletin Intelligence audience-size estimates include Scarborough, GfK MRI, comScore, Nielsen, and the Audit Bureau of Circulation. Data from and access to third party social media platforms, including but not limited to Facebook, Twitter, Instagram and others, is subject to the respective platform’s terms of use. Services that include Factiva content are governed by Factiva’s terms of use. Services including embedded Tweets are also subject to Twitter for Website's information and privacy policies. The Department of the Interior News Briefing is published five days a week by Bulletin Intelligence, which creates custom briefings for government and corporate leaders. We can be found on the Web at BulletinIntelligence.com, or called at (703) 483-6100.

# Conversation Contents 

## Fwd: FW: Chairman Royce Statement on Big Game Trophy Decision 

# "Wainman, Barbara" <barbara_wainman@fws.gov> 

## From: "Wainman, Barbara" <barbara_wainman@fws.gov> 

## Sent: Fri Nov 17 2017 13:01:55 GMT-0700 (MST) 

## To: Greg Sheehan < @fws.gov> 

## Subject: Fwd: FW: Chairman Royce Statement on Big Game Trophy Decision Barbara W. Wainman Assistant Director, External Affairs US Fish and Wildlife Service (202) 208-5256 (office) (571) 471-4159 (cell) 

## ---------- Forwarded message ----------From: Hoover, Craig <craig hoover@fws.gov> Date: Fri, Nov 17, 2017 at 2:27 PM Subject: Fwd: FW: Chairman Royce Statement on Big Game Trophy Decision To: Laury Parramore <laury parramore@fws.gov>, Danielle Kessler <danielle kessler@fws.gov>, Gavin Shire <gavin shire@fws.gov>, Barbara Wainman <barbara wainman@fws.gov>, Matthew Huggler <Matthew Huggler@fws.gov> 

> fyi

## ---------- Forwarded message ----------From: Jones, Lisa <lisa m jones@fws.gov> Date: Fri, Nov 17, 2017 at 2:24 PM Subject: Fwd: FW: Chairman Royce Statement on Big Game Trophy Decision To: Martin Kodis <martin kodis@fws.gov>, Angela Gustavson <angela gustavson@fws.gov>, Craig Hoover <craig hoover@fws.gov>, Tim Vannorman <tim vannorman@fws.gov> fyi....statement from Chairman Royce. Lisa ------------Lisa Hummon-Jones Congressional and Legislative Affairs Specialist U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service 703-358-2536 (o) (b) (6) Press Release View this email in your browser 

FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE 

> November 17, 2017
> https://go.usa.gov/xnB3u

CONTACT 

> Audra McGeorge | Cory Fritz (202) 225-5021

# Chairman Royce Statement on Big Game Trophy Decision 

## Washington, D.C. – House Foreign Affairs Committee Chairman Ed Royce (R-CA) issued the following statement on the Fish and Wildlife Service’s move to allow imports of some big game trophies: 

## “When carefully regulated, conservation hunts can benefit habitats and wildlife populations. That said, this is the wrong move at the wrong time. 

## 202-365-7255 (c) ---------- Forwarded message ----------From: Gallagher, Meghan <Meghan.Gallagher@mail.house.gov> Date: Fri, Nov 17, 2017 at 2:15 PM Subject: FW: Chairman Royce Statement on Big Game Trophy Decision To: "Jones, Lisa" <lisa m jones@fws.gov> 

FYI, wanted to make sure you saw this. 

From: House Foreign Affairs Committee 

Sent: Friday, November 17, 2017 1:03 PM 

To: Gallagher, Meghan <Meghan.Gallagher@mail.house.gov> 

Subject: Chairman Royce Statement on Big Game Trophy Decision “Today Zimbabwe is in economic and political crisis. American citizens in the country are advised to go outdoors only when necessary. In this moment of turmoil, I have zero confidence that the regime – which for years has promoted corruption at the highest levels – is properly managing and regulating conservation programs. Furthermore, I am not convinced that elephant populations in the area warrant overconcentration measures. “The administration should withdraw this decision until Zimbabwe stabilizes. Elephants and other big game in Africa are blood currency for terrorist organizations, and they are being killed at an alarming rate. Stopping poaching isn’t just about saving the world’s most majestic animals for the future – it’s about our national security.” 

## NOTE: Chairman Royce is the author of the END Wildlife Trafficking Act, enacted in 2016, that provides the U.S. and partner nations additional tools to combat illegal wildlife trafficking and poaching. He is also co-chair of the House International Conservation Caucus. ### 

> Copyright © House Foreign Affairs Committee – All rights reserved 2017 HFAC Press Shop | 2170 Rayburn House Office Building Phone: (202) 225-5021 Want to change how you receive these emails? You can update your preferences or unsubscribe from this list.

## --Craig Hoover Chief, Division of Management Authority International Affairs U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service 5275 Leesburg Pike Falls Church, VA 22041-3803 ph: 703-358-2162 www.fws.gov/international 

## Sign up for our e-newsletter to learn how we're working around the globe to protect species and their habitats! Conversation Contents 

## U.S. Department of the Interior News Briefing for Friday, November 17, 2017 

# Bulletin Intelligence <Interior@bulletinintelligence.com> 

## From: Bulletin Intelligence <Interior@bulletinintelligence.com> 

## Sent: Fri Nov 17 2017 04:01:18 GMT-0700 (MST) 

## To: <Interior@bulletinintelligence.com> 

## Subject: U.S. Department of the Interior News Briefing for Friday, November 17, 2017  

> Mobile version and searchable archives available here. Please click here to subscribe.
> DATE: FRIDAY, NOVEMBER 17, 2017 6:00 AM EST

# Today's Table Of Contents 

DOI In The News 

• CBS: US Reverses Ban On Elephant Trophies From Zimbabwe, Zambia. • Washington Post: Watchdog Says Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke Failed To Properly Document Travel. • Grand Junction (CO) Daily Sentinel: US Lands Open For Biz. • U.S. News & World Report: Congress Debates Oil Drilling In Largest US Wildlife Refuge. • U.S. News & World Report: Justice Department Won’t Release National Monument Documents. • Public News Service: Groups Call For Zinkes Commitment To Public Lands. • Independent Journal Review: Int Sec Ryan Zinke Spent The Day In Moccasins And A Fashion Staple That Would Make George H.W. Bush Proud. • NBC News: Drones Are Fighting Wildfires In Some Very Surprising Ways. • WXPR-FM Rhinelander (WI): Wisconsin Trump Supporters: Hands Off Our Public Lands. 

Bureau Of Indian Affairs 

• Tribes Hoping Overhaul Of BIA Regs Will Catalyze Deals. • Tribes Make Renewed Push For Pipeline Protections. 

Bureau Of Land Management 

• Elko (NV) Daily Free Press: Kinross Earns First Sage-Grouse Conservation Credit. • E&E Publishing: Bundy Would Have Received BLM Permit. • Nevada Appeal: BLM Plans To Reseed Wildfire Affected Areas. • U.S. News & World Report: 3 Injured In Plane Crash Near Wyoming Airport. 

Bureau Of Ocean Energy Management 

• House Energy Bill Promotes Offshore Wind Development. Bureau Of Reclamation 

• Arizonan Confirmed As First Woman To Lead U.S. Bureau Of Reclamation. • Spring Runoff, Late Rains Boost Reservoirs In New Mexico. 

Bureau Of Safety And Environmental Enforcement 

• Chemical Safety Board Scraps Recommendation On Offshore Safety. 

Fish And Wildlife Service 

• WTVY-TV Dothan (AL): Alabama Getting Additional $33 Million In BP Oil Spill Settlement Funds. • Alabama Live: Endangered Alabama Fish Expands Its Range After Dam Removal. 

National Park Service 

• U.S. News & World Report: Wounded Veterans Dive For History, Healing In Waters. • San Jose (CA) Mercury News: In A U.S. First, Muir Woods To Require Reservations For All Cars. • U.S. News & World Report: National Park Service Seeks Ways To Manage Non-Native Fish. • Mount Desert (ME) Islander: Acadia To Take Over Lighthouse. • Arizona Daily Sun: Park Service To Create New Fish Plan For Grand Canyon And Glen Canyon. • U.S. News & World Report: Yellowstone Sees Fewer Visitors In Snowy October. • Asheville (NC) Citizen-Times: Land Trust Conserves 127 Acres Bordering Smokies. 

Office Of Insular Affairs 

• Saipan (MNP) Tribune: Robotics Kits Arrive In Yap. • St. Croix Source: Echols Named Acting Superintendent As VINP Undergoes Changes. 

US Geological Survey 

• High Plains and Midwest AG (KS) Journal: New Map Of Worldwide Croplands Supports Food And Water Security. • Kallanish Energy News (UK): Additional Coverage: USGS: 40 Million Pounds Of Uranium In Southern High Plains. 

Opinion Pieces 

• National Monuments Have A Military Defense Mission, Too. • America’s Statue Wars Are A Family Feud. • The World’s Strongest Conservation Law Is Under Attack. It Needs To Be Fixed Instead. • Feds Must Bolster Resources To Eradicate Invasive Snakes: Our View. • Worst Engineering Failure In U.S. History Made Us Safer. • Additional Reading. 

Top National News 

• Washington Times: Media Analyses: House Passes Sweeping Tax Reform Bill In Win For Trump, Ryan. • NBC: Senate Panel To Investigate Franken After Sexual Harassment Accusations. • CBS: White House: Trump Finds Moore Allegations “Troubling,” But Fate Up To Alabama Voters. • New York Times: US Strikes “More Conciliatory” Tone At Climate Talks. • Associated Press: Keystone Pipeline Leaks Oil In South Dakota. 

Editorial Wrap-Up 

• New York Times. - “A Tax Cut Bill To Make Scrooge McDuck Proud.” - “The Da Vinci Lode.” • Washington Post. - “The Destructive Part Of The Republican Tax Bill You’re Not Paying Attention To.” - “Al Franken Is Just The Start Of Congress’s Reckoning With Sexual Harassment.” - “The Pentagon Has Detained A US Citizen For More Than Two Months – And Said Little.” • Wall Street Journal. - “A Solution For Ron Johnson.” - “No Republicans Need Apply.” - “Trump’s South China Sea Message.” 

Big Picture 

> • Headlines From Today’s Front Pages.

Washington Schedule 

> • Today’s Events In Washington.

Last Laughs 

> • Late Night Political Humor.

# DOI In The News 

## US Reverses Ban On Elephant Trophies From Zimbabwe, Zambia. 

The CBS Evening News (11/16, story 9, 0:20, Mason) reported the Fish and Wildlife Service is reversing an “Obama-era ban on elephant trophies” that will allow hunters to bring “elephant remains” into the US from Zimbabwe and Zambia. Animal protection groups argue that killing elephants for sport “could threaten an already endangered species,” and NBC Nightly News (11/16, story 9, 0:25, Holt) said the move “has left many animal lovers and animal rights groups outraged,” although a Fish and Wildlife spokesman “says that legal hunting in and management programs actually help species survive by putting much needed revenue back into conservation.” CNN’s Anderson Cooper 360 (11/16) reported on the ban reversal while noting that Donald Trump Jr. has gone to Africa “many times to hunt” elephants and “defends it.” Also reporting are the AP (11/16, Biesecker), the New York Times (11/16, Chokshi), the Los Angeles Times (11/16, Pearce), Reuters (11/16, Malone), Reuters (11/16, Malone), USA Today (11/16, Diebel), TIME (11/16, Worland), TIME (11/17, Hincks), NPR (11/16, Wamsley), Fortune (11/16, Meyer), Forbes (11/16, Nace), USA Today (11/16), the Huffington Post (11/15, D'Angelo), the Huffington Post (11/17), CNN (11/15, Wallace), NBC News (11/16, EDELMAN, WELKER), CBS News (11/16, Tillett), and CNBC (11/16, Diebel). 

White House Says Elephant Trophy Decision Not Yet Finalized. Reuters (11/16, Malone) reports that the White House on Thursday “said it had not yet finalized a decision to allow trophy hunters who kill elephants in two African countries to bring the endangered animals home as trophies, a move that had outraged U.S. conservation groups.” The proposal, “disclosed this week by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, had triggered protests from conservation groups and a frenzy on social media.” White House spokeswoman Sarah Sanders said, “There hasn’t been an announcement that’s been finalized on this front. Until that’s done I wouldn’t consider anything final.” 

Fox’s Laura Ingraham Rips Trump For Ending Ban On Importing Elephant Trophies From Africa. The Hill (11/16, Savransky) reports that “Fox News’ Laura Ingraham on Thursday ripped the decision by the Trump administration to lift the ban on importing elephant trophies from Africa.” Ingraham tweeted Thursday morning, “I don’t understand how this move by @realDonaldTrump Admin will not INCREASE the gruesome poaching of elephants. Stay tuned.” 

Trump Admin. Began Accepting Permits To Import Lion Trophies Last Month. ABC News (11/16, Ebbs) reports that U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service officials “began issuing permits for lion trophies hunted in Zambia and Zimbabwe about a month ago.” FWS officials “said the decision was made after concluding that regulated hunting would help the survival of the endangered species in the wild.” An agency spokesperson “said they found that ‘legal, well-regulated sport hunting’ can benefit conservation by providing incentives to local communities and generating revenue that can be directed to conservation programs, saying that the programs in Zambia and Zimbabwe will enhance the survival of the species in the wild.” 

## Watchdog Says Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke Failed To Properly Document Travel. 

Interior Department Deputy Inspector General Mary Kendall told department officials this week that Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke “has failed to keep complete records – and in some cases kept none at all – of his travel since taking office,” the Washington Post (11/16, Rein, Harwell) reports. In “a rare alert” to Zinke’s office, Kendall “said her investigation into allegations of improper travel practices by Zinke has been stymied by ‘absent or incomplete documentation for several pertinent trips.’” In addition, Kendall wrote that lawyers and ethics officials have not shown investigators that they can “distinguish between personal, political and official travel” or cost-analyses to justify Zinke’s use of military or charter flights. The alert also says the IG is looking into “the travel of Zinke’s wife, Lola, who often accompanied him on official trips.” According to Kendall, the department’s documentation was so deficient that investigators were unable to determine “the full extent” of her travel and how it was paid for. The AP (11/16, Daly) reports that Deputy Interior Secretary David Bernhardt “said in a memo Thursday that travel procedures followed by previous Interior secretaries were “dysfunctional,” adding that most of those policies and procedures remain in effect, 10 months into the Trump administration.” Bernhardt “promised to turn over documents for all travel by the secretary in the fiscal year that ended Sept. 30, including at least 10 travel vouchers related to trips taken by former Interior Secretary Sally Jewell.” He added that “the department also will provide information related to trips where Zinke’s wife or Jewell’s husband traveled in government-owned vehicles, watercraft or aircraft, and document whether payments were made or if reimbursements were required.” Also reporting are The Hill (11/16, Henry), Bloomberg News (11/16, Natter), Reuters (11/16, Gardner), Politico (11/16, Wolff), the New York Daily News (11/16, Sommerfeldt), My Central Oregon (11/16), ABC News (11/16, Ebbs), the Huffington Post (11/16, D'Angelo), and The Week (11/16, Lange). 

## US Lands Open For Biz. 

The Grand Junction (CO) Daily Sentinel (11/16, Hamilton) reports that “more than 250 people applauded” Kate MacGregor, acting assistant secretary for land and minerals management, “who came to Grand Junction on Thursday night with news that the federal government is dedicated to making federal lands welcome to energy development.” MacGregor “outlined President Donald Trump’s and U.S. Department of the Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke’s plans to remove roadblocks to mining and drilling.” MacGregor said, “This Department of the Interior supports energy and mineral production in all of its many forms but recognizes where those raw materials come from. that’s because one barrel of oil, one mcf of gas or one ton of coal produced here in this nation is better than one that we have to import. Under Secretary (Ryan) Zinke’s leadership we are committed to serving as agents of change. We have been charged by this president to identify and eliminate the obstacles to development of these important resources.” Additional coverage was provided by KKCO-TV Grand Junction, CO (11/16, Prechtl). 

## Congress Debates Oil Drilling In Largest US Wildlife Refuge. 

The AP (11/16, Joling) reports that Congressional Republicans are pushing for drilling in the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge “with a projected $1 billion from lease sales to help pay for President Donald Trump’s proposed tax cut.” The Senate Energy and Natural Resources Committee on Wednesday “advanced the drilling measure.” Chairwoman Lisa Murkowski “says oil production later would bring in much more revenue.” Also reporting are UPI (11/16, Graeber), Forbes (11/16, Blackmon), and Yale University (CT) Environment 360 (11/16, Wight). 

## Justice Department Won’t Release National Monument Documents. The AP (11/16, Ridler) reports that “documents possibly outlining legal justifications for President Donald Trump to shrink national monuments don’t have to be provided to an Idaho environmental law firm because they’re protected communications, federal officials say.” The U.S. Department of Justice on Wednesday “asked a federal judge to dismiss a lawsuit from Advocates for the West seeking the information.” The Justice Department “released more than 60 pages in May,” but the agency “withheld 12 pages...contending they are protected by attorney-client privilege and intra-agency communication rules, making them exempt from Freedom of Information Act requests.” 

## Groups Call For Zinkes Commitment To Public Lands. 

Public News Service (11/17) reports that “on Thursday, a national coalition of sportsmen and women, recreation, business and conservation groups challenged Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke to make good on his promises not to hand over public lands to states.” Also on Thursday, Zinke “announced the appointment of Brian Steed – a vocal proponent of transferring public lands to private interests – to head the Bureau of Land Management.” The article notes that “Zinke has also recommended removing national monument protections, claiming previous administrations over-reached their authority by limiting fossil-fuel development.” 

## Int Sec Ryan Zinke Spent The Day In Moccasins And A Fashion Staple That Would Make George H.W. Bush Proud. 

Independent Journal Review (11/15, Fink) reports that on Wednesday, Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke “marked Native American Heritage Month by participating in #RockYourMocs.” Throughout the day, Zinke “experienced ‘beautiful craftsmanship’ and ‘rich culture’ and met with Indian Affairs Acting Secretary John Tahsuda II.” Zinke also “offered a statement of remembrance of Native American Veteran Michael Bell and was given a quilt his family made as a gift.” 

## Drones Are Fighting Wildfires In Some Very Surprising Ways. 

NBC News (11/16, Baggaley) reports that aerial drones are “showing that they can detect, contain and even extinguish fires faster and with greater safety.” Drones “give firefighters a bird’s-eye view of the terrain and help them determine where a fire will spread – so they can make swift decisions about where fire crews should go and which residents need to be evacuated.” According to the article, “as fires raged across California last summer, dozens of helicopters were grounded.” Brad Koeckeritz, chief of the Interior Department’s unmanned aircraft systems division, said, “The drones provided an opportunity to gather intelligence at a time when we wouldn’t be able to gather it any other way.” 

## Wisconsin Trump Supporters: Hands Off Our Public Lands. 

WXPR-FM Rhinelander, WI (11/16, Morrissey) reports that “a new survey shows Wisconsinites clearly disagree with President Donald Trump’s proposals to roll back federal protections on public lands.” According to the poll commissioned by Wisconsin for Public Lands, “while 68 percent of Wisconsin Trump voters approve of the job he’s doing, 69 percent don’t support selling off public lands for commercial development.” The article notes that “the poll by RABA Research showed similar sentiment among Trump supporters in Michigan, Ohio and Pennsylvania.” In fact, “large majorities of voters in all four state recommended instead that Trump create new national monuments, or leave the current monuments as they are today.” 

# Bureau Of Indian Affairs 

## Tribes Hoping Overhaul Of BIA Regs Will Catalyze Deals. 

Law360 (11/16, Westney) reports that “the Bureau of Indian Affairs’ invitation for tribes to comment on the potential impact of updating the federal government’s regulations for doing business on Native American lands elicited stories of economic development deals hampered by red tape and calls to stop state governments from imposing taxes in Indian Country.” The article “looks at why and how tribes and tribal organizations say the so-called Indian Trader regulations need to be changed.” 

## Tribes Make Renewed Push For Pipeline Protections. 

The AP (11/16, Nicholson) reports that on Wednesday the Standing Rock and Cheyenne River Sioux tribes made “a renewed push to bolster protections for their water supply while federal officials further study the potential impact of the recently completed Dakota Access oil pipeline.” The groups are requesting that the court reject arguments made by the Army Corps of Engineers and Energy Transfer Partners over the tribes’ proposals. Attorneys for the groups’ submitted documents that said, “neither (the company) nor the Corps even attempts to make the case that” the proposed protections “present any hardship to either of them, or that the public interest would be disserved.” 

# Bureau Of Land Management 

## Kinross Earns First Sage-Grouse Conservation Credit. 

The Elko (NV) Daily Free Press (11/16) reports that “the Nevada Department of Conservation and Natural Resources and Kinross Gold U.S.A. announced the first sage-grouse credit transaction under the Nevada Conservation Credit System program.” It is “expected to protect nearly 10,000 acres of primary sage-grouse habitat in northeastern Nevada.” It also “sets a precedent and is expected to make the process more efficient for landowners to participate in the CCS in the future.” Marci Todd, acting Nevada Director of the Bureau of Land Management, said, “This is an excellent example of partnership and stewardship by federal, state and private sector stakeholders to conserve sagebrush habitat. This is about working cooperatively and working smartly. The BLM is proud to be a part of this first-ever transaction under the Nevada Conservation Credit System.” 

## Bundy Would Have Received BLM Permit. 

E&E Publishing (11/16, Yachnin) reports that “even after Nevada rancher Cliven Bundy had defied court orders and grazed his cattle illegally for nearly 15 years, the government would have given him a new grazing permit if he had only responded to repeated entreaties,” a Bureau of Land Management official testified Wednesday. Mary Jo Rugwell, “who served as BLM’s Southern Nevada District office manager from 2008 to 2011, said the agency tried to reach Bundy via local law enforcement, his spouse and letters to his home, all of which he ignored.” As their first witness, “federal prosecutors called Rugwell, who is now BLM’s Wyoming state director, to testify about her tenure in the office, including her decision in 2011 to initiate impoundment proceedings against Bundy’s cattle.” 

## BLM Plans To Reseed Wildfire Affected Areas. 

The Nevada Appeal (11/16, Ranson) reports that the Bureau of Land Management gave “an overview to Churchill County Commissioners on Wednesday to reseed areas burned by several big fires in Churchill County during the summer.” Ken Collum, field manager for the Stillwater Field Office, Carson City District, “said the agency will rehabilitate the land through both drill and aerial seeding.” According to Collum, “drill seeding will occur on about 8,088 acres, and the aerial seeding over another 6,364 acres.” 

## 3 Injured In Plane Crash Near Wyoming Airport. 

The AP (11/16) reports that “three people suffered minor injuries in a plane crash near a Wyoming airport.” Bureau of Land Management Wyoming spokeswoman Kristen Lenhardt “says the people on board included a United States Geological Survey staff member, a member of the Rock Springs Grazing Association and a Bureau of Land Management ‘range technician.’” Bureau Of Ocean Energy Management 

## House Energy Bill Promotes Offshore Wind Development. 

North American Windpower (11/16, Lillian) reports that the House Committee on Natural Resources recently “passed H.R.4239, the ‘Strengthening the Economy with Critical Untapped Resources to Expand American Energy Act,’ which promotes the further development of offshore wind power but also the exploration and production of oil and gas.” The legislation “reforms existing regulatory frameworks for energy development on the Outer Continental Shelf and the onshore acreage under federal ownership.” The article notes that “for offshore wind, the bill requires the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management (BOEM) to conduct feasbility studies for offshore wind lease sales off the coasts of California, Hawaii, Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands.” 

# Bureau Of Reclamation 

## Arizonan Confirmed As First Woman To Lead U.S. Bureau Of Reclamation. 

The Arizona Republic (11/16, Baietto) reports that Brenda Burman has been confirmed as the new commissioner of the U.S. Bureau of Reclamation. She is the first female to lead the agency. Burman, “who was nominated for the post in June by President Donald Trump, was confirmed on a unanimous voice vote by the U.S. Senate on Thursday, according to the Senate record.” 

## Spring Runoff, Late Rains Boost Reservoirs In New Mexico. 

The AP (11/17) reports that “federal water managers say good spring runoff and heavy rains in the fall helped to boost reservoir levels in New Mexico this year.” The Bureau of Reclamation “announced this week that the Rio Grande in 2017 marked its highest spring runoff since 2008.” According to officials, “the good flows allowed for the first time in four years a full allocation of water to those who depend on the San Juan-Chama project.” 

# Bureau Of Safety And Environmental Enforcement 

## Chemical Safety Board Scraps Recommendation On Offshore Safety. 

The Houston Chronicle (11/16, Blum) reports that the U.S. Chemical Safety and Hazard Investigation Board has “opted to withdraw recommendations made in the aftermath of the 2010 Deepwater Horizon tragedy in the Gulf of Mexico” after the Bureau of Safety and Environmental Enforcement refused to enact the protections. The recommendations, put forth in 2016, “would have allowed oil rig employees to stop work in the event of safety concerns and provide them legal whistleblower protections against retaliation.” The head of the BSEE’s offshore regulatory program, Douglas Morris, “told the chemical safety board that it should instead work with industry groups such as the American Petroleum Institute and International Association of Drilling Contractors to develop voluntary guidelines for protecting offshore workers and whistleblower.” 

# Fish And Wildlife Service 

## Alabama Getting Additional $33 Million In BP Oil Spill Settlement Funds. 

WTVY-TV Dothan, AL (11/16) reports that Alabama is “getting another $33 million related to the BP oil spill settlement.” The funds will be “used for land acquisition, habitat restoration and preservation of coastal resources.” Among the new projects is the acquisition by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service of “251 acres to be included within the ‘Bon Secour National Wildlife Refuge.’” 

## Endangered Alabama Fish Expands Its Range After Dam Removal. 

Alabama Live (11/16, Pillion) reports that “populations of the endangered vermilion darter have been found in new areas of Turkey Creek, near Pinson, upstream of where a dam was removed four years ago in an effort to expand the fish’s range.” The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service “partnered with the Freshwater Land Trust to remove the nearly 100-year-old Shadow Lake dam in 2013, and this month confirmed the darters have expanded their range upstream of the old dam site.” 

# National Park Service 

## Wounded Veterans Dive For History, Healing In Waters. 

The AP (11/17, Brean) reports that on WAVES, “short for Wounded American Veterans Experience Scuba, a California-based nonprofit that provides dive training to vets with service-connected injuries or disabilities.” According to the article, “seven members of the group spent the week at Lake Mead National Recreation Area, diving down to historic sites alongside a team from the National Park Service’s Submerged Resources Center.” The article notes that “it was the first outing in a new partnership between WAVES and the park service that will train wounded warriors to become scuba stewards for underwater resources at the nation’s parks.” 

## In A U.S. First, Muir Woods To Require Reservations For All Cars. 

The San Jose (CA) Mercury News (11/16, Rogers) reports that in an effort “to reduce traffic jams and overcrowding, Muir Woods National Monument will become the first national park unit in the United States to require reservations for all vehicles to enter the park year-round.” Park managers of “announced Thursday that starting Jan. 16 everybody who plans to bring a car to Muir Woods will need to book a reservation online or by phone.” Darren Brown, a transportation planner with the Golden Gate National Recreation Area, which manages Muir Woods, said, “Visitation has continued to increase. The problem is too many cars. It’s extremely crowded and we can’t handle as many cars that end up going there.” 

## National Park Service Seeks Ways To Manage Non-Native Fish. 

The AP (11/17) reports that the National Park Service is “looking for ways to manage non-native aquatic species in the Colorado River system below Glen Canyon Dam.” The park service is “holding webinars and open houses over the next few weeks to solicit input from the public.” 

## Acadia To Take Over Lighthouse. 

The Mount Desert (ME) Islander (11/16, Good) reports that Acadia National Park Superintendent Kevin Schneider and Management Assistant John Kelly “met with Tremont selectmen Monday to discuss the transfer” of the Bass Harbor Head Light “to the park from the current owner, the U.S. Coast Guard.” According to the article, “the Coast Guard’s need for the property has been diminished, and the General Services Administration has been considering how to dispose of the lighthouse.” The National Historic Lighthouse Preservation Act allows the transfer of the lighthouse to the National Park Service. 

## Park Service To Create New Fish Plan For Grand Canyon And Glen Canyon. 

The Arizona Daily Sun (11/16, Cowan) reports that the National Park Service is seeking “public input as it creates a plan for managing nonnative aquatic species in Glen Canyon National Recreation Area and Grand Canyon National Park.” The plan looks “to address increases in potentially harmful non-native fish like brown trout and green sunfish that have been documented since 2013.” 

## Yellowstone Sees Fewer Visitors In Snowy October. 

The AP (11/16) reports that Yellowstone National Park “recorded nearly 212,000 visits in October, down 12.4 percent from October 2016.” The park “noted that snowy weather during the month may have contributed to the decline.” 

## Land Trust Conserves 127 Acres Bordering Smokies. 

The Asheville (NC) Citizen-Times (11/16, Chávez) reports that the Southern Appalachian Highlands Conservancy has “purchased 147 acres bordering the Great Smoky Mountains National Park that will serve as prime habitat for elk and other wildlife.” The land, “known as Stevens Creek, is a bowl-shaped pocket just outside the Cataloochee Valley area on the park’s eastern edge.” Carl Silverstein, the organization’s executive director, “said the land trust hopes to partner with other land management agencies and reserves the right to transfer the land to another state or federal land management agencies such as the state wildlife commission.” 

# Office Of Insular Affairs 

## Robotics Kits Arrive In Yap. 

The Saipan (MNP) Tribune (11/17) reports that “robotics clubs at five high schools in Yap received VEX Classroom and Competition kits earlier this month, kicking off expansion of the popular Yap Robo League.” Yap’s Robo League was established in 2011 by the Unonprofit Habele, and “itt is now expanding across that state through a pilot grant award by the Office of Insular Affairs.” OIA director Nik Pula said, “We were inspired by the students from Yap who represented the Federated States of Micronesia this summer at the 2017 FIRST Global Challenge international robotics competition for high school students here in Washington, D.C. Through robotics, the Habele Outer Island Education Fund has been promoting the broadening of students’ experience in applying basic Science, Technology, Engineering, and Math skills in a positive, competitive, and hands-on way, and we are pleased to support expansion of this opportunity for more students in Yap.” 

## Echols Named Acting Superintendent As VINP Undergoes Changes. 

The St. Croix Source (11/16, Roberts) reports that when Hurricane Irma struck on Sept. 6, “much of the employee housing within Virgin Island National Park was severely damaged by either storm surge or high winds.” According to the article, “within a matter of a few days, park rangers, resource managers, and even the deputy superintendent – the highest-ranking official in the VINP – received notice of mandatory evacuation and reassignment to other parks.” However, “some regular maintenance and administrative employees remained on the job, as did three law enforcement rangers, including Chief Ranger Rick Gupman who was named acting deputy superintendent.” Also, Darrell Echols “arrived on St. John Nov. 5 to serve as acting superintendent of the VINP.” 

# US Geological Survey 

## New Map Of Worldwide Croplands Supports Food And Water Security. 

The High Plains and Midwest AG (KS) Journal (11/16) reports that “a map released Nov. 14 details croplands worldwide in the highest resolution yet, helping to ensure global food and water security in a sustainable way.” The study was “led by the USGS and is part of the Global Food Security-Support Analysis Data @ 30-m Project.” Prasad Thenkabail, USGS research geographer and Principal Investigator for the GFSAD30 Project Team, said, “The map clearly shows individual farm fields, big or small, at any location in the world. Given the high resolution of 30 meters and 0.09 hectares per pixel, a big advantage is the ability to see croplands in any country and sub-national regions, including states, provinces, districts, counties and villages.” 

## Additional Coverage: USGS: 40 Million Pounds Of Uranium In Southern High Plains. 

Additional coverage that the U.S. Geological Survey “in a new report estimates 40 million pounds of uranium remains undiscovered in the Southern High Plains of Texas, New Mexico and Oklahoma” was provided by Kallanish Energy News (UK) (11/16) and the Laredo (TX) Morning Times (11/16, Hawes). 

# Opinion Pieces 

## National Monuments Have A Military Defense Mission, Too. 

In an op-ed for The Hill (11/16, Dowdy), Ian Dowdy, AICP, a program director for the non-partisan research-oriented Sonoran Institute, highlights “the important role that national monuments and public lands play for our country – particularly for national defense.” Dowdy argues that “national monuments serve as irreplaceable buffers on lands that are critical for military readiness,” as shown in a report “analyzing the role public lands in the West play in protecting the military mission” released by Sonoran Institute. The report showed “that the open and undeveloped landscape in the West is well suited for training activities.” Dowdy asks the Trump Administration to “recognize the often-overlooked benefits that national monuments and other protect lands provide to military training and readiness, among the many other considerations, before moving forward with boundary adjustments or other reductions to the effectiveness and scale of our nation’s protected lands.” 

## America’s Statue Wars Are A Family Feud. 

Author Sarah Vowell opines in a 1223 word op-ed in the New York Times (11/16, Vowell) that the debate over which statutes to dismantle and which to keep could become increasingly more complex as time passes. Vowell recounts stories of American Indians who fought with the Confederacy and their own decisions regarding statutes of people from that era to put the debate in a new perspective. Vowell also mentions that controversial statues of Christopher Columbus may not have been erected with hateful intentions, but as symbols of civic pride for oppressed Italian-Americans. 

## The World’s Strongest Conservation Law Is Under Attack. It Needs To Be Fixed Instead. 

Peter Alagona, “an associate professor of history, geography and environmental studies at the University of California at Santa Barbara,” and James Salzman, the Donald Bren Distinguished Professor of Environmental Law at the UCLA School of Law and UCSB’s Bren School of the Environment, assert in an op-ed in the Washington Post (11/16, Alagona, Salzman)that five bills currently in Congress that seek to weaken the Endangered Species Act would not “make the law more efficient or effective.” The two academics opine that “the fundamental political problem with the act is that its incentives don’t match its ethics,” and they propose shifting funds or providing “deductions for landowners who successfully enhance and maintain their habitat for endangered species.” The two conclude by declaring that “reform is not a binary choice between weakening the law or keeping the status quo. There is a better path.” 

## Feds Must Bolster Resources To Eradicate Invasive Snakes: Our View. 

In an editorial, the Pacific (GUM) Daily News (11/15) urges the federal government “to significantly ratchet up its efforts and its funding to eradicate the brown tree snake on Guam.” The paper says that “more money and resources need to be channeled into finding ways to eliminate the snake entirely from Guam, as well as the coconut rhinoceros beetle, little red fire ant and other pests.” It notes that the Office of Insular Affairs will “spend about $2.8 million for brown tree snake eradication and control projects” this year, but “given the damage done by the snakes, that’s just not enough.” 

## Worst Engineering Failure In U.S. History Made Us Safer. 

In an op-ed for The Hill (11/16, Weste, Spragens), Santa Clarita mayor pro tem Laurene Weste and Association of State Dam Safety Officials executive director Lori Cannon Spragens discuss the Saint Francis Dam Disaster National Memorial Act, explaining how the rupture of the St. Francis Dam in 1928 “brought about a new era of engineering oversight and methods for dam building across the nation.” Weste and Spragens mention that, “When the dam burst, Native Americans, agricultural farmworkers and Southern California Edison work crews were among those who perished in the path of destruction.” 

## Additional Reading. 

A Barrier To Recovery From War. Moab (UT) Sun News (11/16, Bricker). 

Zinke Is A Clown Pretending To Be A Cowboy. Bozeman (MT) Daily Chronicle (11/16, Heinlein). 

Administration Shrugs Off Public Process For Public Lands. Aspen (CO) Daily News (11/16, Newman). 

Park Service Budget Woes. Jamestown (ND) Sun (11/16, Kuntz). 

A National Park Fee Increase: The $70 Land Grab. Boulder (CO) Weekly (11/16, Malotky). 

Honor Veterans By Maintaining National Parks. Bend (OR) Bulletin (11/17, Perry). 

Resume Health Study On Mining. Wheeling (WV) Intelligencer (11/17). 

# Top National News 

## Media Analyses: House Passes Sweeping Tax Reform Bill In Win For Trump, Ryan. 

Media analyses cast yesterday’s tax reform vote in the House as a significant win for both the President and Speaker Ryan, though nearly all reports warn that the measure faces a challenging path before it gets to Trump’s desk. The Washington Times (11/16, Dinan) says Republicans acted “with spines stiffened by a presidential pep talk,” as Trump met with the GOP caucus ahead of the 227-205 vote. According to the Washington Post (11/16, A1, Debonis, Paletta), his “parting words to Republicans” were: “I love you. Now go vote.” USA Today (11/16, Jackson) notes Rep. Tom Cole later said, however, that “Trump didn’t try to twist arms.” Said Cole, “There’s not a lot of people left to persuade. ... You’ve got a bunch of happy Republicans around here.” In fact, The Hill (11/16, Jagoda, Marcos) recounted, “once the bill reached the magic number for passage, Republicans in the chamber erupted into applause.” Democrats “mockingly joined in, with some singing ‘na na na na, hey hey, goodbye,’ like they did when the chamber passed an ObamaCare repeal bill earlier this year.” All three major network newscasts reported the story. ABC World News Tonight (11/16, story 3, 2:35, Vega) offered a decidedly grim view of the legislation, calling the vote a “small victory” for Trump “on a bill that would add $1.4 trillion to the deficit over ten years.” Also markedly unfavorable was the report on NBC Nightly News (11/16, story 3, 2:00, Welker), which said that “according to an NBC News analysis based on Mr. Trump’s leaked 2005 tax return, the House bill...would save the President more than $20 million and his heirs could potentially save $1.1 billion.” John Heilemann, “NBC News National Affairs Analyst,” was shown saying, “What they got to try to do is convince most Americans that this is not going to be just a sop to the wealthy, but it will help the middle class. That will be a hard sell given what’s in this bill.” The CBS Evening News (11/16, story 3, 2:25, Cordes), meanwhile, said “the ‘Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017’ shrinks the number of brackets from seven to four, lowering rates and eliminating some deductions,” and added that “the independent Tax Policy Center estimates that Americans who make between $50,000 and $90,000 a year would get an average tax cut next year of about $800.” Politico (11/16, Bade, Bresnahan, Lorenzo) says the vote provided “a sorely needed legislative victory for...Trump,” as well as “for Ways and Means Chairman Kevin Brady and Ryan, who GOP sources joke has been dreaming of this moment since he was in diapers.” Bloomberg News (11/16, Edgerton) refers to “a key milestone in...Trump’s quest to cut taxes for businesses and individuals,” the New York Times (11/16, A1, Kaplan, Rappeport) to “a significant leap forward as Republicans seek to...deliver the first major legislative achievement of...Trump’s tenure,” the Washington Post (11/16, A1, Debonis, Paletta) to “a key win for...Trump and....Ryan,” and USA Today (11/16, Jackson) to “a victory for...Ryan,” who “predicted a tax bill would pass before Thanksgiving and needed to show his party could deliver on a major campaign promise.” Another Politico (11/16, Bresnahan) analysis concludes “Trump got a boost,” but “the biggest winner may be...Ryan,” a figure “loathed by the Breitbart wing of the Republican Party.” Reuters (11/16, Morgan, Becker) calls the vote “an important step toward the biggest tax code overhaul since the 1980s,” but warns “the tax debate now moves to the US Senate, where that chamber’s separate plan has already encountered resistance from some Republicans.” The AP (11/16, Fram, Gordon) similarly cautions that “the mostly party-line...vote masked more ominous problems in the Senate,” and adds that “even so, Republicans are hoping to send a compromise bill for Trump to sign by Christmas.” Breitbart (11/16, Moran) also indicates that “Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell will face more dire circumstances to pass the upper chamber’s version,” Roll Call (11/16, McPherson) warns that “the road ahead...won’t be an easy one.” The Wall Street Journal (11/16, A1, Rubin, Hughes) runs a similar story on the vote, and the Washington Free Beacon (11/16, Meyer) titles its favorable assessment of the day’s events “House Passes Tax Cuts and Jobs Act, Giving Americans a Tax Cut Not Seen in 31 Years.” The Los Angeles Times (11/16, Mascaro, Puzzanghera) reports “Democrats were unified against the plan, and the only GOP defections in the House came mostly from lawmakers in the Northeast and California, who were concerned about the plan’s limits on deductions for state and local income taxes important to their districts.” The Daily Caller (11/16, Crowe) lists the Republicans who oppose the measure: California Reps. Tom McClintock, Dana Rohrabacher and Darrell Issa, New Jersey’s Frank LoBiondo, Chris Smith, Leonard Lance and Rodney Frelinghuysen, and New York’s Lee Zeldin, Pete King, Daniel Donovan, John Faso, Elise Stefanik and Walter Jones. Ryan said on Fox News’ Fox & Friends (11/16), “We actually added back a $10,000 property tax deduction in addition to the tax cuts that are already in the bill that everybody gets. So we’ve actually run numbers on these districts and shown that taxpayers in those districts, in those states still get tax cuts – itemizers and nonitemizers. Most people won’t have to itemize. So, what we’ve done is added a $10,000 property tax deduction for these people in those high tax states. Everybody gets it, but it’s really the high-tax state people that would feel it the most – that deduction.” Rep. Tom Cole was asked on MSNBC’s Morning Joe (11/16) about the opposition of Rep. Peter King and others to the elimination of the SALT deduction. Cole said, “I think we’ve made a reasonable compromise in the House bill. Look, I respect Peter King as much as any member we have, and I respect all members who are fighting for their constituents. But at the end of the day, you know, personally, if you make $250,000 in Oklahoma City or $250,000 in New York City, you ought to be paying the same amount of federal taxes. Now, again, the tax code is skewed to the advantage of people in high-tax states. That’s fair enough. People need to look after their constituents. I think we’ve tried to accommodate that in the House bill. I think we’ll be able to sustain that accommodation in a final bill.” 

NYTimes: GOP Taking Money Way “From Working Families” To “Give It” To The Wealthy. 

Under the headline “A Tax-Cut Bill To Make Scrooge McDuck Proud,” the New York Times (11/16) editorializes, “Let that sink in. This tax bill would take money from working families and give it to the wealthiest people in the world. ... Republicans have made clear where their values lie. Well-heeled campaign funders matter. Middle-class families don’t.” Along similar lines, a New York Times (11/16, Tankersley) analysis says “there are tough choices at the heart of the Republican tax bills speeding through Congress, and they make clear what the party values most in economic policy right now: deep and lasting tax cuts for corporations.” The Times adds that “the bill that sailed through the House on Thursday chooses to take from high-tax Democratic states, particularly California and New York, and give to lower-tax Republican states that...Trump carried in 2016, particularly Florida and Texas.” It also “allows for tax increases on millions of families several years from now, if a future Congress does not intervene, but not for similar increases on corporations.” 

## Senate Panel To Investigate Franken After Sexual Harassment Accusations. 

The sexual harassment accusations against Sen. Al Franken dominated the news cycle, with the major network newscasts devoting nearly nine minutes of airtime to the story. 

NBC Nightly News (11/16, lead story, 2:50, Holt) opened its broadcast reporting that “the eye-opening list of powerful men outed for sexual misconduct now includes a sitting US senator,” and ABC World News Tonight (11/16, lead story, 3:05, Muir) also led with the “explosive charge” against Franken, “accused by a woman of forcibly kissing her during a USO tour.” The New York Times (11/16, Fandos) indicates Franken had “been mentioned as a possible presidential candidate,” and the Minneapolis Star Tribune (11/12, Brooks, Spencer, Rao) that “in recent weeks,” he “had repeatedly cheered the accounts of other women in the #metoo movement.” For example, notes the Washington Post (11/16, Wang, Lee, Bever), “in a Facebook post last month...Franken applauded the bravery of the women who shared their stories,” writing, “As we hear more and more about Mr. Weinstein, it’s important to remember that while his behavior was appalling, it’s far too common.” Leeann Tweeden recounted her experiences with Franken on the website of KABC-AM Los Angeles Los Angeles (11/16), where she is news anchor on the “McIntyre in the Morning” show. In her account, she says the now-US senator “put his hand on the back of my head, mashed his lips against mine and aggressively stuck his tongue in my mouth. ... I walked away. All I could think about was getting to a bathroom as fast as possible to rinse the taste of him out of my mouth. I felt disgusted and violated. ... I tried to let it go, but I was angry.” The St. Paul (MN) Pioneer Press (11/16, Orrick) reports that Tweeden, “a California radio host,” also presented “a photo that shows Franken grinning at the camera with his hands hovering over the clothed breasts of the sleeping woman.” Tweeden initially “provided the picture with a tweet saying: ‘I’ve decided it’s time to tell my story. #MeToo.’” USA Today (11/16, Przybyla, Estepa) notes Tweeden later said of the picture, “I couldn’t believe it. He groped me, without my consent, while I was asleep. ... I felt violated all over again. Embarrassed. Belittled. Humiliated. How dare anyone grab my breasts like this and think it’s funny?” The CBS Evening News (11/16, lead story, 2:20, Goldman) also showed the picture that “Tweeden says...shows...Franken groping her while she was sleeping,” but closed the segment reporting that it had “reached out to 16 women who used to work for Franken in the Senate. Six got back to us. They all said they never witnessed or experienced anything inappropriate.” Tweeden also described the incident with Franken on CNN’s The Lead (11/16) and said, “I’ve been angry about it for over ten years, and...my circle of friends and my husband have known how I felt about it for so long. ... I wanted to come out with it ten years ago, and, you know, it wasn’t the right time and, you know, I don’t want anything. I didn’t come out for it to destroy anybody. I came out because I want, you know, if he did this to somebody else or if somebody else has been sexually assaulted or if they’ve been, you know, abused in any way, that maybe somebody else can come out in real time because they find strength in numbers.” The Wall Street Journal (11/16, Andrews) similarly surveys Tweeden’s recollections of the 2006 incident, while Breitbart (11/16, Nolte) reports that “Franken, who has been married since 1975, was elected to the United States Senate in 2008.” The New York Times (11/16, Fandos) notes Tweeden also “wrote that she had been compelled to share the story after an on-air conversation with Representative Jackie Speier, Democrat of California, who has been a leading voice sounding alarms about sexual harassment on Capitol Hill in recent weeks.” Asked about the allegations, Speier told the Washington Examiner (11/16, Ferrechio), “I think it’s disgusting. ... Here is the issue. It’s about whether you have the approval to come on to someone and unwelcome sexual advances are prohibited. ... And I don’t care what initial you have next to your name. It should apply to everybody.” The AP (11/16, Daly, Potter) reports Franken “initially released a brief statement in which he apologized but questioned Tweeden’s recollection of his behavior.” Then, “in a longer statement Thursday afternoon, he again apologized while maintaining that he remembered the rehearsal differently.” Reuters (11/16) says it “was unable to independently verify Tweeden or Franken’s accounts.” The Minneapolis Star Tribune (11/12, Brooks, Spencer, Rao) focuses on Franken’s “extended apology” and call “for a Senate ethics investigation into his behavior.” Said Franken, “The first thing I want to do is apologize: to Leeann, to everyone else who was part of that tour, to everyone who has worked for me, to everyone I represent, and to everyone who counts on me to be an ally and supporter and champion of women. There’s more I want to say, but the first and most important thing – and if it’s the only thing you care to hear, that’s fine – is: I’m sorry.” Added Franken, “While I don’t remember the rehearsal for the skit as Leeann does, I understand why we need to listen to and believe women’s experiences.” Congress, says USA Today (11/16, Przybyla), “may be gridlocked when it comes to policy battles – but the condemnation from lawmakers after allegations” against Franken “was incredibly swift on both sides of the aisle.” The Washington Post (11/16, Phillips) also reports Franken “faced swift and bipartisan condemnation,” and the Los Angeles Times (11/16, Decker) that for Democrats, such “expressions of disappointment...and calls for Ethics Committee action” were “necessary to avoid the suggestion of hypocrisy, since most of them have condemned Roy Moore.” McClatchy (11/16, Magness) reports Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell “said in a statement...that ‘with all credible allegations of sexual harassment or assault, I believe the Ethics Committee should review the matter.’” McConnell “added that he hoped Democratic leader Chuck Schumer would join him on the issue.” Politico (11/16, Schor) quotes McConnell as saying, “Regardless of party, harassment and assault are completely unacceptable – in the workplace or anywhere else.” Schumer quickly agreed, calling for a Senate Ethics Committee investigation. The Boston Globe (11/16, Andersen) reports Sen. Elizabeth Warren also “condemned...her liberal colleague,” saying, “The behavior reported today is unacceptable and deeply disappointing. ... I am glad Senator Franken has acknowledged as much and has agreed to cooperate with an ethics investigation.” To Bloomberg News (11/16, John, Litvan), “Republicans sought to capitalize on the accusations against a Democrat.” The National Republican Senatorial Committee “sent a series of press releases calling on Democrats on the ballot in 2018 to return campaign contributions from Franken’s leadership political action committee.” Bloomberg adds that “senators targeted included Heidi Heitkamp of North Dakota, of Bob Casey of Pennsylvania, Debbie Stabenow in Michigan and Jon Tester of Montana.” Roll Call (11/16) reported that “Republican Party of Minnesota Chairwoman Jennifer Carnahan called for Franken to resign his Senate seat,” while the NRSC communications director “questioned whether Florida Democratic Sen. Bill Nelson would still hold his fundraising date with Franken.” Meanwhile, “Iowa Democratic candidate Abby Finkenaur, who’s challenging Rod Blum, quickly announced she would donate Franken’s contribution to her campaign to a nonprofit for survivors of sexual assault.” The New York Post (11/16, Brown), meanwhile, notes “Sen. Claire McCaskill’s campaign sad she will donate $30,000 from...Franken’s political action committee to a ‘Missouri-based charity,’ while Sen. Kirsten Gillibrand will give $12,500 she’s received to Protect our Defenders, which fights rape and sexual assault in the military.” Sen. Richard Blumenthal said on CNN’s Situation Room (11/16), “Unwanted groping and sexual advances are never funny or acceptable.” Asked if he believes Tweeden Blumenthal said, “I believe the photograph of Al Franken, in effect groping her, cannot be denied.” Blumenthal added, “We need the truth about all of what happened and if there are other facts that we should know about this incident, about other incidents, about other people, they have to be known as well. And then the ethics investigation is going to have to determine whether any sanctions or penalties are appropriate. I also believe, as a prosecutor and someone who really trusts the rule of law and impartial decision makers that this investigation ought to be allowed to proceed without any of us interfering in it.” The Washington Post (11/16) editorializes that as the Senate Ethics panel “looks into Mr. Franken’s behavior, it will have to consider what comes next. What level of misconduct merits a lawmaker’s departure from Congress? Should the legislature have a zero-tolerance policy, or can gradations of offense be recognized? If a member’s wrongdoing took place entirely before his time on the Hill, should that affect continued service?” The Post adds that “members of the House of Representatives should be asking these same questions,” and that “both Democrats and Republicans should support measures to hold predators to account, provide victims with support and make clear that all people deserve to be treated with respect.” Political commentator Amanda Carpenter said on CNN’s The Lead (11/16), “I think...Franken needs to do a lot more than issue a public apology via press release. She has a lot of class. She said she believed his apology. I think he needs to try to make it in person. She may not to want see him. He needs to make a much bigger gesture than a press release because she has gone through a lot over the last ten years.” Mollie Hemingway of The Federalist said on Fox News’ Special Report (11/16), “There is absolutely no question that by the standard recently set by the political and media establishment that...Franken should be expelled. They have been saying for days that conduct 40 years ago should lead to expulsion from the Senate. There is no question this is a credible allegation. This is behavior that was just before he was a senator, and that’s the standard that was being used for the last few days. But I do kind of wonder if maybe what should happen here is a little bit of everybody taking a deep breath, thinking through how to properly handle credible allegations of sexual assault and sexual impropriety, how to balance the allegations with the defense and whether we should institute better systems for handling this.” A.B. Stoddard of Real Clear Politics said on Fox News’ Special Report (11/16), “I just feel, like a lot of people do, that this is the beginning of a big cascading event. I don’t believe Senator Franken is the last lawmaker in the House or senator in the Senate e to have done something like this. Women are coming together...in solidarity with each other, but also just try to stop it from happening again. It’s going to really be a very difficult time on Capitol Hill.” Sean Hannity said on Fox News’ Hannity (11/16) that Franken “has a long history of making all kinds of vicious, vile, completely out of line comments. He is also a massive hypocrite for sexual harassment.” Hannity added, “We have to ask again, given this information, everything we now know, now considering everyone is raising questions who is fit for this office and who is fit for that office, is Sen. Franken fit for office? Sen. Franken clearly is a pretty sick, twisted individual with a warped sense of humor in his own mind that really isn’t funny, but his actions do need to be evaluated. At the end of the day it will be the people of his home state that decide.” The USO, the Washington Examiner (11/16, Quinn) reports, “said Thursday the allegations...are ‘deeply disturbing’ and don’t reflect the organization’s values.” Ashley McLellan, a spokeswoman for the USO, “told the Washington Examiner in an email the USO didn’t have any knowledge of the incident.” 

Two “Prominent” Minnesota Democrats, NYTimes’ Goldberg Call On Franken To Resign. 

The Washington Examiner (11/16, Nelson) reports, “Two prominent members of Minnesota’s Democratic–Farmer–Labor Party,” state auditor Rebecca Otto and Megan Thomas, “president of the party’s official Feminist Caucus,” are “calling on...Franken to resign his Senate seat following allegations of sexual misconduct.” Otto, who is “a candidate for governor in Minnesota, said in a statement that ‘I believe it’s in the best interest of Minnesotans and of women everywhere for Senator Franken to resign, and to set an example to powerful men across America that sexual harassment will not be tolerated.’” Thomas, meanwhile, “told the Washington Examiner that Franken’s misconduct was ‘every woman’s nightmare on a bus.’” She also said in a Facebook post, “No one should fear their elected representatives, so, sadly, for me, I think the Senator should resign.” Michelle Goldberg, in a New York Times (11/16) column, writes she had “hoped Franken would run for president in 2020,” but though she “would mourn Franken’s departure from the Senate...he should go, and the governor should appoint a woman to fill his seat. The message to men in power about sexual degradation has to be clear: We will replace you.” 

Franken Photographed Groping Another Woman In 2000. The Federalist (11/16, Payton) reports that “Tweeden isn’t the only woman Franken has been photographed groping. At a roast hosted by Comedy Central in 2000, Franken was photographed groping Joy Behar’s breast.” 

Another Woman Accuses Franken Of Harassing Phone Calls Until She Threatened To Call Police. The San Jose (CA) Mercury News (11/16, Ross) reports “Melanie Morgan, a longtime Bay Area conservative radio anchor, claimed Thursday that she was harassed with phone calls by...Franken...in 2000, following a contentious debate on Bill Maher’s ABC late-night show ‘Politically Incorrect.’” Morgan “made the allegations on Media Equalizer, a blog she co-founded,” saying “the harassment consisted of Franken aggressively trying to continue the argument off air and repeatedly calling her personal phone number to ‘badger’ her.” Wrote Morgan, “He wouldn’t leave me alone, he kept following me. As a woman, his presence and proximity to me felt very threatening and intimidating.” She also “said he later approached the show’s producer to get her phone number, ‘which was a clear violation of network protocol,’” but “Franken got the phone number and ‘shocked’ her by calling her home at least three times.” Adds Morgan, “By the third phone call I was outraged and terrified, as he is really disturbed.” Morgan also “said he finally left her alone after she threatened to call the police and report him.” 

White House: Senate Investigation “Appropriate.” Politico (11/16, Lima) reports “White House press secretary Sarah Huckabee Sanders said Thursday it would be ‘appropriate’ for the Senate to investigate allegations” against Franken. Said Sanders, “On Sen. Franken, it appears that the Senate is looking into that, which they should, and we feel that that’s an appropriate action.” 

Trump Weighs In On Allegations Against “Frankenstien” On Twitter. The President commented on the accusations against Franken last night, tweeting, “The Al Frankenstien picture is really bad, speaks a thousand words. Where do his hands go in pictures 2, 3, 4, 5 & 6 while she sleeps?” Trump added, “And to think that just last week he was lecturing anyone who would listen about sexual harassment and respect for women. Lesley Stahl tape?” Politico (11/16, East) says “Trump’s acknowledgment of the accusations against Franken comes at the same time that he has distanced himself from...Moore, who has been accused of pursuing and harassing teenage girls when he was in his 30s.” Axios (11/16, Lawler) similarly indicates that “Trump weighed in quickly on Franken, but has declined to address the child sexual abuse allegations against...Moore.” 

## White House: Trump Finds Moore Allegations “Troubling,” But Fate Up To Alabama Voters. 

The White House on Thursday weighed in on the controversy engulfing Alabama Senate candidate Roy Moore, though President Trump, himself, didn’t comment on the situation. The CBS Evening News (11/16, story 2, 2:30, Mason), in a report that covered several aspects of the Moore controversy, showed a clip of White House press secretary Sarah Sanders saying, “The President believes that these allegations are very troubling and should be taken seriously, and he thinks that the people of Alabama should make the decision on who their next Senator should be.” Bloomberg News (11/16, Wayne, Olorunnipa) reports that Sanders “said Trump continues to believe that ‘if any of these allegations are true’ Moore should withdraw from the race. That led to a series of questions from reporters about how the allegations might be substantiated. Sanders said ‘that should be determined, possibly, by a court of law’ but that it is ‘a decision the people of Alabama should make, not the president.’” USA Today (11/16, Korte, Berry) reports that Sanders’ remarks “ended days of silence from the White House, since the allegations first arose last week while Trump was on a 12-day Asia trip. But Sanders stopped short of calling for Moore to drop out of the race, as a chorus of other Republican senators – including Majority Leader Mitch McConnell – have done.” The Washington Times (11/16, Miller) reports that Sanders “did not say whether Mr. Trump believed the women” who’ve accused Moore “of pursuing them or making inappropriate sexual contact. Most of the women were teens, although of legal age in Alabama, when the incidents occurred in the 1970s.” Asked “why Mr. Trump had not called for Mr. Moore...to quit the race, Mrs. Sanders repeatedly said that it was up to Alabama voters. ‘The president has been clear that if any of these allegations are true...then he should do the right thing and step aside,’ Mrs. Sanders said.” Under the headline “Trump Stops Short Of Saying US Senate Candidate Moore Should Leave Race,” Reuters (11/16, Mason, Alexander) quotes Sanders as saying, “The president said in his statement earlier this week that if the allegations are true, then Roy Moore should step aside. He still firmly believes that.” However, Politico (11/16, Nelson) reported that Sanders “refused to outline what it would take for Trump to become convinced of the accusations’ veracity. Sanders also declined to say whether or not Trump would vote for Moore if he were an Alabama voter and would not commit to following up with reporters on the issue.” Under the headline “Trump Ducks Moore Scandal,” Politico (11/16, Johnson, Isenstadt) reported that “Trump has steered conspicuously clear of the” Moore controversy. His “absence from the race has compounded GOP worries the party is about to lose a seat it has no business relinquishing to Democrats. Republicans say a denunciation of Moore from Trump, a beloved figure in Alabama despite his problems elsewhere, offers the only hope of keeping the seat in the party’s hands. But Trump sees nothing but negatives in getting involved, according to three White House aides, who say they consider the options laid out by McConnell and his team far-fetched.” Asked to comment on Moore, Counselor to the President Kellyanne Conway said on Fox News’ Fox & Friends (11/16) “that I was the first person in the Administration last Thursday when this news broke...at the time to come out against the conduct as it was described, and I went a step further. I said – because I tried to make this an issue over a year ago on October 9, 2016, when I talked about maybe, when I was younger and prettier, folks on Capitol Hill behaving in such a way that we should take a look at. ... Nobody wanted to listen to me, because of the campaign I was managing. This is an important topic but in terms of this particular issue and this particular Senate race, I will not get ahead of the President and anything he wishes to add.” Sen. Richard Blumenthal (D-CT) said on CNN’s Situation Room (11/16), “Roy Moore is unfit to be a United States senator on various grounds and those grounds include the kinds of sexual advances he made to children.” 

Alabama GOP Steering Committee Backs Moore. Meanwhile, the New York Times (11/16, Blinder) reports that the Alabama GOP on Thursday said “that it would stand behind...Moore, most likely leaving Republicans with a nominee facing numerous allegations of sexual misconduct and unwanted overtures to women. The decision, which a committee of 21 party leaders reached Wednesday evening but did not formally announce until Thursday, placed the state’s Republicans at bitter and public odds with national party leaders, who had demanded that Mr. Moore leave the race.” The Washington Times (11/16, McLaughlin) reports that in a statement, the Alabama GOP said, “The ALGOP Steering Committee supports Judge Roy Moore as our nominee and trusts the voters as they make the ultimate decision in this crucial race.” The statement added, “Judge Moore has vehemently denied the allegations made against him. He deserves to be presumed innocent of the accusations unless proven otherwise. He will continue to take his case straight to the people of Alabama.” 

Gov. Ivey Won’t Change Date Of Dec. 12 Special Election. On its website, CNN (11/16, Bradner) reported that Gov. Kay Ivey (R-AL) on Thursday said “that the state’s Senate special election date will not change, despite national Republican leaders’ efforts to get...Moore off the ballot. ... Asked if there are any circumstances in which the date of the election or the candidates included could change, Ivey” said, “The election’s going to be December the 12th.” The Hill (11/16, Kamisar) reported that Ivey torpedoed “the idea that Sen. Luther Strange (R-Ala.) could resign and delay next month’s special election.” The Hill added that a “long-shot option that’s been mulled” by Washington Republicans “is that Strange, who was appointed to fill the seat temporarily after Jeff Sessions left it to become attorney general, could step down before the election and reset the clock.” However, “Ivey shot that prospect down.” 

Moore: Allegations “Not Only Untrue, But They Have No Evidence To Support Them.” 

The Montgomery (AL) Advertiser (11/16, Lyman) reports, “Speaking at the end of an event” yesterday in Birmingham, “where ‘pro-family’ speakers expressed support for” Moore, the candidate “declined to answer questions about accusations that he pursued relationships with teenagers in the late 1970s and early 1980s, and that he engaged in sexual misconduct with them. Moore and his wife left the event without answering questions.” However, CNN (11/16, Watkins) reported on its website that Moore on Thursday “continued to deny the allegations against him as more women continue to come forward. ‘They’re not only untrue, but they have no evidence to support them,’ Moore said in Birmingham.” And referring to the Washington Post story that first detailed the accusations against him, Moore said, “The Washington Post is certainly not evidence.” 

NBC News Interviews Moore Accuser. On NBC Nightly News (11/16, story 2, 2:45, Holt), Gabe Gutierrez reported that Moore on Thursday “vowed to stay in the race,” even “as more women are coming forward to accuse Moore of unwanted advances ranging from flirting to sexual assault.” NBC News interviewed Tina Johnson, who, according to Gutierrez, “says Moore groped her at his law office in 1991 when she was 28 and trying to settle a child custody case.” Johnson was shown saying, “I was in shock. And I was so humiliated and sickening. ... When I got up and went out, he grabbed my behind. He had power over me. He had me in a position where I couldn’t do nothing.” 

ABC News Highlights WPost Report On New Accuser’s Claims. On ABC World News Tonight (11/16, story 2, 3:20, Muir), Tom Llamas reported that “Moore has tried to push past the allegations, but new ones pop up nearly every day. The latest, from the Washington Post. Gena Richardson says she was a teenage girl, around 18 years old, when Roy Moore approached her at the local mall where she was working. ... A few days later, Richardson says she was sitting in trigonometry class when she was called to the principal’s office. She tells the Post she was startled, and thought maybe her dad was calling. Instead, she says, the man on the phone was Roy Moore. ‘He said ‘what are you doing? I said, ‘I’m in trig class.’ Richardson says Moore asked her out, but she told him she couldn’t talk. A few days later, at the mall, she says he asked her out again, and that night, they went to the movies. After, Richardson says Moore offered her a ride, and in his car gave her what she calls a ‘forceful’ kiss. ‘I’d never been kissed like that,’ she says, ‘and the minute that happened, got scared, and so I said I’ve got to go, because my curfew is now.’” 

Moore Seizes On Franken Allegations To Hammer McConnell. Alabama Live (11/16, Gattis) reports that in the wake of Sen. Al Franken (D-MN) on Thursday being accused of groping a woman and forcing a kiss on her, Moore “suggested that there was a double standard for how he is being treated.” In a tweet targeting Senate Majority Leader McConnell, Moore said, “Al Franken admits guilt after photographic evidence of his abuse surfaces. Mitch: ‘Let’s investigate.’ In Alabama, ZERO evidence, allegations 100% rejected. Mitch: ‘Moore must quit immediately or be expelled.’” McConnell, who has repeatedly called on Moore to drop his bid, on Thursday “called on the Senate Ethics Committee to review the allegations against Franken.” The Washington Times (11/16, Morton) offers a similar report. 

NRCC Chief: Moore Should “Step Aside.” The Hill (11/16, Manchester) reported that during a Thursday appearance on CNN, National Republican Congressional Committee chief Steve Stivers “called on...Moore to step aside.” Said Stivers, “I think that Roy Moore should step aside,” adding, “I do believe these women.” Stivers, “who had previously donated to Moore’s campaign,” also said, “I’ve subsequently asked for my money back.” The Washington Times (11/16, Persons) also reports on Stivers’ remarks. 

Fox News Poll: Democrat Jones Leads Moore 50%-42%. On its website, Fox News (11/16, Blanton) reported that a Fox News poll of 649 Alabama likely voters, taken Nov. 13-15, shows ex-US Attorney Doug Jones (D) leading Moore 50%-42% in the Dec. 12 special election. Fox News said, “Support from women is the key to the Democrat’s” edge, “as Jones is their choice by 26 points (58-32 percent). The gap grows to 49 points among women under age 45 (69-20 percent), and he’s up by 11 among women ages 45 and over (51-40 percent). Jones even receives 19 percent support from Republican women (to Moore’s 68 percent).” The Hill (11/16, Anapol) also reported on the poll results. Politico (11/16, Debenedetti, Strauss) reported that while Jones “remains an underdog in a state” Trump carried by 28 points, “he does have a path. Here’s how it looks, according to interviews with nearly a dozen Democrats within and near Jones’ team since Moore was hit with accusations of pursuing – and in two cases abusing – teenage girls. First, create a permission structure for alienated Republicans who are skeptical of Moore...to cross the aisle. At the same time invigorate the base, especially African-Americans.” Lastly, “keep the national Democratic Party and its despised brand as far out of the picture as possible, while still benefiting from its money.” Under the headline “Democrat Doug Jones, Roy Moore’s Rival, Gains Traction In Alabama Senate Race,” the Wall Street Journal (11/16, Jamerson, Hook) reports that Jones is picking up momentum as Moore continues to battle allegations of sexual misconduct. Jones, according to the Journal, is largely focusing on issues such as healthcare and jobs 

Alabama Evangelicals Divided Over Whether To Support Moore. Under the headline “For Some Evangelicals, A Choice Between Moore And Morality,” the Washington Post (11/16, Fisher) reports on the debate among Alabama Christians over whether to support Moore, saying, “What’s happening in the churches of Alabama – a state where half the residents consider themselves evangelical Christians, double the national average, according to a Pew Research study – is nothing less than a battle for the meaning of evangelism, some church leaders say. It is a titanic struggle between those who believe there must be one clear, unalterable moral standard and those who argue that to win the war for the nation’s soul, Christians must accept morally flawed leaders.” 

## US Strikes “More Conciliatory” Tone At Climate Talks. 

The New York Times (11/16, Friedman) reports State Department acting undersecretary Judith G. Garber, in the “first official American remarks to the United Nations climate body” since President Trump announced the US would abandon the Paris climate accord, offered “a far more conciliatory message than a presentation earlier in the week by White House officials promoting fossil fuels, which drew catcalls and a walkout.” Garber said, “We remain open to the possibility of rejoining [the accord] at a later date under terms more favorable to the American people.” She also promised to help other countries “adapt to the impacts of climate change.” Environmentalists at the event “found Ms. Garber’s message confusing, and a sign of the awkward tightrope that America’s diplomats are walking as they work on a deal Mr. Trump has disavowed.” The AP (11/16, Frank Jordans) reports Garber added that the US “will continue to be a leader in clean energy and innovation, and we understand the need for transforming energy systems.” Garber stated, “We remain collectively committed to mitigating greenhouse gas emissions through, among other things, increased innovation on sustainable energy and energy efficiency, and working towards low greenhouse gas emissions energy systems.” The Washington Examiner (11/16, Siegel) reports, “Garber never used the word ‘coal’ in her Bonn address, although she reaffirmed the White House position that transitioning to renewable energy sources such as solar and wind must coincide with economic prosperity and energy security.” However, the Washington Times (11/16, Hill) reports, that also on Thursday, “U.S. government officials said Washington will push for a change to World Bank rules blocking funding for coal-related projects, while seeking to build ‘a clean-coal alliance’ of like-minded nations across six continents.” The top US representative at the conference George David Banks “said it was vital that developing countries be able to generate electricity and that the structures of the Paris deal work against poorer countries trying to meet their emissions targets.” The position by the US “was announced even as Canada and Britain were unveiling their own Global Alliance to Power Past Coal to phase out the use of coal.” Several US states have signed on to the alliance to phase out coal. The Hill (11/16, Henry, Cama) highlights the “dueling US delegations” at the conference “the official team and a competing one made up of Democratic officials opposed to President Trump’s decision to remove the U.S. from the Paris climate accord.” Sen. Brian Schatz said, “Whatever the president may say about climate, he cannot stop clean energy. ... He’s a powerful man, but he’s not a monarch, and we are going to continue the clean energy revolution.” California Gov. Jerry Brown added, “The rest of the world’s got to carry the ball while we’re temporarily in America off to the sidelines. ... But there’s still California, there’s still New York, Washington, Oregon, all these other places, and there’s still corporations.” 

Supporters Stick By Trump On Leaving Paris, Rolling Back Regulations. Bloomberg News (11/16, Natter) reports that while the conference goes on in Germany, “the president’s backers in the industrial heartland are cheering him on. Whether it’s ditching Paris, moving to slash funding for the Environmental Protection Agency or rescinding a series of environmental regulations, interviews in the industrial area of Lordstown, Ohio, show those moves are popular among factory workers. They see them as Trump making good on his pledges to restore factory jobs.” CNBC (11/16, DiChristopher) reports that last week at the Heartland Institute’s America First Energy Conference, Trump supporters “gathered to celebrate and take stock of Trump’s progress rolling back Obama-era regulations and his blueprint for achieving U.S. ‘energy dominance.’” The conference “offered a glimpse into an organized and highly dedicated corner of conservatism that is committed to shrinking the EPA, demolishing the foundations of greenhouse gas regulations and minimizing the government’s efforts to combat climate change wherever possible.” 

Pope Francis Calls Climate Denial A “Perverse” Attitude. The AP (11/16, Nicole Winfield) reports Pope Francis yesterday “rebuked those who deny the science behind global warming and urged negotiators at climate talks in Germany to avoid falling prey to such ‘perverse attitudes’ and instead accelerate efforts to curb greenhouse gas emissions.” In his message to the conference, Francis said climate change is “one of the most worrisome phenomena that humanity is facing.” Reuters (11/16, Pullella) reports Francis said, “We have to avoid falling into these four perverse attitudes, which certainly do not help honest research and sincere and productive dialogue on building the future of our planet: negation, indifference, resignation and trust in inadequate solutions.” The Daily Caller (11/16, Bastasch) also provides coverage of this story. 

## Keystone Pipeline Leaks Oil In South Dakota. 

The AP (11/16, Dexter) reports that “TransCanada Corp.’s Keystone pipeline leaked an estimated 210,000 gallons of oil onto agricultural land in northeastern South Dakota,” although officials in South Dakota “don’t believe the leak polluted any surface water bodies or drinking water systems.” Regulators in Nebraska “are scheduled to announce their decision Monday whether to approve the proposed Keystone XL oil pipeline, an expansion that would boost the amount of oil TransCanada is now shipping through the existing line.” TransCanada indicated “in its statement that it expected the pipeline to remain shut down as the company responds to the leak.” ABC World News Tonight (11/16, story 4, 0:15, Muir) reported that “officials say the cleanup could take some time.” The New York Times (11/16, Smith, Bosman) reports that Kim McIntosh, an environmental scientist for the South Dakota Department of Environment and Natural Resources, said, “This is not a little spill from any perspective.” The Washington Post (11/16, Mufson, Mooney) reports that Jane Kleeb, an activist who opposed Keystone XL and is also head of Nebraska’s Democratic Party, said, “TransCanada cannot be trusted. ... I have full confidence that the Nebraska Public Service Commission is going to side with Nebraskans, not a foreign oil company.” 

# Editorial Wrap-Up 

## New York Times. 

“A Tax Cut Bill To Make Scrooge McDuck Proud.” The New York Times (11/16) editorializes, “Let that sink in. This tax bill would take money from working families and give it to the wealthiest people in the world. ... Republicans have made clear where their values lie. Well-heeled campaign funders matter. Middle-class families don’t.” 

“The Da Vinci Lode.” A New York Times (11/16) editorial. 

## Washington Post. 

“The Destructive Part Of The Republican Tax Bill You’re Not Paying Attention To.” A Washington Post (11/16) editorial says the “assault on higher education” in the House tax bill “is one of the less- examined unwise provisions in a tax bill full of unwise provisions.” The bill would require graduate students to “treat tuition waivers as taxable income.” While that “bad idea” is not int he Senate bill, it “contains other provisions that would undermine the nation’s colleges and universities.” For example, both plans “would slap a 1.4 percent excise tax on investment income that universities earn on endowments that Republicans deem to be too large,” a provision which “would mainly hit elite institutions,” that are “generally the ones that offer the most tuition aid to students from needy – and even securely middle-class – families.” 

“Al Franken Is Just The Start Of Congress’s Reckoning With Sexual Harassment.” The Washington Post (11/16) editorializes that as the Senate Ethics panel “looks into [Sen. Al] Franken’s behavior, it will have to consider what comes next. What level of misconduct merits a lawmaker’s departure from Congress? Should the legislature have a zero-tolerance policy, or can gradations of offense be recognized? If a member’s wrongdoing took place entirely before his time on the Hill, should that affect continued service?” The Post adds that “members of the House of Representatives should be asking these same questions,” and that “both Democrats and Republicans should support measures to hold predators to account, provide victims with support and make clear that all people deserve to be treated with respect.” 

“The Pentagon Has Detained A US Citizen For More Than Two Months – And Said Little.” 

The Washington Post (11/16, Board) editorializes that the US government must provide an American citizen, who has been detained in Iraq for over two months on suspicion of aiding the Islamic State, “with legal counsel and access to the justice system if he wishes it.” The Post also calls on the Pentagon to make basic information about the case public “in the spirit of accountability and transparency.” The Post asserts that “it can’t be the case that the government is effectively allowed to block the courts from reviewing a person’s detention by keeping the prisoner anonymous and incommunicado.” 

## Wall Street Journal. 

“A Solution For Ron Johnson.” Citing Sen. Ron Johnson’s concern over the bill’s treatment of large corporations versus “pass through” business, which are taxed at the individual rate, a Wall Street Journal (11/16) editorial says President Trump’s call to reduce the top rate to 35% could be the solution to win Johnson’s support because a 35% rate would provide a more powerful incentive for growth against the Senate bill’s 17.4% pass-through deduction than the Senate bill’s current 38.5% top rate. 

“No Republicans Need Apply.” In an editorial, the Wall Street Journal (11/16, Board) criticizes the Congressional Hispanic Caucus’ decision to reject Republican Rep. Carlos Curbelo’s bid for membership, saying that while the group can set its own rules, Curbelo’s rejection confirms criticisms that the group has less to do with promoting Hispanic interests than pushing a liberal Democratic agenda. 

“Trump’s South China Sea Message.” In an editorial, the Wall Street Journal (11/16) praises President Trump for his challenging China on its territorial aspirations in the South China Sea. The Journal focuses on China’s conflicts in the are with Vietnam and Philippines, and concludes by lauding Trump for seeking to keep shipping lanes open and deter Chinese territorial expansion. 

# Big Picture 

## Headlines From Today’s Front Pages. 

Wall Street Journal: 

Comcast Approached 21st Century Fox About An Acquisition House Backs GOP Tax-Overhaul Bill Google Has Picked an Answer For You—Too Bad It’s Often Wrong Wal-Mart Posts Strongest US Sales In Nearly A Decade 

New York Times: 

House And Senate Panel Pass Tax Bill In Major Step Toward Overhaul Al Franken Issues Apology After Accusation Of Forcible Kissing And Groping Alabama GOP Says It Stands Behind Roy Moore Bill Signals GOP Prioritizes Corporate Tax Cuts Corruption Case Against Senator Menendez Ends In Mistrial Downing North Korean Missiles Is Hard. So The US Is Experimenting. 

Washington Post: 

The Rapid Cycle Of Gun Violence CEO Nightmare: Dreaded Endorsement Of The Alt-Right House Passes Tax Bill, Upping Heat On Senate Al Franken Accused Of Groping Woman In 2006 Mistrial Declared In Menendez Case 

Financial Times: 

Norway Wealth Fund Proposes End To Oil And Gas Investment Saudi Authorities Offer Freedom Deals To Princes And Businessmen Volkswagen Commits €10bn To Build Electric Cars In China 

Washington Times: 

Republicans Rally For A ‘Comeback,’ Push $1.4 Trillion Tax Cut Through House Franken To Face Ethics Investigation, Outraged Colleagues From Both Parties NFL Steps Into Politics, Fights Tax Cut Bill With No Stadium Bond Breaks Researchers Confirm First Living CTE Diagnosis, Look For Early Detection And Treatment U.S. Defends Coal Use In Developing Countries, Proposes International Alliance At Climate Summit In Odinga Strongholds, Kenyans Grapple With Frustrating Election Loss 

Story Lineup From Last Night’s Network News: 

ABC: Al Franken Sexual Misconduct Allegation; Roy Moore Sexual Misconduct Allegations; Tax Reform Plan; Keystone Pipeline Oil Leak; Russia Meddling Investigation-Kushner; Robert Menendez Trial; Starwood Waypoint-Complaints; Black Friday Shopping; Baltimore-Police Officer Shot; California House Explosion; Weather Forecast; Da Vinci Painting Auction. 

CBS: Al Franken Sexual Misconduct Allegation; Roy Moore Sexual Misconduct Allegations; Tax Reform Plan; Robert Menendez Trial; Russia Meddling Investigation-Kushner; Russia-Crimea Occupation; Distracted Drivers; Baltimore-Police Officer Shot; Elephant Trophies Ban Reversed; Amazon Key-Security Concerns; Da Vinci Painting Auction; Bike Riding Benefits. 

NBC: Al Franken Sexual Misconduct Allegation; Roy Moore Sexual Misconduct Allegations; Tax Reform Plan; Russia Meddling Investigation-Kushner; Robert Menendez Trial; Baltimore-Police Officer Shot; Congress-Gun Control; Russia Meddling Investigation-Russian Troll Farm; DC Bible Museum Opening; Elephant Trophies Ban Reversed; California House Explosion; Da Vinci Painting Auction; Kansas Town Revival. 

Network TV At A Glance: 

Roy Moore Sexual Misconduct Allegations – 8 minutes, 35 seconds Al Franken Sexual Misconduct Allegation – 8 minutes, 15 seconds Tax Reform Plan – 7 minutes Russia Meddling Investigation – 5 minutes, 30 seconds Robert Menendez Trial – 2 minutes, 35 seconds 

Story Lineup From This Morning’s Radio News Broadcasts: 

ABC: Ohio State Univ-Hazing; Tax Reform Plan; Roy Moore Sexual Misconduct Allegations; Al Franken Sexual Misconduct Allegation. 

CBS: Tax Reform Plan; Al Franken Sexual Misconduct Allegation; Roy Moore Sexual Misconduct Allegations; VA-PTSD Waiting List; Keystone Pipeline Oil Leak; Latin Grammy Award. 

FOX: Roy Moore Sexual Misconduct Allegations; Al Franken Sexual Misconduct Allegation; Tax Reform Plan. 

NPR: Tax Reform Plan; Robert Menendez Trial; Al Franken Sexual Misconduct Allegation; FCC-Media Ownership. 

# Washington Schedule 

## Today’s Events In Washington. 

White House: 

PRESIDENT TRUMP — Receives his daily intelligence briefing; hosts NCAA National Championship teams; has lunch with Vice President Mike Pence; meets with Secretary of State Rex Tillerson. VICE PRESIDENT PENCE — Participates in a meeting with Governor Kenneth Mapp of the U.S. Virgin Islands; participates in a meeting with Chief Executive Dr. Abdullah Abdullah of Afghanistan; participates in a meeting with Vice President Oscar Naranjo of Colombia; has lunch with the President. 

US Senate: Congress breaks for Thanksgiving recess until Nov. 27. 

US House: 2:00 PM House Veterans’ Affairs subcommittee oversight field hearing and education and transition – Economic Opportunity Subcommittee oversight field hearing on ‘Best Practices in Veterans Education and Transition to Civilian Life’, with testimony from Texas Tech University student vet Kai Iuta, Director of Military and Veterans Programs Col. (Ret.) Lou Ortiz, and Health Sciences Center President Dr Tedd Mitchell and School of Nursing Veteran Liaison Aaron Kyle Chapman; Angelo State University student vet Nicole Meyer; and StarCare Specialty Health System Director of Veterans Services Col. (Ret.) David Lewis Location: Texas Tech University System, 1508 Knoxville Ave, Lubbock, TX Lubbock http://veterans.house.gov/ https://twitter.com/HouseVetAffairs Congress breaks for Thanksgiving recess until Nov. 27. 

Other: 9:30 AM Museum of the Bible opens in Washington, DC – The Museum of the Bible opens, using cutting-edge technology to bring ‘The Bible’ to life. The museum invites everyone to engage with ‘The Bible’ through three permanent sections: History of the Bible, Narrative of the Bible and Impact of the Bible, alongside a space for temporary exhibits. Highlights include a 140-by-15-foot digital arcade ceiling, and the World Stage Theater with 3-D digital mapping Location: Museum of the Bible, 409 3rd St SW, Washington, DC www.museumofthebible.org https://twitter.com/museumofbible 10:00 AM Dem Rep. Robin Kelly speaks at CAP on ‘Women of Color and Mental Health’ – ‘Women of Color and Mental Health: From the Shadows of Silence to Solutions for Leadership’ Center for American Progress discussion on how racism, cultural stereotypes, economic insecurity, gender discrimination, stigma, and shame all impact the mental health of women of color, preventing them from getting the support and treatment they deserve. Speakers include Democratic Rep. Robin Kelly, A Mother’s Sanctuary Founder and Director LaShonta Edwards, Black Women’s Health Health Policy and Legislative Affairs Director Christy Gamble, University of Wisconsin–Madison Department of Counseling Psychology Associate Professor Carmen Valdez, and Center for American Progress Senior Fellow Jamila Taylor Location: Center for American Progress, 1333 H St NW, Washington, DC www.americanprogress.org https://twitter.com/amprog 

# Last Laughs 

## Late Night Political Humor. 

Jimmy Kimmel: “Meanwhile, here on Earth, the House passed the GOP-backed tax plan today, which is very good news for billionaires and also just your average run-of-the-millionaires too. The bill would shift the tax burden from the wealthy to people who really should be paying more, like college students. Time for those little punks to start eating bottom ramen for a while.” 

Jimmy Kimmel: “The President is also about to reverse a law that made it illegal to import elephant parts from African trophy hunts. That’s right, struggling families of America, you asked for it, and the President delivered. We can finally bring our elephant tusks back home from Zimbabwe.” 

Jimmy Kimmel: “Roy Moore has been accused of sexual misconduct and worse by nine women, seven of whom were teenagers when the events allegedly happened. But when Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell called for him to step aside, this is how he responded on Twitter. He wrote, ‘Dear Mitch McConnell, bring it on.’ Now I’m not an expert in PR, but when you’re accused of putting moves on high school girls, maybe don’t reference the title of a movie about high school cheerleaders.” 

Jimmy Kimmel: “There are a bunch of new accusations made today against a wide variety of people, including Sylvester Stallone, the first PBS, and Senator Al Franken, whose story was amplified because it had a visual aid.” 

Jimmy Kimmel: “There is so much of this [sexual harassment news]. I mean, at this point I know it sounds extreme, but it might be time for guys, I think, we might all need to hand our penises over to the police for a few months.” 

Stephen Colbert: “Every day, it seems like we find out about another high-profile sexual harasser. And today is no exception. Brace yourself, because it is Sen. Al Franken. He’s been accused of kissing and groping a woman without her consent. Come on, Franken! I guess there are no good people left, so let’s just get it over with. Just tell us whatever you did, Jimmy Carter, Barack Obama, Tom Hanks.” 

Stephen Colbert: “Moore isn’t afraid of the Washington Republicans, tweeting, ‘Dear Mitch McConnell, bring it on.’ A strong sentiment, leading the head of the National Republican Senatorial Committee to tweet, ‘“Bring It On” is a movie about high school cheerleaders.’” 

James Corden: “Have you guys been following this story about the UCLA basketball players who were arrested in China for shoplifting? Well, President Trump helped get them released, and yesterday they publicly thanked him. So today, Donald Trump tweeted, ‘To the three UCLA basketball players I say, You’re welcome.’ He also tweeted, ‘Have a great life be careful, there are many pitfalls on the long and winding road of life!’ There are many pitfalls on the long and winding road of life? The guy goes on one presidential trip to Asia, and now he’s writing Chinese proverbs.” 

James Corden: “[Donald Trump] is right, though. There are so many pitfalls on the long and winding road of life. For example, there’s bankruptcy, and there are lawsuits against a scam business you started. Then there’s bankruptcy a second time. Then there’s the FBI investigating you about Russia. And then bankruptcy again.” 

James Corden: “A piece of wedding cake from Donald and Melania Trump’s wedding is currently up for auction. The 12-year-old piece of cake is being marketed as a rare collector’s item. I can’t believe it lasted this long. Not the cake, the marriage.” 

Trevor Noah: [Referring to sexual misconduct allegations of Sen. Al Franken and Senate candidate Roy Moore] “Al Franken is going with the whole ‘I’m sorry, I’m going to look at myself. I understand this disgusting.’ That’s so boring. This guy is like, ‘You know who needs to step down for what I did? Someone else!’” 

Jimmy Fallon: “Radio host Leeann Tweeden came forward and said Sen. Al Franken groped her without her consent. And she posted a photo as evidence. In fact, it’s so bad that Franken is already a front-runner for President in 2020.” 

Jimmy Fallon: “Meanwhile, it’s been reported Alabama Senate candidate Roy Moore would hang out in the mall in the ‘80s and try to get teenagers’ phone numbers. He got a lot of numbers, but they were all for ‘Jenny at 867-5309.’” 

Jimmy Fallon: “It’s crazy, though, two more women have come forward accusing Roy Moore of making unwanted advances at the mall, which explains that new slogan, ‘Amazon, so you don’t run into Roy Moore at the mall.’”  

> Copyright 2017 by Bulletin Intelligence LLC Reproduction or redistribution without permission prohibited. Content is drawn from thousands of newspapers, national magazines, national and local television programs, radio broadcasts, social-media platforms and additional forms of open-source data. Sources for Bulletin Intelligence audience-size estimates include Scarborough, GfK MRI, comScore, Nielsen, and the Audit Bureau of Circulation. Data from and access to third party social media platforms, including but not limited to Facebook, Twitter, Instagram and others, is subject to the respective platform’s terms of use. Services that include Factiva content are governed by Factiva’s terms of use. Services including embedded Tweets are also subject to Twitter for Website's information and privacy policies. The Department of the Interior News Briefing is published five days a week by Bulletin Intelligence, which creates custom briefings for government and corporate leaders. We can be found on the Web at BulletinIntelligence.com, or called at (703) 483-6100.

# Conversation Contents 

## November 16 -- Greenwire is ready 

# "E&E News" <ealerts@eenews.net> 

## From: "E&E News" <ealerts@eenews.net> 

## Sent: Thu Nov 16 2017 11:49:57 GMT-0700 (MST) 

## To: @fws.gov> 

## Subject: November 16 -- Greenwire is ready (b) (6) Conversation Contents 

## U.S. Department of the Interior News Briefing for Thursday, November 16, 2017 

# Bulletin Intelligence <Interior@bulletinintelligence.com> 

## From: Bulletin Intelligence <Interior@bulletinintelligence.com> 

## Sent: Thu Nov 16 2017 03:59:55 GMT-0700 (MST) 

## To: <Interior@bulletinintelligence.com> 

## Subject: U.S. Department of the Interior News Briefing for Thursday, November 16, 2017  

> Mobile version and searchable archives available here. Please click here to subscribe.
> DATE: THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 16, 2017 6:00 AM EST

# Today's Table Of Contents 

DOI In The News 

• Reuters: U.S. Senate Panel Advances Quest For Oil In Arctic Refuge. • Washington Post: Trophies From Elephant Hunts In Zimbabwe Were Banned In The U.S. Trump Just Reversed That. • Washington Post: This Group Thinks Trump Hasn’t Done Enough To Unravel Environmental Rules. • Twin Falls (ID) Times-News: New Outdoor Advisory Panel Draws Mixed Reviews. • Newsy: Secretary Zinke Questions His Department’s Loyalty (VIDEO). 

Bureau Of Indian Affairs 

• Gaming Panel Approves Tribe’s Plan For Casino Near Omaha. • Blackfeet Tribal Members In Federal Court Over Water Rights. • Leech Lake Band Seeks To Recover 11,000 Acres Of “Allotted Lands” In The Chip. • Nooksack Can’t Get Second Look At Toss Of Funding Suit. • Enviros Urge 9th Circ. To Revive Wind Farm Challenge. 

Bureau Of Indian Education 

• Oregon Lawmakers Demand Answers From Interior On Chemawa. 

Bureau Of Land Management 

• Washington Post: Three Years After Nevada Ranch Standoff, Bundy Federal Trial Begins In Las Vegas. • San Bernardino (CA) Sun: Here’s Why Cadiz Company Says It’s Taking ‘a Little Pause’ From Its Desert Water Project. • KSTU-TV Salt Lake City: BLM Seeking Public Feedback On Proposal To Expand Research Into Cosmic Rays. 

Bureau Of Reclamation 

• Walden Hydro Bill Would Lower Farmers’ Power Costs. • Timeline Moved Up On Irrigation Pipeline Project; Southwest Bend Piping Project To Begin Around The End Of The Year. 

Bureau Of Safety And Environmental Enforcement 

• BSEE Director Discusses Gulf Of Mexico E&P Opportunities At Deepwater Operations. • About 75,000 Barrels Per Day Of Gulf Oil Output Still Shut After Shell Fire. 

Fish And Wildlife Service 

• Bozeman (MT) Daily Chronicle: New Medicine Lake Blind Wheelchair Accessible. 

National Park Service 

• KPAX-TV Missoula (MT): Public Comment Period On Raising Fees At 17 National Parks Closing Soon. • WSB-TV Atlanta: Why You May Not Have That Lifetime National Parks Pass You Ordered Yet. • Cronkite News: Backers Hope Route 66 ‘Historic Trail’ Designation Can Drive Tourism. • Chicago Tribune: U.S. Steel Dumps More Toxic Chromium Near Lake Michigan, Faces Lawsuit. • Flathead (MT) Beacon: Glacier Park Visitation Up In October. • Las Vegas Review-Journal: Graffiti In Active Volcano At Death Valley Erased By Park Service. 

Office Of Insular Affairs 

• Houston Chronicle: Wildlife Agencies Meet On Guam To Discuss Brown Tree Snakes. 

Office Of Surface Mining 

• Omar’s Pine Creek 2 Mine Receives Award. 

US Geological Survey 

• Midland (TX) Reporter-Telegram: USGS: Uranium Has Been Found Near Big Spring. • Reuters: Aviat Networks Awarded $3.0 Million Project With USGS. • Associated Press: Former Oklahoma Seismologist Testifies In Earthquake Lawsuit. 

Opinion Pieces 

• Has Congress Already Forgotten Our Last Oil Spill Disaster? • We’re Not Paying Our Fair Share To Visit National Parks. • Additional Reading. 

Top National News 

• NBC: Trump Touts Success Of His Asia Trip, Says It Shows “America Is Back.” • CBS: As House Prepares To Vote On Tax Bill, Johnson Says He Opposes Senate Version. • Associated Press: Democrats Introduce Articles Of Impeachment Against Trump. • New York Times: Bonn Conference Trying To Make Headway Despite US Stance On Paris Deal. 

Editorial Wrap-Up 

• New York Times. - “Mr. Trump Casts A Shadow Over The AT&amp;T-Time Warner Deal.” - “The Senate Questions The President’s Power To Launch Nukes.” • Washington Post. - “Republicans Turn Their Irresponsible Tax Bill Into Monumentally Unwise Social Policy.” - “What Happens In Zimbabwe Without Mugabe In Power?” - “Don’t Be Relieved Only Five People Died In California. Be Enraged.” • Wall Street Journal. - “The Appeal Of Mandate Repeal.” - “Zimbabwe’s Coup By Any Other Name.” - “Adios, Richard Cordray.” 

Big Picture 

> • Headlines From Today’s Front Pages.

Washington Schedule 

> • Today’s Events In Washington.

Last Laughs 

> • Late Night Political Humor.

# DOI In The News 

## U.S. Senate Panel Advances Quest For Oil In Arctic Refuge. 

Reuters (11/15, Gardiner) reports that oil drilling in the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge “moved a step closer to reality on Wednesday after the US Senate energy and natural resources panel voted 13-10 to open part of the reserve coveted by conservationists.” Alaska Sen. Lisa Murkowski (R), a supporter of the measure and Chair of the Senate Energy and Natural Resources Committee, which has jurisdiction on the issue, “says drilling in the refuge is needed to provide jobs and boost the country’s resource base,” adding that drilling on the reserve will be done “the right way.” The AP (11/15, Daly) reports that “opening the remote refuge to oil and gas drilling is a longtime Republican priority.” It quotes Murkowski saying that allowing drilling on the refuge “will help keep energy affordable, saving families and businesses money every time they pay for fuel — essentially an energy tax cut.” Bloomberg News (11/15, Dlouhy) reports that “the estimated $1.1 billion in federal revenue it will generate over the next decade offsets proposed tax cuts, binding it to the Republicans’ high-priority overhaul effort and setting it up to pass the Senate on a simple majority vote.” The Houston Chronicle (11/15, Dlouhy) reports drilling could provide a new source of oil for the Trans Alaska Pipeline System, helping to sustain its economic viability as production on the North Slope declines. However, it is not clear if energy companies are eager to move into the Arctic. The high cost of operations in the remote region discourage drilling as cheap shale projects in Texas and North Dakota provide a surge of oil. The Alaska Dispatch News (11/15, Herz) reports Alaska would get half the proceeds from the federal leasing program, which the CBO esstimates could total $1.1 billion over the next decade. The Washington Examiner (11/15, Siegel) reports a number of Democratic amendments to the bill failed, as Sen. Maria Cantwell challenged the purpose and process of the legislation. Cantwell said, “It really does turn regular order on its head. ... We are being asked to consider legislation that is different than previous bills [that tried to allow drilling in ANWR], and has not been subject to single hearing. At its core, the [bill] would change current law and turn the refuge into a petroleum reserve.” However, Murkowski said, “When [the refuge] was created, it specifically said this area right here [the 1002 area] is recognized for its potential and if Congress authorizes it, the coastal plane can be developed for oil and gas. We don’t change the purpose for which ANWR itself was created.” The Huffington Post (11/15, D'Angelo) reports Sen. Bernie Sanders said future generations will look at the hearings and say “what world was the United States Senate living in” as it pushed for fossil fuel development “at a time of devastating damage done by climate change.” Sanders said, “You’re talking about raising a billion dollars here. ... I’m talking about the United States government spending hundreds of billions of dollars repairing damage, which, to a significant degree, not totally, had to do with climate change. And the scientists tell us the worst is yet to come.” E&E Publishing (11/15), E&E Publishing (11/15), E&E Publishing (11/15), Natural Gas Intelligence (11/15, Passut), Courthouse News (11/15, Buchman), and KTUU-TV Anchorage (AK) Anchorage, AK (11/15, Polk) also provided coverage. 

## Trophies From Elephant Hunts In Zimbabwe Were Banned In The U.S. Trump Just Reversed That. 

The Washington Post (11/15, Fears, Eilperin) reports the Trump Administration reversed an import ban on the remains of elephants legally hunted in Zimbabwe and Zambia. The Post adds that African elephants are listed as threatened under the Endangered Species Act. The US Fish and Wildlife Service previously determined that Zimbabwe “had failed to prove that its management of elephants enhanced the population.” In its new statement, the agency “did not specify what had changed in that country.” The move follows Interior Secretary Zinke’s establishment of an International Wildlife Conservation Council to advise him on how to increase Americans’ public awareness of conservation, wildlife enforcement and the “economic benefits that result from U.S. citizens traveling abroad to hunt.” The Hill (11/15, Cama) reports that the FWS “said it has determined that hunting African elephants in Zimbabwe and Zambia ‘will enhance the survival of the species in the wild,’ which is the standard by which officials judge whether to allow imports of parts – known as trophies – of the animals.” An FWS spokesman said in a statement late Wednesday, “Legal, well-regulated sport hunting as part of a sound management program can benefit the conservation of certain species by providing incentives to local communities to conserve the species and by putting much-needed revenue back into conservation.” Also reporting are the Washington Examiner (11/15, Siciliano), CNN International (11/15, Wallace), Newsweek (11/15, Meza), the Huffington Post (11/15, D'Angelo), ABC News (11/15, Ebbs), WIMS-AM South Shore (IN) South Shore, IN (11/15), UPI (11/16, Downs), and Gizmodo (11/15, McKay). 

## This Group Thinks Trump Hasn’t Done Enough To Unravel Environmental Rules. 

Here’s Its Wish List. The Washington Post (11/15, Eilperin, Dennis) reports that at a private meeting last week sponsored by the Heartland Institute, activists were “giddy” about “much of what the Trump administration had done to roll back Obama-era environmental regulations,” but also “grumpy” that “it wasn’t nearly enough.” The article notes that while Interior Deputy Secretary David Bernhardt could not “make the meeting in person,” Interior energy policy counselor Vincent DeVito did speak to the gathering. Asked this week why DeVito had chosen to address the group, Interior spokeswoman Heather Swift said in an email, “The summit was an opportunity to communicate the progress the department has made on energy and restoring multiple-use and access to federal lands, as well as share ideas and perspectives on how to achieve energy dominance.” The Post continues that “the institute’s scorecard on energy issues, Swift added, reflected that Interior ‘is making incredible progress on restoring traditional multiple uses and access to public lands and toward cutting costly and job-killing regulations on responsible energy development.’” 

## New Outdoor Advisory Panel Draws Mixed Reviews. 

The Twin Falls (ID) Times-News (11/15, Barker) reports that “representatives of outdoor recreation and conservation groups see both potential and peril” in Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke’s new “Made in America” recreation advisory committee. For instance, Sandra Mitchell of the Idaho Recreation Council “embraced the idea and said the committee could help ensure all user groups, both motorized and non-motorized, are treated equally.” On the other hand, “Paul Sanford, national director of recreation policy for the Wilderness Society at Washington, D.C., said he doesn’t object to the committee, but doesn’t want it to be overpopulated with people who represent recreational vehicles and motorized recreation.” 

## Secretary Zinke Questions His Department’s Loyalty (VIDEO). 

Newsy (11/15, Miller) reports that Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke is “at odds with his own department about loyalty to the Trump administration.” According to the article, “since taking over the department, Zinke has restructured many of the senior positions,” and “a handful of career officials have resigned over these changes.” Bureau Of Indian Affairs 

## Gaming Panel Approves Tribe’s Plan For Casino Near Omaha. 

The AP (11/15, Funk, Press) reports that the National Indian Gaming Commission has “again approved the Ponca Tribe of Nebraska’s plan to build a casino near Omaha, but after a decade of court hearings, the project’s future remains uncertain.” The commission’s decision “this week came nearly 10 years after it first approved the proposed casino in Carter Lake, Iowa.” Ponca Tribal Chairman Larry Wright Jr. lauded “the latest decision because building the casino would give the tribe significant new resources to help its members.” Additional coverage was provided by the Omaha (NE) World-Herald (11/16, Duggan, Moring). 

## Blackfeet Tribal Members In Federal Court Over Water Rights. 

KRTV-TV Great Falls, MT (11/15, DeMarco) reports that “members of the Blackfeet tribe were in federal court in Great Falls on Tuesday requesting legal ownership of tribal natural resources.” In October 2015, “enrolled members of the Blackfeet Tribe filed a complaint against the Bureau of Indian Affairs and the Secretary of the Interior.” Judge John Johnston has “granted an extension in the case so the enrolled members of the Blackfeet Tribe can find a lawyer to help represent them on the complaint.” 

## Leech Lake Band Seeks To Recover 11,000 Acres Of “Allotted Lands” In The Chip. 

The Walker (MN) Pilot-Independent (11/15, DeBoer) reports that “an error by the Bureau of Indian Affairs back in the 1940s or 1950s resulted in about 11,000 acres of ‘allotted lands’ that rightly belonged to the Leech Lake Band of Ojibwe, being wrongly transferred to the Chippewa National Forest.” For the last “two to three years, the Leech Lake Band has been working to get the allotted acres transferred back to Band ownership through ‘secretarial transfers.’” 

## Nooksack Can’t Get Second Look At Toss Of Funding Suit. 

Law360 (11/15, Westney) reports that “a Washington federal judge rejected a bid Tuesday to reconsider his dismissal of a lawsuit by the Nooksack Indian Tribe’s purported council that claimed the Bureau of Indian Affairs wrongly refused funding to the tribe, saying the dismissal appropriately deferred to the agency’s finding that the council wasn’t allowed to bring the case.” 

## Enviros Urge 9th Circ. To Revive Wind Farm Challenge. 

Law360 (11/15, Westney) reports that “a conservation group has asked the Ninth Circuit to overturn a lower court decision tossing claims that the Bureau of Indian Affairs violated environmental law in approving a lease between a wind farm developer and a California tribe, saying the agency failed to do enough to protect golden eagles and other birds.” 

# Bureau Of Indian Education 

## Oregon Lawmakers Demand Answers From Interior On Chemawa. 

KUOW-FM Seattle (11/15, Manning) reports that “the six Democrats in Oregon’s congressional delegation released a letter Wednesday pressing a top official in the Interior Department to answer questions about the Chemawa Indian School in Salem.” The letter “comes in response to a series of stories from OPB that found health, safety and academic problems at the school. Staff have also complained to OPB that administrators would retaliate against anyone who raised concerns about how the school was managed.” The letter specifies four “areas it wants Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary for Indian Affairs John Tahsuda to look into: student safety and health, academic failings and high enrollment fluctuations, whistleblower protections, and overall transparency in decision making.” 

# Bureau Of Land Management 

## Three Years After Nevada Ranch Standoff, Bundy Federal Trial Begins In Las Vegas. 

The Washington Post (11/15, Sottile) reports that “more than three years after Nevada rancher Cliven Bundy and hundreds of militiamen faced off with federal law enforcement officers who had repossessed Bundy’s cattle, the 71-year-old is finally seeing his battle reach a courtroom.” Bundy; “two of his sons, Ryan and Ammon; and militia leader Ryan Payne are facing federal trial here on charges of conspiracy to commit an offense against the United States, conspiracy to impede and injure a federal officer, and extortion, among other charges that, if they result in convictions, could lead to life sentences.” According to the article, “prosecutors argued in opening statements this week that the standoff was an attack on the government; attorneys representing the Bundys say the gathering was an exercise of the family’s right to protest.” The AP (11/15, Ritter) reports that Ryan Bundy “told a federal jury on Wednesday he believes protesters and self-styled militia members saved his life when they arrived in April 2014 after government agents used dogs and stun guns against his family members ahead of a gunpoint showdown that ended a cattle roundup.” Bundy, “who is serving as his own lawyer in the trial in Las Vegas, spent more than an hour speaking with a projected image of his wife and eight children on the courtroom screen.” Bundy”told his family history, declared his belief in states’ rights over limited federal government, and professed his love of family, the land, God, Americans, liberty and freedom.” Also reporting are the AP (11/15, Ritter), Reuters (11/15, Smith), and the Daily Mail (11/15, Miller)/ 

## Here’s Why Cadiz Company Says It’s Taking ‘a Little Pause’ From Its Desert Water Project. 

The San Bernardino (CA) Sun (11/15, Steinberg) reports that after recently receiving “the long-sought federal approval for its massive desert water project, Scott Slater, Cadiz president and CEO, said it’s time for the project to ‘slow down’ a bit.” Slater explained, “We are going to take a little pause…and double our effort to allow people to understand this project. We believe people should support an innovative project like ours.” However, “one environmentalist who has studied and followed the project for years, said pausing at this point strikes an odd note.” David Lamfrom, California Desert and National Wildlife Programs director with the National Parks Conservation Association, “said he believes the pause is really because the California Lands Commission has recently surfaced as a possible stumbling block to the project.” But “Cadiz downplays that notion.” 

## BLM Seeking Public Feedback On Proposal To Expand Research Into Cosmic Rays. 

KSTU-TV Salt Lake City (11/15, Steinbrecher) reports that the Bureau of Land Management seeks input “from the public on a proposal that would quadruple the size of an international scientific study happening near Delta.” According to the article, “using clusters of telescopes and surface detectors on the ground, researchers from the University of Utah and around the world are studying cosmic rays, particularly a phenomenon called the ‘Oh-My-God Particle.’” Researchers propose “to quadruple the size of the project to 750,000 acres, which would allow them to place more detectors on the ground.” The article says that “many of the detectors would go on BLM land, and the Millard County Commission is concerned that will mean less public land is available for other uses like grazing, recreation or economic development.” 

# Bureau Of Reclamation Walden Hydro Bill Would Lower Farmers’ Power Costs. 

The Ripon Advance (11/15) reports that Rep. Greg Walden “on Friday introduced the Klamath Infrastructure Improvement Act, legislation that would serve Klamath County irrigators needing affordable water rates.” H.R. 4329 would “amend the Klamath Basin Water Supply Enhancement Act of 2000 and would bring Klamath Basin hydropower costs in line with those for Bureau of Reclamation projects in other Pacific Northwest areas.” Walden said, “We have 1,000 farms in Klamath County. We have 650,000 acres of farmland in the county. Combined crop and livestock sales annually reach approximately $200 million. Agriculture is essential not only to the lifeblood of Klamath County, and frankly to our entire district.” 

## Timeline Moved Up On Irrigation Pipeline Project; Southwest Bend Piping Project To Begin Around The End Of The Year. 

The Bend (OR) Bulletin (11/16, Hamway) reports that “after talk of major delays last week, a project that would replace a section of canal near the southern edge of Bend with a 3,000-foot irrigation pipeline is back on track to begin around the end of the year.” Craig Horrell, general manager of Central Oregon Irrigation District, “said a $5 million piping project is expected to break ground in December or January, pending the results of a federal environmental analysis.” Edna Rey-Vizgirdas, spokeswoman for the Bureau of Reclamation, said, “We’re trying to accommodate their timeline.” 

# Bureau Of Safety And Environmental Enforcement 

## BSEE Director Discusses Gulf Of Mexico E&P Opportunities At Deepwater Operations. 

Offshore Magazine (11/15) reports that at the Deepwater Operations Conference & Exhibition, BSEE director Scott Angelle emphasized the importance of deepwater Gulf of Mexico E&P. During his keynote presentation, Angelle said, “The offshore oil and gas industry has demonstrated that when faced with challenges in deepwater whether market-based or technology, it continues to innovate and accelerate. ... BSEE must work to ensure that the outer continental shelf is attractive for investment and that all operations are conducted safely and are environmentally sustainable.” World Oil (11/15) reports conference director David Paganie said, “Director Angelle’s remarks at Deepwater Operations were an encouraging reminder that offshore oil and gas has advocates in Washington that seek to galvanize the industry in this challenging market.” 

## About 75,000 Barrels Per Day Of Gulf Oil Output Still Shut After Shell Fire. 

Reuters (11/15, Sims) reports a combined 75,206 bpd of oil and 215,122 mcfd of natural gas production remain offline at four platforms in the Gulf of Mexico in the wake of a fire on Shell’s Enchilada platform. The BSEE said production has been shut in fro Shell’s Enchilada, Salsa and Augers platforms, along with Hess’ Baldpate platform and Conger field. Shell said a plan to repair the damage caused by the fire is underway, while Hess is helping the oil major determine when production can resume. 

# Fish And Wildlife Service 

## New Medicine Lake Blind Wheelchair Accessible. 

The Bozeman (MT) Daily Chronicle (11/14) reports that a new accessible blind was dedicated in Ducks Unlimited volunteer Pat Nolan’s honor in Medicine Lake National Wildlife Refuge. According to the article, “construction of the blind was led by DU volunteer Steve Cunningham, and completed by two sons and five grandsons of Nolan’s, with assistance from refuge staff.” Sean Lofgren, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service project leader at Medicine Lake, “said the blind will be used for hunting, wildlife observation and wildlife photography.” National Park Service 

## Public Comment Period On Raising Fees At 17 National Parks Closing Soon. 

KPAX-TV Missoula, MT (11/15, Miller) reports that the comment period for a proposal to raise fees at 17 popular national parks “will be closing in just about a week.” Due to concerns that the 30-day comment period is not enough time, Sen. Steve Daines on Wednesday “sent a letter to the acting director of the National Park Service asking for an extension of the public comment period.” A spokesman with the National Park Service “says the 30-day comment period isn’t unusual.” 

## Why You May Not Have That Lifetime National Parks Pass You Ordered Yet. 

WSB-TV Atlanta (11/15, Johnson) reports that senior citizens can expect their lifetime passes to national parks to be mailed out “sometime in the next 30 days, according to the AARP.” The National Park Service had “said that seniors rushing to beat a steep price increase on lifetime passes created a logjam so severe that it delayed the processing of the requests.” 

## Backers Hope Route 66 ‘Historic Trail’ Designation Can Drive Tourism. 

Cronkite News (11/15, Windes) reports that lawmakers are considering “a bill that would put Route 66 on the road to becoming a National Historic Trail.” The bill, “heard Wednesday by a House Natural Resources subcommittee, would put the more-than-2,400-mile road under the care of the National Park Service, returning signage to the road and letting it appear on maps as a historic road, among other changes.” 

## U.S. Steel Dumps More Toxic Chromium Near Lake Michigan, Faces Lawsuit. 

The Chicago Tribune (11/14, Hawthorne) reports that “six months after U.S. Steel dumped a plume of toxic metal into a Lake Michigan tributary, the company quietly reported another spill at the same northwest Indiana plant and asked state environmental regulators to keep it secret, according to newly released documents.” According to the article, “the 56.7 pounds of chromium released in late October by the company’s Midwest Plant was 89 percent higher than its water pollution permit allows over 24 hours, U.S. Steel revealed in a letter sent to the Indiana Department of Environmental Management.” The Northwest Indiana Post-Tribune (11/16, Lavalley) reports that officials with the Indiana Dunes National Lakeshore and Indiana American Water Company said they weren’t told about the October leak. Bruce Rowe, public information officer and supervisory ranger in charge at the national lakeshore, said, “Our chief of resource management contacted IDEM (Wednesday) morning to learn more about this, and is going to contact other agencies. We obviously want to protect our resources and our visitors just like that spill six months ago, so we’re taking this very seriously and looking into it.” 

## Glacier Park Visitation Up In October. 

The Flathead (MT) Beacon (11/15) reports that “monthly visitation in Glacier National Park grew once again in October after a dip due to wildfires.” According to the National Park Service, “an estimated 84,000 people visited the park last month, roughly 9,000 more people than a year ago.” 

## Graffiti In Active Volcano At Death Valley Erased By Park Service. 

The Las Vegas Review-Journal (11/15, Brean) reports that “National Park Service employees had to roll out about 600 feet of hose to erase the latest graffiti at Death Valley.” In late October, unidentified “vandals scratched large letters and symbols into the mud bottom of Ubehebe Crater, at the northern end of the national park about 180 miles northwest of Las Vegas.” After receiving “complaints from visitors about the graffiti, the park dispatched a water tanker and team of seven park employees to the crater Nov. 7.” 

# Office Of Insular Affairs 

## Wildlife Agencies Meet On Guam To Discuss Brown Tree Snakes. 

The AP (11/15) reports that “wildlife agencies are meeting this week on Guam to provide updates on numerous projects targeting the invasive brown tree snake, which has proved detrimental to Guam’s native bird population.” The meetings will focus on “increased inspections, awareness programs and effective baiting methods.” The article notes that “approximately $2.8 million from the Office of Insular Affairs is anticipated to carry out the brown tree snake eradication and control projects for the fiscal year.” 

# Office Of Surface Mining 

## Omar’s Pine Creek 2 Mine Receives Award. 

The Williamson (WV) Daily News (11/15) reports that “Arch Coal’s Coal-Mac LLC Pine Creek 2 Surface Mine, located in Omar, received the Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement 2017 Excellence in Surface Coal Mining Reclamation Award.” The award was presented at the National Mining Association’s awards ceremony in Washington, D.C. on Nov. 6. The mine was recognized for “the development and use of multiple techniques to control threats to water quality, such as selenium pollution, total dissolved solids and conductivity.” 

# US Geological Survey 

## USGS: Uranium Has Been Found Near Big Spring. 

The Midland (TX) Reporter-Telegram (11/16, Hawes) reports that the U.S. Geological Survey announced the discovery of uranium in West Texas this week. The USGS “released preliminary information about the discovery northwest of Big Spring.” According to the article, “the uranium itself is part of a new mineral called finchite, named after longtime USGS uranium scientist Warren Finch.” 

## Aviat Networks Awarded $3.0 Million Project With USGS. 

Reuters (11/15) reports that Aviat Networks Inc. has been awarded a $3.0 million project with the U.S. Geological Survey. The new system is “to be used by earthquake science center to transport geophysical, seismographic data, security video to/from various sites.” 

## Former Oklahoma Seismologist Testifies In Earthquake Lawsuit. 

The AP (11/15) reports that former Oklahoma seismologist Austin Holland, who said he was “pressured by an official at the University of Oklahoma to not link the state’s surge in earthquakes to oil and gas production” gave sworn testimony in a lawsuit filed by residents against oil companies for a 2011 earthquake. Accord to the lawsuit, the earthquake that affected Kansas, Arkansas, Tennessee allegedly caused the residents to sustain damages. Holland testified that he was reprimanded for assisting in publishing a journal article on how to handle man-made earthquakes. 

# Opinion Pieces 

## Has Congress Already Forgotten Our Last Oil Spill Disaster? 

In an op-ed for The Hill (11/15, Super), David A. Super, a professor of law at Georgetown Law, criticizes the proposed SECURE American Energy Act (H.R. 4239). The legislation “would transfer to states the authority to authorize oil and gas drilling on public lands,” but it would not “provide states with any resources to perform this work, which currently costs the Bureau of Land Management well over $100 million a year.” Super claims that “the legislation’s only real effect would be to tie the hands of future Congresses that might wish to reassert the balance between extractive, other economic, recreational, and environmental interests that historically has guided our natural resources policy.” 

## We’re Not Paying Our Fair Share To Visit National Parks. 

In an op-ed for The Hill (11/15, WatkinsOpinion Contributor —), Tate Watkins, a research fellow at the Property and Environment Research Center, defends the Interior Department’s proposal to raise fees at 17 popular national parks. Watkins argues that “if our parks, forests, and wilderness areas are truly national treasures, then outdoor recreationists should have no qualms paying to enjoy — and support — them.” But Watkins also suggests that “managers should have flexibility to set pricing structures that work best for each site—whether that includes peak-season fees, annual passes, day rates, or surcharges for visitors from abroad.” 

## Additional Reading. 

Park Fee Increase Prices Out Families. Jackson Hole (WY) News & Guide (11/15, Iobst). 

Fees Just Part Of Park Solution. Jackson Hole (WY) News & Guide (11/15). 

Accessing Our National Parks Should Not Be A Privilege Afforded Only To The Privileged. 

Bend (OR) Source (11/15). 

Wrong Path On National Park Fees. Concord (NH) Monitor (11/15). 

Veterans Service & Conservation Corps: Career Pathways Through Continued Service. 

Huffington Post (11/15). 

We Need Responsible Energy Development On Public Lands. Montana Standard (11/15, Nyman, Rogers). 

Guest Commentary: Trump Administration Shuns Voices Behind Local Groundwork. 

Aspen (CO) Times (11/15, Newman). 

Thomas Mitchell: Constitution Stretched To The Breaking Point. Elko (NV) Daily Free Press (11/15, Mitchell). 

A Ray Of Hope For American Shad. Narrowsburg (NY) River Reporter. 

Progress In The World’s Fight To Save Elephants, Rhinos, Pangolins And Sharks . . . Backsliding In The Fight To End Trophy Hunting By Americans. Huffington Post (11/15, Greene). 

# Top National News 

## Trump Touts Success Of His Asia Trip, Says It Shows “America Is Back.” 

To widespread media skepticism, the President yesterday celebrated his accomplishments in Asia, claiming credit for crafting a unified front against North Korea and for trade deals worth billions of dollars. Two major network newscasts reported Trump’s remarks. In its story about “what he sees as” the trip’s “accomplishments,” NBC Nightly News (11/15, story 3, 1:30, Welker) said Trump “took a victory lap,” and described him as “clearly frustrated by headlines that suggested he didn’t secure any concrete results.” The CBS Evening News (11/15, story 8, 0:45, Mason), meanwhile, quipped that it “appeared for a time” that Trump’s “account of his Asia trip...might run as long as the 12-day journey itself.” In his speech, USA Today (11/15, Jackson, Korte) reports, “Trump outlined his efforts in a country-by-country rundown,” and “some commentators on Twitter likened” his “methodical recitation to someone showing slides of their summer vacation.” More favorable toward Trump was the Washington Times (11/15, Miller) account, which quotes him as saying, “My fellow citizens, America is back and the future has never looked brighter. ... I swore that in every decision and with every action I would put the best interest of the American people first. ... That is exactly what I have done.” Politico (11/15, Lima), however, says Trump touted the success of his trip “despite a dearth of marquee victories for the White House,” which “seemingly did not draw any major diplomatic concessions from the nations it visited on major issues like North Korea’s nuclear efforts, new trade pacts or human rights.” Townhall (11/15, O'Brien) reported that “trade and commerce” were the issues Trump “spent the most time discussing, clearly enthused by his recent meetings.” But Bloomberg News (11/15, Wayne, Pettypiece) says the trade deals touted by Trump “aren’t contracts and might not be fulfilled. And while the president railed against what he regards as systemic flaws in US trade relationships, he neither publicly requested or received specific assurances by foreign leaders to reduce imbalances or address issues such as market access by US companies and intellectual property theft.” The Washington Post (11/15, Gearan) casts Trump as chafing “at criticism that he did not notch any major accomplishments,” and USA Today (11/15, Jackson, Korte) says he “gave the speech at the White House in the wake of criticism of the trip by some analysts and political foes.” The Los Angeles Times (11/15, Bennett) similarly indicates Trump’s “message was undermined by the lack of significant accomplishments he could point to from the trip,” and the New York Times (11/15, Qiu) runs a “Fact Check” analysis under the headline “Trump’s ‘Tremendous Success’ Abroad Is Overstated.” Another New York Times (11/15, Shear) story similarly describes the trip as having brought “few concrete achievements,” and adds “Trump made no significant announcements in a speech that he had hyped on Twitter as ‘a major statement’ to be delivered upon his return.” The Times goes on to report that “critics say Mr. Trump has abandoned the United States’ status as a global superpower by retreating from trade agreements and backing out of the Paris climate accord.” Trump’s “political rivals accuse him of straining relationships with allies in NATO and elsewhere while embracing despots.” The Wall Street Journal (11/15, Ballhaus) runs a similar story this morning. Jonah Goldberg of National Review said on Fox News’ Special Report 

(11/15),”This was no major announcement. He had teased this as a major announcement – tune in for major announcement. There was no major announcement. At the same time, I’m not sure it matters. The press was mad about it. I’m not sure that matters.” Goldberg added that “it sounded like a successful trip. It looked like a successful trip. He came back and talked about it like a successful trip and just because the reporters in the room didn’t like it, well, welcome to the era of Trump. Reporters in the room often don’t like what he does, but he was reaching out to his audience beyond that and I thought it was probably going to be effective for him.” 

Trump’s Search For Water Bottle Featured Across News Coverage. A significant topic across the coverage of the President’s remarks were the two occasions in which he paused to drink water. The Hill (11/15, Fabian), for example, said “the speech might be remembered for Trump’s two awkward-looking water breaks,” and the New York Times (11/15, Qiu) that the President was “deterred only by a struggle to quench his thirst.” While the subject is mentioned in virtually every story on Trump’s remarks, the CBS Evening News (11/15, story 8, 0:45, Mason) devoted all but one sentence of its 45-second report to explain that the President’s “mouth got so dry he had to stop and search for a bottle of water to quench his thirst. A few minutes later, it happened again.” Added CBS, “You’ll recall Mr. Trump, on the campaign trail, mocked then-rival Marco Rubio for taking a water break as he delivered the GOP response to a state of the union address.” Rubio weighed in on Twitter, writing, “Needs work on his form. Has to be done in one single motion, and eyes should never leave the camera, but not bad for his first time.” The AP (11/15, Thomas) also indicates that “during the 2016 campaign, Trump frequently skewered Rubio...for needing to quench his thirst during speeches,” and USA Today (11/15, Estepa) reports, “Sometimes, you really just need a drink of water. Sen. Marco Rubio knows this.” 

Trump: Xi Agrees “Freeze-For-Freeze” Is Unacceptable. The AP (11/15, Pennington) reports Trump said “the US and China agree that North Korea cannot just freeze its nuclear weapons program in exchange for concessions and that it must eliminate its arsenal.” Trump “was restating a long-standing US position but suggested that China now concurred with Washington that a ‘freeze-for-freeze’ agreement was unacceptable.” Said Trump, “President Xi recognizes that a nuclear North Korea is a grave threat to China, and we agreed that we would not accept a so-called freeze for freeze agreement, like those that have consistently failed in the past.” 

Following Trump Visit, China To Send High-Level Envoy To North Korea. The AP (11/14, Bodeen) reports that “following...Trump’s visit to Beijing, China said Wednesday that it would send a high-level special envoy to North Korea amid an extended chill in relations between the neighbors over Pyongyang’s nuclear weapons and missile programs.” Song Tao, “the head of China’s ruling Communist Party’s International Department, will travel to Pyongyang on Friday to report on outcomes of the party’s national congress held last month, the official Xinhua News Agency said.” The Washington Post (11/15, Denyer) says “it is not clear whether this trip has anything to do with” Trump’s visit, as “Beijing routinely undertakes such trips to fellow Communist states.” 

North Korean Editorial: Trump Should Be Sentenced To Death For Kim Insults. The Washington Post (11/15, Erickson) reports “the ever-escalating war of words between the United States and North Korea got dialed up to 11 on Wednesday, when an editorial in a state-run newspaper called...Trump a coward who deserved the death penalty.” The Post adds that “Rodong Sinmun, a mouthpiece for Kim’s ruling Workers’ Party of Korea, took aim at Trump,” writing, “The worst crime for which he can never be pardoned is that he dared [to] malignantly hurt the dignity of the supreme leadership. ... He should know that he is just a hideous criminal sentenced to death by the Korean people.” 

Murphy: Restraining Trump’s Nuclear Authority Won’t Signal Weakness To North Korea. 

Sen. Chris Murphy, a member of the Foreign Relations Committee, said on CNN’s Situation Room (11/15) that he’s not “alone” in being concerned about President Trump’s ability to pre-emptively launch nuclear weapons at North Korea, arguing that “it’s not a coincidence that the first major hearing that we’ve had on the decision-making process regarding the launch of a nuclear weapon happens at the exact same moment that President Trump is suggesting through his Twitter feed that he might use a nuclear weapon against North Korea without consulting with Congress.” When asked if restraining the President’s nuclear authority signals a “weakness to regimes like North Korea,” Murphy said that’s “nonsense,” adding that no president can engage in a pre-emptive military strike without authorization from Congress. Murphy said he’s “introduced legislation that would clarify that.” In an editorial headlined “The President’s Power To Launch Nukes,” the New York Times (11/15) says “Trump and North Korea have prompted Congress to do something it hasn’t done in more than four decades: formally consider changes to the law that gives American presidents the sole authority to launch nuclear weapons.” The US President “is engaged in a dangerous game of chicken with Kim Jong-un,” and while “the Republican-led Congress, which has shown few signs of pushing back against presidential powers, may end up taking no action...there are hard questions to be addressed, especially now that the American people have been alerted to the scope and potential peril of Mr. Trump’s powers.” Sen. Jeanne Shaheen said on CNN’s The Lead (11/15), “I thought this was a great opportunity to try and further engage Russia in what’s going on with North Korea. One of the things we need to do with North Korea, which is a rogue nation, is to get the international community in support of further sanctions, of keeping pressure on the North Korean regime and Russia is a key player there and he missed that opportunity to engage Putin on that issue.” Shaheen added, “We need to build an international coalition as President Obama did on Iran to get people united in working and keeping the pressure on North Korea. What we don’t need is inconsistent messages on Twitter that...are open to interpretation by Kim Jong-un, who is a very irrational and radical leader. So I think that’s the kind of consistent, stable diplomacy that we need to continue and I think, unfortunately, this administration has fallen short in that score.” UCLA Basketball Players Thank Trump For Intervening With China To Win Their Release. 

NBC Nightly News (11/15, story 5, 1:50, Holt) reported three UCLA men’s basketball players are back in the US “after being caught up in a legal drama in China which led...Trump to intervene when they were caught shoplifting and faced up to a decade in prison.” Trump was shown saying, “What they did was unfortunate, and you know you’re talking about very long prison sentences. They do not play games.” The White House says Trump’s words with Chinese President Xi Jinping, “along with diplomatic efforts by the State Department, led to a reduction in charges.” On Wednesday morning, Trump tweeted, “Do you think the three UCLA basketball players will say, ‘thank you, President Trump’ they were headed for ten years in jail.” The CBS Evening News (11/15, story 7, 0:35, Mason) reported the three players apologized on Wednesday for shoplifting, and ABC World News Tonight (11/15, story 8, 1:15, Muir) that the three thanked Trump for his efforts. Fox News’ Special Report (11/15) showed footage of the players thanking the President and the US government. USA Today (11/15, Peter), Reuters (11/15, Carroll), the Washington Post (11/15, Bontemps), Politico (11/15, Lima, Nelson) and the Los Angeles Times (11/15, Bolch), among other news outlets, also report the story. 

In Japan, Bannon Warns Against China’s Plans To “Dominate” World Economy. The Washington Times (11/15, Taylor) reports that Steve Bannon “railed against China’s ‘hegemonic’ ambitions Wednesday, telling a crowd in Tokyo that the West and its Asian allies must wake up to communist Beijing’s plan to ‘dominate’ the world economy.” Bannon said “American ‘elites’ have long believed a ‘false premise’ that China would become more of a liberal democracy and a free market economy as its economy grew,” yet “the exact opposite has happened. ... The Chinese leadership had no intention ever of joining the rules-based international order. They had their own plan, and they executed that plan very rigorously.” 

Trump Takes To Twitter To Blast “Naïve (Or Dumb)” NYTimes, CNN. The Washington Times (11/15, Miller) reports that earlier Wednesday, Trump “took to Twitter with a vengeance...to blast his critics in the news media.” Trump “labeled CNN as ‘Loser!’ and skewered the ‘failing’ New York Times for being ‘naive (or dumb)’ on foreign policy.” Trump said of the Times, “The failing @nytimes hates the fact that I have developed a great relationship with World leaders like Xi Jinping, President of China. ... They should realize that these relationships are a good thing, not a bad thing. The U.S. is being respected again. Watch Trade!” Politico (11/15, Lima) says “it was unclear what specific Times article the president was responding to,” though “earlier Wednesday Times foreign affairs columnist Thomas Friedman penned a piece criticizing” him “for allowing himself to be manipulated by Xi on trade, an issue the president has made a priority in his overseas diplomatic talks.” Under the headline “China Could Sell Trump the Brooklyn Bridge,” Friedman writes in the New York Times (11/14, Friedman) that “Xi has been brilliant at playing Trump, plying him with flattery and short-term trade concessions and deflecting him from the real structural trade imbalances with China.” 

## As House Prepares To Vote On Tax Bill, Johnson Says He Opposes Senate Version. 

With the House set to vote on its tax cut plan Thursday, President Trump tweeted Wednesday evening, “Big vote tomorrow in the House. Tax cuts are getting close!” However, coverage on the network news broadcasts and in print this morning focuses on the Senate bill, suggesting the measure could be in trouble after Sen. Ron Johnson said he will not support it and Sen. Susan Collins said the decision to include a repeal of the ACA’s individual mandate was a mistake. Anthony Mason reported on The CBS Evening News (11/15, story 2, 2:40, Mason) that House Republicans “are set to pass a massive package of corporate and individual tax cuts” Thursday. Chief congressional correspondent Nancy Cordes added that the House plan would “eliminate the deduction for state and local taxes,” which “has angered a handful of GOP House members from high-tax states, but there probably aren’t enough of them to prevent passage in the House.” However, much of the media coverage highlights Johnson’s opposition to the Senate bill as well as the inclusion of the individual mandate repeal and Collins’ criticism of that decision. Johnson told the Wall Street Journal (11/15, Hughes) Wednesday that he opposes the Senate Republican tax bill, arguing that the measure benefits corporations more than other businesses. Johnson told the Journal, “If they can pass it without me, let them. ... I’m not going to vote for this tax package.” The Washington Times (11/15, Sherfinski) reports that in a statement Johnson “said...that it’s important to strike a proper competitive balance between larger corporations and smaller ‘pass-through’ companies that file their taxes as individuals and are often taxed at levels higher than the 35 percent corporate rate.” Said Johnson, “These businesses truly are the engines of innovation and job creation throughout our economy, and they should not be left behind. ... Unfortunately, neither the House nor Senate bill provide fair treatment, so I do not support either in their current versions.” The Washington Examiner (11/15, Lawler) says Johnson is “the first Republican senator to express opposition to the GOP tax bill,” and the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (11/15, Glauber) says his opposition “could prove important since Republicans have only 52 seats in the Senate.” 

Rove: Differences Between House, Senate Bills Can Be Used To Craft A Better Final Version. Karl Rove writes in the Wall Street Journal (11/15) that while much has been made of the differences between the House and Senate bills, their goals are similar, and the areas where they differ can be used to craft a better final bill. Rove adds that Republicans, and President Trump in particular, need to persuade Americans that the corporate tax changes will create jobs and raise incomes, which will help the economy grow. 

## Democrats Introduce Articles Of Impeachment Against Trump. 

In what the AP (11/15, Freking) describes as “a long-shot effort that stands little chance in the Republican-led House,” six House Democrats have introduced articles of impeachment against President Trump, “accusing him of obstruction of justice and other offenses.” The AP adds that “the large majority of Democrats seem intent on having nothing to do with the effort either as lawmakers await the results of special counsel Robert Mueller’s investigation,” and “Democratic leaders have argued that the impeachment campaign riles up Trump’s GOP base, a critical bloc in next year’s midterm elections.” The Washington Times (11/15, Dinan) reports that the Democrats, led by Rep. Steve Cohen, say Trump “has obstructed justice in his dealings with then-FBI Director James Comey, and his businesses are taking money that is illegal under two separate parts of the Constitution.” In addition they say Trump “has undermined the judiciary by using his pardon powers on former Sheriff Joe Arpaio, and that he’s undermined the press corps covering him by berating news outlets or calling them ‘fake.’” 

Podesta: Trump Wants To Run The Justice System “Like A Banana Republic.” In an op-ed for the Washington Post (11/15), John Podesta, who served as chair of Hillary Clinton’s 2016 presidential campaign, writes that reports that “Sessions — in an apparent effort to appease Trump — is considering appointing a special counsel to investigate Clinton’s role in approving the purchase of Uranium One” is proof that Trump “wants to upend 230 years of constitutional history and principle to run the U.S. justice system like a banana republic, or perhaps more aptly like what now passes for the rule of law in the country he aspires to emulate, the Russian Federation.” Podesta argues that “authoritarians and tyrants” use “the instruments of state power, particularly the wrath of the prosecutor, to rain opprobrium down upon citizens with whom they disagree.” 

Sessions To Be Interviewed By House Intelligence Committee. Reuters (11/15) reports a DOJ spokesman said Wednesday that Attorney General Sessions will be interviewed in a closed door session with the House intelligence committee on Nov. 30. The committee is one of several, “along with the Department of Justice’s special counsel Robert Mueller, investigating alleged Russian interference in the 2016 presidential campaign and potential collusion by President Donald Trump’s campaign.” 

Firm Mentioned In Trump Dossier Linked To Internet Pirates. McClatchy (11/15, Hall) reports that the co-called Trump Dossier “got a lot right,” but “the accusation that a company called XBT and its US subsidiary Webzilla hacked the emails of Democratic Party leaders” is “still vexing investigators.” XBT and Webzilla “have long been the targets of lawyers who fight Internet piracy.” McClatchy adds that is review of “more than 1,000 pages of court documents” found that “Webzilla employees were linked through litigation and regulatory filings to two companies accused of large-scale copyright violations involving Hollywood movies and subscription pornography.” The Daily Caller (11/15, Ross) cites “a source familiar” with Glenn Simpson’s testimony to the House Intelligence Committee who said the Fusion GPS founder “acknowledged...that he did not verify information in the uncorroborated and salacious dossier before briefing reporters on its contents during the campaign.” Bloomberg News (11/15, House) reports that “people familiar with his testimony” say Simpson “defended [the dossier’s] credibility” during his testimony. 

Judge Calls For Greater Transparency In Legal Fight Over Fusion Bank Records. 

Politico (11/15, Gerstein) reports that following “a brief hearing in US District Court in Washington, Judge Richard Leon” told lawyers involved in the legal fight between the House Intelligence Committee and Fusion GPS that the dispute over the committee’s demands for Fusion’s bank records “is of major public significance and needs to be handled with greater transparency.” Leon said, “If there were ever a case where [public access] is in the best interest of all concerned, this is one. ... This is not the kind of case, in my judgment, where there should be much if any time behind the [closed] door, unless it’s necessary. … I think the arguments can be made in open court on the nonconfidential, discrete legal questions.” 

Schiff: Parts Of Trump Dossier Have Turned Out To Be True. In an interview with the Wall Street Journal (11/15, Tau) Wednesday, Rep. Adam Schiff, the ranking Democrat on the house intelligence Committee rejected attempts by Republicans to discredit the Dossier, arguing that its claims that Russia sought to help elect Trump proved to be true. 

## Bonn Conference Trying To Make Headway Despite US Stance On Paris Deal. 

The New York Times (11/15, Friedman, Plumer) reports that “few at United Nations climate talks” in Bonn, Germany “are openly showing” any anger they feel at the United States for rejecting the Paris climate change agreement. In private negotiating sessions, career State Department staffers are “making headway on technical issues to strengthen the Paris accord”; many of them “are familiar players in these negotiations and are continuing to pursue longstanding objectives, like greater transparency on emissions cuts from developing countries.” George David Banks, a senior energy adviser to President Trump, said that because the US has “the best negotiating team in the world,” the “other delegations are very supportive of making sure the US delegation is as involved as possible.” However, the State Department official originally leading the talks, Thomas A. Shannon Jr., canceled at the last minute, “leaving the negotiations largely in the hands of lower-ranking colleagues,” and Banks “refers most questions to the State Department.” In contrast, Fox News’ Special Report (11/15) reported that at the conference, “the US is taking heavy criticism over President Trump’s decision to withdraw from the Paris Climate Accord.” One American energy executive “infuriated participants when he said it’s naïve to suggest poor countries can escape poverty through wind and solar when fossil fuel remains a cheaper...alternative.” That remark came as scientists at the conference say they’re anticipating a 2 percent rise in global CO2 emissions for 2017, with Corinne Le Quere of the University of East Anglia shown saying that the CO2 increase is “driven primarily by what’s happening in China with the renewed use of coal.” Meanwhile, a separate American delegation expressed support for the Accord. Washington Gov. Jay Inslee was shown saying, “Donald Trump cannot stop us. This is the most important thing we wanted the world to know.” 

# Editorial Wrap-Up New York Times. 

“Mr. Trump Casts A Shadow Over The AT&T-Time Warner Deal.” The New York Times (11/15) editorializes that “President Trump’s hostility toward the news media, and CNN in particular, has been so extreme that it is calling into doubt whether his appointees at the Department of Justice can fairly evaluate a merger involving the cable news channel’s parent company, Time Warner, and AT&T.” The Justice Department’s Antitrust Division “has reportedly asked AT&T to sell the Turner Broadcasting division of Time Warner, a unit that includes CNN, or sell its DirecTV unit to gain approval for the deal.” While the Times notes that “on its face, this is not an unreasonable request,” it argues that “given Mr. Trump’s repeated attacks on CNN, there’s ample cause to suspect that the Justice Department scheme is a ploy to force a sale of the news organization to owners that will strip away its editorial independence and turn it into a house organ of the Trump administration.” 

“The Senate Questions The President’s Power To Launch Nukes.” In an editorial, the New York Times (11/15) says President Trump and North Korea “have prompted Congress to do something it hasn’t done in more than four decades: formally consider changes to the law that gives American presidents the sole authority to launch nuclear weapons.” The US President “us engaged in a dangerous game of chicken with Kim Jong-un,” and while “the Republican-led Congress, which has shown few signs of pushing back against presidential powers, may end up taking no action...there are hard questions to be addressed, especially now that the American people have been alerted to the scope and potential peril of Mr. Trump’s powers.” 

## Washington Post. 

“Republicans Turn Their Irresponsible Tax Bill Into Monumentally Unwise Social Policy.” A Washington Post (11/15) editorial says by including a provision to repeal the ACA’s individual mandate in their tax bill, Senate Republicans “remade their tax bill into an Obamacare repeal bill.” The provision, the Post argues, “turned a fiscally irresponsible tax plan into a monumentally unwise piece of social policy that would do much more than widen the deficit.” The Post argues that if Republicans believe repealing the mandate “is good health-care policy, they should seek to pass it on its own, with hearings, markups and debate.” 

“What Happens In Zimbabwe Without Mugabe In Power?” In an editorial, the Washington Post (11/15) writes that the “prospects don’t look good” for Zimbabwe. President Mugabe’s “horrific record” did not inspire the coup and Mnangagwa has “a history of brutal behavior” and could lose a fair vote to the opposition leader. However, the Post warns that “a genuine popular mandate” is needed for reforms to revive the economy. The Post calls on the US and other Western governments to “insist on a prompt restoration of constitutional order and a firm commitment by the military to holding internationally supervised elections next year.” The Post concludes this is “a fragile opportunity to rescue” Zimbabwe, should the situation “not lead to the installation of another strongman.” 

“Don’t Be Relieved Only Five People Died In California. Be Enraged.” The Washington Post (11/15) editorializes that observers should not be comforted by the fact that “only” five people died in Tuesday’s shooting at an elementary school. The Post asserts that “what ought to be foremost is rage at the refusal of lawmakers to take action that might prevent these needless tragedies — and a renewed demand for sensible gun-control regulations, including a ban on assault weapons and comprehensive background checks with better enforcement.” 

## Wall Street Journal. 

“The Appeal Of Mandate Repeal.” A Wall Street Journal (11/15) editorial praises Senate Republicans’ decision to include a repeal of the ACA’s individual mandate in their tax bill and argues that Democrats should explain, why, if ACA insurance provides quality coverage at affordable prices, do people have to be coerced into buying it. 

“Zimbabwe’s Coup By Any Other Name.” The Wall Street Journal (11/15) warns in an editorial that Zimbabwe’s coup is motivated by a political power struggle within the ruling Zanu-PF party and not the suffering of the country’s people. The Journal predicts the coup will not lead to improvements, which would require a total overhaul of its governance. 

“Adios, Richard Cordray.” In an editorial, the Wall Street Journal (11/15, Journal) expresses pleasure at Consumer Financial Protection Bureau director Richard Cordray’s exit, writing that he overstepped the mandate of CFPB and went after industries unpopular with progressives. 

# Big Picture 

## Headlines From Today’s Front Pages. 

Wall Street Journal: 

Activist Peltz Narrowly Wins P&G Board Seat, New Count Shows Republican Sen. Ron Johnson Opposes GOP Senate Tax Package Zimbabwe Army’s Power Grab Could Mark End Of Mugabe’s Reign A Specter Is Haunting Europe’s Recovery: Zombie Companies 

New York Times: 

Tax Bill Thrown Into Uncertainty As First GOP Senator Comes Out Against It Four More Women Describe Advances By Roy Moore As Campaign Pushes Back With Mugabe’s Era Ending In Zimbabwe, A Warning Echoes In Africa A Growing Call To Limit Lawyers’ Donations To Prosecutors Deception And Ruses Fill The Toolkit Of Investigators Used By Weinstein Leonardo Da Vinci Painting Sells For $450.3 Million, Shattering Auction Highs 

Washington Post: 

Two More Women Accuse Moore Of Pursuing Them Senate Tax Bill Hits New Snags Zimbabwe Awaits Fate Of Detained Mugabe Crack Of Gunfire Led To School’s Lockdown Museum Of The Bible Is Strictly By The Book 

Financial Times: 

Zimbabwe Army Seizes Power And Holds Mugabe Africa’s Richest Woman Removed As Head Of Angola State Oil Group Russia And Venezuela Agree $3bn Debt Restructuring 

Washington Times: 

Catch-And-Release Of Illegals Restarted In Texas, Border Patrol Agents Say Democrats Introduce Articles Of Impeachment Against Trump Newest Museum In Nation’s Capital Will ‘Tell The Biography Of The Bible’ Zimbabweans Stunned, Uncertain After Military’s ‘Soft Coup’ Of Mugabe Liberals Finally Hold Bill Clinton Accountable For Sexual Misconduct Kurds Seek More Help From Trump Administration To Keep Peace With Iraq 

Story Lineup From Last Night’s Network News: 

ABC: Roy Moore Sexual Misconduct Allegations; Tax Reform Plan-Obamacare Repeal; California Shooting; Tampa-Possible Serial Killer; Congress-Sexual Harassment Policy; Weather Forecast; Zimbabwe-Military Coup; US College Basketball Players Return; Loose Mental Patient Captured; Pilot-Carrying Gun On Board; St. Louis-Car Crash; New Planet Discovery; Adopted Sibling Discovery. 

CBS: Roy Moore Sexual Misconduct Allegations; Tax Reform Plan-Obamacare Repeal; California Shooting; Texas Church Shooting-Gunman; Loose Mental Patient Captured; Zimbabwe-Military Coup; US College Basketball Players Return; Trump-Asia Tour Wrap Up; Ford-SUV Carbon Monoxide Leak; Wilbert Jones Freed; NBA News; Pope-Lamborghini Donation; Da Vinci Painting Auction. 

NBC: Roy Moore Sexual Misconduct Allegations; California Shooting; Trump-Asia Tour Wrap Up; Tax Reform Plan-Obamacare Repeal; US College Basketball Players Return; Tampa-Possible Serial Killer; Schools-Cyber Security; St. Louis-Fire; Amazon-Grocery Business; Treasury Secretary-Dollar Bills Signature; Meteor Sighting; Pope-Lamborghini Donation; Charity Turned Hobby. 

Network TV At A Glance: 

Roy Moore Sexual Misconduct Allegations – 9 minutes, 30 seconds California Shooting – 7 minutes Tax Reform Plan-Obamacare Repeal – 6 minutes, 5 seconds US College Basketball Players Return – 3 minutes, 40 seconds 

Story Lineup From This Morning’s Radio News Broadcasts: 

ABC: Roy Moore Sexual Misconduct Allegations; Trump-Asia Tour Wrap Up; Baltimore Police Officer Shot; California Shooting. 

CBS: Roy Moore Sexual Misconduct Allegations; Tax Reform Plan-Obamacare Repeal; Trump-Asia Tour Wrap Up; Loose Mental Patient Captured; US College Basketball Players Return; Da Vinci Painting Auction. 

FOX: Roy Moore Sexual Misconduct Allegations; Trump-Asia Tour Wrap Up; Baltimore Police Officer Shot; Charles Manson Ill. 

NPR: Roy Moore Sexual Misconduct Allegations; Obamacare Enrollment Rate; Trump Administration-Immigration Policies; Zimbabwe-Military Coup. 

# Washington Schedule 

## Today’s Events In Washington. 

White House: 

PRESIDENT TRUMP — Gives remarks to the House Republican Conference. VICE PRESIDENT PENCE — No public schedule announced. 

US Senate: 10:00 AM Senate Foreign Relations Committee top secret briefing on new counterterrorism guidance – Closed / Top Secret / Sensitive Compartmented Information briefing on ‘New Counterterrorism Guidance’, given by State Department Coordinator for Counterterrorism Nathan Sales, and Assistant Legal Advisor Steven Fabry; and Joint Staff Deputy Director for Special Operations and Counterterrorism Maj. Gen. Albert Elton II Location: U.S. Capitol Visitor Center, SVC-217, Washington, DC http://foreign.senate.gov/ 10:00 AM Senate Judiciary Committee Executive Business Meeting – Executive Business Meeting, with agenda including the nominations of Leonard Steven Grasz to be U.S. Circuit Judge for the Eighth Circuit; Terry Doughty to be U.S. District Judge for the Western District of Louisiana; Terry Fitzgerald Moorer to be U.S. District Judge for the Southern District of Alabama; Mark Saalfield Norris Sr. to be U.S. District Judge for the Western District of Tennessee; Scott Brady to be U.S. Attorney for the Western District of Pennsylvania; and Andrew Lelling to be U.S. Attorney for the District of Massachusetts; as well as ‘S. 2070, Kevin and Avonte’s Law’ Location: Rm 226, Dirksen Senate Office Bldg, Washington, DC http://judiciary.senate.gov/ 10:00 AM Senate Transportation subcommittee hearing on USCG readiness – Oceans, Atmosphere, Fisheries, and Coast Guard Subcommittee hearing on ‘Coast Guard Readiness: How Far Can We Stretch Our Nation’s Only Multi-Mission, Military Force?’, with testimony from U.S. Coast Guard Commandant Adm. Paul Zukunft; Etta Kuzakin of King Cove, AK; Michigan Technological University’s Dr Guy Meadows; and Mississippi Emergency Management Agency’s Lee Smithson Location: Russell Senate Office Building, Rm 253, Washington, DC http://commerce.senate.gov https://twitter.com/SenateCommerce 10:00 AM Senate Armed Services Committee nominations hearing – Nominations hearing considers John Rood to be Under Secretary of Defense for Policy; and Randall Schriver to be Assistant Secretary of Defense for Asian and Pacific Affairs Location: Dirksen Senate Office Building, Rm G50, Washington, DC http://armed-services.senate.gov/ 11:30 AM MomsRising and other groups visit Capitol Hill to talk about how they are ‘thankful for the immigrants in their lives’ – MomsRising, SEIU, Herd on the Hill, Mormon Women for Ethical Governance, UndocuBlack, and allies visit Capitol Hill to ‘tell Members of Congress why they’re thankful for the immigrants in their lives’ and ‘remind them that the diversity of our nation is what makes us strong, innovative and prosperous – and we’re thankful to live in the United States of America together’. MomsRising’s Donna Norton, SEIU’s Jaime Contreras, Mormon Women for Ethical Governance’s Sharlee Glenn, and DACA recipient and UndocuBlack member Cindy Kolade hold press conference with Democratic Sen. Chris Van Hollen, before advocates deliver Thanksgiving-themed cookies shaped like turkeys to dozens of senators and representatives along with petitions signed by 25,000 people in support of the DREAM Act and protecting Temporary Protected Status recipients Location: U.S. Capitol, S-115, Washington, DC momsrising.org https://twitter.com/MomsRising 2:00 PM Closed Briefing: Intelligence Matters Location: Rm 219, Hart Senate Office Bldg, Washington, DC http://intelligence.senate.gov 

US House: 9:00 AM House expected to vote on Tax Cuts and Jobs Act – House of Representatives meets for legislative business, with agenda expected to include completion of consideration of ‘H.R. 1, The Tax Cuts and Jobs Act’ * The Tax Cuts and Jobs Act would reduce the number of different tax bands, increase the standard deduction, eliminate the Alternative Minimum Tax, largely eliminate the State and Local Tax Deduction, convert corporate tax into a flat rate, and increase the estate tax exemption Location: Washington, DC http://www.house.gov/ 10:00 AM House Commerce subcommittee hearing on 5G – Communications and Technology Subcommittee hearing on ‘The Race to 5G and its Potential to Revolutionize American Competitiveness’, with testimony from Wireless Infrastructure Association President and CEO Jonathan Adelstein; The Brattle Group Principal Dr Coleman Bazelon; Indiana Biosciences Research Institute CEO David Broecker; 5G Americas President Chris Pearson; and City of San Jose Chief Innovation Officer Shireen Santosham Location: Rayburn House Office Building, Rm 2123, Washington, DC http://energycommerce.house.gov/ https://twitter.com/HouseCommerce 1:30 PM Dem Rep. Earl Blumenauer hosts forum on ‘A Call for Reform: Fix the Farm Bill’ – Democratic Rep. Earl Blumenauer hosts forum on ‘A Call for Reform: Fix the Farm Bill’, focusing on ‘the need to create a more visionary, equitable, and cost-effective Farm Bill’. ‘The Omnivore’s Dilemma’ and ‘In Defense of Food’ author Michael Pollan keynotes, followed by a panel discussion featuring ASPCA Farm Animal Campaign Content Director Suzanne McMillan, Environmental Working Group Vice President of Government Affairs Scott Faber, Food Policy Action Executive Director Monica Mills, Humane Society of the United States CEO and President Wayne Pacelle, Taxpayers for Common Sense President Ryan Alexander, and U.S. PIRG Food and Farming Program Director Bill Wenzel * Ahead of the forum, Rep. Blumenauer holds a press conference with Pollan, Mills, Pacelle, Alexander, Democratic Reps. Don Beyer, Rosa DeLauro, Chellie Pingree, and Peter Welch, and Union of Concerned Scientists Food & Environment Program Director Ricardo Salvador Location: U.S. Capitol, Washington, DC blumenauer.house.gov https://twitter.com/repblumenauer 

Other: 

# Last Laughs 

## Late Night Political Humor. 

Jimmy Kimmel: “The President hasn’t weighed in on the biggest story of the week, Roy Moore. Donald Trump’s in a real bind. On one hand, he doesn’t want to support an accused pedophile for Senate. His other hand is grabbing a woman by the...you know what I’m saying.” James Corden: “Trump said he accomplished a lot of things on his trip, but North Korea seems to have a different opinion, because yesterday, North Korea state media published a scathing review of President Trump’s trip to Asia. They said Trump displayed his ‘true colors as an old lunatic, mean trickster, and human reject.’ Now you listen here, North Korea, we may not like him either, but that is the President of the United States you’re accurately describing.” 

James Corden: “I can’t believe Trump and Kim Jong-Un are still going back and forth like this. Like the two of them have literally become the characters in every rom-com you have ever seen. They’ve written insulting each other so much you just know they’ll actually end up together. You know what I mean? They’re like, ‘You are an old trickster.’ ‘You a crazy rocket man.’ ‘Yeah, well you, you’re the love of my life.’” 

Trevor Noah: [Referring to the military coup in Zimbabwe] “I think the news is being dramatic here, all right. You don’t overthrow a 93-year-old man, okay? You just don’t wake him up. The generals are probably in the room like, ‘We’re now in power, we rule.’ ‘Shhhh!’ You know how it’s funny how back in the day, Americans would have seen this news and been like, ‘Man, I’m glad that doesn’t happen here.’ And now people are like, ‘Man, wish that happened here.’” 

Trevor Noah: “Oh, and speaking of African dictators, President Trump is back from Asia.” 

Trevor Noah: “Let’s move on to Congress, because people say that Congress never gets anything done. But yesterday, they got more nothing done than I have ever seen before. First, Attorney General Jeff Sessions flew in from the North Pole to explain to the House Judiciary Committee why his memory is perfect. Except when it comes to remembering Russians, he couldn’t remember them at all.” 

Trevor Noah: “Out of nowhere, it came out that the Senate Republican tax plan will now include repealing Obamacare’s individual mandate, which would mean 13 million fewer Americans having health insurance. You’ve got to admit, this is super sneaky. Like, they couldn’t repeal Obamacare outright, so now they’re just going to try to Bill Cosby it. You know, they just slip it into something else so America wakes up the next day like, ‘Wait, what the hell happened to our healthcare?’ ‘What healthcare? You don’t have a plan, and now you’re going to die.’” 

Jimmy Fallon: “I read that Congress is debating if President Trump should have the power to order a nuclear strike. I guess right now, it’s an even split between ‘no’ and ‘hell no.’ ... They have a good plan, though. They’re going to replace the red button on his desk with the one that orders office supplies from Staples.” 

Seth Meyers: “Former White House Communications Director Anthony Scaramucci is reportedly in talks with publishers about a book chronicling his tenure in the White House. A book? You were there for ten days. At best, you could release a fortune cookie.” 

Seth Meyers: “North Korean state media today called President Trump a coward for canceling his visit to the Demilitarized Zone during his trip to Asia. Listen, President Trump is a lot of things, but a coward is just one of those things.” 

Seth Meyers: “Republicans are reportedly hoping that President Trump will pressure Alabama senator candidate Roy Moore to drop out of the race. Roy Moore still might not drop out, but at least he’ll know what it’s like to be pressured by an older man.”  

> Copyright 2017 by Bulletin Intelligence LLC Reproduction or redistribution without permission prohibited. Content is drawn from thousands of newspapers, national magazines, national and local

television programs, radio broadcasts, social-media platforms and additional forms of open-source data. Sources for Bulletin Intelligence audience-size estimates include Scarborough, GfK MRI, comScore, Nielsen, and the Audit Bureau of Circulation. Data from and access to third party social media platforms, including but not limited to Facebook, Twitter, Instagram and others, is subject to the respective platform’s terms of use. Services that include Factiva content are governed by Factiva’s terms of use. Services including embedded Tweets are also subject to Twitter for Website's information and privacy policies. The Department of the Interior News Briefing is published five days a week by Bulletin Intelligence, which creates custom briefings for government and corporate leaders. We can be found on the Web at BulletinIntelligence.com, or called at (703) 483-6100. The Fish and Wildlife Service announced that elephants legally hunted in Zimbabwe and Zambia between 2016 and 2018 can be imported into the United States. Pxhere 

Elephants legally killed in Zimbabwe and Zambia between 2016 and 2018 now can be imported into the United States, under a new Fish and Wildlife Service ruling that pleases hunters but could alarm some wildlife conservation advocates. Revisiting a policy that's already sparked one court battle, the agency announced the new open door to certain imports at an African Wildlife Consultative Forum co-hosted by Tanzania and Safari Club International Foundation. "Legal, well-regulated sport hunting as part of a sound management program can benefit the conservation of certain species by providing incentives to local communities to conserve the species and by putting much-needed revenue back into conservation," said FWS in a statement today. The policy covers elephants hunted in Zimbabwe between Jan. 21, 2016, and Dec. 31, 2018, as well as elephants hunted in Zambia in calendar years 2016, 2017 and 2018. "These positive findings for Zimbabwe and Zambia demonstrate that the Fish and Wildlife Service recognizes that hunting is beneficial to wildlife and that these range countries know how to manage their elephant populations," SCI Foundation President Paul Babaz said in a statement. FWS's decision comes as the Interior Department is reaching out to the hunting community in a number of ways ( Greenwire , Nov. 8). Last week, Interior announced the establishment of the International Wildlife Conservation Council. The advisory group is supposed to raise public awareness of the "benefits that result from U.S. citizens traveling to foreign nations to engage in hunting," according to Interior. The panel must include U.S. hunters actively engaged in "hunting conservation," as well as senior representatives of the "firearms or ammunition manufacturing industry" and the "archery and/or hunting sports industry," according to Interior's guidance. Elephants in Zimbabwe are listed as threatened under the Endangered Species Act. The Obama administration's FWS banned elephant importation from Zimbabwe in 2014. Zambia's elephants are listed as threatened. WILDLIFE 

# Elephant trophy imports get green light again 

> Michael Doyle, E&E News reporter
> Published: Wednesday, November 15, 2017

AN E&E NEWS PUBLICATION 

## 202-676-7675 cell On Nov 15, 2017, at 10:20 PM, Wainman, Barbara <barbara wainman@fws.gov> wrote: Barbara W. Wainman Assistant Director, External Affairs US Fish and Wildlife Service (202) 208-5256 (office) (571) 471-4159 (cell) 

## ---------- Forwarded message ----------From: Parramore, Laury <laury parramore@fws.gov> Date: Wed, Nov 15, 2017 at 1:59 PM Subject: From Greenwire -- WILDLIFE: Elephant trophy imports get green light again To: Barbara Wainman <barbara wainman@fws.gov>, Matthew Huggler <matthew huggler@fws.gov>, Gavin Shire <gavin shire@fws.gov>, "Hoover, Craig" <Craig Hoover@fws.gov>, Tim Vannorman <tim vannorman@fws.gov>, Danielle Kessler <danielle kessler@fws.gov> Cc: Amy Jonach <amy jonach@fws.gov>, Christina Meister <christina meister@fws.gov>, Lisa Jones <lisa m jones@fws.gov> The Fish and Wildlife Service announced that elephants legally hunted in Zimbabwe and Zambia between 2016 and 2018 can be imported into the United States. Pxhere 

Elephants legally killed in Zimbabwe and Zambia between 2016 and 2018 now can be imported into the United States, under a new Fish and Wildlife Service ruling that pleases hunters but could alarm some wildlife conservation advocates. Revisiting a policy that's already sparked one court battle, the agency announced the new open door to certain imports at an African Wildlife Consultative Forum co-hosted by Tanzania and Safari Club International Foundation. "Legal, well-regulated sport hunting as part of a sound management program can benefit the conservation of certain species by providing incentives to local communities to conserve the species and by putting much-needed revenue back into conservation," said FWS in a statement today. The policy covers elephants hunted in Zimbabwe between Jan. 21, 2016, and Dec. 31, 2018, as well as elephants hunted in Zambia in calendar years 2016, 2017 and 2018. "These positive findings for Zimbabwe and Zambia demonstrate that the Fish and Wildlife Service recognizes that hunting is beneficial to wildlife and that these range countries know how to manage their elephant populations," SCI Foundation President Paul Babaz said in a statement. FWS's decision comes as the Interior Department is reaching out to the hunting community in a number of ways ( Greenwire , Nov. 8). Last week, Interior announced the establishment of the International Wildlife Conservation Council. The advisory group is supposed to raise public awareness of the "benefits that result from U.S. citizens traveling to foreign nations to engage in hunting," according to Interior. The panel must include U.S. hunters actively engaged in "hunting conservation," as well as senior representatives of the "firearms or ammunition manufacturing industry" and the "archery and/or hunting sports industry," according to Interior's guidance. Elephants in Zimbabwe are listed as threatened under the Endangered Species Act. The Obama administration's FWS banned elephant importation from Zimbabwe in 2014. Zambia's elephants are listed as threatened. The agency said in 2014 it could not make the finding that the sport-killing of the Zimbabwe elephants "would enhance survival of the species," as the law requires. Officials stated, in part, that the population of Zimbabwe elephants fell to 47,366 in 2013, down from 84,416 in 2007. Safari Club International and the National Rifle Association filed suit to challenge the Zimbabwe ban. The groups contended FWS failed to support its ban with necessary findings and also challenged the agency's data on population and poaching. A trial judge largely sided with FWS. "The agency rationally determined that the status of the elephant population and Zimbabwe's management of the population did not warrant" a finding to allow imports, U.S. District Judge Royce Lamberth ruled last year. A three-judge panel of the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit heard oral arguments in the case last month ( Greenwire , Oct. 13). 

Want to read more stories like this? 

Click here to start a free trial to E&E -- the best way to track policy and markets. 

ABOUT GREENWIRE – THE LEADER IN ENERGY AND ENVIRONMENT NEWS 

Greenwire is written and produced by the staff of E&E News. The one-stop source for those who need to stay on top of all of today's major energy and environmental action with an average of more than 20 stories a day, Greenwire covers the complete spectrum, from electricity industry restructuring to Clean Air Act litigation to public lands management. Greenwire publishes daily at 1 p.m. 

E&E News 122 C Street NW 7th Floor Washington, DC 20001 Phone: 202-628-6500 Fax: 202-737-5299 www.eenews.net 

> All content is copyrighted and may not be reproduced or retransmitted without the express consent of Environment & Energy Publishing, LLC. Click here to view our privacy policy.

# Conversation Contents 

## November 15 -- Greenwire is ready 

# "E&E News" <ealerts@eenews.net> 

## From: "E&E News" <ealerts@eenews.net> 

## Sent: Wed Nov 15 2017 11:51:32 GMT-0700 (MST) 

## To: @fws.gov> 

## Subject: November 15 -- Greenwire is ready (b) (6) Conversation Contents 

## DOI Daily Report 

# "Hinson, Alex" <alex_hinson@ios.doi.gov> 

## From: "Hinson, Alex" <alex_hinson@ios.doi.gov> 

## Sent: Mon Oct 16 2017 09:16:50 GMT-0600 (MDT) 

## To: undisclosed-recipients:; 

## BCC: @fws.gov 

## Subject: DOI Daily Report 

# INTERIOR DAILY COMMUNICATIONS REPORT 

# NEWS TO SHARE: 

## New York Times: Zinke Vows to End ‘Virus’ of Harassment in Park Service 

## “Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke vowed Friday that there would be “no quarter” for employees who sexually harass or discriminate against colleagues. He said he would dismiss anyone found guilty of harassment and supervisors who sweep such charges under the rug. “I have no problem removing manager after manager until there are none left,” Secretary Zinke, a former member of the Navy SEALs, told employees at Grand Canyon National Park, according to prepared remarks made public earlier in the day. “Intimidation, harassment and discrimination are viruses within an operation, and we’re going to eradicate them.” 

# Correcting the Record: 

## CNN: What's up with Ryan Zinke? 

## “A security staffer takes the elevator to the seventh floor, climbs the stairs to the roof and hoists a special secretarial flag whenever Zinke enters the building. When the secretary goes home for the day or travels, the flag — a blue banner emblazoned with the agency’s bison seal flanked by seven white stars representing the Interior bureaus — comes down. In Zinke’s absence, the ritual is repeated to raise an equally obscure flag for Deputy Secretary David Bernhardt. Responding this week to questions from The Washington Post, a spokeswoman for Zinke, a former Navy SEAL commander, defended the Navy flag-flying tradition as “a major sign of transparency.” 

## DOI Statement (Flag Flying): "Ryan Zinke is proud and honored to lead the Department of the Interior, and is restoring honor and tradition to the department, whether it's flying the flag when he is in garrison or restoring traditional access to public lands. Furthermore, flying the secretarial flag is a major sign of transparency. There is no doubt of when the secretary is in HQ or working in the field." 

## DOI Statement (Travel): “The Interior Department under the Trump Administration has always and will always continue to work to ensure all officials follow appropriate rules and regulations (b) (6) when traveling, including using government coach class fare options at all times appropriate and feasible, to ensure the efficient use of government resources.” 

## DOI Ethics Statement (Travel): "The Scheduling Office meets regularly with the Departmental Ethics Office and the Division of General Law to ensure that all travel is thoroughly reviewed and approved in advance and that it is fully compliant with all applicable laws, rules, and regulations. Consistent with this process, the trip was reviewed and approved in advance by both the Departmental Ethics Office and the Division of General Law. In short, the trip - including the Secretary's address to the hockey developmental squad - was completely compliant with all applicable laws, rules, and regulations." --Joint Statement from Melinda Loftin (Department of the Interior Designated Agency Ethics Official and Director of the Departmental Ethics Office) and Edward Keable (Deputy Solicitor - General Law). Both are career members of the Senior Executive Service. 

## Secretary Zinke’s Statement (Travel): I believe taxpayers absolutely have a right to know how much official government travel costs. It’s common sense. At the Department we make those documents available to the public. Using tax dollars wisely and ethically is a big responsibility and is at the heart of good government. There are some times when Interior - regardless of the administration - has to utilize charter services because we often travel to areas that don’t have a lot of flight options. Since being sworn in, I’ve used a charter on three occasions: • On a trip organized by the Senate Energy and Natural Resources Committee in the Arctic Circle • Flying overnight to Montana to speak at the Western Governors Conference and hold a bipartisan round table discussion concerning Western issues and President Trump's Energy initiative. 

## • and traveling between two of the islands that make up the United States Virgin islands. As you’re aware the Interior Department oversees federal policy for the U.S. Territories and the events marked the 100-year anniversary of the territory joining the United States. As the only Senate confirmed member of Interior, I was honored to represent President Trump and accompany Governor Mapp and the Prime Minister of Denmark on this historic occasion. I also took military air with Secretary Purdue so he and I could meet with wildfire crews battling a dangerous Type 1 wildfire that had already taken the life of one firefighter. I also fly military air when I travel with the President and Vice President.All of this travel was done only after it was determined by multiple professionals at the Department that no commercial options existed to meet the schedule. And as importantly, the flights were only booked after extensive due diligence by the career professionals in the Department’s General Law and Ethics divisions. Every single trip I take is pre-approved by them. We are continually looking at ways to lower costs at the Department, and also looking at ways to increase revenues. I will always be honest and upfront about travel – in fact you can follow it on Twitter. 

# OTHER TOP STORIES: 

## New York Times: Drilling in the Arctic Wildlife Refuge: How the G.O.P. Could Finally Break the Impasse 

## “The Trump administration and congressional Republicans in recent weeks have renewed the fight over opening part of an enormous wildlife refuge in northern Alaska to oil and gas exploration. The battle over the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge, which pits Republicans in Washington and much of the political and business establishment in Alaska against congressional Democrats and environmental and conservation groups, has been going on for decades. With Republicans holding both houses of Congress and the presidency, the prospects for opening the refuge, at least to studies of its oil and gas potential, are better than they have been in years. And a budget resolution introduced late last month, and supported by Senator Lisa Murkowski of Alaska, may help pave the way. “There seems to be a decent opportunity to get this done,” said Thomas J. Pyle, president of the Institute for Energy Research, which promotes fossil fuels.” 

## THE HILL: Fight over national monuments intensifies 

## “House Republicans are moving forward with a bill to reform a century-old conservation law, raising the stakes in their ongoing effort to curtail the president's’ ability to set aside wide swaths of federal land as national monuments and protect them from future development. The new legislation, from Rep. Rob Bishop (R-Utah), comes as the White House mulls reductions to several previously declared monuments. That’s an effort environmentalists consider an affront to the Antiquities Act, a law signed by conservation champion Theodore Roosevelt in 1906. Conservatives, industry groups and Westerners have long pushed for changes to the Antiquities Act, saying presidents of both parties have abused the law, handcuffing local communities who could look to create jobs on public land. President Trump is an ally in that effort.” 

## Law 360: Elephant Trophy Ban Faces Tough DC Circuit Bench 

## “A skeptical D.C. Circuit panel on Friday suggested that the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service bypassed its required rule-making process when it banned imports of sport-hunted African elephant trophies from Zimbabwe. The FWS, an agency within the U.S. Department of the Interior, faced pushback from the three-judge panel while fending off a challenge from the Safari Club and the National Rifle Association to its decision to ban the imports under the Endangered Species Act.” 

## ### 

## --

> Alex Hinson

## Deputy Press Secretary Department of the Interior Conversation Contents 

## U.S. Department of the Interior News Briefing for Monday, October 16, 2017 

# Bulletin Intelligence <Interior@bulletinintelligence.com> 

## From: Bulletin Intelligence <Interior@bulletinintelligence.com> 

## Sent: Mon Oct 16 2017 05:02:02 GMT-0600 (MDT) 

## To: <Interior@bulletinintelligence.com> 

## Subject: U.S. Department of the Interior News Briefing for Monday, October 16, 2017  

> Mobile version and searchable archives available here. Please click here to subscribe.
> DATE: MONDAY, OCTOBER 16, 2017 7:00 AM EDT

# Today's Table Of Contents 

DOI In The News 

• New York Times: Zinke Vows To End “Virus” Of Harassment In Park Service. • Washington Times: US, States Struggle To Pay Spiraling Cost Of Fighting Fires. • Politico Magazine: Trump’s Love Affair With Coal. • New York Times: Drilling In The Arctic Wildlife Refuge: How The G.O.P. Could Finally Break The Impasse. • Washington Post: Interior Looks At Behind-The-Scenes Land Swap To Allow Road Through Wilderness Refuge. • Havasu (AZ) News-Herald: Interior Department May Expand Recreational Shooting On Federal Lands. • The Hill: Fight Over National Monuments Intensifies. • U.S. News & World Report: Colorado County Hopeful Changes On Grouse Will Help Industry. • Politico: Kelly Tries To Get Empty Administration Jobs Filled Fast. • Washington Times: Additional Coverage: Ryan Zinke Has Flag Lowered Above Interior Dept. When He Leaves The Building: Report. • CNN: What’s Up With Ryan Zinke? • The Hill: Ryan Zinke Wants To Break Many Conservation Efforts. • Deseret (UT) News: In Our Opinion: We Support Coalition Efforts In Western Lands Debate. • Arizona Daily Sun: Our View: Be Better Prepared For New Era Of Uranium Mining. • Yakima (WA) Herald-Republic: Land-water Fund Supports Our Way Of Life And Economy. • Moffat County Commissioner Don Cook told the Craig Press that the issue impacts about 40 percent of the county’s land area. 

Bureau Of Indian Affairs • Tribe Demands Nix Of Slawson Drilling Go-Ahead. • Flandreau Tribal Police Officer Fired After Reporting High-speed Chase To Feds. 

Bureau Of Land Management 

• Fence Post: Wyoming Attorney Karen Budd-Falen May Be Next BLM Leader. • Kingman (AZ) Daily Miner: Gosar Helping La Paz County With 8,000 Acre Solar Farm. • Alaska Public Radio Network: State Recoups Almost $600,000 From Suit Involving Interior River. 

Bureau Of Reclamation 

• Bella Vista Water District To Reduce Energy Costs With Solar Energy Project. 

Bureau Of Safety And Environmental Enforcement 

• Cleanup Under Way After Large Oil Spill Off Louisiana Coast. • Gulf Oilfield Returns To Normal After Hurricane Nate. 

Fish And Wildlife Service 

• Wall Street Journal: It’s Lizard Vs. Oil Magnate In The Latest Fight Over Fracking In Texas. • USA Today: When Nature Calls: Florida Wildlife Refuge Makes Restrooms Artsy, Educational. • U.S. News & World Report: US Agency’s Bid To Allow Trumpeter Swan Hunting Draws Fire. • U.S. News & World Report: Colorful North Georgia Fish Could Get Federal Protection. • U.S. News & World Report: Century Old Buildings In Northeast Wisconsin To Be Restored. • Law360: Elephant Trophy Ban Faces Tough DC Circuit Bench. • Salem (OR) Capital Press: Federal Wildlife Agency Says Wolf Was Shot, Offers Reward. • Medford (OR) Mail Tribune: OR-7’s Daughter Got Some New Bling. 

National Park Service 

• Kearney (NE) Hub: Nation’s Last Homesteader’s 1945 Allis Chalmers To Be Restored. • WUSA-TV Washington: New Mural Comes To Tenleytown, Honoring The Neighborhood’s History. 

Office Of Insular Affairs 

• Washington Post: Trump Botches Reference To ‘President’ Of Virgin Islands A Day After Rick Perry Called Puerto Rico A ‘Country’. • Reuters: U.S. Diplomacy With North Korea To Continue Until ‘First Bomb Drops’: Tillerson. 

US Geological Survey 

• U.S. News & World Report: Group Launches Campaign To Rename Colorado’s Gore Range. • Additional Reading. 

Top National News 

• NBC: Trump Faces Bipartisan Criticism Over ACA Subsidy Move. • Bloomberg News: Trump Takes Victory Lap On Healthcare Executive Order As Criticism Continues. • NBC: Trump Refuses To Certify Iran Nuclear Deal, Approves Sanctions On IRCG. • New York Times: North Korea Hints At Possible Retaliation Over Joint US-South Korea Exercises. 

Editorial Wrap-Up 

• Washington Post. - “Avoiding Fiscal Disaster.” - “Too Many In Prison.” - “Parochialism Continues To Cripple Metro.” • Wall Street Journal. - “Trump’s NAFTA Threat.” - “The Antidote To Steve Bannon.” - “The Rest Of The Russia Story.” 

Big Picture 

> • Headlines From Today’s Front Pages.

Washington Schedule 

> • Today’s Events In Washington.

Last Laughs 

> • Late Night Political Humor.

# DOI In The News 

## Zinke Vows To End “Virus” Of Harassment In Park Service. 

The New York Times (10/13, Cochrane) reports Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke “vowed Friday that there would be ‘no quarter’ for employees who sexually harass or discriminate against colleagues,” and “said he would dismiss anyone found guilty of harassment and supervisors who sweep such charges under the rug.” In an address to employees at Grand Canyon National Park, Zinke said, “I have no problem removing manager after manager until there are none left. ... Intimidation, harassment and discrimination are viruses within an operation, and we’re going to eradicate them.” The Los Angeles Times (10/13, Sahagun) reports that Zinke said, “Under my leadership we’re going to hold people accountable. We’re also fixing the problem of victims being afraid of retaliation or inaction by codifying the right of victims to report abuse to any manager at any location across the service, and by bringing on an independent investigative partner.” The Washington Post (10/13, Rein) reports that “Zinke said he fired four ‘senior leaders’ in recent weeks, adding, ‘The consequence of [these] actions has to be clear.’” According to an Interior Department official, “the terminations were of senior executives and other senior officials and that the offenders were guilty of sexual harassment, intimidation and abuses of authority.” The Washington Examiner (10/13, Siciliano) reports that “the department announced that it would be increasing its ability to investigate and address harassment complaints by increasing Employee Relations and Labor Relations staff with ten additional employees.” Also, “ethics staff will be beefed up with four additional employees to improve the park service’s ‘capacity to investigate and resolve allegations and incidents of harassment efficiently,’ the agency said.” Meanwhile, the AP (10/14, Fonseca) reports that “a survey of National Park Service employees found widespread complaints of harassment and discrimination in the workplace, and top officials vowed to address the problems that have tarnished the agency’s image.” According to department, “nearly two of five Park Service employees surveyed this year had experienced some sort of harassment or discrimination over a 12-month period.” Also, “more than 10 percent of employees were sexually harassed.” The article adds that “about 19 percent of employees reported gender harassment,” but “less than 1 percent reported sexual assault.” Also reporting are Government Executive (10/13, Corrigan), Cronkite News (10/13, Clair), Outside (10/13, Ogles), Law360 (10/13, Gurrieri), and KGTV-TV San Diego San Diego (10/14, Mendoza, Packard). Local TV coverage was provided by KNXV-TV Phoenix (10/15), KTVK-TV Phoenix (10/13), and KSTU-TV Salt Lake City (10/14). 

## US, States Struggle To Pay Spiraling Cost Of Fighting Fires. 

The AP (10/15, Thompson, Elliott) reports that “the long and brutal 2017 wildfire season is stressing the state and federal agencies that have to pay for the army of ground crews and machinery required to fight them.” The federal government “spent more than $2.7 billion on firefighting in its most recently finished budget year, a record that far surpassed the previous high point of $2.1 billion set just two years ago.” The U.S. is “seeing more and bigger wildfires, and the wildfire season is getting longer.” According to Jennifer Jones, a spokeswoman for the National Interagency Fire Center, “the reasons are hotter, drier weather and a buildup of dead and dying trees because of past fire-suppression practices.” Additional coverage was provided by NPR (10/13, Brumfiel) and the Grass Valley (CA) Union (10/15, Boardman). 

Strong Winds Prompt More California Wildfires Evacuations. The CBS Weekend News (10/14, lead story, 2:30, Morgan) reported that strong winds “prompted more wildfire evacuations today in northern California.” Ten thousand firefighters “are battling 16 large fires that have forced 100,000 people from their homes.” Sonoma County Sheriff Rob Giordano said, “It is not over. Stay away from the houses.” In addition, California Gov. Jerry Brown visited the area and is quoted saying, “This is truly one of the greatest, if not the greatest, tragedy that California has ever faced. The devastation is just unbelievable. It’s a horror that no one could have imagined.” The Los Angeles Times (10/14, Serna, Nelson, Megerian, Kohli) reports the death toll has risen to 40. The Washington Post (10/14, Bonos, Wang, Wootson) says Northern California officials “ordered a new round of mandatory evacuations overnight Saturday for parts of the Sonoma Valley and eastern Santa Rosa as gusting winds returned.” The National Weather Service “warned Friday night that strong winds were expected throughout Northern California, with gusts of 35 to 45 mph, putting much of the region under a red flag warning.” NBC Nightly News (10/14, lead story, 2:30, Diaz-Balart) reported that “a red flag warning stretches up and down the state, warning that fires burning since last Sunday are likely to continue spreading.” And the weather forecast “suggests Mother Nature will not help damp down the 16 fires burning from the north in Mendocino to the south of Los Angeles and Anaheim. No rain expected there until next Thursday or Friday at the earliest.” 

Death Toll Rises In California Wildfires As Forecasts Call For High Winds This Weekend. 

NBC Nightly News (10/13, story 3, 2:00, Holt) reported on the rising death toll in California’s wildfires, calling this “the deadliest week for wildfires in that state’s history, and there’s no sign of a let-up coming.” NBC noted that “many of those who died in the fires were in their 70s and 80s.” NBC also reports that “more than 2,800 homes were destroyed” in Santa Rosa. Meanwhile, there’s a new red flag warning taking effect as “wind gusts could top 50 miles an hour at higher elevations over the weekend, which has everyone here on high alert.” In a front-page story, the Washington Post (10/13, A1, Lowery) reports there were “at least 17 blazes still burning as of Friday.” Santa Rosa Mayor Chris Coursey said Friday, “We all have suffered a trauma here. And we’re going to be a long time in recovering from this incident.” The Los Angeles Times (10/13, Nelson) reports, “Some Santa Rosa residents may be allowed to return home Saturday or Sunday,” and officials said they are working to reopen the Kaiser hospital as well as get power restored. Mayor Coursey said the city has suffered “$1.2 billion in damage, and 5% of its residences were lost to flames.” The New York Times (10/13, A1, Fuller, Pérez-Peña) in a front-page story reports that for those victims of the fire, “advance warning was measured in minutes or seconds, or never came at all,” and “hesitation was lethal.” The Times reports the confirmed death toll at 35 as of “Friday night, making this the deadliest wildfire outbreak in California history, and the figure is likely to climb.” ABC World News Tonight (10/13, story 4, 2:30, Muir) reported that officials “fear possible worsening winds” with “dangerous conditions expected through Sunday.” Smoke has reached San Francisco, “75 miles away.” The fires have spread over an area “larger than New York City,” and at least 3,500 structures have been destroyed. The CBS Evening News (10/13, story 4, 2:35, Mason) reported that “more than 200” people “are unaccounted for,” with local authorities attempting to check their homes. So far “the fires in six counties have burned more than 220,000 acres.” ABC World News Tonight (10/13, story 5, 0:35, Muir) said the fires are “shaping up to be a statewide event,” and that by Saturday morning “we’re talking about Los Angeles and Ventura counties – winds’ll be ripping there.” These “dry Santa Ana winds” have dropped humidity levels to under 10%, “dangerous levels.” The AP (10/13, Elias, Gecker) reports that firefighting crews have arrived in the past day from as far away as Australia and Canada. Firefighters were able to gain “some ground on a blaze burning in the heart of California’s wine country.” California emergency operations director Mark Ghilarducci said, “The emergency is not over, and we continue to work at it, but we are seeing some great progress.” The Los Angeles Times (10/13, Nelson, Kohli, John, Smith, Agarwal) reports, “The Redwood fire in Mendocino County has burned 34,000 acres and was 10% contained as of Friday.” That fire along with the 2,500-acre Sulphur fire have prompted the evacuation of 8,000 people. Meanwhile, the Tubbs fire has burned 34,770 acres and as of Friday “was 25% contained, a jump from the 10% containment gained Thursday night.” 

Northern California Fires Have Destroyed At Least 5,700 Buildings. The New York Times (10/14, Watkins) reports state officials “announced Friday that the wildfires across Northern California have destroyed at least 5,700 buildings.” An analysis by The New York Times “using satellite images in combination with its own ground surveys found that one fire in particular incinerated at least 5,100 structures, which would make it the most destructive wildfire in the state’s history.” The Wall Street Journal (10/14, Ailworth, Lazo, Lovett, Elinson) reports that families and friends are searching frantically to find loved ones amid the devastation in California. Families are showing up at evacuation centers and posting desperate notes on Facebook. The Journal adds that more than 1,300 missing persons reports have been filed already in Sonoma County alone. 

See It, Say It: Climate Change. The Washington Post (10/14) editorializes the natural disaster that started in California last Sunday has been “unprecedented, and so the question that must be confronted is what caused the deadliest week of wildfires in the state’s history.” Gov. Jerry Brown (D) “pointed the finger at climate change. ‘With a warming climate, dry weather and reducing moisture, these kinds of catastrophes have happened and will continue to happen and we have to be ready to mitigate, and it’s going to cost a lot of money,’ he said last week.” The Post concedes no single fire can be specifically linked to climate change, “but scientists say there is a clear connection between global warming and the increase in recent years in the severity and frequency of wildfires in the West.” 

## Trump’s Love Affair With Coal. 

In a piece titled “Trump’s Love Affair With Coal,” Politico Magazine (10/15, Grunwald) reports that “as the Trump administration has battled internally and seesawed publicly over issues like trade, health care, infrastructure and even immigration, there’s no issue where it’s been more consistent and emphatic than its support for coal.” Coal miners showed up “at his raucous campaign rallies, and sure enough, he’s been a relentless advocate for this small and beleaguered industry.” The Los Angeles Times (10/15, Halper) reports that despite the attempts of the Trump Administration to end what it calls the “war on coal,” coal communities have yet to see significant benefit. 

Trump Says He Ended The ‘War’ On Coal Companies. But It’s Too Late To Save Them. 

In a piece for the Washington Post (10/13, Federman), Adam Federman, reporting fellow with the Investigative Fund at the Nation Institute, wrote that while opponents and energy executives depicted the Obama administration’s “three-year moratorium on federal coal leasing” as a “witch hunt” and “a politically motivated sham,” President Trump “promised to save the coal industry from oppressive regulations and slumping sales.” In a March speech at EPA headquarters, Trump announced that he was lifting the moratorium along with other measures. But, Federaman says, the move actually exposed coal’s “weaknesses – and revealed a trend that coal companies and the Trump administration have not acknowledged publicly: The companies are scaling back, in some cases shedding workers and passing on the opportunities the federal government now wants to give them.” While coal companies have outwardly “embraced Trump’s aggressive rollbacks,” in private, coal executives are “deeply skeptical about the administration’s ability to alter market conditions.” 

Additional Coverage. Additional coverage was provided by Bloomberg News (10/13, Frisch) and the Huffington Post (10/13, Marshall). 

## Drilling In The Arctic Wildlife Refuge: How The G.O.P. Could Finally Break The Impasse. 

The New York Times (10/13, Fountain) reports that the Trump Administration and congressional Republicans “in recent weeks have renewed the fight over opening part” of the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge to oil and gas exploration. The battle over the refuge, “which pits Republicans in Washington and much of the political and business establishment in Alaska against congressional Democrats and environmental and conservation groups, has been going on for decades.” Now, “with Republicans holding both houses of Congress and the presidency, the prospects for opening the refuge, at least to studies of its oil and gas potential, are better than they have been in years.” The article adds that “a budget resolution introduced late last month, and supported by Senator Lisa Murkowski of Alaska, may help pave the way.” 

## Interior Looks At Behind-The-Scenes Land Swap To Allow Road Through Wilderness Refuge. 

In a front-page article, the Washington Post (10/15, Eilperin) reports, “The Interior Department is preparing to set aside a decades-old ban on development in federally protected wilderness areas by pursuing a controversial proposal to build a nearly 12-mile road through” Alaska’s Izembek National Wildlife Refuge by turning federal land over to a tribal corporation. Opponents say that “allowing the project would violate the founding principle of federal wilderness...and set a precedent that could endanger other refuges.” The Post says that “multiple federal analyses have suggested alternatives to a new road...as the preferred policy option.” Meanwhile, an Interior study “concluded that the project should not be pursued because many species would be harmed.” However, documents obtained by the Defenders of Wildlife under the Freedom of Information Act “make clear that Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke has elevated the issue to one of the agency’s top priorities, and his appointees have taken deliberate steps to conceal the plan from the public.” 

## Interior Department May Expand Recreational Shooting On Federal Lands. 

The Havasu (AZ) News-Herald (10/14, Hyde) reports that “target shooting, hunting and fishing could be expanded on public lands under a federal proposal drawing attention in Arizona.” Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke “directed land managers to come up with a plan to expand recreational shooting in areas like Ironwood Forest National Monument in Tucson.” Proponents “say it could mean more hunting and fishing opportunities on federal land.” However, critics “think it risks people’s safety and could trash some of nature’s most pristine areas.” Additional coverage was provided by KTAR-FM Glendale, AZ (10/14, Hyde). 

## Fight Over National Monuments Intensifies. 

The Hill (10/15, Henry) reports that House Republicans are moving forward with a bill to reform the Antiquities Act, “raising the stakes in their ongoing effort to curtail the president’s’ ability to set aside wide swaths of federal land as national monuments and protect them from future development.” Rep. Rob Bishop’s bill “would give presidents the power to declare monuments of up to 640 acres without restriction.” However, “as potential designations get bigger, they would have to meet other conditions, including environmental reviews and approval by state and local officials who are currently not involved in the monument designation process.” According to the article, “changing the Antiquities Act, rather than rescinding previously monuments, is a higher priority for the interest groups who oppose monument-making power.” Colorado County Hopeful Changes On Grouse Will Help Industry. 

The AP (10/15) reports that “officials in northwest Colorado say they hope changes to federal plans for dealing with an imperiled bird species will allow more energy development in their part of the state.” The Interior Department is “reconsidering restrictions on mining, oil and gas drilling, grazing and other activities imposed by the Obama administration to protect greater sage grouse.” Additional coverage was provided by the Craig (CO) Daily Press (10/13, Blair) and the Aspen (CO) Times (10/15, Blair). 

## Kelly Tries To Get Empty Administration Jobs Filled Fast. 

Politico (10/15, Cook) reports White House Chief of Staff Kelly is “reversing efforts under his predecessor Reince Priebus to run most” political appointments through the West Wing, giving Cabinet secretaries more autonomy in their selections. According to 10 interviews with White House officials and advisers close to the Administration, Kelly is seeking “to do a better job of finding candidates for the hundreds of jobs” still vacant. Part of the issue with the vacancies is the Administration requirement that candidates be “loyal to the administration and not have spoken harshly about the president during the campaign,” criteria that “created a particular problem” on national security, as scores of Republican experts signed a letter criticizing Trump prior to the election. The issue was exacerbated by “many experienced Republicans” who would ordinarily seek middle- and top-level posts choosing “to sit out the Trump administration in January.” 

## Additional Coverage: Ryan Zinke Has Flag Lowered Above Interior Dept. When He Leaves The Building: Report. 

Additional coverage that Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke “has a flag hoisted above his agency whenever he’s in the building for work” was provided by the Washington Times (10/13, Persons), USA Today (10/13), TIME (10/13, Waxman), Newsweek (10/13, Lanktree), CNN International (10/13), the National Review (10/16, Nordlinger), MSNBC (10/13, Benen), the Billings (MT) Gazette (10/13), the Helena (MT) Independent Record (10/13), the Missoula Current (MT) (10/13, Devlin), the Boston Globe (10/13, Finucane, Meyers), the St. Louis Post-Dispatch (10/13), the Las Cruces (NM) Sun-News (10/15, Rubel), the Daily Mail (10/13, Earle), KGW-TV Portland (OR) Portland, OR (10/13), and WUSA-TV Washington Washington (10/13). 

## What’s Up With Ryan Zinke? 

In an analysis for CNN (10/13, Krieg), Gregory Krieg points out that Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke has been appearing in the headlines since arriving to work for his first day on horseback. Zinke has also grabbed attention for his review of recently designated national monuments and the move “to expand hunting and fishing access on public lands.” 

## Ryan Zinke Wants To Break Many Conservation Efforts. 

In an op-ed for The Hill (10/14, Rodewald, Fitzpatrick), Amanda Rodewald and John Fitzpatrick, both faculty fellows at Cornell University’s Atkinson Center for a Sustainable Future, write that “despite praising and promoting public-private partnerships as cost-effective approaches to managing federal lands,” Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke is proposing “to overhaul agreements built upon decades of negotiations among ranchers, conservationists, sportsmen, industries, and agencies” with its plan “to revise 98 land-use management plans developed to conserve the Greater Sage-Grouse across 10 Western States.” They write that “an unprecedented and bipartisan conservation partnership crafted a package of plans to save the Greater Sage-Grouse,” the “package of plans, finalized in 2015, was the crux of the Interior Department’s decision not to list Greater Sage-Grouse.” They warn that “if the conservation plans are revoked and aggressive development resumed, Greater Sage-Grouse populations are forecast to plummet by up to one-third by 2050, again raising the probability of Endangered Species listing.” In Our Opinion: We Support Coalition Efforts In Western Lands Debate. 

In an editorial, the Deseret (UT) News (10/13) supports the a new coalition that are seeking to promote a “shared vision” for Western lands. Among the signatories to a recent letter sent to members of Congress, are “Utah, Montana and Nevada ranchers, as well as Californian conservationists.” The paper is hopeful “that an effort that has so many groups agreeing on principles will translate to agreement on balanced policies that can lead to conservation and the wise use and development of lands in the West.” 

## Our View: Be Better Prepared For New Era Of Uranium Mining. 

Expecting that Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke will “turn his attention to reopening parts of the Grand Canyon watershed to uranium mining,” the Arizona Daily Sun (10/15) advises opponents “to pick their spots and negotiate for highly restricted and monitored mine sites in exchange for areas of permanent withdrawal.” It urges Grand Canyon advocates “to get up to speed on modern breccia pipe mining and come up with counter-proposals that contain the risks in exchange for protecting the most vulnerable seeps and springs.” 

## Land-water Fund Supports Our Way Of Life And Economy. 

In an op-ed for the Yakima (WA) Herald-Republic (10/15, Joyce), Steve Joyce, managing partner of Red’s Fly Shop in the Yakima River Canyon, urges support for the Land and Water Conservation Fund, which is “at risk once again and will expire in one year unless Congress reauthorizes it.” Joyce hopes Congress will “agree that LWCF is a great deal for all of us and permanently reauthorize this program to the benefit of all Americans.” 

## Moffat County Commissioner Don Cook told the Craig Press that the issue impacts about 40 percent of the county’s land area. 

He says there was little local input when the restrictions were adopted under Obama.knnjbmbghb n Sage grouse once ranged widely across the West but have seen their habitat shrink dramatically as the region develops. Luke Schafer with Conservation Colorado says the changes announced by Interior could throw out years of work on sage grouse. Copyright 2017 The Associated Press. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed. 

# Bureau Of Indian Affairs 

## Tribe Demands Nix Of Slawson Drilling Go-Ahead. 

Law360 (10/13, Phillis) reports that “the Mandan, Hidatsa & Arikara Nation on Thursday told a North Dakota federal court that drilling company Slawson Exploration Co. Inc. appealed an administrative order prematurely, arguing that the court should throw the case out so that the U.S. Department of the Interior’s process can continue unimpeded.” The MHA Nation argued “that because the administrative process had not fully played out and no final agency action had occurred, the federal courts did not have jurisdiction when it issued a temporary restraining order.” 

## Flandreau Tribal Police Officer Fired After Reporting High-speed Chase To Feds. 

The Sioux Falls (SD) Argus Leader (10/13, Ellis) reports that “a former police officer for the Flandreau Tribal Police Department says he was fired after filing a complaint with the Bureau of Indian Affairs over the department’s role in a high-speed chase last summer.” According to the article, “Nick Cottier, a BIA certified tribal police officer, says he was removed after he notified BIA’s district office in Aberdeen about the chase, which left three young adults with life threatening injuries and questions about why the chase took place.” The article notes that “the pursuit violated BIA and department pursuit policies on several levels, according to a copy obtained by Argus Leader Media.” Bureau Of Land Management 

## Wyoming Attorney Karen Budd-Falen May Be Next BLM Leader. 

The Fence Post (10/13, Spencer) reports that Wyoming attorney Karen Budd-Falen could be the next leader of the Bureau of Land Management. Budd-Falen has “worked extensively for private property owners, agricultural operations and local governments.” The article notes that “among her most well-known clients is the Bundy family who made headlines after a 2014 standoff between federal agents and supporters of rancher Cliven Bundy.” 

## Gosar Helping La Paz County With 8,000 Acre Solar Farm. 

The Kingman (AZ) Daily Miner (10/15) reports that “a bipartisan bill to foster economic development and job creation in rural Arizona has moved forward to a committee hearing, Rep. Paul Gosar said in a statement Wednesday.” The bill, H.R. 2620, “will allow La Paz County to buy 8,000 acres from the Bureau of Land Management at fair market value to use for solar energy development.” Gosar said, “Solar energy generation in La Paz County will provide clean renewable power for the southwestern United States as well as create high-paying jobs and economic development for this rural corner of Arizona.” 

## State Recoups Almost $600,000 From Suit Involving Interior River. 

The Alaska Public Radio Network (10/13, Bross) reports that the state of Alaska has “re-couped nearly $600,000 in legal fees from a 2012 lawsuit with the Bureau of Land Management over an Eastern Interior river.” According to U.S. District Court documents, Alaska “sought a million dollars in fees after prevailing in a suit to gain title to the Mosquito Fork of the Forty Mile River.” 

# Bureau Of Reclamation 

## Bella Vista Water District To Reduce Energy Costs With Solar Energy Project. 

WaterWorld (10/13) reports that “the Bureau of Reclamation awarded Bella Vista Water District a WaterSMART Water and Energy Efficiency Grant to install two solar photovoltaic power generation facilities near the cities of Bella Vista and Redding.” The BOR “provided BVWD a grant for $999,938 out of a total project cost of $2,571,782.” 

# Bureau Of Safety And Environmental Enforcement 

## Cleanup Under Way After Large Oil Spill Off Louisiana Coast. 

The Wall Street Journal (10/15, Molinski, Sider) reports LLOG Exploration Co said 9,350 barrels of oil that spilled into the Gulf of Mexico near Louisiana appeared to be contained. The BSEE said the spill, which stemmed from a fractured offshore pipeline, is not expected to impact the shoreline, and there are no reports of injuries. The agency is still investigating the cause of the fracture. The Coast Guard discovered three sheens of oil on the surface Saturday morning during an observation flight. The Wall Street Journal (10/14, Molinski, Sider) reported LLOG shut in all wells that could have been contributing to the spill on Thursday, after workers noticed discrepancies between well and platform data. The company does not think the hurricane caused the fracture in the pipeline, because tests conducted after the storm showed it was in good condition. The New Orleans Times-Picayune (10/14, Schleifstein) reported the BSEE said, “LLOG reported that through the use of a remotely-operated vehicle, a fracture was observed in a jumper pipe leading from Mississippi Canyon Block 209, Well No. 1 to a manifold located on the seafloor. ... As a result of shutting in the well, the flow through the fracture in the pipe has ceased.” The agency went on to say, “A sheen was observed and reported through the National Response Center. ... Monitoring of the residual sheen continues. No shoreline impacts have been reported. There are no reports of personnel injuries.” LLOG also “reported that two skimming vessels sourced from Clean Gulf Associates and Marine Spill Response Corporation are on location and are prepared to respond.” The Baton Rouge (LA) Advocate (10/14) reported the Coast Guard said, “Initial trajectory models calculated by the responsible party and NOAA indicate that any surface oil is expected to move in a southwesterly direction and is not expected to impact the shoreline.” The AP (10/14) and The Hill (10/14, Manchester) also provided coverage. 

## Gulf Oilfield Returns To Normal After Hurricane Nate. 

The Houma (LA) Courier (10/14) reported that as of Saturday, the BSEE said that all but 1.4 percent of the Gulf of Mexico’s 737 platforms had returned to normal operations. Workers returned to all of the 20 rigs working in the Gulf. Around 1 percent of production remained shut in 

# Fish And Wildlife Service 

## It’s Lizard Vs. Oil Magnate In The Latest Fight Over Fracking In Texas. 

The Wall Street Journal (10/13, Matthews) reports on the looming battle between frackers in the Permian Basin of Texas and the rare dunes sagebrush lizard, which environmentalists are seeking to classify as an endangered species. 

## When Nature Calls: Florida Wildlife Refuge Makes Restrooms Artsy, Educational. 

USA Today (10/13, Ruane) reports that the J.N. “Ding” Darling National Wildlife Refuge has “rolled out its newest exhibit: learning lavatories.” Refuge Manager Paul Tritaik joked, “We wanted to transform a necessary nature call into an innovative nature enthrall.” The article notes that “a $125,000 grant from the West Coast Inland Navigation District and contributions from private donors paid for the restroom renovations.” 

## US Agency’s Bid To Allow Trumpeter Swan Hunting Draws Fire. 

The AP (10/14, Karnowski) reports that “a federal plan to let hunters shoot trumpeter swans has drawn fire from some of the people who toiled to bring the majestic white birds back from the brink of extinction.” The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service is “working on a plan that would let hunters shoot them in several states that allow the hunting of tundra swans, a more numerous species.” According to the article, “tundra swans look almost identical to trumpeter swans, especially at a distance, and a tundra swan hunter who mistakenly shoots a trumpeter is subject to a fine.” The article says that “the risk is expected to grow as trumpeter swans spread from states that have invested heavily in restoration efforts, such as Minnesota, Iowa, Wisconsin and Michigan in the Mississippi Flyway.” 

## Colorful North Georgia Fish Could Get Federal Protection. 

The AP (10/15) reports that the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Serviceis consideringing protecting the trispot darter as threatened under the Endangered Species Act. Jeff Powell, an assistant field supervisor at the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, said, “It is a beautiful little fish, and it has a unique life history and it’s really interesting. If we can keep this species alive in the Conasauga River, the way we’re going to do that is protecting water quality, and that benefits everybody.” 

## Century Old Buildings In Northeast Wisconsin To Be Restored. 

The AP (10/15) reports that the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service is “working to restore buildings on some islands in northeast Wisconsin that date back more than a century.” According to the article, “renovations to the 325-acre Plum Island and the 4-acre Pilot Island could total almost $7 million.” The FWS and the Friends of Plum and Pilot Island nonprofit are “covering the costs of the renovations.” 

## Elephant Trophy Ban Faces Tough DC Circuit Bench. Law360 (10/13, Hoover) reports that “a skeptical D.C. Circuit panel on Friday suggested that the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service bypassed its required rule-making process when it banned imports of sport-hunted African elephant trophies from Zimbabwe.” The FWS “faced pushback from the three-judge panel while fending off a challenge from the Safari Club and the National Rifle Association to its decision to ban the imports under the Endangered Species Act.” 

## Federal Wildlife Agency Says Wolf Was Shot, Offers Reward. 

The Salem (OR) Capital Press (10/13, Mortenson) reports that “state and federal wildlife officials are investigating the death of a second wolf discovered in the Fremont-Wenema National Forest of Southern Oregon in the past year.” The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service “offered a $5,000 reward for information leading to the arrest of the person responsible for shooting a gray wolf designated OR-33 by Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife.” 

## OR-7’s Daughter Got Some New Bling. 

The Medford (OR) Mail Tribune (10/13, Freeman) reports that “state and federal wildlife managers will again be able to track gray wolf OR-7’s Rogue Pack now that one of his presumed offspring is sporting a new GPS collar.” In a “textbook” capture, “biologists on the morning of Oct. 3 were able to trap, tranquilize and collar the newly named OR-54 in Klamath County’s Wood River Valley, the eastern portion of the pack’s normal range, according to the Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife.” According to John Stephenson, a wildlife biologist with the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service in Bend, “the roughly 80-pound female is about 1½ years old and is likely from OR-7’s 2016 litter.” 

# National Park Service 

## Nation’s Last Homesteader’s 1945 Allis Chalmers To Be Restored. 

The Kearney (NE) Hub (10/14, Hendee) reports that a 1945 Allis Chalmers Model C tractor will join “the collections of Americana preserved by the National Park Service across the nation when it goes on permanent display at Homestead National Monument of America near Beatrice next month.” Currently, “the machine – used in Alaska by the last person to receive free land under the federal Homestead Act of 1862 – is undergoing preservation treatment by members of the Tractor Restoration Club at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln.” According to the article, “the public unveiling of the 1945 Allis Chalmers tractor used by America’s last homesteader is scheduled for 2 p.m., Nov. 20, at Homestead National Monument of America near Beatrice.” Additional coverage was provided by the Omaha (NE) World-Herald (10/14, Hendee). 

## New Mural Comes To Tenleytown, Honoring The Neighborhood’s History. 

WUSA-TV Washington (10/14, Thande) reports that “a new mural has popped-up in Tenleytown, celebrating the neighborhood’s history.” The mural was “unveiled with a ribbon cutting and dedication ceremony Saturday morning.” The article notes that “Mayor Muriel Bowser attended alongside Councilmember Mary Cheh and National Park Service Superintendent Julia Washburn.” 

# Office Of Insular Affairs 

## Trump Botches Reference To ‘President’ Of Virgin Islands A Day After Rick Perry Called Puerto Rico A ‘Country’. 

The Washington Post (10/13, Blake) reports President Trump, at the Values Voters Summit on Friday, mistakenly said he met with the “president” of the US Virgin Islands. The Post explains that “the Virgin Islands don’t have a president; they have a governor, Kenneth Mapp, with whom Trump met 10 days ago. In fact, their president is none other than Trump himself, since they are Americans.” According to the Post, “Trump’s flub comes a day after [Energy Secretary] Rick Perry made a similar error on Puerto Rico.” 

Black Lawmakers Pushing For More Aid, Attention To Virgin Islands. USA Today (10/13, Berry) reports the Congressional Black Caucus has asked House Speaker Ryan to approve an official congressional trip to the US Virgin Islands “to assess the damage there and draw attention to the plight of residents still struggling in the wake of two major hurricanes.” Caucus Chairman Rep. Cedric Richmond said Thursday, “We think it’s important for people not only who are on the ground to see the cavalry coming, but it’s important for us to go down and independently assess the needs of the people.” Del. Stacey Plaskett, the representative from the US Virgin Islands, “said the region will need much more than the $5 billion” requested by the territory’s governor. 

## U.S. Diplomacy With North Korea To Continue Until ‘First Bomb Drops’: Tillerson. 

Reuters (10/15, Lynch) reports Secretary of State Tillerson told CNN on Sunday that President Trump had instructed him to continue diplomatic efforts with North Korea, saying “those diplomatic efforts will continue until the first bomb drops.” Speaking on CNN’s State Of The Union , Tillerson “downplayed” Trump’s tweets suggesting the Secretary of State was wasting his time trying to negotiate with Pyongyang. Trump “has made it clear to me to continue my diplomatic efforts,” Tillerson said. The AP (10/15) reports Tillerson added, “He is not seeking to go to war.” 

McMaster Defends Trump’s North Korea Tweet. Asked on Fox News Sunday 

(10/15, Rosen) if the President’s tweets regarding North Korea were having a positive impact, National Security Advisor McMaster said, “I think with a real danger is in terms of communicating with Kim Jong-un is that he doesn’t understand how serious we are about his behavior and behavior of the regime.” He added, “The President has been very clear on that and i think that’s beneficial to the safety and security of not only the United States, but our great allies in South Korea and Japan.” 

# US Geological Survey 

## Group Launches Campaign To Rename Colorado’s Gore Range. 

The AP (10/14, Fixler) reports that “the rugged mountain underbite in Summit and Eagle counties known as the Gore Range,” could be renamed. The range is “named for a 19th century Irish aristocrat named Lord St. George Gore,” but “for roughly 10,000 years and before formal government removal to a Utah reservation in 1879, the Ute tribe, who called themselves the Nuntzi, resided in the valley they referred to as Naa Ohn Kara.” According to the article, “the native Ute spoke of the Rockies as the Shining Mountains, and if a local group gets its way that’s what they intend to re-label the local range.” Summit’s Board of County Commissioners “formally supported the change through a recent resolution, and the campaign is gaining steam.” The article says that “the goal is to gain further momentum, hear other pitches for an alternative name — though preference remains giving the Utes a chance to heavily weigh in — and then take it to the USGS’s Board of Geographic Names to decide.” 

## Additional Reading. 

Public Explores Turners Falls ‘Fish Lab’ During Open House. Greenfield (MA) Recorder (10/14, Ashline). 

Groundbreaking Report Documents Hundreds Of Human-triggered Earthquakes. Fox News (10/13). 

Yellowstone Supervolcano Isn’t About To Erupt: But Here’s What Happens When It Does. 

Newsweek (10/13, Frankel). 

Supervolcano Eruption At Yellowstone: No, You Shouldn’t Worry. TIME (10/13, Chan). 

Minnesota To Collar More Than 100 Wild Deer With Tracking Devices To Fine-tune Its Fight Against CWD. Minneapolis Star Tribune (10/14, Kennedy). 

Ruffed Grouse Numbers Lagging For Hunters So Far This Fall In Wisconsin, Minnesota. 

Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (10/14, Smith). U.S. Drillers Idle Rigs In Eagle Ford, Barnett. San Antonio Express-News (10/13, Eaton). 

# Top National News 

## Trump Faces Bipartisan Criticism Over ACA Subsidy Move. 

Coverage of the Sunday morning talk show discussion of President Trump’s decision to halt payments of Affordable Care Act subsidies is mostly negative, with critics from both parties getting more attention than defenders. Analyses also say that the chances for a deal on restoring the payments is slim, which could lead to a government shutdown in December. NBC Nightly News (10/15, story 4, 2:30, Snow) reported, “The President is under fire from an influential group of doctors, insurance companies, and many in the business community after announcing he would end subsidies to offset the cost for Obamacare for low income Americans. Today, even some leading Republicans said the President’s decision will hurt families, including many in the middle class who voted for him.” Reuters (10/15, Morgan) writes that the decision will make it harder for the President “to engage in bipartisan talks with Democrats as Congress edges toward a possible government shutdown.” The Washington Post (10/15, Kane) reports that Senate Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions Chairman Lamar Alexander and ranking member Sen. Patty Murray “have been in negotiations over ways to stabilize the ACA markets ever since Republicans failed in their bid to repeal” the law, but that Trump’s move could complicate matters. The Wall Street Journal (10/15, A1, Armour, Peterson) reports that their plan is expected this week, as is a more conservative version by Sen. Ron Johnson. Sen. Lindsey Graham said on CBS’ Face The Nation (10/15, Dickerson), “I hope that we can get a deal between Sen. Alexander and Patty Murray that will allow us to continue the payments but get reform ... The President is not going to continue to throw good money after bad give $7 billion to insurance companies unless something changes about Obamacare that would justify it.” Sen. Susan Collins said on CNN’s State Of The Union (10/15, Tapper) that “what the President is doing is affecting the ability of vulnerable people to receive healthcare right now.” On ABC’s This Week (10/15), Collins – who cited healthcare as one reason why she decided to stay in the Senate rather than run for Maine governor in 2018 – said that she is “very disappointed in the President’s actions of this past week.” The New York Times (10/15, Hulse) reports that while the Trump Administration “found a legal justification for its decision to stop paying as much as $7 billion this year to insurers in exchange for holding down out-of-pocket expenses for millions of Americans,” Democrats are calling the move “a blatant attempt to undermine the health care law by roiling the insurance markets and driving up costs for consumers.” Sen. Chris Murphy said on Fox News Sunday (10/15, Rosen) that the President is trying to “sabotage” the Affordable Care Act, calling Trump’s action “the equivalent of healthcare arson.” The Hill (10/15, Hellmann, Roubein) reports that Democrat “say Trump now owns ObamaCare, bearing responsibility for any problems that arise in the system, including higher premiums and insurer exits.” The Washington Examiner (10/15, Leonard) reports that there is “great uncertainty over whether they will be able to strike a deal to keep Obamacare’s insurer subsidies flowing now that President Trump will not be funding them” – which could lead to a government shutdown. The Washington Times (10/15, Howell) reports that Democrats “downplayed talk of forcing” a shutdown, but Trump “has shown little interest in a deal that temporarily shores up the 2010 health care law without paving the way for repeal or bolstering other parts of his agenda, leaving little room for a deal.” House Minority Leader Pelosi said on ABC’s This Week (10/15) that it is up to the Republicans to keep the government open in December. She said, “What he’s doing is hurting the American people. This isn’t about policy or politics; it’s about the American people.” The Washington Post (10/15, Kane) reports that Pelosi also cited the ongoing healthcare fight as her reason for remaining her party’s leader in the House, despite some caucus dissension. USA Today (10/15, O'Donnell) reports that Ohio Gov. John Kasich “added to the chorus of critics who are questioning President Trump’s decision to stop paying the subsidies that help cover the out of pocket health care costs of millions of Americans.” Kasich said on NBC’s Meet The Press (10/15, Todd), “What are they doing? Are they just passing these things and people are praising what the President did because of politics? I mean, do they understand the impact that this has on families, on people?” USA Today (10/15) says in an editorial, “Trump and fellow Republicans spent much of the Obama administration complaining about how the president was legislating by the fiat of executive order, bypassing Congress and undermining existing law. So what has President Trump done with his latest actions on the Affordable Care Act? Legislate by fiat, bypass Congress and undermine existing law.” USA Today calls the President’s move “a blatant effort to do himself what Congress refused to do this summer: sabotage the health insurance markets that millions of individual Americans have come to rely on to cover themselves and their families.” But Michael Tanner of the Cato Institute writes in a responding USA Today (10/15) op-ed, “For all the headlines about ‘dismantling Obamacare,’ President Trump’s executive order will likely have less of an impact than its supporters hope or critics fear.” But it “represents a modest step toward giving consumers more choices and expanding millions of Americans’ access to lower cost insurance that better fits their individual needs.” 

## Trump Takes Victory Lap On Healthcare Executive Order As Criticism Continues. 

President Trump took to Twitter on Saturday morning to reiterate his support for the executive orders he signed late this week rolling back provisions of the Affordable Care Act and ceasing the cost-sharing reduction (CSR) payments to health insurers. While media coverage fell heavily from a day earlier, reporting highlighted his new remarks in addition to the growing industry pushback against his recent actions on healthcare. Bloomberg News (10/13, Sobczyk, Litvan, Tracer) reports that the President “boasted about triggering a decline in health insurance stocks with his decision to end federal subsidies to those companies that help low-income Americans afford their medical coverage.” According to the New York Times (10/14, Fortin), “It is unlike...Trump to cheer when stocks fall, but early on Saturday he did just that.” The Times reports that “on Friday, stocks for Centene, Molina and Anthem, insurers that have participated in state marketplaces under the Affordable Care Act, slumped by more than 3 percent” while “shares in Acadia Healthcare declined by more than 3 percent and in Tenet Healthcare dropped by just over 5 percent.” The Hill (10/14, Carter) reports Trump tweeted, “Health Insurance stocks, which have gone through the roof during the ObamaCare years, plunged yesterday after I ended their Dems windfall!” He added, “Very proud of my Executive Order which will allow greatly expanded access and far lower costs for HealthCare. Millions of people benefit!” USA Today (10/14, Schouten) reports the President’s decision “to abruptly cut off federal payments to insurers reverberated through the political world Saturday, putting pressure on Congress to take action to address the high premiums that American consumers could face and jolting the insurance industry.” The Hill (10/14, Sullivan, Bolton) says “key Republican members of Congress want to restore the ObamaCare payments” and Senate Republicans, including Majority Whip John Cornyn, “made clear before leaving Washington for a weeklong Columbus Day recess that they were not fans of simply letting ObamaCare fall apart.” However, The Hill acknowledges “a spokesman for Cornyn said Friday that his boss had not yet weighed in on Trump’s decision to end the ObamaCare payments, adding that his previous statement did not necessarily reflect his views of this week’s action.” On the CBS Weekend News (10/14, story 2, 2:05, Morgan), Errol Barnett reported that although the President “beamed over cutting Obamacare subsidies,” Sen. Susan Collins “feels differently.” Collins said, “I will say that I’m very concerned about the President’s executive order.” Meanwhile, the Washington Post (10/14, A1, Goldstein) in a front-page article warns the timing of the President’s decision “could inflict maximal disruption on the Affordable Care Act enrollment season scheduled to begin in two weeks.” The Post reports “the most immediate upheaval is playing out in a set of states where regulators had ignored the risk that the president might carry out his threat and told insurers not to include any cushion in their 2018 rates for ACA health plans,” but even in “states that prepared for a possible cutoff of the ‘cost-sharing reduction’ payments, Trump’s action so close to the fifth sign-up period is sowing widespread confusion among consumers, according to leaders of insurance exchanges and enrollment-assistance organizations around the country.” MNsure CEO Allison O’Toole said, “The timing couldn’t be worse.” “Nearly 70 percent of those benefiting from the so-called cost-sharing subsidies live in states Trump won last November, according to an analysis by” the AP (10/14, Cassidy, Hoyer), which reports that “the number underscores the political risk for Trump and his party, which could end up owning the blame for increased costs and chaos in the insurance marketplace.” In a separate article, the AP (10/14, Fram, Alonso-Zaldivar) reports America’s Health Insurance Plans, Blue Cross Blue Shield Association, the American Medical Association, the American Academy of Family Physicians, the US Chamber of Commerce and other “leading” healthcare groups “joined Saturday in a letter to House and Senate leaders imploring Congress to restore the payments.” The Hill (10/14, Manchester) reports that in the letter, the organizations warned, “There will be serious consequences without Congressional action: millions will face higher premiums, fewer choices, and less access to the medical care they need. Let’s work together on solutions that deliver the access, care, and coverage that the American people deserve.” According to The Hill (10/14, Delk) “Briefing Room” blog, former Vice President Joe Biden on Saturday “defended the Affordable Care Act as something that brought people ‘peace of mind,’ following President Trump’s executive order aimed at taking action on the law after Congress failed to repeal it.” In addition, The Hill (10/14, Delk) “Briefing Room” blog reports NAACP interim president and CEO Derrick Johnson in a statement “accused President Trump of trying to ‘kill’ the Affordable Care Act on Saturday, saying that his executive order to open up ObamaCare markets to new plans was a ‘new low.’” Johnson said, “President Trump’s executive orders to kill the Affordable Care Act – and make no mistake, this action is intended to do exactly that – are a new low.” 

Media Analyses Consider How Trump Working To Undo Obama’s Legacy. In a front-page analysis, the New York Times (10/14, A1, Baker) says that Trump “leaves little doubt about what he thinks of his predecessor’s top domestic and international legacies,” but “as much as he has set his sights on them, Mr. Trump after nearly nine months in office has not actually gotten rid of” the Affordable Care Act or Iran nuclear deal, though “in the past few days, he took partial steps to undercut both initiatives and then left it to Congress to figure out what to do next. Whether either will ultimately survive in some form has become a central suspense of Mr. Trump’s first year in office.” According to the Times, “In the case of health care, Mr. Trump is making a virtue of necessity.” However, the Times acknowledges “a question for the president is whether partial actions will satisfy supporters demanding a full repudiation of the Obama era.” In an analysis, the Washington Post (10/14, Wagner, Nakamura) states that with Trump “frustrated with his inability to spur Congress to act on much of his agenda,” he “is increasingly using his executive powers in a risky bid to gain leverage with lawmakers on an array of unfulfilled campaign promises.” The Post adds “the strategy has been cheered by many of the president’s core supporters, who view it as Trump making good on his pledge to be a disruptive force in Washington while dismantling the legacy of” former President Obama, “but such political hostage-taking carries considerable risk, particularly given the paralysis that has gripped Congress in the first nine months of the Trump presidency and the real possibility that the ‘deals’ Trump is seeking won’t materialize.” The Post warns “hanging in the balance now are the ability of millions of Americans – including many of Trump’s working-class supporters – to afford health insurance, the fate of hundreds of thousands of “dreamers” who could face deportation, and the international standing of the United States.” In another analysis, the Washington Post (10/14, Balz) contends the President seems to be “perfecting a style of leadership commensurate with his campaign promise to disrupt business as usual in Washington,” which it labels “governing by cattle prod.” The Post describes the tactic as “born of frustration and dissatisfaction” and concedes it has “overload[ed] the circuits of government – from Capitol Hill to the White House to the Pentagon to the State Department and beyond.” The Post adds that “in the face of his own unhappiness, the president is trying to raise the pain level wherever he can.” The New York Times (10/14, Bouchard, Boardman) also takes “a look at four of the most significant areas where Mr. Trump has acted to undo his predecessors’ accomplishments, and where those actions now stand.” The Times says that regarding the ACA, the Administration “has made a variety of moves, including two major actions on Thursday, that could fundamentally undermine the viability of the federal health care marketplaces, a central part of the law.” The Times contends that “for now, the law’s provisions remain in effect, but many people will be closely watching whether the Trump administration’s executive actions drive insurance companies to withdraw from the federal health care exchanges, or, if they stay, whether premiums will rise uncontrollably.” 

## Trump Refuses To Certify Iran Nuclear Deal, Approves Sanctions On IRCG. 

President Trump on Friday announced his Administration would not certify Iran is in compliance with the 2015 nuclear deal, but he stopped short of withdrawing the US from the accord. Trump made clear that if Congress and US allies did not impose tougher conditions on Iran, which he accused of violating the spirit of the accord, then he will terminate the US’ participation. While coverage says Trump’s move stopped short of his campaign promise to completely abandon the accord, cable and network outlets made clear that Trump’s move defied recommendations from Cabinet officials as well as the international community. NBC Nightly News (10/13, story 2, 2:00, Holt) said Trump, in his “fiery speech” threatening to withdraw from the accord, issued “a blistering indictment of Iran’s terrorism, starting with the hostage taking at the US embassy in Tehran in 1979.” Correspondent Andrea Mitchell reported he also ordered “new sanctions against Iran’s hard-line revolutionary guard, instruct[ed] the intelligence agencies to reinvestigate reports Iran is dealing with North Korea, [and] demand[ed] Congress restrict Iran’s missile program and make all restrictions on the nuclear program permanent under US law.” Reuters (10/13, Holland, Bayoumy) reports the President also “gave the U.S. Congress 60 days to decide whether to reimpose economic sanctions on Tehran that were lifted under the pact.” According to a front-page New York Times (10/13, A1, Landler, Sanger) article, Trump “listed three...triggers – the deployment of an intercontinental ballistic missile by Iran, Iran’s refusal to negotiate an extension of the deal’s existing constraint on its nuclear activities and evidence that Iran could manufacture a bomb in less than 12 months” that “could prompt the United States to walk away from the deal.” The Times says that with his “fire-breathing indictment of the Iranian government’s activities around the Middle East,” the President “seemed determined to erase any residual hope that the nuclear deal might form the basis of a new relationship between the United States and Iran.” While the Washington Post (10/13, A1, Gearan, Phillip) in a front-page article acknowledges his decision “throws [the deal’s] future into doubt,” the Post says that his approach “falls well short of Trump’s repeated campaign vow to scrap the deal altogether, marking the latest collision between his ‘America first’ worldview and the realities of global diplomacy and dealmaking” while AFP (10/13, Beatty) similarly says that “behind Trump’s hardline rhetoric was a subtle but significant presidential climbdown.” However, when asked Friday whether he may scrap the entire deal, Trump responded, “Well, I may do that. I may do that. The deal is terrible. So what we’ve done is, through the certification process, we’ll have Congress take a look at it and I may very well do that,” broadcast CNN’s Situation Room (10/13, 6:01 p.m. EDT, Blitzer). The Wall Street Journal (10/13, A1, Schwartz) reports in a front-page article that during his speech at the White House, Trump asserted, “It is under continuous review, and our participation can be canceled by me, as president, at any time.” Reuters (10/13, Oliphant) reports Trump continued, “We’ll see what happens over the next short period of time and I can do that instantaneously.” He added, “I like a two-step process much better” than withdrawing from the accord immediately. The AP (10/13, Lee) reports the President said Congress “may come back with something that’s very satisfactory to me, and if they don’t, within a very short period of time, I’ll terminate the deal.” While Trump cannot unilaterally “terminate the accord, which lifted sanctions on Iran in exchange for concessions regarding its nuclear program,” the AP concedes that “withdrawing the U.S. would render the deal virtually meaningless.” The Washington Times (10/13, Boyer) reports that in his address, the President “also said he’s directing the Treasury Department to sanction Iran’s Revolutionary Guard Corps over its support of terrorism in the Middle East, calling it a ‘long overdue step.’” Trump stated, “We will not continue down a path whose predictable conclusion is more violence, more terror and the very real threat of Iran’s nuclear breakout.” He continued, “Iran is not living up to the spirit of the deal.” Breitbart (10/13, Nazarian) reports the President also referred to the ICRG as “the Iranian Supreme Leader’s corrupt personal terror force and militia.” He called on American allies to join the US “in taking strong actions to curb Iran’s continued dangers and destabilizing behavior, including thorough sanctions outside the Iran deal that target the regime’s ballistic missile program and support for terrorism, and all of its destructive activities; of which there are many.” In a release, Treasury Secretary Mnuchin said the Administration made the designation against the ICRG “for providing support to the IRGC-QF, the key Iranian entity enabling Syrian President Bashar al-Assad’s relentless campaign of brutal violence against his own people, as well as the lethal activities of Hizballah, Hamas, and other terrorist groups” Nonetheless, Bloomberg News (10/12, Wadhams) states that the Administration “stopped short of declaring the Revolutionary Guard, which plays a key military and economic role within Iran, a foreign terrorist organization.” Politico (10/13, Toosi) similarly says that “in what amounted to a pulled punch, he stopped short of formally branding the notorious military unit a terrorist group.” Politico describes the action as an apparent “compromise between Trump’s desire to crack down on perceived Islamist threats and the tricky nature of singling out an arm of a foreign government, even a hostile one, for punishment.” Leading CNN’s Situation Room (10/13, 5:01 p.m. EDT, Blitzer), correspondent Jim Acosta reported Trump “turned his campaign rhetoric into action” by granting Congress “a chance to toughen the agreement. If Congress fails to act, he warns, he may scrap the deal.” Trump “arrived at his policy after senior leaders in his own Cabinet pleaded with him to stay in the agreement now. The President was still in a defiant mood, insisting Iran had violated the agreement.” Trump’s decision came a day after Secretary of State Tillerson told reporters, “We don’t disagree, we don’t dispute that [Iran] is under technical compliance.” Acosta added (10/13, 5:06 p.m. EDT, Blitzer) that “there are mixed messages coming from the Administration.” Acosta continued that while Trump “said today that he may end up canceling the agreement altogether,” Tillerson “told reporters that the US would remain in the deal if Congress does nothing, and it’s unclear if Republican lawmakers will be able to find the votes on Iran when they have failed to act on so many other fronts.” Margaret Brennan, in the lead story for the CBS Evening News (10/13, lead story, 2:25, Mason), also called Trump’s decision “at odds with his own national security team.” She added Tillerson, Defense Secretary Mattis, and Chairman of the Joint Chiefs Joseph Dunford “designed the new strategy as a compromise to keep Mr. Trump from scraping the agreement completely.” Reuters (10/13, Ali) reports Mattis “said on Friday he had not yet seen any provocative actions from Iran following...Trump’s speech...and added there had been no change in U.S. military posture so far.” Mattis told reporters, “Right now, we keep an eye on the potential for more provocations from the Iranians but right now we have not seen that.” Mattis added, “With the Iranians destabilizing record from Lebanon to Syria, from Yemen to Afghanistan, of course we watch for this. ... Right now we are not changing our posture.” The Hill (10/13, Mitchell) reports Mattis said, “I give advice to the president. He was elected by the American people and I stand by this Iran strategy as it came out today.” A Defense Department spokesman told Reuters (10/13, Stewart) the Pentagon is “assessing the positioning of its forces as well as planning but offered few details.” The spokesman explained, “We are identifying new areas where we will work with allies to put pressure on the Iranian regime, neutralize its destabilizing influences, and constrain its aggressive power projection, particularly its support for terrorist groups and militants.” Meanwhile, The Hill (10/13, Bowden) reports Tillerson “said that Trump’s decision to declare Iran noncompliant presented a ‘real opportunity’ for the U.S. and its allies to address more of Iran’s actions in the region.” Tillerson continued, “I think we have a real opportunity to address all the threats that are posed by Iran.” Tillerson added, “I think the plan the president’s laid out has been quite clear in terms of articulating those threats; that really, it’s in all of our interests to work together.” Breitbart (10/13, Mason) reports Tillerson and National Security Advisor H.R. McMaster in a conference call on Thursday “laid out the broad strokes of what a White House fact sheet referred to as ‘President Donald J. Trump’s New Strategy on Iran.’” According to Breitbart, McMaster described the policy change as the result of “months of an inter-agency process.” Former White House advisor Dr. Sebastian Gorka last week told Breitbart News, “I can tell you one thing: I was in the Oval the day it was recertified last. It was the president behind the Resolute Desk. It was Steve [Bannon] and myself on the side of the president. It was H.R. McMaster, Rex Tillerson, [Steven] Mnuchin who were saying we have to recertify.” Politico (10/13, Johnson) credits Ambassador Haley with becoming the Administration’s “most vocal public proponent of decertification – and Trump’s favorite internal voice on Iran – further boosting her standing with the president at a time when she is seen as a potential successor to Tillerson, whose tense relationship with Trump has burst into the open in recent days.” Politico states that “in internal debates, where most members of the...cabinet initially opposed decertification, Haley played a similar role: She was ‘the most engaged and most vocal’ cabinet member who favored decertification, according to a senior White House aide.” However, Politico adds “the fingerprints of former U.N. ambassador John Bolton, whose access to Trump was recently limited by chief of staff John Kelly, were also on Trump’s Friday address in the form of a warning that Trump, who opted not to push for steps that could undo the nuclear agreement, could still cancel the deal ‘at any time.’” 

GOP Lawmakers Praise Trump’s Stance, Begin Drafting Reforms To Nuclear Deal. 

Leading Fox News’ Special Report (10/13, 6:01 p.m. EDT, Baier), correspondent John Roberts reported lawmakers are already “working on a fix.” Roberts said Senate Foreign Relations Committee Chairman Bob Corker along with Sens. Tom Cotton, and Marco Rubio “are proposing the re-imposition of US sanctions if Iran approaches the threshold of developing a nuclear weapon; making those restrictions permanent by removing the sunset provisions; bolstering International Atomic Energy Agency verification powers; and limit Iran’s advanced centrifuge program.” However, Reuters (10/13, Zengerle) reports that while Corker and Cotton “offered an outline of legislation they said would ‘address flaws’ in the accord,” Rubio “said he had ‘serious doubts’ about the Corker-Cotton plan,” although he agreed to “reserve judgment until the final measure, but preferred that Trump abandon the deal.” The Hill (10/13, Kheel) reports Rubio said, “President Trump made the right decision to decertify the Obama administration’s Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action on Iran (JCPOA). ... He is correct in finding that this deal is not in our national interest.” The Hill (10/13, Oliveira) reports GOP lawmakers “said Trump’s move to decertify the deal, known formally as the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) – while stopping short of withdrawing from the accord – signaled the United States’s deep issues with the deal.” Rep. Tom Garrett, a member of the House Foreign Affairs Committee, told The Hill, “I think the statement that it would send is we’re not happy with terms of JCPOA.” Rep. Francis Rooney, another member of the committee, added, “Declining to certify might present an opportunity to see if we can get Iran back to table to fix some of the blatant problems and deficiencies that exist in the joint plan of action now.” The Daily Caller (10/13, Picket) reports House Speaker Ryan also “praised...Trump Friday for decertifying the nuclear agreement.” Ryan said, “I support President Trump’s decision to reevaluate this dangerous deal, and the House will work with his administration to counter Iran’s range of destabilizing activities.” Meanwhile, The Hill (10/13, Kheel) reports that “top House Republicans said Friday that the chamber would take up bipartisan Iran sanctions legislation unrelated to an Obama-era nuclear deal after President Trump decertified the deal and called on Congress to amend a law providing oversight of the accord.” In a statement, House Majority Leader McCarthy, Foreign Affairs Committee Chairman Ed Royce, Armed Services Chairman Mac Thornberry, and Rep. Liz Cheney said, “We cannot allow such a regime to become a nuclear power. The nuclear deal has significant flaws that must be addressed if that objective is going to be accomplished.” They continued, “We are committed to work with the president to address these flaws, hold Iran strictly accountable to its commitments and support efforts to counter all the Iranian threats.” However, Reuters (10/13, Zengerle) reports that McCarthy “did not advocate ending the deal.” The Washington Examiner (10/13, Ferrechio) says Senate Majority Leader McConnell “joined other Republicans in praising Trump’s announcement,” which he touted as “an appropriate response to the consequences of the Obama administration’s failed policies.” McConnell added, “I am committed to working with the Trump administration to constrain Iran’s support for terrorism and proxy militias, impede the threat of ballistic missiles and deny Iran the path to a nuclear weapon.” McConnell continued, “Strengthening the criteria attached to a presidential certification is solely within the powers of the American government and based on making the verification of the JCPOA more in keeping with our national interests.” The Hill (10/13, Delk) “Briefing Room” blog reports Senate Armed Services Committee Chairman John McCain also “praised President Trump’s decision to decertify Iran’s compliance with the Obama-era international nuclear accord, saying Tehran has ‘literally been getting away with murder.’” McCain asserted, “The goals President Trump presented in his speech today are a welcomed long overdue change.” AFP (10/14, Smialowski) reports that while Corker and Cotton proposed an amendment to the Iran Nuclear Agreement Review Act (INARA) “that would toughen Iran’s compliance requirements and address ‘deficiencies’ in the deal,” diplomats “expressed worry that tweaking INARA could jeopardize the agreement, and warned that the US unilaterally abolishing the “sunset” would make it harder to negotiate with allies that back the existing agreement.” The Washington Examiner (10/13, Weaver) reports House Minority Leader Pelosi “called President Trump’s Friday threat to withdraw from the Iran nuclear agreement a ‘grave mistake’ that threatens American security, and argued that the Iranians are in compliance with the 2015 agreement.” She added, “The president, I think, is being frivolous with this.” Sen. Ben Cardin, the ranking member of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, told CNN’s Situation Room (10/13, 6:11 p.m. EDT, Blitzer) that while he “opposed the agreement when it was presented, because I thought we could have done a lot better dealing with Iran’s non-nuclear issues and dealing with what happens after the time period to make sure Iran does not become a nuclear weapons state, but it’s clearly in our national security interest for the Untied States to comply with the nuclear agreement as long as Iran’s complying with it.” On those non-nuclear issues, like Iran’s human rights violations and support of terrorism, Cardin said the US needs “the international community working with us so that we can get unified sanctions to get Iran to change its behavior.” Cardin added that withdrawing from the agreement gives the US “less leverage” on those issues, as it isolates the US internationally. In an interview with USA Today (10/13, Shesgreen), Cardin denounced Trump’s decision as “reckless and dangerous.” In a statement, Cardin also accused Trump of making a “‘political decision’ that will make it harder for the U.S. to address other threats posed by Iran by imposing ‘self-inflicted international isolation on the United States.’” CNN (10/13, Barrett, Killough, Walsh) reports online that while he had “opposed the original deal,” Senate Minority Leader Schumer in a statement “predicted Congress would not scrap” the deal. He said Mattis and Dunford “both said that it’s in our national security interest to keep the JCPOA in place and I agree. ... I believe Congress, both Democrats and Republicans, will heed their recommendation.” Rep. Eliot Engel, the ranking member of the House Foreign Affairs Committee, “said Iran must never be able to obtain a nuclear weapon but that Trump’s approach is wrong.” On CNN’s Situation Room (10/13, 5:30 p.m. EDT, Blitzer), Rep. Ruben Gallego called Trump’s decision “deeply irresponsible.” He explained, “While I was sitting on the Armed Services Committee, I actually asked the Secretary of Defense whether or not Iran was in compliance, if he recommended that we stayed within the JCPOA. And the Secretary of Defense, Mattis, said, yes, yes, we should.” Gallego posited Trump made the decision not “for any type of foreign security, but really to fulfill the President’s ego” by acting on a campaign promise. Second, Gallego said, “the problem is, what does this mean for the rest of our partners around the world?” Lastly, he said, “doing these types of actions does not encourage peaceful end to” the North Korean nuclear threat. AB Stoddard of Real Clear Politics told Fox News’ Special Report (10/13, 6:43 p.m. EDT, Baier) that with Trump’s decision, “the onus is completely on Congress. As I said before, I don’t have a lot of faith in Congress doing anything in 60 days. There are members, like Sen. Corker and Sen. Cotton, they want to make – they want to place greater restrictions. They are watching the ICBM testing, the things that the Iranian regime is doing that violates the spirit but not per se the letter of the law. That is going to be a really hard sell.” 

Gulf States, Israel Embrace Trump’s Approach, As Iran, EU, Russia, And UN Condemn Efforts To Weaken Nuclear Deal. Chief White House correspondent Jonathan Karl of ABC World News Tonight (10/13, story 3, 2:15, Muir) reported that the President defied “some of America’s closest allies, and even some of his own advisers,” in declaring “that Iran is not keeping its side of the nuclear agreement negotiated under President Obama.” Karl added Tillerson “had been working the phones to reassure European allies who are firmly committed to the Iran deal,” and “they’re not particularly happy with the President’s actions,” although “after those conversations, what’s notable is that France, Germany, and the UK did not directly criticize the President and said they would work with the United States on curbing Iran’s support for terrorism and its missile program.” Fox News’ Special Report (10/13, 6:05 p.m. EDT, Baier) broadcast Tillerson as stating, “I fully expect that our allies and friends in Europe and in the region are going to be very supportive in efforts undertaken to deal with Iran’s threats.” Reuters (10/13, Yaakoubi) reports Saudi Arabia “welcomed the new U.S. policy toward Iran and said lifting sanctions had allowed Iran to develop its ballistic missile program and step up its support for militant groups, state news agency SPA reported on Friday.” Reuters (10/13, Hashem) reports the United Arab Emirates also “said on Friday it fully supported the new U.S. policy toward Iran and it renewed its commitment to work with Washington to counter Iran’s support of extremism, the state news agency WAM reported.” The AP (10/13) reports Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu in a statement “congratulated” Trump and “praised what he called a ‘courageous decision.’” Reuters (10/13, Williams) reports Netanyahu in a Facebook video said Trump “boldly confronted Iran’s terrorist regime [and] created an opportunity to fix this bad deal, to roll back Iran’s aggression and to confront its criminal support of terrorism.” Reuters (10/13, Williams) reports Israeli Intelligence Minister Israel Katz “said...Trump’s speech...was ‘very significant’ and could lead to war given threats that preceded it from Tehran.” Meanwhile, senior international correspondent Frederik Pleitgen of CNN’s Situation Room (10/13, 6:05 p.m. EDT, Blitzer), reporting from Tehran, said Iran’s reaction “has been extremely forceful” and “extremely fast.” Pleitgen reported Iranian President Hassan Rouhani responded “with a speech of his own, and absolutely blasted the US President, saying that the US can’t unilaterally pull out of that deal, accusing him of lies and deceit.” Rouhani cautioned “at some point that President Trump’s remarks show that the US was, quote, ‘against the Iranian people.’” Pleitgen said “two things that really stood out” about Rouhani’s comments. “On the one hand, he said the Iranians would not pull out of the deal unless the US was not in compliance,” meaning “if the US does levy new sanctions against Iran.” More importantly, Pleitgen said, Rouhani “defended the Revolutionary Guard,” meaning “sides that have been at odds with one another really seem to be pulling together in the face of what...Trump said.” The Washington Post (10/13, Cunningham) reports that while Rouhani had recently “sought to curb the Revolutionary Guard’s role in a stagnant economy as part of a bid to woo further foreign investment,” he now “said...Iran is united in the face of foreign aggression.” Rouhani asserted the Administration has “made us more united than ever. ... You can try to separate the government and the people, but you cannot sow discord.” The AP (10/13, Karimi) reports Rouhani in his televised address also “said Friday his country ‘will continue to stick to’ the nuclear deal, calling it ‘much stronger’ than U.S. President Donald Trump thinks.” He added, “The U.S. is more lonely than ever about the deal.” The Wall Street Journal (10/13, Fitch, Eqbali, Iran) reports Rouhani said, “The Iranian people will not bend down before a dictator. It has never surrendered and will never.” He continued that “no paragraph or article or note will be added” to the deal to placate Trump. USA Today (10/13, Stanglin) reports he asserted, “No president can revoke an international document backed by the U.N. on his own.” However, Reuters (10/13, Hafezi) reports that “Rouhani said Tehran might walk away if the continuing agreement does not serve the country’s national interests” and “said Tehran will double its efforts to expand the country’s defense capabilities, including the country’s ballistic missile program despite the U.S. pressure to suspend it.” Elizabeth Palmer of the CBS Evening News (10/13, story 2, 1:50, Mason) reported Rouhani “hinted that Iran may escalate its conventional weapons program, possibly its ballistic missile development. For millions of Iranians, especially the young who counted on improved relations with the US and the rest of the world to bring investment, jobs, and reform, this is a black day. They fear hard liners will now gain ground, arguing the US can’t be trusted.” The Washington Times (10/13, Muñoz) reports Iranian cleric Ayatollah Mohammad Ali Movahedi Kermani also “lashed out at...Trump’s decision to decertify the nuclear deal with the country Friday, saying Washington’s actions ‘revealed the true image of America across the world.’” In a speech, Kermani described Trump’s action as “ridiculous” and “said the move was just another example of U.S.-led efforts to bring Tehran under the heel of the West.” Reuters (10/13, Hafezi) cites the Tasnim news agency in reporting Esmail Ghaani, the deputy commander of the IRGC Quds force, said, “We are not a war-mongering country. But any military action against Iran will be regretted.” Ghaani continued, “Trump’s threats against Iran will damage America. ... We have buried many...like Trump and know how to fight against America.” Reuters (10/13, Solovyov) additionally cites the TASS news agency in reporting Iranian parliament speaker Ali Larijani warned that if the US withdraws from the deal, the agreement would collapse and “said that Washington’s withdrawal from the nuclear deal could lead to global chaos.” In another article, Reuters (10/13, Mohammed, Strobel) reports “key U.S. allies, including Britain, France and Germany who, along with Russia and China, negotiated the deal with Iran alongside the European Union,” also “defended the 2015 nuclear agreement with Tehran and said they would stick by it, after...Trump threatened to terminate the agreement.” The New York Times (10/13, Castle, Erdbrink) says “the reaction was far from panicked” and while “they avoided direct criticism of Mr. Trump, Prime Minister Theresa May of Britain, Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany and President Emmanuel Macron of France said in a rare joint statement that they ‘stand committed’ to the 2015 nuclear deal and that preserving it was ‘in our shared national security interest.’” Reuters (10/13, Melander, Irish) reports Macron also “assured...Rouhani on Friday of France’s commitment to the 2015 Iranian nuclear deal, Macron’s office said.” The Wall Street Journal (10/13, Norman) reports EU foreign policy chief Federica Mogherini additionally told reporters, “The president of the United States has many powers, not this one.” She added, “The agreement is working, has been implemented, continues to be implemented. I would expect all sides to stick to it.” The Washington Post (10/13, Birnbaum, Witte) reports also Mogherini ‘described the deal as “robust’ and said Iran is upholding its end of the bargain, with no recorded violations.” She continued, “The deal has prevented and continues to prevent and will continue to prevent Iran from developing a nuclear weapon.” In addition, Reuters (10/13, Teterevleva) reports the Russian Foreign Ministry issued a statement Friday that said Trump’s announcement “once again underlines the inadmissibility of using aggressive and threatening rhetoric in international relations.” Reuters (10/13, Lowe) cites the RIA news agency in reporting that Russian Deputy Foreign Minister Sergei Ryabkov “said...it was ‘extremely troubling’ that...Trump was raising questions that had been settled when an international deal on Iran’s nuclear program was signed.” Reuters (10/13, Kolodyazhny) reports Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov also “told his Iranian counterpart Mohammad Javad Zarif that Russia remains fully committed to the Iran nuclear deal, Russia’s foreign ministry said in a statement.” Meanwhile, the AP (10/13) reports a spokesman for UN Secretary-General Antonio Guterres said Guterres “‘strongly hopes’ the Iran nuclear deal will remain in place.” Reuters (10/13, Nasralla) reports Yukiya Amano, director general of the International Atomic Energy Agency, “reiterated on Friday that Iran was under the world’s ‘most robust nuclear verification regime’” and asserted, “The nuclear-related commitments undertaken by Iran under the JCPOA are being implemented.” 

Former US Officials Criticize Trump’s Position On Iran Deal. The Hill (10/13, Delk) “Briefing Room” blog reports former Vice President Joe Biden in a Facebook post on Friday “said President Trump’s decision to decertify Iran’s compliance with an international nuclear deal would ‘isolate’ the U.S.” He warned, “This decision will cost us leverage. It will weaken our unity with our allies. It will damage our credibility.” Former CIA Director and Defense Secretary Leon Panetta, on CNN’s Situation Room 

(10/13, 6:25 p.m. EDT, Blitzer), similarly said he worries Trump’s action is “going to damage the United States’ position in the world. It’s going to weaken our world leadership at a very dangerous time.” Panetta continued, “It raises questions about whether we will stick to our word, whether we’re credible, and it really raises questions about our going it alone in the world and not working with our allies and working with others to try to make sure that we try to get Iran to address these other concerns.” He said the move also “creates a very dangerous example of a President who is anxious to blow up agreements but doesn’t quite have a strategy as to where we’re going once he does that.” The Hill (10/13, Manchester) “Briefing Room” blog reports former Secretary of State John Kerry in a statement also “slammed” Trump. Kerry said, “I strongly hope that the other six signatories will prove to the world what responsible behavior is, and adhere to this agreement – no matter what false accusations and contrived provocations are put forward by President Trump.” He continued, “Our allies and our Congress must not act as the only adults left in the room with the power to protect our national interests. I served in the Senate for nearly 28-plus years. I can’t imagine a more important moment than this one where cooler, wiser voices have had a bigger responsibility to put a policy back on track.” In a New York Times (10/13, Blinken) op-ed, Antony Blinken, the former United States Deputy Secretary of State and Deputy National Security Advisor to former President Obama, asserts “Trump waxed disingenuous about the deal – weaving together misstatements, exaggerations and distortions – to trigger the one totally subjective standard for decertification in the 90-day review law: an assertion that the nuclear steps Iran is actually taking to implement the J.C.P.O.A. are insufficient to warrant the suspension of sanctions.” He calls on Congress to “resist the temptation – and the political pressure – to unilaterally renegotiate the Iran deal and therefore kill it.” Blinken concludes lawmakers should instead “usefully lay out what Mr. Trump’s speech did not: an actual comprehensive strategy to contend with Iran’s non-nuclear behavior, including diplomatic efforts to end the conflicts in Yemen, Syria and Iraq that Iran exploits; stronger security cooperation with the Gulf States and Israel; better coordination with America’s allies; and targeted sanctions on Iran that do not violate the nuclear accord.” CNN’s Situation Room ’s (10/13, 5:38 p.m. EDT, Blitzer) Jim Sciutto reported David Axelrod, adviser to former President Obama, suggested that “changing the terms would be viewed by the Iranians as bad faith,” and “essentially breaking the contract.” According to Axelrod, Trump “doesn’t seem to feel there are consequences to this, but there are, not just in terms of the Iranians, but our international partners.” Writing in Politico Magazine (10/13, Shapiro), Daniel Shapiro, a distinguished visiting fellow at the Institute for National Security Studies in Tel Aviv who previously served as US ambassador to Israel and was a senior director for the Middle East and North Africa at the National Security Council during the Obama Administration, reflects on the drafting of the deal and outlines what he believes is “that’s the least risky, best managed potential outcome of Trump’s reckless decertification decision.” McClatchy (10/13, Ordoñez, Goldstein) reports other former US diplomats and their counterparts abroad are also “shaking its head at Trump’s actions and wondering how long allies and adversaries will continue to trust the United States.” 

International Companies Concerned By Trump’s Iran Stance. The Wall Street Journal (10/13, Faucon, Kent) reports that Tillerson on Friday said American companies approved to do business with Iran are not affected by Trump’s demands on the nuclear deal, but the executives of major companies now have to decide whether they can tolerate the uncertainty of possible future sanctions and so will likely soon have to make a choice whether to remain in the country. 

WSJournal Lauds Trump As WPost, Columnists Criticize Action On Iran Deal. The Wall Street Journal (10/13) editorializes that President Trump’s decision not to certify the Iran nuclear deal is a positive strategic move away from his predecessor’s failure to stand up to Iran’s aggression in the Middle East, even if his policy shift does not take tangible action on the accord. In an editorial, the Washington Post (10/13) condemns the President for his “act of political vanity and geopolitical folly” that makes “one of the most serious national security challenges facing the United States, that of Iran, considerably worse.” While the Post acknowledges “the nuclear accord is flawed” and says the Administration “is justified in imposing sanctions on Iran’s Revolutionary Guard Corps,” Trump “appears to have no clear plan to address Iran’s military entrenchment in Syria, which is threatening to touch off a new conflict with Israel.” The Post concludes “Rather than tackling those urgent challenges, Mr. Trump prefers to renounce the legacy of his political nemesis Barack Obama and thereby reopen the one front where Tehran is currently contained. North Korea will take note: The United States cannot be trusted to stick to any nuclear accord.” In his New York Times (10/13, Stephens) column, Bret Stephens asserts “Donald Trump has taken a hostage” in the form of the deal because his decision not to certify the deal is “a psychological step, a brash signal that Trump is prepared to see the deal fail and accept the consequences, including war, if he can’t negotiate a better one.” In her Washington Post (10/13, Rubin) column, Jennifer Rubin says the President’s announcement “set off a series of predictable and negative consequences.” She adds, “I strongly disagree with the President’s reckless, political decision and his subsequent threat to Congress. At a moment when the United States and its allies face a nuclear crisis with North Korea, the President has manufactured a new crisis that will isolate us from our allies and partners, compromising our ability to employ a diplomatic surge on the Korean Peninsula.” In his Washington Post (10/13, Waldman) column, Paul Waldman contends “it would be edifying to hear Trump or some of his aides and allies explain exactly how this scenario is supposed to play out and where it’s supposed to end up. But if they tried to do that, it would become obvious how little they’ve thought it through.” He asserts “Presidents don’t need to be policy geniuses, but at the very least they need a sense of how cause leads to effect and a vision of what they’re trying to accomplish.” However, Waldman concludes “Trump has neither, which means he’s either being pushed around by people who have figured out how to manipulate him for their own ideological ends, or he’s flopping about aimlessly with no principles to guide him except if Obama did it, I should do the opposite. Either way, it’s not very encouraging.” In his Washington Post (10/13, Ignatius) column, David Ignatius warns “Trump’s speech tossed a verbal grenade into a turbulent Middle East,” which while it “may have been the goal of a president who styles himself as ‘the great disrupter’” also “fuels regional feuds that Trump can’t control and provokes disputes with both allies and adversaries that may frustrate America’s interest in curbing Iran’s bad behavior.” According to Ignatius, “facing so many flash points in trying to contain Iran, Trump has chosen to put the nuclear issue center stage, once again.” He adds that “rather than focusing on Iranian behavior, Congress and foreign allies will instead be preoccupied anew with Trump’s threatening statements about the future of the nuclear agreement. It will be about Trump, more than Iran. But maybe that’s the way he wants it.” 

## North Korea Hints At Possible Retaliation Over Joint US-South Korea Exercises. 

The New York Times (10/13, Sang-Hun) reports that “amid heightened tensions over North Korea’s advancing nuclear missile program,” a 10-day joint US-South Korea naval exercise will begin Monday “in waters east and west of South Korea.” Both the US and South Korea maintain the drills are defensive in nature, but it is “unclear whether North Korea will lash out with a weapons test during the exercise, as it often has in the past.” The official Korean Central News Agency on Friday quoted North Korean researcher Kim Kwang-hak as stating, “We have already warned several times that we will take counteractions for self-defense, including a salvo of missiles into waters near the U.S. territory of Guam.” He continued, “The U.S. military action hardens our determination that the U.S. should be tamed with fire and lets us take our hand closer to the ‘trigger’ for taking the toughest countermeasure.” 

China Reports Significant Drop In Imports From North Korea. The Washington Post (10/13, Denyer) reports Huang Songping, a spokesman for China’s General Administration of Customs, announced Friday “that China’s imports from North Korea fell 37.9 percent in September, the seventh successive monthly decline,” and that its “exports North Korea dropped a more modest 6.7 percent in September.” Noting “China is North Korea’s economic lifeline, and Beijing’s role in the sanctions effort is critical,” the Post says that “there is reason to believe that there has been a recent slowdown in trade, experts say.” Still, “fishermen and seafood traders said smuggled seafood was still moving across the border.” 

EU To Ratchet Up Pressure On North Korea, Venezuela. The Wall Street Journal (10/13, Norman) reports that on Monday, European Union foreign ministers are expected to approve a new series of measures aimed at further pressuring North Korea over its nuclear threat. Diplomats also said bloc officials are also expected to further efforts to impose new sanctions against officials in Venezuelan President Nicolas Maduro’s government. 

NATO Head Reiterates Call For Political Solution To North Korean Crisis. NATO Secretary-General Jens Stoltenberg urged all nations in the alliance “to find a political solution to the crisis in North Korea,” as military action would “have devastating effects for many, many people and therefore we have to try to avoid that,” reports Bloomberg News (10/13, Bravo, Cehic) . Stoltenberg, who is slated to visit South Korea and Japan to reiterate NATO’s cooperation with the two countries, stressed, “We need to understand that we can’t do nothing, we can’t just sit there and just watch North Korea develop these weapons.” 

Analysts Suggest Administration Not Readying For Military Action In North Korea. The AP (10/13, Pennington) examines whether President Trump’s “ominous rhetoric” and repeated military exercises over the Korean Peninsula suggest that US officials are “readying for what many feel is unthinkable – a military conflict with a nuclear-armed North Korea that would put millions of civilians at risk?” Former senior Pentagon adviser Jim Schoff said he does not believe American “policymakers think we’re on the brink of an all-out war,” although “he added that doesn’t mean the administration is bluffing or has ruled out some kind of limited strike in response to a North Korean provocation.” Former Air Force Brig. Gen. Rob Givens posited any “decision to strike a few strategic targets” could “happen very quickly,” and the public would not likely see it coming. Givens “cautioned that North Korea was likely to fight back against even a limited strike, meaning the U.S. would have to prepare for a major conflict if it took that step.” 

Diehl: Corker May Have Had Broader Goal In Suggesting Trump Facilitating A World War III. Jackson Diehl, in his column for the Washington Post (10/13, Diehl), argues Secretary of State “Tillerson gets low marks from many in Washington, both inside and outside the State Department,” but Sen. Bob Corker seemingly considers Tillerson to be “instrumental in opening a path away from confrontation with North Korea through quiet diplomacy with China.” Diehl says “Corker’s assertion that ‘we could be heading towards World War III’ was a more pungent way of conveying Trump’s undermining of diplomacy,” with his point being “that the combination of exaggerated statements and the undercutting of Tillerson could corner the White House.” Perhaps, Diehl adds, “Corker may also have had a more sly purpose,” because by suggesting the possibility of a World War III, Trump will undoubtedly do all he can to prove the senator wrong, and Corker “will have achieved his purpose.” 

# Editorial Wrap-Up 

## Washington Post. 

“Avoiding Fiscal Disaster.” In an editorial, the Washington Post (10/15) calls for Senate to reject the budget outline as doing “tax reform the wrong way”: inflating “the debt to pay for tax cuts, nullifying the benefits of the rewrite by plunging the country into dangerous fiscal territory.” The Post condemns the plans supporters who argue otherwise as relying on “a combination of budget gimmickry and magical thinking.” The Post argues that the right way to tax reform is by “taking care to simplify the code without harming the country’s already stretched finances,” and calls on senators to make good “on years of rhetoric promising budgetary responsibility.” 

“Too Many In Prison.” In an editorial, the Washington Post (10/15) writes that the Sentencing Reform and Corrections Act – a bill by Senate Judiciary Committee Chairman Charles Grassley (R-IA) and Sen. Richard Durbin that aims to reduce the federal prison population by lowering mandatory-minimum sentences for nonviolent drug offenses – “would be a significant step forward” but “would also be far from sufficient as a solution to overincarceration.” The Post argues that in order to address overincarceration, criminal justice reform also needs to occur at a state and local level and go beyond addressing nonviolent drug offenders. 

“Parochialism Continues To Cripple Metro.” In an editorial, the Washington Post (10/15) writes that the DC Metro system continues to face problems that are worsened by the fact that top officials from Virginia, Maryland, and the District have little contact with each other. This communication problem is heightened by “the fact that any jurisdiction on the Metro board can veto decisions favored by the other two” – a situation the Post describes as a “recipe for gridlock,” as highlighted by recent disagreement over the construction of Maryland’s Purple Line. The Post concludes that the core problem “is that Metro board members are so parochial and tunnel-visioned that they cannot discern the Purple Line’s clear benefit to the region amid the clutter of their separate agendas.” 

## Wall Street Journal. 

“Trump’s NAFTA Threat.” A Wall Street Journal (10/15) editorial says if the President’s threats to back out of the trade pact are a negotiating tactic designed to get concessions from Mexico and Canada, it may work. However, the Journal warns that if Trump is playing a game of chicken, he will lose. 

“The Antidote To Steve Bannon.” The Wall Street Journal (10/15) says in an editorial that the best way for the GOP to protect itself from Bannon is for senators like Collins, John McCain, Lisa Murkowski, and Rand Paul to back the President’s tax reform plan so the establishment GOP can show some victories heading into 2018. 

“The Rest Of The Russia Story.” The Wall Street Journal (10/15) in an editorial questions why Democrats and Fusion GPS do not appear to want to publicly disclose who requested the dossier on Trump put together by Christopher Steele prior to the 2016 election. The Journal says the public should know whether then-FBI Director James Comey was relying on the dossier when he obtained warrants monitoring the Trump campaign. 

# Big Picture 

## Headlines From Today’s Front Pages. 

Wall Street Journal: 

Healthcare Back On Congress’s Front Burner Central Bankers Cling To Stimulus Amid Weak Inflation Wildfire Victims Had Only Seconds To Make Fateful Choices Barbarians Open Their Gates As Blackstone, Others Seek Retail Cash 

New York Times: 

The World Once Laughed At North Korean Cyberpower. No More. Mogadishu Truck Bombings Are Deadliest Attack In Decades For Weinstein, A Brush With The Police, Then No Charges Jeff Flake’s Lesson For Republicans: Cross Trump At Your Own Risk After The Las Vegas Shooting, Concertgoers Became Medics Aiding Transgender Case, Sessions Defies His Image On Civil Rights 

Washington Post: 

Trump May Have Bolstered Kneelers’ Legal Position Terrorist Blasts In Somalia Kill 276 Interior’s Alaska Land Swap Plan Stirs Worry A Case Of Politics Fatigue Has Fewer Focusing On Va. Governor’s Race Miles Of Lovely Countryside, Obliterated By Fire Iraqi Forces Clash With Kurds In Move To Retake Base, Oil Fields 

Financial Times: 

Death Toll In Somalia Bombing Rises To 276 Austrian Far-Right Posts Strongest Result Since 1999 Alleged Murder Plot Exposes Battle To Succeed Robert Mugabe UberEats A Bright Spot On Menu With $3bn Potential Sales 

Washington Times: 

Democrats Downplay Shutdown Over Obamacare, But Deal With Trump Looks Unlikely Trump’s Decertification Plan For Nuclear Deal Gives Congress 60 Days To Get Tough On Iran Commission For Modern Military To Consider Skills-Based Draft, Women’s Roles, Millennial Recruitment Confederate Heritage Stands Strong In Parts Of Rural Virginia Medical Rights, Religious Freedom Clash When Illegal Immigrant Youths Seek Abortions Feds Granting Nearly 2 Million Work Permits To Illegal Immigrants In 2017 

Story Lineup From Last Night’s Network News: 

ABC: Kaepernick NFL; California Wildfires; California Wildfires-Tracking; Missouri Jailbreak; White House-Bannon, Tillerson; Somalia-Bombing; Weinstein-Sexual Harassment Scandal; Puerto Rico Hurricane Recovery; Dating App Danger; Old Murder Case-New Witness; Highway Shootout; Restaurant Thief; Baltimore School Choir. 

CBS: California Wildfires; Trump-Legislative Agendas; Iran Nuclear Deal-Iranian Response; Syria-Raqqa Assault; Somalia-Bombing; Weinstein-Sexual Harassment Scandal; Hurricane Ophelia; Las Vegas Shooting Survivors; Opioid Epidemic-DEA Whistle Blower; Gene Therapy-Blindness; Voyager-Time Capsule. 

NBC: California Wildfires; Puerto Rico Hurricane Recovery; Trump-Tillerson Relations; Healthcare Executive Order; Hurricane Ophelia Tracking; Sir Roger Moore Tribute; NFL News. 

Network TV At A Glance: 

California Wildfires – 8 minutes, 10 seconds Weinstein-Sexual Harassment Scandal – 4 minutes, 15 seconds Puerto Rico Hurricane Recovery – 3 minutes, 45 seconds 

Story Lineup From This Morning’s Radio News Broadcasts: 

ABC: Kaepernick NFL; Healthcare Executive Order-Reponses; Iran Nuclear Deal; Trump-Tillerson Relations. 

CBS: California Wildfires; Somalia-Bombing; Iran Nuclear Deal-Iranian Response; Trump-Legislative Agendas; Kaepernick NFL; Baseball News. 

FOX: Louisiana Oil Rig Explosion; California Wildfires; Hurricane Ophelia; Sen. Feinstein Reelection. 

NPR: California Wildfires; Austria-Parliamentary Election; Somalia-Bombing; Louisiana Oil Rig Explosion. 

# Washington Schedule 

## Today’s Events In Washington. 

White House: 

PRESIDENT TRUMP — Holds a Cabinet Meeting; has lunch with Vice President Mike Pence and Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell; gives remarks at a McMaster for Governor Reception. VICE PRESIDENT PENCE — Joins the President for a Cabinet meeting; joins the President for lunch with Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell; participates in the second round of the US-Japan Economic Dialogue with Deputy Prime Minister Tarō Asō. 

US Senate: 4:00 PM Senate returns from Columbus Day recess, and votes on nominated U.S. Ambassador to the Vatican – Senate returns after Columbus Day State Work Period * Chamber convenes and resumes consideration of the nomination of Callista Gingrich to be U.S. Ambassador to the Holy See, with agenda including a vote on the nomination Location: Washington, DC http://www.senate.gov/ Sen. Thad Cochran returns to the Senate – Republican Sen. Thad Cochran returns to work in the Senate, following treatment for urological issues and a number of weeks recovering at home in Mississippi * Sen. Cochran’s absence from the chamber caused confusion last month when President Donald Trump repeatedly claimed that the Graham-Cassidy healthcare reform bill would have had the votes to pass in time to take advantage of budget reconciliation rules was it not for the fact that one senator – who he did not name – was in hospital, only for Sen. Cochran to subsequently explain that he was not hospitalized and for analysts to point out that three Republican senators and all 49 Democrats had already expressed their opposition to the bill Location: TBD http://www.cochran.senate.gov/ https://twitter.com/SenThadCochran 

US House: 10:00 AM House of Representatives meets in pro forma session On recess until 23 October. 

Other: 8:00 AM Labor Secretary Acosta attends U.S. Chamber Foundation ‘America Working Forward’ event – U.S. Chamber of Commerce Foundation hosts ‘America Working Forward’ – a national workforce conference bringing together employers, education and training providers, and policymakers from across the country for panel discussions on new approaches to improve recruiting, training, and worker retention. Attendees include Secretary of Labor Alexander Acosta, Rhode Island Governor Gina Raimondo, Strada Education Network Senior Vice President for Philanthropy Daryl Graham, U.S. Chamber of Commerce Senior Executive Vice President Suzanne Clark, and U.S. Chamber Foundation Center for Education and Workforce Senior Vice President Cheryl Oldham Location: U.S. Chamber of Commerce, 1615 H St NW, Washington, DC www.uschamber.com https://twitter.com/USChamber 

# Last Laughs 

## Late Night Political Humor. 

No late-night talk show aired on Sunday night. 

Copyright 2017 by Bulletin Intelligence LLC Reproduction or redistribution without permission prohibited. Content is drawn from thousands of newspapers, national magazines, national and local television programs, radio broadcasts, social-media platforms and additional forms of open-source data. Sources for Bulletin Intelligence audience-size estimates include Scarborough, GfK MRI, comScore, Nielsen, and the Audit Bureau of Circulation. Data from and access to third party social media platforms, including but not limited to Facebook, Twitter, Instagram and others, is subject to the respective platform’s terms of use. Services that include Factiva content are governed by Factiva’s terms of use. Services including embedded Tweets are also subject to Twitter for Website's information and privacy policies. The Department of the Interior News Briefing is published five days a week by Bulletin Intelligence, which creates custom briefings for government and corporate leaders. We can be found on the Web at BulletinIntelligence.com, or called at (703) 483-6100. Conversation Contents 

## October 13 -- Greenwire is ready 

# "E&E News" <ealerts@eenews.net> 

## From: "E&E News" <ealerts@eenews.net> 

## Sent: Fri Oct 13 2017 11:42:18 GMT-0600 (MDT) 

## To: < @fws.gov> 

## Subject: October 13 -- Greenwire is ready (b) (6) Conversation Contents 

## U.S. Department of the Interior News Briefing for Thursday, October 5, 2017 

# Bulletin Intelligence <Interior@bulletinintelligence.com> 

## From: Bulletin Intelligence <Interior@bulletinintelligence.com> 

## Sent: Thu Oct 05 2017 05:02:16 GMT-0600 (MDT) 

## To: <Interior@bulletinintelligence.com> 

## Subject: U.S. Department of the Interior News Briefing for Thursday, October 5, 2017  

> Mobile version and searchable archives available here. Please click here to subscribe.
> DATE: THURSDAY, OCTOBER 5, 2017 7:00 AM EDT

# Today's Table Of Contents 

DOI In The News 

• Tampa Bay (FL) Times: Interior Secretary Zinke To Visit Florida This Week. • Washington Examiner: House GOP Wants To Compare Interior’s Ryan Zinke’s Travel With Predecessors. • Salt Lake (UT) Tribune: House Democrats Demand More Transparency In National Monument Review. • The Hill: Court Blocks Trump’s ‘Unlawful’ Delay Of Obama Methane Leak Rule. • Washington Post: Interior Department Whistleblower Resigns, Calling Ryan Zinke’s Leadership A Failure. • Washington Examiner: Ryan Zinke Focuses On Energy Development On Public Lands As New Committee Starts. • Casper (WY) Star-Tribune: Wyoming Governor Concerned By Anticipated Sage Grouse Changes. • Flathead (MT) Beacon: A Rising Tide Of Outdoor Recreation. • Jackson Hole (WY) News & Guide: Work Still Left For Wild And Scenic Rivers. 

Bureau Of Indian Affairs 

• Spirit Lake Reservation Landowners Get Land Buyback Offers. • Duwamish Tribe Keeps Fighting For Federal Recognition. • Bill To Provide Educational Opportunities For Native Students Gets Committee Approval. • Crow Agency Warns Residents To Not Drink Town’s Water. 

Bureau Of Land Management 

• Salt Lake (UT) Tribune: Utahn Brian Steed To Be Deputy Director Of The Bureau Of Land Management. • Albuquerque (NM) Journal: Land Office Swap Of National Monument Land To BLM Back On Track. • New York Times: Wild Horses And The Inmates Who ‘Gentle’ Them. • St. Cloud (MN) Times: Rep. Emmer Pitches New Pro-mining Legislation. • Daily Mail: Cliven Bundy Supporter Wants Las Vegas Trial Postponed. • Elko (NV) Daily Free Press: Thomas Mitchell: Lawsuit Falsely Claims Fracking Will Be Devastating. • Bend (OR) Bulletin: Editorial: BLM Blocks Disclosure, Again. 

Bureau Of Reclamation 

• Federal Judge Dismisses Suit Against BOR For 2001 Water Shutoff. 

Bureau Of Safety And Environmental Enforcement 

• Tropical Depression Raises Hurricane Threat For U.S. Gulf Coast. 

Fish And Wildlife Service 

• USA Today: 25 Species, Including Pacific Walrus, Denied Endangered Protection By Trump Administration. • Alaska Public Radio Network: ANWR Takes Tiny Step Down Rocky Senate Road. • Salem (OR) Capital Press: Uneven Impacts Seen In Oregon Spotted Frog Settlement. 

National Park Service 

• U.S. News & World Report: Stonewall Jackson Monument Vandalized At Manassas Park. • Inside INdiana Business: Dunes National Park Effort Moves Forward. • Law360: Enviros Hit FAA With Suit Over Air Tours In National Parks. • Mississippi Business Journal: Delta State Receives Prestigious National Park Service Award. • WNEP-TV Scranton (PA): Admission Fees Waived At Steamtown National Historic Site. • Knoxville (TN) News Sentinel: Park Counts Down To Reopening Of Trail Closed By Gatlinburg Wildfire. • Corpus Christi (TX) Caller-Times: Padre Island National Seashore Beaches Close Because Of High Water. • Los Alamos (NM) Monitor: Bandelier Seeks Concession Proposals. • WTKR-TV Norfolk (VA): Oceana Neighborhood Gets Added To National Register Of Historic Places. • Washington Times: Additional Coverage: National Mall May Permit 45-foot Statue Of A Naked Woman: ‘She’s Asking For Equal Rights’. 

Office Of Insular Affairs 

• Politico: Administration Appears To Walk Back Trump Comments On Puerto Rico’s Debt. • New York Times: Puerto Rico’s Death Toll More Than Doubles To 34. • New York Times: White House Seeks $29 Billion For Hurricane Aid. • New York Times: Reporter Describes Recovery Efforts On St Thomas. • South China Morning Post (HKG): US Spy Planes Kept Eye On Chinese Scientists During Research Expedition Near Guam. • Guam Daily Post: Governor Addresses UN Committee. • Nebraska Public Radio: U.S. Virgin Islands Need Help Rebuilding Hospitals ‘from The Ground Up’. 

Office Of Surface Mining 

• House Approves LaHood Bill To Advance Mine Reclamation Efforts. 

US Geological Survey 

• Additional Reading. Top National News 

> • ABC: Trump Lauds Bravery Of First Responders And Victims In Las Vegas. • ABC: Tillerson Says He Never Weighed Resigning, Does Not Directly Deny “Moron” Remark. • Washington Times: House Panel Approves $10 Billion Payment For Border Wall. • Bloomberg News: Administration To Propose Repealing Clean Power Plan.

Editorial Wrap-Up 

> • New York Times. - “Donald Trump’s Foreign Policy Circus.” - “Michael Grimm, New York’s Next Zombie Candidate.” - “Would You Buy A Condo From The Trumps?” • Washington Post. - “This GOP Tax Reform Proposal Isn’t Fair. Here’s What Would Be.” - “The Senate’s Russia Probe Is Still Far From Over.” - “Let The Rohingya Return To Burma – Immediately.” • Wall Street Journal. - “The Gun Control Mirage.” - “Russian Reality Check.” - “Brussels On The Amazon.”

Big Picture 

> • Headlines From Today’s Front Pages.

Washington Schedule 

> • Today’s Events In Washington.

Last Laughs 

> • Late Night Political Humor.

# DOI In The News 

## Interior Secretary Zinke To Visit Florida This Week. 

The Tampa Bay (FL) Times (10/4, Leary) reports that Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke will travel to Florida on Thursday to “conduct on-the-ground assessments of hurricane damage at National Park Service locations and to receive a briefing on Everglades Restoration,” according to a release. On Thursday, Zinke will receive “a briefing on infrastructure upgrades and Everglades restoration at Lake Okeechobee.” On Friday, Zinke will assess “hurricane damage and clean-up at Big Cypress National Preserve.” And Saturday, Zinke will “hold a media event with Sen. Marco Rubio and members of the congressional delegation.” Additional coverage was provided by the Palm Beach (FL) Post (10/4, Bennett) and WJXT-TV Jacksonville, FL (10/4). 

Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke Visits Okefenokee Swamp. The Florida Times-Union (10/4, Dickson) reports that Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke visited Okefenokee National Wildlife and held “closed door talks with the refuge management.” The Okefenokee Swamp is “a watery field right now after the persistent late spring and early summer rain that extinguished the enormous West Mims Fire and more recently a dousing from Tropical Storm Irma.” Zinke “had said he will concentrate on restoring revenue streams that could meet a lot of shortages in the National Park Service and others.” 

## House GOP Wants To Compare Interior’s Ryan Zinke’s Travel With Predecessors. 

The Washington Examiner (10/4, Ferrechio) reports that “House Republicans want to compare the travel records of Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke with those of the department heads during President Obama’s administration.” House Natural Resources Committee Chairman Rob Bishop “asked Zinke to provide records on the use of private, chartered, rented, and government-owned aircraft by secretaries of the interior dating back to Obama’s first day in office.” Bishop is looking “to compare non-commercial aircraft use by Obama Interior Secretaries Ken Salazar (2009-2013) and Sally Jewell (2013-2017) to that of Zinke, who is under investigation by the department’s inspector general for using chartered and military planes for official travel that was also mixed with political business.” Also reporting are Roll Call (10/4), the AP (10/4), Politico Morning Energy (10/4, Adragna), and Law360 (10/4, Westney). 

Interior Chief Dismisses Criticism Of Travel With Vulgarity. The AP (10/4, DALY, BYNUM) reports that Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke on Wednesday “strongly defended his use of private charter flights for government business, calling criticism of his taxpayer-financed travel ‘complete and utter bull----’ and driven by politics.” Zinke dismissed “news reports that he took at least three private flights costing taxpayers a total of $20,000 since taking office in March, saying all his travel is ‘legal, ethical. All the trips went through absolute due diligence.’” Zinke “said that in his job, everything he does ‘goes through absolute legal review.’” 

Investigations Opened Into Zinke’s Meeting With Golden Knights Hockey Team. CNN (10/4, Green) reports that “a summer visit that Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke made to the Vegas Golden Knights hockey team is now under two investigations by federal watchdogs.” The Interior Department’s inspector general has “added concerns about Zinke’s meeting with the new NHL team and use of a private jet from Las Vegas to an investigation it opened Friday looking into the secretary’s travel, an IG spokesperson confirmed to CNN Wednesday.” The Office of Special Counsel has “also opened a Hatch Act investigation into Zinke’s meeting with the hockey team.” Additional coverage was provided by The Hill (10/4, Thomsen). 

Interior Secretary Draws Flak For Mixing Politics, Official Travel. Politico (10/5, Lefebvre, Whieldon) reports that Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke is drawing scrutiny over his “habit of mixing official government business with political activism.” According to ethics watchdogs, “Zinke is combining politics with his Interior duties so frequently that he risks tripping over the prohibitions against using government resources for partisan activity, even though his appearance at the Virgin Islands event seems to have been legal.” they say Zinke’s attendance at a fundraiser in the U.S. Virgin Islands “during his first month as secretary is not in line with past administrations’ conduct, even if he crossed no legal red lines.” 

Expense-ive Error: Would Ryan Zinke Make The Same Mistake Twice? In a piece for the Missoula (MT) Independent (10/5, Brooks), Dan Brooks writes that “to believe Zinke was abusing his travel privileges, you’d have to believe he was making the same mistake twice.” Brooks notes that “in the 1990s, back when he was an officer on SEAL Team 6, Zinke was cited for improperly billing the Navy for travel to Montana.” Brooks asks, “Why would a man whose Navy career was marked by improper billing of travel expenses go on to improperly bill travel expenses as a member of Donald Trump’s cabinet?” 

## House Democrats Demand More Transparency In National Monument Review. 

The Salt Lake (UT) Tribune (10/5, Burr) reports that Democrats in the House on Wednesday “introduced a resolution to require more transparency of the Interior Department’s review of national monuments, a move that could force a vote of the chamber.” The resolution “demands action within 14 legislative days by the House Natural Resources Committee or, under House rules, the Democrats could take their challenge to the House floor.” According to the article, “should the resolution come before the full House, the likely outcome of a vote would be a rejection, given the partisan breakdown of the GOP-controlled Congress.” 

Critics Continue Push For Monument Changes. The Deseret (UT) News (10/4, O'Donoghue) reports that “critics of monument designations in Utah and elsewhere in the country are not letting up with their pressure on the Trump administration to reduce boundaries and right the ‘wrongs’ of past U.S. presidents.” According to the article, “in a joint event Wednesday hosted by Utah’s Sutherland Institute and the Heritage Foundation in Washington, D.C., speakers and panelists also pressed for a drastic overhaul” of the Antiquities Act. The event included remarks by Rep. Rob Bishop and Sen. Mike Lee, “who have been at the forefront of Utah’s political leaders jockeying for key policy changes in the public lands arena.” 

The President Is Quietly Taking Aim At Our National Monuments. For the “Congress” blog of The Hill (10/4, Grijalva), Rep. Raúl M. Grijalva claims that the Trump Administration, “urged on by well-funded ideologues and fossil fuel interests, is engaged in an unprecedented effort to destroy our country’s system of public lands.” Grijalva warns that “if President Trump, Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke and their allies on Capitol Hill have their way, few monuments – whether they protect historic Native American sites, iconic natural wonders or world-class wildlife habitats – will be safe over the long haul.” Grijalva criticizes Zinke’s handling of the review of national monuments, as well as his recommendation to shrink four monuments. 

Interior Secretary Poses Danger To Parks, Monuments. In his column for the Knoxville (TN) News Sentinel (10/4, Harmon), Mark Harmon, a professor of journalism and electronic media at the University of Tennessee, and a member of the Tennessee Democratic Party Executive Committee, claims that Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke “conducted a sham ‘review’ of national monuments.” Moreover, he notes that “the Interior Department’s 60-day public comment period yielded more than 2.8 million comments,” and “analysis by the Center for Western Priorities found 98 percent favored maintaining or expanding existing monuments.” But Zinke “nevertheless recommended that President Donald Trump shrink the borders of four national monuments and open six others to mining, drilling, commercial fishing and logging — often endangering Native American cultural artifacts.” 

## Court Blocks Trump’s ‘Unlawful’ Delay Of Obama Methane Leak Rule. 

The Hill (10/4, Cama) reports that “late Wednesday” Judge Elizabeth Laporte of the District Court for the Northern District of California ruled “that the Trump administration broke the law when it tried this summer to delay an Obama administration rule related to greenhouse gas released through oil and natural gas drilling.” Laporte “said the Interior Department cannot use a provision in the Administrative Procedure Act to delay the rule on methane emissions on federal land, as it tried to do in June.” The judge’s decision “represents another bump in the road on the Trump administration’s deregulatory agenda,” and “it means that for now, the January 2018 compliance date for the rule is in effect.” The Los Angeles Times (10/4, Halper) reports “the ruling came at the behest of California and other states, which charged the administration’s is required by law to enforce the new rules intended to cut the release of 175,000 tons of the potent greenhouse gas annually, as well as reduce the emission of associated toxic pollutants.” E&E Publishing (10/4) reports “the court’s decision revives the standards, meaning any oil and gas companies not already in compliance will have to scramble to catch up.” The AP (10/4, Daly) also provides coverage. 

Interior Moves To Delay Obama-era Rule On Methane Emissions. The AP (10/4, Daly) reports that the Interior is attempting to delay a regulation that is meant to restrict methane emissions on federal lands coming from oil and gas production. The department hopes to delay the Obama-era rule, which was finalized last November, until January 2019. The AP states “the Interior Department said in a notice to be published Thursday in the Federal Register that an analysis conducted during the Obama administration may have underestimated costs and overestimated benefits.” The Hill (10/4, Cama) reports that the Department of the Interior’s notice said “the BLM is currently reviewing the 2016 final rule and wants to avoid imposing temporary or permanent compliance costs on operators for requirements that may be rescinded or significantly revised in the near future.” American Petroleum Institute Director of Upstream Operations Erik Milito said “we welcome BLM’s efforts to get this right and encourage the agency to develop an achievable rule in the months ahead that serves to prevent waste and conserve resources while encouraging energy production on federal lands.” Natural Gas Intelligence (10/4, Passut) reports that Bureau of Land Management Acting Director Michael Nedd said “as we strengthen America’s energy independence, we intend to evaluate regulations to determine if they unnecessarily encumber energy production, constrain economic growth, or prevent job creation.” Nedd also said, “our proposal would give the BLM sufficient time to review the 2016 final rule and consider revising or rescinding its requirements.” Also reporting are Reuters (10/4, Gardner), the Washington Post (10/4, Grandoni), the Forum of Fargo-Moorhead (ND) (10/4), Wyoming Public Radio (10/4, McKim), the San Francisco Chronicle (10/5, Egelko), MarketWatch (10/4, Murphy), CNBC (10/4, DiChristopher), Natural Gas Intelligence (10/4, Shelor), and Law360. 

## Interior Department Whistleblower Resigns, Calling Ryan Zinke’s Leadership A Failure. 

The Washington Post (10/4, Fears) reports that “an Interior Department executive turned whistleblower who claimed the Trump administration retaliated against him for publicly disclosing how climate change affects Native Alaskan communities resigned Wednesday.” The Hill (10/4, Cama) reports that in a resignation letter to Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke, Joel Clement “said he objected to his June reassignment out of a climate change role.” Clement “also cited ‘poor leadership’ by Zinke, climate change skepticism and wasted tax money.” Also reporting are the Sacramento (CA) Bee (10/5, Halper), the Portland (ME) Press Herald (10/4, Woodard) and the Huffington Post (10/4, D'Angelo). 

## Ryan Zinke Focuses On Energy Development On Public Lands As New Committee Starts. 

The Washington Examiner (10/4, Siciliano) reports that the Interior Department held the first meeting for its new Royalty Policy Committee Wednesday. The department’s Energy Policy Counselor Vincent DeVito said the committee’s creation represents the start of a more heightened prioritization for energy instead of a “sleepy portfolio.” DeVito said “this is a business committee, this is our board, our shareholders are the American people.” 

## Wyoming Governor Concerned By Anticipated Sage Grouse Changes. 

The Casper (WY) Star-Tribune (10/4, Richards) reports that Wyoming Gov. Matt Mead expressed concern over the potential federal alterations to sage grouse protections Friday and also restated that Western states should be consulted on potential changes. Gov. Mead said, “I just can’t overemphasize how important it is to have that state input.” Mead added that “if it was a state-by-state listing decision, that’d be one thing. But the way we are with the law right now, if one state gets listed, we all are going to get listed.” Meanwhile, Western Watersheds Project wildlife biologist Erik Molvar argued, “the existing federal sage-grouse protections already are far too weak to sustain sage grouse populations in the face of commercial uses that are being approved on public lands in many areas.” 

## A Rising Tide Of Outdoor Recreation. 

The Flathead (MT) Beacon (10/4, Scott) reports that “in many ways, America is in the midst of an outdoor recreation renaissance, a trend driven by innovation, awareness and sheer growth in the number of people exploring nature.” According to the article, “outdoor-rich states such as Colorado, Washington and Utah have also identified outdoor recreation as a tangible industry that deserves its own governmental office, similar to agriculture and manufacturing, devoted to protecting the resources and building on the associated economic benefits.” 

## Work Still Left For Wild And Scenic Rivers. 

In an op-ed for the Jackson Hole (WY) News & Guide (10/4, Palmer, Carlman), author Tim Palmer, and Len Carlman, the executive director of the Snake River Fund, write in support of the National Wild and Scenic River program. They say that “our great expanses of public land and our lifelines of rivers — owned by every citizen — are indispensable and irreplaceable natural features.” As they looks forward to 2018, when the Wild and Scenic program will celebrate its golden anniversary, they note that “dozens of rivers across the West and in Wyoming still deserve protection from damming, from desiccating withdrawals, from the ravages of fracking and poorly regulated fossil fuel development and from other threats that have rendered all but 2 percent of the nation’s waterways unfit for this prestigious initiative, according to the Nationwide Rivers Inventory by the National Park Service.” 

# Bureau Of Indian Affairs 

## Spirit Lake Reservation Landowners Get Land Buyback Offers. 

The AP (10/4) reports that “thousands of landowners on the Spirit Lake Indian Reservation have been sent purchase offers through a federal program to return land on reservations to tribal control.” The Interior Department “says 5,041 Spirit Lake landowners have been sent offers. They have about two months to consider them.” 

## Duwamish Tribe Keeps Fighting For Federal Recognition. 

The Redmond (WA) Reporter (10/4, Kunkler) reports that “despite a lengthy process that has seen the federal government flop on its position, the Duwamish tribe of Puget Sound is continuing its legal challenge to be officially recognized.” The Duwamish has “filed an appeal which is working its way through the Interior Board of Indian Appeals.” Bart Freedman, an attorney who has represented the tribe in court pro bono in recent years, is “contending that the evaluation criteria the Department of Interior used to make their most recent decision was based on outdated guidelines from 1994, which was updated in 2015.” 

## Bill To Provide Educational Opportunities For Native Students Gets Committee Approval. 

KSWO-TV Lawton, OK (10/4, Poolaw) reports that the Johnson O’Malley Supplemental Indian Education Program Modernization Act would call on the Interior Department “to update its severely outdated count of Native students in a timely manner by using existing public information from the US Census Bureau and the National Center for Education Statistics (NCES) to identify underserved students who are potentially eligible for the program.” Sen. James Lankford said, “The Johnson O’Malley Act is a critical program that provides cultural and academic assistance to American Indian students and opens the door to a number of valuable resources. I applaud the Committee’s progress today to update decades-old data which will allow American Indian students to have access to quality education. I look forward to a vote on the Senate floor in the days ahead.” 

## Crow Agency Warns Residents To Not Drink Town’s Water. 

KULR-TV Billings, MT (10/4, Adams) reports that the Bureau of Indian Affairs is “warning residents in the town of Crow Agency to not drink their water.” According to the Crow Reservation, “one of the two water plants on the reservation was vandalized.” The BIA has “experts at the plant...to determine the extent of the damage and repairs needed.” Additional coverage was provided by the Billings (MT) Gazette (10/4, Kordenbrock). 

# Bureau Of Land Management 

## Utahn Brian Steed To Be Deputy Director Of The Bureau Of Land Management. 

The Salt Lake (UT) Tribune (10/4, Burr) reports that Brian Steed, who previously served as Rep. Chris Stewart’s chief of staff, has been appointed the deputy director of the Bureau of Land Management. Stewart said in a statement, “I always say he’s the best chief of staff on the Hill. I consider him a brother and will miss him greatly. He has a huge opportunity to serve the American people at the Bureau of Land and Management and I know he’ll have great success.” Additional coverage was provided by the Deseret (UT) News (10/4, O'Donoghue) and Utah Policy (10/4, Schott). 

## Land Office Swap Of National Monument Land To BLM Back On Track. 

The Albuquerque (NM) Journal (10/4) reports that the Interior Department approved an “agreement to initiate” on a land exchange between the Bureau of Land Management and the New Mexico State Land Office. The land exchange will “consolidate holdings within the Río Grande del Norte National Monument and the Sabinoso Wilderness Area under federal control.” Bureau of Land Management acting New Mexico State Director Aden Seidlitz said, “we look forward to working with Commissioner Dunn and the State Land Office on the proposed land exchange, which will benefit both agencies and, most importantly, the public.” Additional coverage was provided by the AP (10/4, Lee). 

## Wild Horses And The Inmates Who ‘Gentle’ Them. 

The New York Times (10/5, Kurutz) reports that a program the Northern Nevada Correctional Center allows inmates to work with wild horses. The Wild Horse Program at the prison is “one of the ways the Bureau of Land Management is dealing with a population of mustangs and wild burros in the Western states that, after the 2017 foal crop, could be as high as 86,000.” 

## Rep. Emmer Pitches New Pro-mining Legislation. 

The St. Cloud (MN) Times (10/4, Hertel) reports that Twin Metals Minnesota “could get its mineral licenses back and resume exploration in the Superior National Forest if a new bill from U.S. Rep. Tom Emmer becomes law.” Emmer’s proposal would “give Congress the authority to approve mineral withdrawals in Minnesota’s national forest land — a task currently under the U.S. Forest Service’s purview.” The legislation “also gives Congress, rather than the president, authority to designate national monuments on federal forest land in Minnesota.” 

## Cliven Bundy Supporter Wants Las Vegas Trial Postponed. 

The Daily Mail (10/4, Pleasance) reports that “a protester accused of getting into an armed standoff with police while guarding the Bundy ranch has asked for his trial to be postponed after the Vegas shooting.” Ryan Payne, “who allegedly helped mobilize an armed militia to defend the ranch of Cliven Bundy from federal agents in a dispute over grazing rights back in 2014, claims it will not be possible to get a fair trial in the current climate.” Attorneys Brenda Weksler and Ryan Norwood said the “unprecedented act of violence will prevent the defendants from having a fair trial in this city one week from now.” 

## Thomas Mitchell: Lawsuit Falsely Claims Fracking Will Be Devastating. 

In a column for the Elko (NV) Daily Free Press (10/4, Mitchell) Thomas Mitchell states that two “self-styled environmental groups,” the Center for Biological Diversity and the Sierra Club, “have filed a lawsuit...in an attempt to block oil and gas leases on tracts on Bureau of Land Management public land, claiming hydraulic fracturing...might somehow jeopardize aquifers and all manner of wildlife.” The lawsuit references a US Environmental Protection Agency 2016 study, which it says “concluded that fracking can and has resulted in adverse effects on drinking water resources.” However, Mitchell writes, “the suit fails to mention the EPA reported that fracking ‘can impact drinking water resources under some circumstances,’ but ‘the scientific evidence is insufficient to support estimates of the frequency of contamination.’” 

## Editorial: BLM Blocks Disclosure, Again. In an editorial, the Bend (OR) Bulletin (10/4) criticizes the Bureau of Land Management for not releasing “crucial information” on “a private home built on public land near Prineville.” The Bulletin has “made a Freedom of Information Act request for the public comments about the BLM’s possible plans for the property,” but “the BLM’s responded twice with different answers and again blocked critical information.” It concludes: “The Freedom of Information Act is supposed to be the law that keeps citizens in the know about their government. It’s not working here.” 

# Bureau Of Reclamation 

## Federal Judge Dismisses Suit Against BOR For 2001 Water Shutoff. 

The Siskiyou (CA) Daily News (10/4, Smith) reports that “despite laying claim to one victory in a years-long battle, Klamath Project irrigators were denied their claims in a ruling filed on Sept. 29.” Judge Marian Blank Horn “ultimately concludes that, due to the tribes’ senior rights, no compensation is due junior water rights holders, as their water was withheld to protect ESA listed fish and, as such, that action protected the tribes’ water rights.” Additional coverage was provided by the Klamath Falls (OR) Herald And News (10/4). 

# Bureau Of Safety And Environmental Enforcement 

## Tropical Depression Raises Hurricane Threat For U.S. Gulf Coast. 

Bloomberg News (10/4, Sullivan, Perez) reports a tropical depression developing off the Nicaraguan coast could grow into a hurricane and is forecast to hit the US Gulf Coast late Sunday, potentially shutting down offshore oil and gas rigs. Eric Blake, a specialist at the National Hurricane Center, said the storm “could affect portions of the northern Gulf Coast as a hurricane this weekend, with direct impacts from wind, storm surge, and heavy rainfall.” 

# Fish And Wildlife Service 

## 25 Species, Including Pacific Walrus, Denied Endangered Protection By Trump Administration. 

USA Today (10/4, Rice) reports that the Trump Administration on Wednesday “declined to list 25 species as endangered, noting that extra protection ‘is not warranted at this time.’” USA Today says environmental groups are particularly concerned about the Pacific walrus, but the US Fish and Wildlife Service “reported that it can’t say with certainty that the Pacific walrus is likely to become endangered, despite an extensive loss of Arctic Sea ice due to global warming.” The decision that was “applauded” by Alaska’s Republican congressional delegation. The AP (10/4, Joling) reports that the decision on the walrus “likely will be challenged in court, said Shaye Wolf, climate science director for the Center for Biological Diversity, who wrote the listing petition filed in 2008.” Wolf “called the decision a misrepresentation of science to reach a predetermined conclusion.” Also reporting are the Washington Examiner (10/4, Siciliano), the Washington Times (10/4, Richardson), The Guardian (UK) (10/4, Milman) and KTUU-TV Anchorage (AK) Anchorage, AK (10/4, Mackintosh). 

Federal Agency Denies Protections For Small, Fanged Predator. The AP (10/4) reports that the Trump Administration “included the Northern Rockies fisher among 25 species that officials said do not merit protection under the Endangered Species Act.” The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service “last year agreed to consider new protections after wildlife advocates documented at least 66 fishers accidentally killed by trappers in Idaho.” The FWS “says a months-long review found no evidence fisher populations were in decline because of trapping, climate change, logging or other potential threats.” New England Thrush Species Will Not Be Listed Endangered. The AP (10/4) reports that the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Services says the Bicknell’s thrush will not be listed under the Endangered Species Act. The agency said a review suggests populations of the species are likely to “persist for the foreseeable future.” 

## ANWR Takes Tiny Step Down Rocky Senate Road. 

The Alaska Public Radio Network (10/4, Ruskin) reports that “the effort to open the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge to oil drilling made a baby step forward in the Senate” yesterday, “with the debut of a Republican budget plan in a committee.” The plan is “a non-binding resolution but it contains the seeds of what could become a law that allows oil development in the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge.” 

GUEST COMMENTARY: Time To Say ‘Yes’ To ANWR Drilling. In an op-ed for the Alaska Journal of Commerce (10/4, Rexford), Matthew Rexford, the president of Kaktovik Iñupiat Corp., writes in support of opening up the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge to drilling. Accoridng to Rexford, “the wishes of the people who live in and around the refuge’s coastal plain are frequently drowned out by people who live hundreds and even thousands of miles away.” He notes that Voice of the Arctic Iñupiat, “an organization with 21 members from across the Arctic Slope region — including members from Kaktovik located inside ANWR — have voted unanimously to pass a resolution supporting oil and gas development in the 1002 area.” 

## Uneven Impacts Seen In Oregon Spotted Frog Settlement. 

The Salem (OR) Capital Press (10/4, Perkowski) reports that “a legal settlement intended to upgrade conditions for the Oregon spotted frog is having uneven impacts on the threatened species’ habitat, according to federal biologists.” The deal was “struck last year to resolve a lawsuit between environmental groups, irrigation districts and the federal government over the operation of several dams in the region.” According to a recent “biological opinion” from the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, “while conditions for the spotted frog improved in portions of the basin during certain seasons, they were degraded in other locations and times under the deal.” 

# National Park Service 

## Stonewall Jackson Monument Vandalized At Manassas Park. 

The AP (10/4) reports that the National Park Service “says it is making repairs to a Stonewall Jackson monument that was vandalized at Manassas National Battlefield.” The NPS “says the vandalism at the monument depicting the Confederate general was discovered early Wednesday morning and occurred overnight.” According to the article, “white paint was splashed on the granite base of the monument, and the word ‘Dead!’ was added in gold spray paint.” Also reporting are the Washington Post (10/4, Moyer, Olivo), the Washington Times (10/4, Harper), and the Richmond (VA) Times-Dispatch (10/4). 

## Dunes National Park Effort Moves Forward. 

Inside INdiana Business (10/4, Brown) reports that “a bill that would designate the Indiana Dunes National Lakeshore as a national park is heading to the floor of the U.S. House of Representatives.” The House Committee on Natural Resources “unanimously approved the bill which would create the first national park in Indiana.” Rep. Pete Visclosky, who introduced the bill, said, “I thank Chairman Rob Bishop, Ranking Member Raul Grijalva, and all the members of the Natural Resources Committee, for their leadership to bring forward and advance this legislation. I hope that the full House considers this important legislation as soon as possible so that we can quickly begin to harness this national recognition of the Indiana Dunes and attract new visitors and economic activity to our region.” 

## Enviros Hit FAA With Suit Over Air Tours In National Parks. Law360 (10/4, Hanson) reports Public Employees for Environmental Responsibility and the Hawaii Island Coalition Malama Pono filed suit against the FAA in DC federal court Wednesday, “seeking to limit air tour operations in national parks, including the Great Smoky Mountains and the Hawaii Volcanoes, due to noise and disruption from excessive flights.” The AP (10/4, McAvoy) reports the lawsuit “asks the court to order the FAA to draft either air tour plans or voluntary agreements governing air tours for seven parks within two years.” According to the AP, “FAA spokesman Ian Gregor said the agency doesn’t comment on pending litigation.” 

## Delta State Receives Prestigious National Park Service Award. 

The Mississippi Business Journal (10/4) reports that “the Delta Center for Culture and Learning at Delta State University and the Mississippi Delta National Heritage Area recently received 2016 National Park Service Centennial Awards for creating the Delta Jewels Oral History Partnership.” According to the article, “the cultural heritage interpretation project has honored the lives of unsung Mississippi Delta church mothers featured in Alysia Burton Steele’s book, ‘Delta Jewels: In Search of My Grandmother’s Wisdom.’” Chris Abbett, associate regional director of partnerships, interpretation and education at the National Park Service Southeast Regional Office, said, “The Mississippi Delta National Heritage Area and the Delta Center demonstrated exceptional leadership and creativity in organizing 15 community gatherings with Alysia Burton Steele and several of the Delta Jewels featured in the book. The programs throughout Mississippi, as well as the Smithsonian Anacostia Community Museum in Washington, D.C., connected with and helped to create the next generation of visitors, supporters and advocates for the National Park Service.” 

## Admission Fees Waived At Steamtown National Historic Site. 

WNEP-TV Scranton, PA (10/4, Lange) reports that the National Park Service “decided to waive entrance fees for the Steamtown National Historic Site.” According to the article, “until this week, the entrance fee for visitors at Steamtown was $7 for ages 16 and up.” The NPS says it’s removing “that fee in hopes of bringing more people to the attraction.” 

## Park Counts Down To Reopening Of Trail Closed By Gatlinburg Wildfire. 

The Knoxville (TN) News Sentinel (10/4, Lakin) reports that “after months of work, the popular Chimney Tops Trail in the Great Smoky Mountains National Park reopens to hikers Friday with some new additions.” However, “the whole trail won’t be open, even after Friday.” According to the article, “the last quarter-mile of the 2-mile trail leading toward the peaks, or Pinnacles as they’re known, remains closed due to fallen trees and unstable footing.” 

## Padre Island National Seashore Beaches Close Because Of High Water. 

The Corpus Christi (TX) Caller-Times (10/4, Lopez) reports that “both North and South beaches at Padre Island National Seashore have been closed by the National Park Service because of high water.” Seashore Public Information Officer Patrick Gamman “said the closure of the beaches is for the public’s safety.” He said, “At this time the waves are splashing against the dunes, creating a situation where there is no place to drive on the beach. As park rangers, we monitor natural conditions to hopefully close beaches before anyone goes out and finds themselves stuck down island with no way out.” 

## Bandelier Seeks Concession Proposals. 

The Los Alamos (NM) Monitor (10/4) reports that the National Park Service “announced Tuesday the release of two prospectuses for the award of two new concession contracts in Bandelier National Monument.” The park service is “looking to revitalize the Bandelier National Historical Landmark District in Frijoles Canyon by increasing visitor services through these two concessions.” 

## Oceana Neighborhood Gets Added To National Register Of Historic Places. WTKR-TV Norfolk, VA (10/4, Boykin) reports that “the Oceana Neighborhood Historic District was officially placed on the National Register of Historic Places by the National Park Service on Sept. 18.” Additional coverage was provided by the Southside Daily (VA) (10/4, Poulter). 

## Additional Coverage: National Mall May Permit 45-foot Statue Of A Naked Woman: ‘She’s Asking For Equal Rights’. 

Additional coverage that National Park Service officials are mulling a request to install a 45-foot-tall statue on the National Mall was provided by the Washington Times (10/4, Ernst). 

# Office Of Insular Affairs 

## Administration Appears To Walk Back Trump Comments On Puerto Rico’s Debt. 

President Trump’s claim in an interview that aired Tuesday night on Fox News’ Hannity and again Wednesday morning on Fox News’ Fox & Friends that “we have to look at [Puerto Rico’s] whole debt structure. They owe a lot of money to your friends on Wall Street. We will have to wipe that out,” sparked concern on Wall Street on Wednesday, sending Puerto Rican bonds lower and seemingly prompting the Administration to walk back the statements. Politico (10/4, White, Wilhelm) reports that Wall Street “freaked out” over Trump’s comments, “sending Puerto Rican bonds into a tailspin.” The Wall Street Journal (10/4, Gillers) says Puerto Rico’s general obligation bonds were trading at a record low of 30 cents on the dollar Wednesday. The New York Times (10/4, Walsh) says “investors who hold Puerto Rico’s debt and their advisers said they were taken aback and unwilling to comment.” Politico (10/4, White, Wilhelm) says the White House “move[d] swiftly to clean up Trump’s seemingly offhand remarks.” The Administration “indicated it has no current plans to take the unprecedented, politically dangerous and probably illegal step of wiping out the owners of Puerto Rico’s bonds in the wake of Hurricane Maria’s devastation.” The New York Times (10/4, Buerkle) reports in its “DealBook” column that Trump “doesn’t even have the authority to abrogate debts, something the budget director, Mick Mulvaney, seemed to recognize Wednesday when he said the president’s comments shouldn’t be taken literally.” Anthony Mason reported on the CBS Evening News (10/4, story 7, 2:00) that Mulvaney said Wednesday that “there will be no bailout for Puerto Rico after the President suggested there might be.” Fox News’ Special Report (10/4) showed Mulvaney saying, “I think what you saw there was the President focusing on the reality that in order to get its long-term fiscal operation back in order, Puerto Rico is going to have to figure out a way to restructure its debt.” Bloomberg News (10/4, Sink, Epstein) reports that Mulvaney “said Wednesday that the administration is devising an aid package to send to Congress that will deal with rebuilding and repair.” Mulvaney said, “We are not going to bail them out. ... We are not going to pay off those debts. We are not going to bail out those bond holders.” Meanwhile, USA Today (10/4, Bomey) reports in an analysis that while “Trump’s proposal to slash all of Puerto Rico’s liabilities may not be financially or politically realistic, it’s increasingly likely that financiers and individuals who lent money to Puerto Rico will suffer huge losses as political momentum mounts for action.” 

Cardona: Puerto Rico Visit Was An Exercise In Propping Up Trump’s Ego. In an op-ed for The Hill (10/4), Democratic strategist Maria Cardona, a principal at the Dewey Square Group, calls Trump’s visit to Puerto Rico “an exercise in shoring up Trump’s massive, fragile ego that had been bruised by critics who know what an afterthought in planning and preparation Puerto Rico actually was for this administration.” Trump showed “zero humility, empathy, humanity and not one iota of understanding of what his fellow Americans were going through.” Cardona adds that if the recovery of Puerto Rico does not happen quickly, “there will be a massive exodus of hundreds of thousands of American citizens who are immediately eligible to register and vote when they settle into states like Texas and Florida,” which will not “bode well for Trump or Republicans in 2018 or 2020.” 

Milbank “Excerpts” Fictional Book Calling Natural Disasters “Inconvenient” For Narcissists. In his Washington Post (10/4) column, Dana Milbank sarcastically “excerpts” a fictional book titled “The Me-Driven Life: A Narcissist’s Guide to Helping Others Understand It Is All About You,” by John Barron, which is the name Trump reportedly used when masquerading as his own spokesman. In the “excerpt,” Milbank writes that natural disasters “are frustrating, and inconvenient, because they tend to cause those people to think about their own problems,” which is “harmful because it distracts them from their more pressing obligation to think about you.” 

## Puerto Rico’s Death Toll More Than Doubles To 34. 

The New York Times (10/4, Ferré-sadurní) reports that Puerto Rico’s Gov. Ricardo Rosselló said Wednesday that the island’s official death toll has “more than doubled from 16 to 34 two weeks after the storm as a result of a full accounting intended to add up the piecemeal reports from around the island.” Rosselló said, “We were not able to aggregate this complete set of data before. ... We were getting little bits of certified data, but after yesterday’s effort, we have a more complete picture of what has occurred in terms of direct deaths due to the storm and indirect as well.” While the new count “may still not be complete...it offers the clearest picture yet of the death toll and how people died during and after Maria, he said.” Dr. Jon LaPook said on The CBS Evening News (10/4, story 7, 2:00) that many of the dead “are from the island’s rural interior, where most people are still without water, without power, and aid is arriving very slowly. Estimates are, it will take months to restore electricity,” which is “at odds with the President’s upbeat remark about power to a selected crowd in a church.” Trump: “Flashlights! You don’t need them anymore. You don’t need them anymore.” Reuters (10/4, Brown, Respaut, Resnick-Ault) reports that “less than 10 percent of Puerto Rico’s 3.4 million people have seen power restored – and many will wait months.” While restoring the grid “would be a monumental task even for a well-run utility,” it “will be much harder for the chronically underfunded Puerto Rico Electric Power Authority (PREPA), which went bankrupt in July amid mounting maintenance problems, years-long battles with creditors, a shrinking workforce and frequent management turnover.” The Wall Street Journal (10/4, Hernandez) reports that many Puerto Ricans are facing health problems as they still lack access to clean water, medical supplies, and healthcare. A front-page story in the Washington Post (10/4, A1, Hernandez) reports that during his visit to Puerto Rico, Trump took a “walking tour of a neighborhood, where high-speed winds had blown out some second-story windows and knocked over a few trees – but where life seemed to be returning to normal, thanks to assistance from the government.” Had he “traveled a little deeper into the island, to the communities that sustained some of the heaviest damage, he would have witnessed a very different Puerto Rico.” In the city of Caguas, “hills were stripped naked by Maria’s malicious winds, leaving the trees without leaves and fruit, their bare branches contorted in painful postures.” Houses “were blown off their foundations and destroyed by toppled vegetation,” and “twisted metal roofs landed in creeks all over the once-lush region.” 

Concerns Rise About Drug, Medical Device Shortages. The New York Times (10/4, A1, Thomas, Kaplan) reports federal officials, as well as manufacturers of pharmaceuticals and medical devices, are concerned about potential shortages following the devastation caused by a hurricane to Puerto Rico, which is a major manufacturer of both types of products. The Times reports that there are over 80 plants in Puerto Rico that manufacture pharmaceuticals or medical devices, but that manufacturers are facing many problems, including unreliable electricity and transportation issues. FDA Commissioner Scott Gottlieb told Congress this week, “Some of these products are critical to Americans. A loss of access could have significant public health consequences.” 

Contributions For Maria Victims Small Compared To Harvey, Irma Donations. USA Today (10/4, Cava) reports that “as contributions soar to homegrown fundraising efforts for victims of Sunday’s Las Vegas shooting, those devastated by Maria have seen comparatively small donations especially when compared to money raised for those affected by hurricanes Harvey and Irma, according to groups contacted by USA TODAY.” According to fundraisers, “a prime reason for lower Maria numbers has to do with its damage coming after devastating storms hit the US mainland in Texas and Florida, which means donors are more apt to be either financially or even emotionally tapped out.” In addition, media attention is “a huge factor in generating contributions, and the supersaturated coverage that greeted Harvey and Irma tapered for Maria.” 

## White House Seeks $29 Billion For Hurricane Aid. 

The White House on Wednesday asked Congress “to approve $29 billion in additional hurricane relief and debt forgiveness, seeking to help Puerto Rico and other battered areas and to shore up the troubled federal program that provides flood insurance to homes and small businesses,” the New York Times (10/4, Kaplan, Walsh) reports. The request “seeks $12.8 billion for the Federal Emergency Management Agency, to stay current with the nearly $200 million a day the agency is spending on recovery work.” In addition, it asks lawmakers “to wipe out $16 billion in debt that the National Flood Insurance Program owes to the Treasury and has no immediate way to repay.” The White House also seeks “$577 million in response to wildfires that have been prevalent this year in Western states, and is calling for efforts to limit the cost and devastation of wildfires.” 

## Reporter Describes Recovery Efforts On St Thomas. 

In a piece for the New York Times (10/4), reporter Jeremy W. Peters describes recovery efforts on St. Thomas in the aftermath of Hurricane Irma and Hurricane Maria. Peters writes that the power grid is “mostly flattened, its wires lying across roads or tangled in trees, its poles snapped in half, its transformers sitting in puddles of stagnant floodwater. It will take months to fully restore.” This “has knocked out cell towers and internet service, creating a cascade of breakdowns that hampers the most basic daily necessities.” Peters adds that doctors say the aftereffects of the hurricanes “are starting to show in people who are hurting themselves while cleaning out what remains of their houses or letting wounds go untreated because they cannot get to a clinic.” 

## US Spy Planes Kept Eye On Chinese Scientists During Research Expedition Near Guam. 

The South China Morning Post (HKG) (10/4, Chen) reports that “China’s most advanced research vessel recently spent nearly a month operating in the backyard of the largest US military base in Asia-Pacific waters ‘under the nose of US spy planes’, according to a marine scientist leading the expedition.” The researcher said that “the Kexue oceanographic ship had regular low flyovers from US Navy P3-Orion surveillance aircraft while investigating a seamount southeast of Guam between August 5 and September 5.” Xu Kuidong, “a lead researcher with the mission who is affiliated with the Institute of Oceanology, Chinese Academy of Sciences in Qingdao, Shandong, said the scientists on board were ‘well aware’ of the area’s sensitivity.” 

## Governor Addresses UN Committee. 

The Guam Daily Post (10/3) reports that Gov. Eddie Calvo was scheduled to deliver a “speech to a United Nations committee that hears pleas on decolonization concerns.” Following his speech, Calvo was to set to meet “with permanent missions from various countries, to include the Marshall Islands, Federated States of Micronesia, Nauru and Solomon Islands, according to his office.” 

## U.S. Virgin Islands Need Help Rebuilding Hospitals ‘from The Ground Up’. 

On Nebraska Public Radio (9/28), U.S. Virgin Islands Governor Kenneth Mapp discussed the recovery effort following two hurricanes. Mapp said, “We have received tremendous provisions and support from the federal partners. We’re now talking about and beginning the process of covering and sheltering folks in homes that lost roofs. We have cleared a good bit of debris out of the road system and we’re working on getting the power distribution system up.” Additional coverage of the recovery effort was provided by WIVB-TV Buffalo, NY (9/29). 

# Office Of Surface Mining 

## House Approves LaHood Bill To Advance Mine Reclamation Efforts. 

The Ripon Advance (10/4) reports that the House approved legislation on Monday that Rep. Darin LaHood “introduced to empower states to partner with non-governmental organizations (NGO) to reclaim abandoned mines and to address related water pollution issues.” The Community Reclamation Partnerships Act, H.R. 2937 “would advance mine reclamation by allowing states to assume legal and regulatory liability on behalf of NGOs willing to take part in state reclamation programs.” LaHood said on the House floor, “This bill empowers state and local community leaders who want to assist in abandoned mine cleanup efforts so that future development can occur in these areas. No group should be punished for wanting to help out their local community in a responsible way.” 

# US Geological Survey 

## Additional Reading. 

Earthquake Swarm At Yellowstone Supervolcano Now The Longest Ever Recorded. 

Newsweek (10/4, Osborne) 

‘Statistically, It’s Coming’: California Prepares For The Next Big Earthquake. KTLA-TV Los Angeles (10/4) 

3.5 Magnitude Earthquake Rattles Major County. KWTV-TV Oklahoma City (10/4, Nuttle) 

# Top National News 

## Trump Lauds Bravery Of First Responders And Victims In Las Vegas. 

Coverage of President Trump’s Wednesday visit to Las Vegas is straightforward and respectful, focusing primarily on the President’s remarks to law enforcement personnel, first responders, and victims. Coverage also notes that the President was asked about possible gun control legislation, but declined to comment. ABC World News Tonight (10/4, story 3, 2:20, Muir) reported that it was “the first time he’s had to visit the scene of a mass shooting.” ABC’s Cecilia Vega: “In Las Vegas today, President Trump, in a new role, comforter in chief. With the First Lady by his side. Their first stop: the hospital treating dozens of patients, still fighting for their lives.” Trump: “Some were very, very badly wounded, and they were badly wounded because they refused to leave. They wanted to help others because they saw people going down all over. And it’s an incredible thing to see. That’s tremendous bravery.” On the CBS Evening News (10/4, story 3, 2:00, Mason), Major Garrett reported, “At University Medical Center, the hospital that received 100 victims, the President thanked doctors and nurses. The President also toured the Las Vegas police command center and hailed the bravery of officers and civilians who faced the terror head on.” Trump: “In the depths of horror, we will always find hope in the men and women who risk their lives for ours.” NBC Nightly News (10/4, story 4, 0:35, Holt) ran a 35-second brief item on the visit. KVVU-TV Las Vegas (10/4, 6:05 p.m. PDT) reported that Trump was at UMC “longer than he originally planned to be, visiting with doctors and patients.” KSNV-TV 

Las Vegas (10/4, 6:08 p.m. PDT) reported that Trump’s visit “lasted just roughly four hours – four very necessary hours for Las Vegas and for Nevada.” KLAS-TV Las Vegas (10/4, 6:03 p.m. PDT) reported that “Trump visited several victims at the hospital and meeting with doctors and medical staff. The President offered his condolences to the community and the victims’ families.” The President later tweeted a 54-second video about the visit, writing, “On behalf of a GRATEFUL NATION, THANK YOU to all of the First Responders (HEROES) who saved countless lives in Las Vegas on Sunday night,” and followed with a tweet of a two-minute-and-20-second video, writing, “WE LOVE YOU LAS VEGAS!” Jim Acosta said on CNN’s Situation Room (10/4), “The White House took great pains to keep the President’s trip here more subdued and more scripted than other official visits in recent days.” Acosta added, “One topic the President is taking on during his visit is gun control. ... The White House is steering clear of the issue.” The Las Vegas Review-Journal (10/4, Erickson) reports that Trump “noted that many of the wounded were heroes themselves, saying ‘they were badly wounded because they refused to leave. They wanted to help others because they saw people going down all over.’” The AP (10/4, Lucey, Colvin) reports that Trump “waved off questions about the availability of firearms – the shooter had a veritable arsenal of weapons – saying this is not the time to discuss the possibility of further restrictions.” USA Today (10/4, Jackson) reports, “Unlike Tuesday’s visit with hurricane victims in Puerto Rico – where he made a joke about the cost of the federal relief efforts and told locals they could be proud that only 16 people had died versus the ‘literally thousands’ who were killed Hurricane Katrina in 2005 – Trump stayed very much on script in Las Vegas.” The President said, “Our souls are stricken with grief. We know your sorrow feels endless. ... We will endure the pain together. We will overcome it together as Americans.” Breitbart (10/4, Spiering) reports that Trump “delivered a somber statement” after meeting with law enforcement officials, and Townhall (10/4, Pavlich) reports that the President was accompanied by the First Lady “throughout the day and also visited wounded victims in a local hospital.” The New York Times (10/4, Landler) says that Trump “has been uncharacteristically subdued about the Las Vegas shooting. ... He has tweeted little about it and deflected questions about the killer’s motives, in contrast with previous mass shootings, which have drawn quick, furious reactions from him, particularly when the perpetrators were Muslim.” For Trump, “the political subtext of Las Vegas has more to do with gun laws, which he campaigned against in 2016.” The Wall Street Journal (10/4, Nicholas) reports that the White House has indicated that the President has not changed his stance. The New York Post (10/4, Fredericks) reports that the President called shooter Stephen Paddock “‘a very sick man, a very demented person,’ but would not address a possible motive.” The Washington Times (10/4, Miller) reports that Trump said, “He was a very demented person and we haven’t seen [a motive] yet but we will know very soon if we find something. We are looking very hard.” Politico (10/4, Nelson) and The Hill (10/4, Easley) have brief reports on the President’s remarks. 

Legislators Of Both Parties Seem Open To “Bump Stock” Ban. USA Today (10/4, Gaudiano, Collins) reports, “Some key Republicans are showing interest in a narrowly written Democratic gun-control bill to ban ‘bump stock’ rifle attachments that enable rapid firing.” Sen. John Thune “said some of his colleagues are ‘at least interested’ in learning more about ‘that narrow issue,’” and Senate Majority Whip Cornyn “told reporters Wednesday that trigger accelerators are ‘something that I think bears looking into.’” Cornyn said that he has raised the issue with Senate Judiciary Chairman Charles Grassley. The New York Times (10/4, Stolberg, Hsu) reports that House Freedom Caucus head Rep. Mark Meadows (R-NC) “said he would be open to considering a bill,” and moderate Rep. Carlos Curbelo (R-FL) “said he was drafting bipartisan legislation” mirroring Sen. Dianne Feinstein’s Senate version. Rep. Dina Titus (D-NV) said on CNN’s Situation Room (10/4) that she is co-sponsoring another bill with Rep. David Cicilline (D-RI) to make bump stocks illegal “because they will change a regular gun into an automatic weapon that can fire 400-600 times in a minute. We don’t need that for recreation.” Rep. Tom Cole (R-OK) was asked on MSNBC’s Morning Joe (10/4) if lawmakers should consider outlawing the “bump stock” used by the Las Vegas gunman. Cole said, “I think there’s no question we ought to look into that. Automatic weapons – when I saw the clips and heard the fire, I just assumed he had an automatic weapon. I did not know that there was technology capable that cheaply of transforming a semi-automatic into an automatic weapon. Yeah, I don’t think there’s any question we ought to look at that.” The Wall Street Journal (10/4) says in an editorial that outlawing bump stocks would not halt the practice, since “bumping” can be done with a finger, and also argues that past bans on certain types of rifles have proven ineffective in preventing mass murder. Politico (10/4, Bresnahan, Kim, Everett) also reports on the bump stock legislation. 

Las Vegas Sheriff Believes Paddock Had Help “At Some Point.” The New York Post (10/4, Li) reports that Clark County Sheriff Joseph Lombardo said Wednesday that he “believes Paddock must have had some help along the way.” Lombardo said, “You look at the weapon obtaining the different amounts of Tannerite [explosives] available, do you think this was all accomplished on his own? You got to make the assumption he had to have help some help at some point.” 

FBI Questioning Shooter’s Girlfriend In Los Angeles. The New York Times (10/4) reports that Paddock’s girlfriend Marilou Danley, now back in the US from the Philippines, is being questioned at the FBI building in Los Angeles. FBI Deputy Director Andrew McCabe said that the FBI “is trying to reconstruct the actions of the gunman, including finding and interviewing ‘everyone and anyone who crossed his path in recent weeks.’” The Washington Post (10/4) reports that “so far...few clues have emerged to help investigators understand” Paddock or his motives. NBC Nightly News (10/4, story 2, 2:35, Holt) reported that Danley was questioned “for hours” on Wednesday. Her attorney read a statement in which she said that Paddock “never said anything to me or took any action that I was aware of that I understood in any way to be a warning that something horrible like this was going to happen.” According to the lead story for the CBS Evening News (10/4, lead story, 3:25, Mason), Danley’s statement also explained that the “thousands of dollars he wired to her in the Philippines...was meant for her to buy a home there. Danley thought Paddock was planning on breaking up with her.” ABC World News Tonight (10/4, story 2, 2:30, Muir) reported that one of Danley’s sisters said Paddock “sent her away” so he could plan for the attack. 

“Senior Jihadist” Claims Paddock Was An ISIS Recruit. Breitbart (10/4, Klein, Waked) reports in an “exclusive” that Abu Baker al-Maqdisi, “a senior jihadist associated with the Islamic State (ISIS) in the Gaza Strip, insists his terrorist organization was responsible for the Las Vegas massacre.” Al-Maqdisi told Breitbart Jerusalem that Paddock “was recruited by ISIS when he converted to Islam several months ago. There is no evidence of any such conversion.” Al-Maqdisi said, “Even the weapons he used in this assault were purchased with Islamic State funds.” However, Breitbart reports, he offered no proof. 

Republicans Hammer Murphy For Fundraising Off Las Vegas Shooting. The Connecticut Post (10/4, Vigdor) reports that Sen. Chris Murphy “is using his national profile to prime the pump for gun control groups after the Las Vegas massacre” – a move that “is being condemned by Republicans for pairing that effort with a request for re-election campaign contributions.” The Murphy camp issued “an email blast Tuesday night to supporters urging them to give money to a trio of gun control groups” aligned with him, or to Murphy’s re-election campaign. The Hill (10/4, Greenwood) reported that small-business owner Matthew Corey, one of the Republicans seeking the GOP nomination to challenge Murphy in 2018, said that Murphy “should donate contributions his campaign received from the email to the victims of the Las Vegas attack.” 

## Tillerson Says He Never Weighed Resigning, Does Not Directly Deny “Moron” Remark. 

Coverage of Secretary of State Tillerson’s appearance Wednesday to reaffirm his commitment to his job – and to deny an NBC report that he called President Trump a “moron” several months ago – stresses that Tillerson did not actually deny the comment (though a spokesperson did). Reports also state that the public appearance was unusual for Tillerson. There is also speculation over how long Tillerson, described by multiple sources as frequently at odds with the President, will stay in his post. Martha Raddatz reported on ABC World News Tonight (10/4, story 5, 2:15, Muir) that Tillerson made “a rare impromptu appearance” on Wednesday to address the “report rocketing around Washington” that Tillerson “had called Trump a ‘moron’ last July, after a national security team meeting and was then on the verge of resigning.” Tillerson: “The Vice President has never had to persuade me to remain as secretary of state, because I have never considered leaving this post.” Raddatz: “And that report of calling the President a moron?” Tillerson: “I’m not going to deal with petty stuff like that. I’m just not going to be a part of this effort to divide this Administration.” Raddatz: “Not a flat-out denial, but his spokesperson later, more definitive.” State Department spokesperson Heather Nauert: “He did not say that.” Kaitlin Collins reported on CNN’s Situation Room 

(10/4) that Tillerson “insisted he never threatened to resign, but it’s notable he didn’t take the opportunity to deny the reports that he called the President of the United States a ‘moron.’” The CBS Evening News (10/4, story 5, 2:10, Mason) reported that Tillerson “made an extraordinary appearance before cameras at the State Department today to refute reports that he had disparaged the President and had to be talked out of quitting.” CBS’ Margaret Brennan: “The press-averse Secretary of State declared that he never considered quitting his job but did not deny having referred to the President as a ‘moron.’ ... The President was told Tillerson made the remark after this July meeting at the Pentagon. Days earlier, the President had blown up at Tillerson over sharply differing views on the Iran nuclear deal. Tillerson himself was frustrated. He’d been undermined on other key issues including Venezuela and a Mideast dispute,” and the “lifelong Boy Scout was dismayed by Mr. Trump’s comments at a Boy Scout gathering.” On NBC Nightly News (10/4, story 5, 2:30, Holt), Andrea Mitchell also reported that Tillerson “stopp[ed] short of a full denial.” The AP (10/4, Lee, Klapper) reports that “the normally camera-shy Tillerson sought to rebut” the “widely disseminated” story that Vice President Pence had to talk him out of resigning. The AP says that Trump “has at times appeared to undercut Tillerson’s message on some of America’s most sensitive national security challenges, including Iran and North Korea. Tillerson also has publicly complained about the White House blocking him from making key appointments.” USA Today (10/4, Fair) reports that Pence’s former press secretary, Marc Lotter, said that Pence did speak to Tillerson, but that the conversation was “about the need to come together and make sure that everyone is moving forward with the message in the framework that is echoing what [Trump] wants to have communicated.” On Wednesday, the New York Times (10/4, Sullivan, Harris) reports, Tillerson “gave a full-throated defense of Mr. Trump’s foreign policy.” Jake Sullivan, former director of the State Department’s policy planning office, said on CNN’s The Lead (10/4), “The spectacle today was striking with Rex Tillerson feeling the need to come out and basically say he likes the job, he gets along with the President, and he’s planning on sticking around. I can’t think of a secretary in state in memory who’s had to do something like that.” The Los Angeles Times (10/4, Wilkinson) calls Tillerson’s remarks “an unusual statement.” The Wall Street Journal (10/4, Schwartz) also reports that Tillerson said he has never considered resigning, while The Hill (10/4, Fabian) refers to “the bombshell report.” Roll Call (10/4, Bennett) headlines its story “Tillerson Doesn’t Deny Calling Trump A ‘Moron.’” The New York Post (10/4, Moore, Fredericks) is one of the few sources to report that NBC actually reported that Tillerson had “referred to the president as a ‘f---ing moron.’” Max Boot of USA Today (10/4) writes, “This is a classic Washington gaffe, defined by journalist Michael Kinsley as what happens ‘when a politician tells the truth – some obvious truth he isn’t supposed to say.’ ... The real scandal isn’t that Trump’s secretary of State called him a moron. It’s that his job performance lends so much credence to that description.” Boot tweeted, “Trump’s handling of Hurricane Maria lends credence to Tillerson’s disparaging assessment of his mental capability.” Preet Bharara tweeted, “At the risk of controversy, I disagree with Tillerson. I don’t think Trump is a moron. To say he is lets him off the hook way way too much.” Matt Flegenheimer of the New York Times (10/4) looks at how, in stating that “[in] the places I come from, we don’t deal with that kind of petty nonsense,” Tillerson joined in the long-standing tradition of political figures attacking Washington. The Washington Times (10/4, Persons), BuzzFeed (10/4), and Politico (10/4, Nelson) also report on Tillerson’s remarks. 

Trump: NBC Story “Totally Phony,” “Made Up,” Asks For Apology. On NBC Nightly News (10/4, story 5, 2:30, Holt), Mitchell reported, “The President in Las Vegas today labeling the NBC report fake news.” President Trump: “It was a totally phony story. Thank you very much. It was made up. It was made up by NBC. Total confidence in Rex. I have total confidence.” The President tweeted, “The @NBCNews story has just been totally refuted by Sec. Tillerson and @VP Pence. It is #FakeNews. They should issue an apology to AMERICA!” 

WPost A1 Analysis: Tillerson Expected To Leave Job Relatively Soon. The Washington Post (10/4, A1, Gearan, Rucker, Parker) writes on its front page that “Tillerson’s move on Wednesday to reassure Trump of his convictions may well be too little and too late for the long term, according to the accounts of 19 current and former senior administration officials and Capitol Hill aides.” The “already tense relationship between the two headstrong men...has ruptured into what some White House officials call an irreparable breach that will inevitably lead to Tillerson’s departure, whether immediately or not.” A “former senior official” said, “The White House thinking is unequivocal that he’s going to be gone soon, but the assumption is that he’s going to quit on his own so Trump can say, ‘Thank you for your year of service.’” New York Times financial columnist Ron Lieber tweeted, “Treated like a trophy. Eye-rolling. Profoundly uncomfortable. Calls the president a moron. Does he last the month?” Politico’s Blake Hounshell tweeted, “Post leans into the idea that Tillerson isn’t gonna be around too long.” 

Tillerson, Mattis, And Mnuchin Reportedly Have Resignation “Suicide Pact.” The Washington Examiner (10/4, Quinn) reports that Tillerson, Defense Secretary Mattis, and Treasury Secretary Mnuchin “reportedly have forged a ‘suicide pact’ in which all three members of President Trump’s Cabinet would leave if one of them became a target of the president.” USA Today’s Jill Lawrence tweeted, “So maybe ‘suicide pact’ is why Tillerson could say he never considered leaving his post?” Politico (10/4, Lima) reports that Senate Foreign Relations Chairman Bob Corker “offered a blunt assessment” of the Trump Administration on Wednesday, saying, “I think Secretary Tillerson, Secretary Mattis and Chief of Staff Kelly are those people that help separate our country from chaos.” 

Ex-Counselor To UN Ambassador Says Tillerson Is Hurting State Department. Nik Steinberg, a senior adviser to the president of Columbia University and former counselor to then-UN Ambassador Samantha Power, writes in Politico Magazine (10/4) that Tillerson is leading good veteran staff members to leave the State Department: “None of them have served a president like this before – and that includes the most seasoned hands, who have spent decades in the department.” The President is “proposing to slash roughly a third of the State Department’s budget, a cut” that Tillerson “has embraced,” and “experts on complex issues and regions have repeatedly found themselves left out of policy debates and drafting processes. ... When career public servants are not given a seat at the table, not only are mistakes made and policies worse off, but opportunities are missed.” And “as more people leave, fewer are coming in.” 

## House Panel Approves $10 Billion Payment For Border Wall. 

The Washington Times (10/4, Dinan) reports that in an 18-12 party-line vote Wednesday, the House Homeland Security Committee “gave first approval to the broad scope of President Trump’s border wall...clearing a bill that would authorize $10 billion in new infrastructure spending, new waivers to speed up construction and 10,000 more border agents and officers to patrol the US-Mexico line.” Democrats argued that “the wall was a boondoggle and the fact that US taxpayers will fund it violates the president’s campaign pledge to make Mexico foot the bill,” while Republicans said “it was time to get a handle on the border.” 

Cruz Challenger O’Rourke’s Bill Seeks To Protect Landowners From “Trump Wall.” The Houston Chronicle (10/4, Diaz) reports that Rep. Beto O’Rourke, who is mounting a 2018 challenge to Sen. Ted Cruz, on Wednesday introduced a bill aimed at “protect[ing] landowners from ‘Trump’s wall.’ The issue is likely to become a flashpoint in” O’Rourke’s bid to unseat Cruz, “an immigration hard-liner who supports President Donald Trump’s plan to build a border wall.” The Chronicle says, “Two-thirds of the land along the southwest border is private or state-owned. Most of that falls within Texas. The Protecting the Property Rights of Border Landowners Act would amend the Immigration and Nationality Act to block the government from using eminent domain to acquire land to build a wall along the US-Mexico border.” Said O’Rourke, “We do not need a border wall that raids the land of private citizens, ransacks the businesses and ranches of hard-working Texans, and strips property rights away from Americans.” 

## Administration To Propose Repealing Clean Power Plan. 

Citing “a person familiar with the deliberations,” Bloomberg News (10/4, Dlouhy) reports that in a proposal that could be released this week or next, the Administration will propose repealing the Clean Power Plan, “former President Barack Obama’s signature plan for combating climate change by asserting that its expansive approach to addressing carbon emissions exceeds legal limits.” In addition, the EPA will “issue a formal request for the public to offer ideas for a replacement to the Clean Power Plan that could be more modest in scope.” The New York Times (10/4, Friedman) cites an internal EPA document, which states, “The agency is issuing a proposal to repeal the rule,” but does not explain how it “will justify to the courts the decision to eliminate the regulation.” 

# Editorial Wrap-Up 

## New York Times. 

“Donald Trump’s Foreign Policy Circus.” A New York Times (10/5) editorial says, “Another day, another embarrassing foreign policy circus in the nation’s capital that can only further erode trust in American leadership at home and abroad.” The Times argues that the “conflicts are numerous and mounting,” and “to say the least, all of this has made matters difficult for Mr. Tillerson, while confusing American foreign policy. Secretaries of state must be seen as having the president’s personal trust and the clout to represent him authoritatively all over the world.” 

“Michael Grimm, New York’s Next Zombie Candidate.” The New York Times (10/5, Board) editorializes, “Some New York politicians are in a separate class: They’re incapable of blushing. These are people, whether ethically suspect or downright criminal, whose sense of decency has gone haywire.” The Times says Michael Grimm, “a former congressman from Staten Island who spent seven months in a federal prison for felony tax fraud” and announced this week that he would try to recapture his seat, is among this class of politicians. It argues that “there’s no compelling reason for Mr. Grimm to run,” and urges him to “find something other than a taxpayer-financed position to fill his days.” 

“Would You Buy A Condo From The Trumps?” In an editorial, the New York Times (10/5, Board) writes, “Until their father’s personal lawyer intervened, Ivanka and Donald Trump Jr. were under criminal investigation by Manhattan prosecutors for possibly defrauding buyers of units in the Trump SoHo development, according to an investigation by ProPublica, WNYC and The New Yorker.” Chief of Staff Kelly, it adds, “appears to recognize that Mr. Kushner and Ms. Trump are a drag on a White House already plagued by problems. Let’s also hope that he can persuade the Trump family members to deal more forthrightly with the American public than they did with their investors.” 

## Washington Post. 

“This GOP Tax Reform Proposal Isn’t Fair. Here’s What Would Be.” The Washington Post (10/4) argues in an editorial that National Economic Council Director Gary Cohn’s claim that the Administration is “trying to get rid of all of the loopholes and all of the deductions that mostly wealthy people use,” is “not the case.” The Post says the plan targets the state and local tax deduction, which “wealthy people in mostly Democratic states use disproportionately,” and leaves others, including the deductions for home mortgage interest and for charitable giving, “hardly touched.” The Post argues that a “fairer way” would be to “close loopholes without singling out one tax break, one area of the country or one set of wealthy people.” 

“The Senate’s Russia Probe Is Still Far From Over.” The Washington Post (10/4), editorializes that Wednesday’s news conference by Senate Intelligence Committee Chairman Richard Burr and ranking Democrat Mark Warner “raised more questions than it answered on the state of the committee’s probe into Russian election interference. But it did make one thing clear: The investigation is far from over.” The Post asserts, “Importantly, we learned that the committee continues to study whether collusion took place between the Kremlin and the Trump campaign.” 

“Let The Rohingya Return To Burma – Immediately.” In an editorial, the Washington Post (10/4) writes that Rohingya who have fled Burma amid attacks from the military must be allowed to return immediately. The Post argues that the UN Security Council “must move beyond mere discussion and forcefully express the world’s disgust and support new sanctions,” and that the Administration should “impose targeted sanctions on military commanders and others who supported the Rohingya atrocities.” The Post concludes, “Failing to respond to their plight and persecution would compound the crime of their expulsion.” 

## Wall Street Journal. 

“The Gun Control Mirage.” The Wall Street Journal (10/4) says in an editorial that outlawing bump stocks would not halt the practice, since “bumping” can be done with a finger, and also argues that past bans on certain types of rifles have proven ineffective in preventing mass murder. 

“Russian Reality Check.” In an editorial, the Wall Street Journal (10/4) discusses the remarks made by Senate Intelligence Committee Chairman Richard Burr and ranking Democrat Mark Warner at a Wednesday news conference, saying that the lawmakers’ comments boiled down to this: Russia interfered in the 2016 presidential election; the threat of future Russian meddling in US elections remains a very serious concern; and there has apparently yet to be any evidence uncovered of collusion between Russia and the Trump camp. 

“Brussels On The Amazon.” In an editorial, the Wall Street Journal (10/4) writes that Wednesday’s ruling by European Union’s antitrust division, which ordered the collection of $294 million in back taxes from Amazon, serves as a reminder to companies of why they need tax reform in the United States. If implemented, US tax reform would encourage companies such as Amazon to repatriate profits and reinvest them in the US – a more positive model of growth than that pursued by EU officials Wednesday. 

# Big Picture 

## Headlines From Today’s Front Pages. 

Wall Street Journal: 

Mystery Deepens On Las Vegas Shooter’s Motive Russian Spy Tactic: Hack Smartphones Of NATO Soldiers Another Thing Amazon Is Disrupting: MBA Recruiting Trade’s Test Case: Your Washing Machine 

New York Times: 

Hurricane Damage In Puerto Rico Leads To Fears Of Drug Shortages Nationwide Las Vegas Gunman Chased Gambling’s Payouts And Perks Republicans Open To Banning ‘Bump Stocks’ Used In Massacre Inside The Las Vegas Gunman’s Hotel Suite Tillerson’s News Conference Only Highlights Strains With Trump Brian Bowen’s Path To Louisville: A Federal Case Study 

Washington Post: 

Casinos Were A Second Home For A Frequent Gambler For Those Returning To Cars, Quiet Belies Still-Fresh Terror Tillerson Assures Trump He’s Loyal Northam Leads Gillespie By 13 Points, Poll Finds What Trump Didn’t See In Puerto Rico No Warning, Gunman’s Girlfriend Says 

Financial Times: 

Mishaps Mar Theresa May’s Fightback At Tory Conference Trump Sends Puerto Rican Bonds Into Tailspin Catalonia’s Silent Majority Struggles To Unite Against Secession Tillerson Denies He Considered Leaving Trump Administration 

Washington Times: 

Kremlin’s Campaign Ads Intended To Create “Chaos” — Not Back Any Candidate, Senators Say 70 Million People May Have Seen Russian Facebook Ads, Seven Times The Social Media Giant’s Estimate US Interests At Risk In Arab Allies’ Bitter Feud Qatar Prepares For World Cup Spectacle In Middle Of Dispute With Persian Gulf Powers Presidential Front-Runner Lopez Obrador Vows To Drain The Swamp In Mexico With Talk Of Ban, Gun Shops Brace For Run On “Bump Stocks” 

Story Lineup From Last Night’s Network News: 

ABC: Las Vegas Shooting-Gunman; Las Vegas Shooting-Person Of Interest; Las Vegas Shooting-Trump Visit; Las Vegas Shooting-Survivors; Tillerson-Trump Relations; Tropical Storm Tracking; Anti-Vaccine Mother Jailed; Tennessee Chemical Plant Explosion; NYC Bombing Video Released; Equifax Breach-Senate Hearing; Las Vegas Shooting-Community Response. 

CBS: Las Vegas Shooting-Person Of Interest; Las Vegas Shooting-Gunman; Las Vegas Shooting-Trump Visit; Las Vegas Shooting-Medical Teams; Tillerson-Trump Relations; Las Vegas Shooting-Congress; Hurricane Recovery-Puerto Rico; Las Vegas Shooting-First Responders. 

NBC: Las Vegas Shooting; Las Vegas Shooting-Person Of Interest; Las Vegas Shooting-Survivors; Las Vegas Shooting-Trump Visit; Tillerson-Trump Relations; Las Vegas Shooting-Congress; Las Vegas Shooting-City Response; Tropical Storm Tracking; Las Vegas Shooting-First Responders. 

Network TV At A Glance: 

Las Vegas Shooting – 38 minutes, 35 seconds Tillerson-Trump Relations – 6 minutes, 55 seconds Las Vegas Shooting-Trump Visit – 4 minutes, 55 seconds 

Story Lineup From This Morning’s Radio News Broadcasts: 

ABC: Las Vegas Shooting; Las Vegas Shooting-Trump Visit; Tillerson-Trump Relations. 

CBS: Las Vegas Shooting; Russia Meddling Investigation-Dossier; Tillerson-Trump Relations; Nigeria-US Soldier Deaths; Google Pixel 2 Announcement; Equifax Breach-Senate Hearing; NBA News. 

FOX: Las Vegas Shooting; Las Vegas Shooting-Gun Control; Nigeria-US Soldier Deaths. 

NPR: Las Vegas Shooting-Trump Visit; Las Vegas Shooting-Gun Control; Rep. Tim Murphy Retiring. 

# Washington Schedule 

## Today’s Events In Washington. 

White House: 

PRESIDENT TRUMP — Meets with Senator Tom Cotton; meets with the Chairwoman of the Republican National Committee; participates in a briefing with Senior Military leaders; has dinner with Senior Military leaders and spouses. VICE PRESIDENT PENCE — Hosts the first meeting of the National Space Council; receives a briefing on Hurricane Maria relief and recovery efforts and tours the Disaster Relief Center; delivers remarks to the Puerto Rican community and assists in volunteer efforts distributing goods to Puerto Rico for the relief effort. 

US Senate: 9:30 AM Nominations hearing considers Paul Trombino III to be Federal Highway Administration Administrator Location: Dirksen Senate Office Building, Rm 406, Washington, DC http://epw.senate.gov/public/ 9:30 AM Senate Agriculture Committee nominations hearing – Nominations hearing considers Gregory Ibach to be Under Secretary of Agriculture for Marketing and Regulatory Programs, and William Northey to be Under Secretary for Farm and Foreign Agricultural Services Location: Russell Senate Office Building, Rm 328A, Washington, DC http://agriculture.senate.gov/ 9:30 AM Bipartisan senators call for permanent reauthorization of the Land and Water Conservation Fund – Republican Sens. Richard Burr, Steve Daines, and Cory Gardner and Democratic Sens. Maria Cantwell and Tom Udall call for the permanent reauthorization of the Land and Water Conservation Fund, via press conference * Sen. Burr has introduced ‘S. 896’ – a bill to permanently reauthorize the Fund – while Democratic Rep. Raul Grijalva has introduced a similar bill in the House of Representatives Location: U.S. Capitol, Senate Swamp, Washington, DC burr.senate.gov https://twitter.com/SenatorBurr 9:30 AM Senate Foreign Relations Committee Business Meeting – TIME CHANGE – Business Meeting, with agenda including ‘S. 1118, A bill to reauthorize the North Korean Human Rights Act of 2004, and for other purposes’, with a substitute amendment, ‘S. 832, African Growth and Opportunity Act and Millennium Challenge Act Modernization Act’, with a substitute amendment, ‘S. Res. 245, A resolution calling on the Government of Iran to release unjustly detained United States citizens and legal permanent resident aliens, and for other purposes’, and ‘S. Res. 211, A resolution condemning the violence and persecution in Chechnya’, with amendments Location: Rm 419, Dirksen Senate Office Bldg, Washington, DC http://foreign.senate.gov/ 10:00 AM Senate Judiciary Committee Executive Business Meeting – Executive Business Meeting, with agenda including nominations of Amy Coney Barrett to be U.S. Circuit Judge for the Seventh Circuit; Joan Louise Larsen to be U.S. Circuit Judge for the Sixth Circuit; William Campbell Jr. to be U.S. District Judge for the Middle District of Tennessee; Thomas Lee Robinson Parker to be U.S. District Judge for the Western District of Tennessee; Annemarie Carney Axon to be U.S. District Judge for the Northern District of Alabama; Michael Lawrence Brown and William Ray II to be U.S. District Judges for the Northern District of Georgia; Thomas Alvin Farr to be U.S. District Judge for the Eastern District of North Carolina; Eric Dreiband to be Assistant Attorney General for the Civil Rights Division; Robert Duncan Jr. to be U.S. Attorney for the Eastern District of Kentucky; Charles Peeler to be U.S. Attorney for the Middle District of Georgia; and Brian Schroder to be U.S. Attorney for the District of Alaska Location: Rm 226, Dirksen Senate Office Bldg, Washington, DC http://judiciary.senate.gov/ 10:00 AM NIH and FDA heads testify to Senate HELP Committee on the opioid crisis – Hearing on ‘The Federal Response to the Opioid Crisis’, with testimony from National Institutes of Health Director Dr Francis Collins; Food and Drug Administration Commissioner Scott Gottlieb; Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration Assistant Secretary for Mental Health and Substance Use Dr Elinore McCantz-Katz; and CDC National Center for Injury Prevention and Control Director Debra Houry Location: Dirksen Senate Office Building, Rm 430, Washington, DC http://help.senate.gov/ 10:00 AM Senate Finance Committee nominations hearing – Nominations hearing considers Jeffrey Gerrish to be Deputy U.S. Trade Representative for Asia, Europe, the Middle East, and Industrial Competitiveness, with the rank of Ambassador; Gregory Doud to be Office of the U.S. Trade Representative Chief Agricultural Negotiator, with the rank of Ambassador; and Jason Kearns to be a U.S. International Trade Commission member Location: Rm 215, Dirksen Senate Office Bldg, Washington, DC http://finance.senate.gov 10:30 AM Congressional-Executive Commission on China leaders discuss release of annual report – Congressional-Executive Commission on China Chair Republican Sen. Marco Rubio and Cochair Republican Rep. Chris Smith hold press conference on the release of the CECC 2017 Annual Report, discussing its findings and recommendations for the administration’s China policy, and announcing joint initiatives on Hong Kong and efforts to commemorate the late Nobel Peace Prize laureate and Chinese political prisoner Liu Xiaobo Location: U.S. Capitol Visitor Center, SVC-215, Washington, DC www.cecc.gov https://twitter.com/CECCgov 10:30 AM Senate Budget Committee concludes marking up FY’18 Budget Resolution – Markup hearing concludes on the Senate Budget Resolution for Fiscal Year 2018 * Began yesterday Location: Hart Senate Office Building, Rm 216, Washington, DC http://budget.senate.gov/ https://twitter.com/SenateBudget 11:00 AM Sen. Graham, Pro-life Leader introduce Pain Capable Unborn Child Protection Act – U.S. Senator Lindsey Graham (R-South Carolina); Pro-life leaders formally introduce Pain Capable Unborn Child Protection Act in the Senate. Contact: Taylor Reidy , taylor_reidy@lgraham.senate.gov (202) 224-5972 or Kevin Bishop, kevin_bishop@lgraham.senate.gov (864) 250-1417 Location: 138 Dirksen Senate Office Building 2:00 PM Closed Briefing: Intelligence Matters Location: Rm 219, Hart Senate Office Bldg, Washington, DC http://intelligence.senate.gov 2:30 PM Senate Committee on Foreign Relations nominations hearing – TIME CHANGE Location: Rm 419, Dirksen Senate Office Bldg, Washington, DC http://foreign.senate.gov/ 3:30 PM Helsinki Commission co-hosts briefing on the Arctic – ‘A New Ocean in the North: Perils and Possibilities’ Helsinki Commission briefing, held in conjunction with the Senate Arctic Caucus, Senate Oceans Caucus, and Congressional Arctic Working Group. State Department Senior Arctic Official Julie Gourley, Embassy of Finland in the United States’ Iina Peltonen, 17th Coast Guard District Commander Rear Adm. Michael McAllister, Kawerak President and CEO Melanie Bahnke, and Vitus Energy CEO Mark Smith examine ‘the importance of the development of Arctic infrastructure as the OSCE’s least-developed region becomes more accessible’ and analyze ‘the challenges faced by the international community to promote greater cooperation in unlocking the region’s potential’ Location: Dirksen Senate Office Building, Rm G11, Washington, DC http://www.csce.gov https://twitter.com/HelsinkiComm 

US House: 9:00 AM House Foreign Affairs Committee hearing on U.S. response to Rohingya crisis in Burma – Hearing on ‘The Rohingya Crisis: U.S. Response to the Tragedy in Burma’, with testimony from Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Southeast Asia W. Patrick Murphy, and Deputy Assistant Secretary for Population, Refugees, and Migration Mark Storella; and USAID Acting Deputy Assistant Administrator for Democracy, Conflict, and Humanitarian Assistance V. Kate Somvongsiri Location: Rayburn House Office Building, Rm 2172, Washington, DC http://www.hcfa.house.gov https://twitter.com/HouseForeign 9:00 AM House votes on ‘FY’ 18 Republican Budget Resolution’ – House of Representatives meets for legislative business, with agenda including completion of consideration of ‘H.Con.Res. 71’ Fiscal Year 2018 Republican Budget Resolution’ Location: Washington, DC http://www.house.gov/ 9:15 AM Former Equifax CEO testifies to House Financial Services Committee – Hearing on ‘Examining the Equifax Data Breach’, with testimony from former Equifax CEO and Chairman Richard Smith * Follows data breach that potentially exposed the personal information of 143 million Americans Location: Rayburn House Office Building, Rm 2128, Washington, DC http://financialservices.house.gov https://twitter.com/FinancialCmte 10:00 AM House GOP speak on threat of wildfires – House Committee on Natural Resources Chairman Rob Bishop and fellow Republican Reps. Bruce Westerman, Cathy McMorris Rodgers, Greg Walden, Paul Gosar, Greg Gianforte, Raul Labrador, Doug LaMalfa, Tom McClintock, and Scott Tipton discuss the threats wildfires pose to the western U.S., legislation to improve management of the nation’s federal forests, and ‘the need to reform wildfire suppression funding practices’, via press conference Location: U.S. Capitol Visitor Center, HVC 110, Washington, DC http://naturalresources.house.gov https://twitter.com/NatResources 10:00 AM House Small Business subcommittee hearing on agribusiness – Agriculture, Energy, and Trade Subcommittee hearing on ‘High-Tech Agriculture: Small Firms on the Frontier of Agribusiness’, with testimony from American Farm Bureau Federation Director of Rural Development Dr Lisa Benson; IN10T co-founder and COO Kevin Heikes; AgroSpheres Chief Scientific Officer Dr Mark Kester; and Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University College of Agriculture and Life Sciences Agricultural Technology Program Senior Instructor Joe Guthrie Location: Rm 2360, Rayburn House Office Bldg, Washington, DC http://smallbusiness.house.gov/ https://twitter.com/SmallBizGOP 10:00 AM House Energy subcommittee hearing on improving the nation’s electricity markets – Energy Subcommittee hearing on ‘Powering America: Consumer-Oriented Perspectives on Improving the Nation’s Electricity Markets’, with testimony from Monitoring Analytics President Dr Joseph Bowring; New Jersey Division of Rate Counsel Director Stefanie Brand; Electricity Consumers Resource Council President and CEO John Hughes; Public Citizen Energy Program Director Tyson Slocum; Consumer Liaison Group Chairman Rebecca Tepper (on behalf of ISO New England); and Walmart Vice President of Energy Mark Vanderhelm Location: Rayburn House Office Building, Rm 2123, Washington, DC http://energycommerce.house.gov/ https://twitter.com/HouseCommerce 10:30 AM Congressional-Executive Commission on China leaders discuss release of annual report – Congressional-Executive Commission on China Chair Republican Sen. Marco Rubio and Cochair Republican Rep. Chris Smith hold press conference on the release of the CECC 2017 Annual Report, discussing its findings and recommendations for the administration’s China policy, and announcing joint initiatives on Hong Kong and efforts to commemorate the late Nobel Peace Prize laureate and Chinese political prisoner Liu Xiaobo Location: U.S. Capitol Visitor Center, SVC-215, Washington, DC www.cecc.gov https://twitter.com/CECCgov 3:30 PM Helsinki Commission co-hosts briefing on the Arctic – ‘A New Ocean in the North: Perils and Possibilities’ Helsinki Commission briefing, held in conjunction with the Senate Arctic Caucus, Senate Oceans Caucus, and Congressional Arctic Working Group. State Department Senior Arctic Official Julie Gourley, Embassy of Finland in the United States’ Iina Peltonen, 17th Coast Guard District Commander Rear Adm. Michael McAllister, Kawerak President and CEO Melanie Bahnke, and Vitus Energy CEO Mark Smith examine ‘the importance of the development of Arctic infrastructure as the OSCE’s least-developed region becomes more accessible’ and analyze ‘the challenges faced by the international community to promote greater cooperation in unlocking the region’s potential’ Location: Dirksen Senate Office Building, Rm G11, Washington, DC http://www.csce.gov https://twitter.com/HelsinkiComm 

Other: 9:00 AM Heritage Foundation release ‘2018 Index of U.S. Military Strength’ – ‘2018 Index of U.S. Military Strength’ released at the Heritage Foundation, containing the latest assessments of global threats, operating environments, and the status of the U.S. military. Includes keynote from House Armed Services Committee Chairman Mac Thornberry, with other speakers including Index of U.S. Military Strength Editor Dakota Wood, Institute for National Security and Foreign Policy Vice President James Carafano, Heritage Foundation Center for National Defense Director Lt. Gen. (Ret.) Thomas Spoehr, and Heritage Foundation Defense Budgeting Policy Analyst Frederico Bartels Location: Heritage Foundation, 214 Massachusetts Ave NW, Washington, DC www.heritage.org https://twitter.com/Heritage 9:30 AM Pakistani foreign minister speaks at USIP on Pakistan-U.S. relations – Pakistani Foreign Minister Khawaja Asif speaks at the U.S. Institute of Peace on the new U.S. strategy for Afghanistan and South Asia, Pakistan’s reaction to the announcement, the dynamics between Pakistan and its neighbors, the role of regional players such as China, Iran, and Russia, and the future of U.S.-Pakistan relations Location: U.S. Institute of Peace, 2301 Constitution Ave NW, Washington, DC www.usip.org/events/pakistans-foreign-minister-relations-us https://twitter.com/USIP 9:30 AM GOP Sen. Thom Tillis keynotes ‘A New Approach to American Immigration’ forum – ‘Leading the Way: A New Approach to American Immigration’ forum, hosted by the National Immigration Forum and the Forum Action Fund, to discuss immigration policy solutions that serve the interests of America, especially its workers and their families. Includes keynote from Republican Sen. Thom Tillis Location: JW Marriott Washington, DC, 1331 Pennsylvania Ave NW, Washington, DC www.leadingtheway.us https://twitter.com/NatImmForum 10:30 AM Afghanistan Ambassador to the U.S. speaks at Wilson Center on ‘America’s Longest War’ – ‘Sixteen Years and Counting in Afghanistan: What’s Next for America’s Longest War?’ Wilson Center Asia Program discussion, with opening address from Afghanistan Ambassador to the U.S. Amb. Hamdullah Mohib, Center for a New American Security Adjunct Senior Fellow Christopher Kolenda, Heritage Foundation Center for Foreign Policy Director Luke Coffey, and New America Senior South Asia Fellow Shamila Chaudhary Location: Wilson Center, 1300 Pennsylvania Ave NW, Washington, DC http://www.wilsoncenter.org/ https://twitter.com/TheWilsonCenter 11:00 AM AG Sessions announces DoJ initiative to reduce violent crime – Attorney General Jeff Sessions and Deputy Attorney General Rod Rosenstein make ‘significant announcement on an initiative designed to reduce violent crime’, with remarks (11:00 AM EDT) followed by a roundtable discussion with ‘prominent law enforcement leaders’ on the implementation of such initiatives (11:50 AM EDT) Location: Department of Justice, 950 Pennsylvania Ave NW, Washington, DC www.justice.gov https://twitter.com/TheJusticeDept 5:00 PM Former Vice President Joe Biden delivers CSIS Zbigniew Brzezinski Annual Lecture – Center for Strategic and International Studies Zbigniew Brzezinski Annual Prize and Lecture, recognizing and promoting the importance of geostrategic thinking with a transcending moral purpose. This year’s prize recipient is former Vice President Joe Biden, who delivers the lecture, with other speakers including former Secretary of Defense William Cohen, and CSIS President and CEO John Hamre Location: Center for Strategic and International Studies, 1616 Rhode Island Ave NW, Washington, DC http://www.csis.org https://twitter.com/CSIS 6:30 PM World Affairs Council Embassy Series event with Oman Ambassador to the U.S. Amb. Hunaina Sultan Ahmed Al-Mughairy Location: Sultan Qaboos Cultural Center, 1100 16th St NW, Washington, DC http://www.worldaffairsdc.org https://twitter.com/wac_dc 

# Last Laughs 

## Late Night Political Humor. 

Jimmy Kimmel: “By the way, if Trump is upset Rex Tillerson called him a moron, wait till he finds out what the rest of the country has been calling him.” 

Stephen Colbert: “Hold on there, Tillerson! Nobody calls our President a moron except me!” Stephen Colbert: “Here’s the deal. Why would Tillerson say such a vicious, accurate thing about his boss?” 

James Corden: “It was reported that Tillerson had called Trump a moron. So I guess Tillerson isn’t so much Secretary of State as he is secretary of stating the obvious. “ 

Trevor Noah: “In addition to North Korea, it turns out Rex Tillerson may now need to negotiate peace between his boss and himself.” 

Trevor Noah: “So Facebook has fake news. Google has fake news. Twitter has fake news. Who would have thought we would be living in a world where Snapchat is our only legitimate source of news?” 

Trevor Noah: “Now, it would already be bad if all the fake news coming out from the inside of the White House was the only thing we had to deal with. But as we’ve learned, the Russians are also involved. And if there is one guaranteed way to make any situation worse, just sprinkle a little Russia over it.” 

Jimmy Fallon: “It just came out that Secretary of State Rex Tillerson called President Trump a moron and threatened to quit. You can tell the situation’s a mess because Trump started throwing paper towels at it.” 

Jimmy Fallon: “After it came out that Tillerson called Trump a moron, Tillerson held a press conference and called the President smart. Then he said, ‘Do you think the moron bought it?’” 

Jimmy Fallon: “It turns out that Trump’s son-in-law and adviser Jared Kushner had a third private email account that he used for government business. And if you all listen closely, you can hear Hillary backstage laughing.” 

Seth Meyers: “Former First Lady Michelle Obama yesterday criticized the lack of diversity in Congress. Said Congress, ‘Not true. We have white men from 50 different states!’”  

> Copyright 2017 by Bulletin Intelligence LLC Reproduction or redistribution without permission prohibited. Content is drawn from thousands of newspapers, national magazines, national and local television programs, radio broadcasts, social-media platforms and additional forms of open-source data. Sources for Bulletin Intelligence audience-size estimates include Scarborough, GfK MRI, comScore, Nielsen, and the Audit Bureau of Circulation. Data from and access to third party social media platforms, including but not limited to Facebook, Twitter, Instagram and others, is subject to the respective platform’s terms of use. Services that include Factiva content are governed by Factiva’s terms of use. Services including embedded Tweets are also subject to Twitter for Website's information and privacy policies. The Department of the Interior News Briefing is published five days a week by Bulletin Intelligence, which creates custom briefings for government and corporate leaders. We can be found on the Web at BulletinIntelligence.com, or called at (703) 483-6100.

# Conversation Contents 

## U.S. Department of the Interior News Briefing for Monday, October 2, 2017 

# Bulletin Intelligence <Interior@bulletinintelligence.com> 

## From: Bulletin Intelligence <Interior@bulletinintelligence.com> 

## Sent: Mon Oct 02 2017 04:57:09 GMT-0600 (MDT) 

## To: <Interior@bulletinintelligence.com> 

## Subject: U.S. Department of the Interior News Briefing for Monday, October 2, 2017  

> Mobile version and searchable archives available here. Please click here to subscribe.
> DATE: MONDAY, OCTOBER 2, 2017 7:00 AM EDT

# Today's Table Of Contents 

DOI In The News 

• Atlanta Journal-Constitution: After Price Resignation, Democrats Keep Focus On Travel By Other Trump. • Wall Street Journal: A Return To The Conservation Ethic. • KBSC-FM Boise (ID): Zinke Set To Change Obama’s Sage Grouse Plan For Idaho And 9 Other States. • Press TV (IRN): US Interior Secretary Hints At Economic War On Iran. • Associated Press: Springfield Mayor: Wonders Of Wildlife A “Game-Changer.” • Los Angeles Times: What The Trump Administration Doesn’t Understand About Wildfires. 

Bureau Of Indian Affairs 

• Lake Superior Island Returned To Chippewa. 

Bureau Of Land Management 

• Eureka (CA) Times Standard: Environmental Groups Name Toilet After Interior Secretary In Public Lands Protest. • Albuquerque (NM) Journal: DC Monuments “Report” Takes Hike To Nowhere. • Washington Examiner: Ryan Zinke’s Monumental Disappointment In Montana. • Santa Fe New Mexican: Zinke Is Far From Teddy Roosevelt. 

Bureau Of Ocean Energy Management 

• Public Meeting Set For Tuesday On Hilcorp’s Beaufort Sea Project. 

Bureau Of Reclamation 

• Feds Won’t Oppose Klamath River Dam Removal, Official Says. Bureau Of Safety And Environmental Enforcement 

• Offshore Safety Chief Urges Shift From “Little Bitty Things.” 

Fish And Wildlife Service 

• Associated Press: DNA Tests Confirm Gray Wolf Is Roaming NW Washington State. • Omaha (NE) World-Herald: Omaha Zoo Helps Breed, Release Critically Endangered Frogs. 

National Park Service 

• Associated Press: No Increased Danger After Yosemite Rocks Fall. • Associated Press: Missing Hiker Found In Sequoia National Park. • Washington Times: Successful Border Enforcement Saves Habitat, Visitor Security On National Park Service Land. • Associated Press: Park Officials Prepare To Phase Down Services On North Rim. • Associated Press: Permission Sought For Observatory Atop Colorado’s Pikes Peak. 

Top National News 

• USA Today: Trump Blasts Critics Of Administration’s Response To Hurricane Maria. • ABC: After Trump Again Calls To End Protests, Fewer NFL Players Kneel During Anthem. • NBC: Trump: Tillerson “Wasting His Time” Talking To North Korea. 

Editorial Wrap-Up 

• New York Times. - “Actually, A Health Care Deal Is Possible.” - “Discrimination Inside The N.Y.P.D.” - “Goodbye Seal, Goodbye Flag.” • Washington Post. - “Will Trump’s Tax Cuts Profit Trump?” - “The Republican Rot Runs Deeper Than Roy Moore.” - “The Guggenheim Caves To Threats – And Squashes Free Expression.” • Wall Street Journal. - “Tax Policy Center Propaganda.” - “Trump’s Excellent Judges.” - “Arbitration Is Back At The Supreme Court.” 

Big Picture 

• Headlines From Today’s Front Pages. 

Washington Schedule 

• Today’s Events In Washington. 

Last Laughs 

• Late Night Political Humor. 

# DOI In The News 

## After Price Resignation, Democrats Keep Focus On Travel By Other Trump. 

Throughout the weekend, there was ongoing coverage of the travel expenses of members of President Trump’s Cabinet. The Atlanta Journal-Constitution (10/1, Dupree) reports that as HHS Secretary Price “departed, Democrats were already asking the feds for more details on the travel habits of others in the Trump Cabinet, especially zeroing in on Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke, EPA chief Scott Pruitt and Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin.” Zinke “has already said he thinks questions about his travel are ‘BS,’ amid reports that he had the Interior Department spend over $12,000 on a private jet to fly home to Montana.” The Hill (9/29, Delk) reported that Rep. Betty McCollum (D-N) sent a letter to Zinke on Friday, “asking for more information on the privately chartered flights he took at taxpayer expense while in office, saying that the flights have created ‘the appearance of a serious conflict of interest.’” Bloomberg News (9/29, Olorunnipa, John) reported that Zinke flew from Las Vegas to Montana “in June aboard a plane owned by the executives of a Wyoming company. ... A department official said Zinke has never met the energy executive who owned the plane, and that the charter plane company he used has been a vendor of the federal government for years.” The Washington Times (9/29, Wolfgang) reported that on Friday, Zinke “said all of his private flights...had been cleared by the department’s ethics office.” Among the other sources mentioning Zinke in coverage of the issue were BBC News (UK) (9/29), the Daily Beast (9/29, Ryan), CBS News (9/29, Watson), CNN (9/29, Green), Esquire Magazine (9/29, Pierce), the Huffington Post (9/29), NBC News (9/29), Politico (9/29, Lefebvre), Quartz (9/30, Timmons), and TIME (10/1, Miller). 

## A Return To The Conservation Ethic. 

In her Wall Street Journal (9/29) column, Kimberley Strassel praises Interior Secretary Zinke’s plans to restore the conservation vision of Gifford Pinchot. Zinke told Strassel, “My first goal is to restore trust with America that we are in fact using our public lands ‘for the benefit and the enjoyment of the people’ – not for the very few and the elite. ... We are going to be great stewards of these treasures, but we are also going to restore access to the people and to industry – and be a partner.” Zinke also told Strassel that he may move the Bureau of Land Management, the Bureau of Reclamation, and the Fish and Wildlife Service out of Washington to the West, possibly Colorado. 

## Zinke Set To Change Obama’s Sage Grouse Plan For Idaho And 9 Other States. 

In continuing coverage, KBSC-FM Boise, ID (9/29, Barnhill) reported on its website that though the Interior Department under President Obama did not put the greater sage grouse on the endangered species list, “officials created a plan which restricted ranching, mining and other resource extraction – but not as drastically as a listing decision would have.” Interior Secretary Zinke is now “set to reverse much of this plan.” 

## US Interior Secretary Hints At Economic War On Iran. 

Iranian state outlet Press TV (IRN) (9/30) reported that Interior Secretary Zinke “says Washington is now better placed to use its ‘economic dominance’ to cut Iran’s oil revenues.” Press TV writes, “American companies have been jacking up shale oil production” since President Trump “walked away from the Paris climate treaty. US ability to extract energy from vast shale formations has put the country on the brink of being a global energy powerhouse.” In his Friday speech at the Heritage Foundation, Zinke said US “economic leverage would work to supplant every drop of crude that Iran produces and energy dominance is part of that.” 

## Springfield Mayor: Wonders Of Wildlife A “Game-Changer.” 

The AP (9/30) reported on the opening of the Wonders of Wildlife National Museum & Aquarium in Springfield, Missouri last week. Interior Secretary Zinke “scuba-dived into the aquarium” along with actor Mark Wahlberg. Forbes (10/1, Shiels) also has a report. 

## What The Trump Administration Doesn’t Understand About Wildfires. 

Char Miller, a professor of environmental analysis at Pomona College, writes in the Los Angeles Times (10/1) that the Trump Administration’s “key wildfire officials – Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke, Agriculture Secretary Sonny Perdue and EPA Administrator Scott Pruitt – have refused to acknowledge the primary role that dangerous climatological factors, such as drought, heat and wind, play in energizing and propelling wildland fire. Instead, they’re fingering ‘radical environmentalists’ who allegedly have scuttled timber sales that would have removed trees and reduced ignition sources.” 

# Bureau Of Indian Affairs 

## Lake Superior Island Returned To Chippewa. The Minneapolis Star Tribune (9/30, Louwagie) reported that the Grand Portage Band of Lake Superior Chippewa and the Nature Conservancy have “announced that, with approval from the U.S. Bureau of Indian Affairs,” Susie Island, the largest of “the 13 small Lake Superior islands off the northeast tip of Minnesota...has been returned to the tribe.” The Susie Islands Archipelago “is located entirely within the boundaries of the Grand Portage Indian Reservation,” though initially left out. The band “made a long-term goal to reacquire the islands where ancestors had gathered blueberries and fished. It succeeded in getting most of them, but the large island was among the last to be returned.” 

# Bureau Of Land Management 

## Environmental Groups Name Toilet After Interior Secretary In Public Lands Protest. 

The Eureka (CA) Times Standard (9/30, Houston) reported that two Humboldt County, California environmental organizations, “protesting Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke’s proposal to downsize a southern Oregon and northern California national monument...chose to give...Zinke a monument of his own: a toilet.” Representatives of the Environmental Protection Information Center and the Northcoast Environmental Center held a ribbon cutting at “the vault toilet at the Ma-le’l Dunes’ south entrance in Manila on Saturday morning. ... As the bathroom is Bureau of Land Management property, the wood plaque bearing Zinke’s name was removed after the ceremony.” Breitbart (10/1) picked up the report. 

## DC Monuments “Report” Takes Hike To Nowhere. 

The Albuquerque (NM) Journal (10/1) editorializes, “The leaked draft of Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke’s recommendations to President Trump on 27 national monuments...is so vague it’s useless to the communities that would be affected by any changes.” Since the White House “is not answering questions about it...everyone, especially those who live, work and play in or near the monuments, is left to speculate on the few semi-solid recommendations in the draft.” 

## Ryan Zinke’s Monumental Disappointment In Montana. 

William Perry Pendley writes in his Washington Examiner (10/2, Pendley) column that Interior Secretary Zinke’s “leaked report on President Trump’s ordered review of 27 national monument designations or expansions of the last 21 years was trebly disappointing.” Zinke “failed to recommend revocation of any Clinton and Obama decrees, despite finding that many failed to satisfy the requirements of the Antiquities Act of 1906. He offered boundary adjustments for only four monuments...but suggested, with unwarranted optimism, the worst of the others could be eased by expanding the lawful activities there.” And he “urged using the widely-discredited act to set more land off-limits, including in his backyard in Montana.” 

## Zinke Is Far From Teddy Roosevelt. 

Brian Sybert of the Conservation Lands Foundation and David Petersen of Colorado Backcountry Hunters and Anglers wrote in the Santa Fe New Mexican (9/30), “In his so-called review of national monuments, Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke – who likes to declare himself a Teddy Roosevelt fan – claims that his recommended changes to our national monuments will help sportsmen by ‘restoring’ fishing and hunting rights taken away by previous administrations. That’s an outright lie. Hunting and fishing are currently allowed in every single one of the 23 land-based national monuments included in Secretary Zinke’s review.” Sybert and Petersen argue that the recommendations “aim to shrink our national monuments and weaken protections to make it easier for private industry to exploit these treasured public places.” 

# Bureau Of Ocean Energy Management Public Meeting Set For Tuesday On Hilcorp’s Beaufort Sea Project. 

The Fairbanks (AK) News-Miner (10/1) reports, “A public hearing will be held Tuesday in Fairbanks about a proposed oil and gas development project north of Alaska in the Beaufort Sea.” Hilcorp “has filed a plan with the U.S. Bureau of Ocean Energy Management to build a small artificial gravel island in the sea. The island would be similar to four existing oil and gas producing islands in the area.” 

# Bureau Of Reclamation 

## Feds Won’t Oppose Klamath River Dam Removal, Official Says. 

The Eureka (CA) Times Standard (9/29, Houston) reported that Bureau of Reclamation Deputy Commissioner Alan Mikkelsen “said in a recent interview with an Oregon newspaper that the department will not interfere with a plan to remove four dams from the 236-mile Klamath River.” Mikkelsen said, “Interior is not going to do anything to slow or stop the dam removal process.” The Klamath Hydroelectric Settlement Agreement “proposes to remove four hydroelectric dams from the Klamath River starting in 2020 in order to improve water quality for wildlife and downstream users.” 

# Bureau Of Safety And Environmental Enforcement 

## Offshore Safety Chief Urges Shift From “Little Bitty Things.” 

The Houston Chronicle (9/29, Osborne) reported that Bureau of Safety and Environmental Enforcement Director Scott Angelle “said in a recent interview that he was concerned that over-policing was creating a contentious environment in which the bureau and the oil companies it oversees were spending too much time sending paperwork back and forth and not enough time focused on preventing oil spills and blowouts.” Angelle said, “If you’re inspecting around some things, but they’re for little bitty things and we’re not focused on the big things, or we’re not even inspecting for those big things, isn’t that a misalignment?” At BSEE, Angelle “has instigated an agency overhaul designed to reduce lag times in permitting and focus inspections on those violations and operations determined to pose the greatest risk.” 

# Fish And Wildlife Service 

## DNA Tests Confirm Gray Wolf Is Roaming NW Washington State. 

The AP (9/30) reported that Fish and Wildlife Service officials “say DNA testing has confirmed that a wolf is roaming on the west side of the Cascade mountains in northwestern Washington state. ... Fish and Wildlife spokeswoman Ann Froschauer says it’s not clear where the gray wolf came from because DNA samples don’t find a connection with known wolf packs in eastern Washington, Idaho or British Columbia.” 

## Omaha Zoo Helps Breed, Release Critically Endangered Frogs. 

The Omaha (NE) World-Herald (9/29, Peters) reported, “This summer, Omaha’s zoo introduced 82 critically-endangered Mississippi gopher frogs into the wild.” The Henry Doorly Zoo & Aquarium “partnered with the Memphis Zoo and the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service to breed the frogs using in vitro fertilization.” 

# National Park Service 

## No Increased Danger After Yosemite Rocks Fall. 

The AP (9/29) reported that “geological analysis Friday found there was no more danger than usual of another giant rock fall after two huge slides, including one involving a slab of granite the size of a 36-story building, occurred this week on the famed El Capitan rock formation in Yosemite National Park.” One person was killed and two injured “in the successive rock falls on Wednesday and Thursday at the climbing mecca.” The Los Angeles Times (9/29, Serna, Tchekmedyian) reported that “park officials said Friday that despite the rockfalls, El Capitan remains safe, and climbers continued their treks.” The Independent (UK) (9/30, Baynes) reported that British climber Andrew Foster “was trapped when more than 1,000 tonnes of rock fell from the face of the El Capitan monolith on Wednesday.” Fox News (9/29) reported on its website that “a rock climber fell Friday in Yosemite National Park and had to be airlifted out of the area” in “the third incident in Yosemite this week.” 

## Missing Hiker Found In Sequoia National Park. 

The AP (9/30) reported, “A hiker who went missing days ago in Sequoia National Park has been found safe.” The National Park Service “says a helicopter on Saturday found 49-year-old Edward Newbegin hiking on a trail. He was uninjured and was escorted out of the area to reunite with his family.” 

## Successful Border Enforcement Saves Habitat, Visitor Security On National Park Service Land. 

The Washington Times (10/1, Dinan) cites Organ Pipe Cactus National Monument in southern Arizona as “one of the success stories of the border, where a combination of stiffer enforcement, changing migration patterns and a new spirit of cooperation between federal agencies has produced gains unimaginable just a few years ago.” For more than a decade, the area “was considered prime crossing territory for illegal immigrants and smugglers.” At its worst, “tens of thousands of illegal immigrants and smugglers crossed the southern Arizona borders each month, cutting trails on foot or barreling through in vehicles,” leaving “mountains of trash in their wake.” Now, “visitors are coming back to the parks in Arizona.” 

## Park Officials Prepare To Phase Down Services On North Rim. 

The AP (9/30) reported, “Grand Canyon National Park is preparing to begin the annual phasedown of services on the North Rim before its Dec. 1 winter closure. Seasonal shutdown of most visitor services begins with Grand Canyon Lodge serving its last meal the morning of Oct. 16,” with the last North Rim trail rides the day before. The North Rim “will remain open from Nov. 1 to Nov. 30 only for day use. All North Rim operations close Dec. 1 or earlier if snow closes State Route 67.” 

## Permission Sought For Observatory Atop Colorado’s Pikes Peak. 

The AP (9/29) reported that the National Space Science and Technology Institute recently submitted an application to the US Forest Service “seeking permission to build an observatory atop Colorado’s Pikes Peak. ... The Forest Service as well as Colorado Historic Preservation Office and the National Park Service will take part in analyzing the proposal.” 

# Top National News 

## Trump Blasts Critics Of Administration’s Response To Hurricane Maria. 

Media coverage of the Administration response to Hurricane Maria focuses heavily on the President’s tweets yesterday (particularly his comments concerning San Juan Mayor Carmen Yulín Cruz) and is decidedly negative, casting Trump as lashing out and questioning the accuracy of his claims. Trump on Sunday morning “defended his administration’s response to the humanitarian disaster in Puerto Rico, dismissing any critics of his relief efforts as ‘fake news’ and ‘politically motivated ingrates,’” USA Today (10/1, Jackson, Slack) reports. In a pair of tweets, Trump wrote, “We have done a great job with the almost impossible situation in Puerto Rico. ... Outside of the Fake News or politically motivated ingrates...people are now starting to recognize the amazing work that has been done by FEMA and our great Military.” In a third tweet, “Trump had kind words for Puerto Rico Gov. Ricardo Rossello, thanking him and ‘all of those who are working so closely with our First Responders. Fantastic job!’” The New York Post (10/1, Moore) describes Trump as “lash[ing] out” and “ramping up his feud with the mayor of San Juan and the ‘Fake News’ media for their criticism of his response to Puerto Rico in the aftermath of Hurricane Maria.” Politico (10/1, Cohen) says Trump’s Sunday tweets “were in contrast to some he wrote Saturday in which he assailed” Cruz “and the news media – and seemingly mocked the population of Puerto Rico as lazy.” Politico adds that it also “wasn’t clear whether Trump’s claims Sunday were true. CNN, for instance, quoted the governor of Puerto Rico as saying that some areas of the island remain basically isolated, casting doubt on Trump’s claim that ‘all buildings now inspected.’” The AP (10/1, Colvin) says Trump “spent Saturday ensconced in his New Jersey golf club and on Sunday attended an international golf competition near New York City,” and “appeared unconcerned with the optics of spending his Sunday afternoon watching The Presidents Cup at the Liberty National Golf Club as the crisis continued.” NJ News (10/1) reports that as Trump awarded the Presidents Cup trophy to the US team on Sunday, he discussed “golf and hurricane relief.” Trump said, “On behalf of all of the people of Texas and all of the people of – if you look today and see what’s happening, how horrible it is, though we have it under really great control in Puerto Rico. ... And the people of Florida, who have really suffered over this last short period of time with the hurricanes, I want to just remember them and we’re going to dedicate this trophy to all of those people that went through so much.” Julie Pace of the AP said on CNN Inside Politics (10/1), “For the President, everything comes down to winning and losing. And he watches the coverage right now, he is seeing people, either officials or Puerto Ricans who are being critical of the federal response and he believes that that reflects poorly on him. So he wants to push back and make it sound like he is actually winning this. But in doing that, in framing it in that context, he’s really losing sight of what we’re actually talking about.” Administration officials also spoke out in defense of the Administration response on Sunday. The Hill (10/1, Savransky) reports, “White House officials on Sunday were united in blaming factors beyond their control for Puerto Rico’s struggle to recover from hurricane damage.” Business Insider (10/1) says, “The White House has increasingly attempted to spin its response to Maria – which many have criticized as slow to recognize the extent of devastation – as a success.” OMB Director Mulvaney also took aim at Cruz, Politico (10/1, Temple-West) reports. Mulvaney told CNN’s State Of The Union (10/1, Tapper), “My understanding is that as of yesterday, she had not even been to the FEMA operation center in her own city. ... It is unfortunate that the San Juan mayor wants to sort of go against the grain. We’d love to have her on the team as we all pull in the same direction.” The Hill (10/1, Beavers) reports that Treasury Secretary Mnuchin also “defended” the President for his “series of attacks” against Cruz. Appearing on NBC’s Meet the Press (10/1, Todd), Mnuchin said, “When the President gets attacked, he attacks back, and I think the mayor’s comments were unfair, given what the federal government has done.” National Economic Council Director Cohn told Fox News Sunday Morning Futures 

(10/1, Bartiromo) that he wanted to “reiterate how involved the Administration continues to be.” He noted that “the United States has gone through extraordinary efforts to deliver goods to the island” and that currently, “our big challenge to get those goods delivered to the citizens of the island that need those goods.” FEMA Administrator Long also defended Administration efforts on ABC’s This Week 

(10/1), saying, “We have been working with mayors all around Puerto Rico to make sure we have a strategy” and “that we execute the strategy going forward.” He said that the mayor of San Juan does “have access to commodities” as “we have established 11 regional distribution hubs.” Long told Fox News Sunday (10/1, Wallace) that “the bottom line is this is the most logistically challenging event the United States has ever seen and we have been moving and pushing as fast as the situation allows.” USA Today (10/1, Slack) that in response to Long’s claim on Fox, “social media users quickly shot back, outlining other significant logistical challenges the US has tackled in its history.” Axios (10/1, Allen) reports that it obtained a leaked update, sent by Homeland Security Adviser Bossert to West Wing colleagues, “that points to a rapid recovery no one on the ground is witnessing” in Puerto Rico. In the memo, Bossert says, “The storm caused these problems, not our response to it. We have pushed about as much stuff and people through a tiny hole in as short a timeframe as possible.” In a separate story, The Hill (10/1, Manchester) reports Bossert “said the federal government has ‘a strong ground game’ in Puerto Rico...despite dire reports from residents and journalists on the island.” He stated in the memo obtained by Axios: “We have a strong ground game in place on the island with military leadership. [Puerto Rico Gov. Ricardo] Rossello should continue to get more public messaging support from us.” Newsmax (10/1, Burke) says Bossert “outlin[ed] a public relations campaign to promote rapid stabilization and a ‘bright future,’ Axios reported.” Bossert added in his message that President Trump’s visit to the island on Tuesday “will inspire the people and let them know we all care.” The Daily Intelligencer (NY) (10/1, Danner) says that despite Bossert’s suggestions, the “reality of the humanitarian crisis in Puerto Rico...has rarely lined up with the Trump administration’s optimistic takes on the situation. Criticism of federal relief efforts continues to intensify as many of the supplies that have been delivered to the island remain out of the hands of the communities that need them.” Citing Trump’s tweets Sunday morning, Mother Jones (10/1, West) says the President “appears to be ignoring whatever positive PR strategy his adviser Bossert is going with.” Reuters (10/1, Respaut, Stargardter) reports that lawmakers on Sunday urged Trump to “stop sniping” at Cruz and “get to work helping them recover.” Senate Minority Leader Schumer told CBS’ “Face the Nation” that the relief effort has been “slow footed, disorganized and not adequate. ... The president, instead of tweeting against the mayor of San Juan who’s watching her people die and just made a plea for help, ought to roll up his sleeves and get to work here.” Bloomberg News (10/1, Levin) reports that Sen. Bernie Sanders “bridled at the administration’s continued attacks on Cruz,” telling CNN’s State Of The Union (10/1, Tapper), “Speaking from his fancy golf club, playing golf with his billionaire friends, attacking the mayor of San Juan, who is struggling to bring electricity to the island, food to the island, water to the island, gas to the island, that is just – it is unspeakable.” Rep. Shelia Jackson Lee said on MSNBC’s Politics Nation (10/1), “I applaud Mayor Cruz for taking him on because, unfortunately, he does not know the topography or he does not know Puerto Rico. Puerto Rico happens to have many cities. Mayor Cruz made it very clear that what she is speaking of is those individuals, those mayors, those small governments beyond San Juan who cannot speak for themselves who are facing the devastation of bodies, the devastation of dead animals, the lack of water, having to travel an hour and a half for a bag of groceries, roads that are impassable. And the President failed on this, absolutely failed.” Criticism also came from inside Trump’s party on Sunday. Ohio Gov. John Kasich said on CNN’s State Of The Union (10/1, Tapper), “When people are in the middle of a disaster, you don’t start trying to criticize them.” He added, “What’s happening down there is just terrible. And maybe part of it is storm fatigue.” He concluded that “when you get behind the curve on a natural disaster, you get behind the curve, you just play catch-up all the way and it never works out the way you want it to.” Sen. Marco Rubio said on CBS’ Face The Nation (10/1, Dickerson), “Every minute we spend in the political realm bickering with one another over who’s doing what, or who’s wrong, or who didn’t do right is a minute of energy and time that we’re not spending trying to get the response right.” Susan Ferrechio of the Washington Examiner said on Fox News MediaBuzz 

(10/1), “Let’s try to imagine an alternative universe where Hillary Clinton were President right now. What do you think the narrative would look like? Do you really think it would be the San Juan mayor proclaiming people are dying and we are not getting any help? I think that he did well with Texas and Florida and Democrats were really looking for a way to turn Puerto Rico into a Katrina-like disaster for Trump.” Katie Pavlich of Townhall.com said on Fox News MediaBuzz (10/1), “I think they are not pointing out in fairness of yes, the San Juan mayor is saying these things, but the governor is out praising the President’s response and saying, ‘Yes this is a difficult situation. We need more help, obviously. This is not going to be over in the week coming. It’s going to be a long-term process.’ But they tried to pin all this on the President and ignore the timeline of what the Department of Homeland Security has done and try to get those people on the ground to distribute those supplies.” 

San Juan Mayor Says She Is Willing To Meet With Trump. Meanwhile, the Washington Post (10/1, Snell) reports that as Trump “continued to praise the relief effort and the US government response,” Cruz on Sunday “called for more, better coordinated federal aid...to deal with the widespread storm damage in Puerto Rico.” In an appearance on ABC’s This Week (10/1), Cruz “avoided directly criticizing Trump...and attempted to refocus the discussion on speeding aid and supplies to people on the island territory.” Cruz said, “All I did last week, or even this week, was ask for help. ... It has to happen in a sustained manner. It has to happen quickly.” Cruz also “said she would be willing to meet with Trump during his planned visit to Puerto Rico this week.” The Wall Street Journal (10/1, Mauldin, Bender) says Cruz took a different tone on NBC’s “Meet the Press,” saying of Trump’s comments, “Bring it on. I’m here,” and he can “attack me all he wants.” David Wright said on ABC World News Tonight (10/1, story 2, 2:45, Llamas) that while Cruz has said she is willing to meet with Trump, “it’s not clear the invitation has been given.” A Politico (10/1, Karni) analysis says “Cruz’s frustration with the layers of bureaucracy standing between her wiped-out city and food and water delivery might have been in line with Trump’s own interest in cutting regulations and red tape,” but her “plea was interpreted by Trump as a personal insult.” Politico adds that “longtime Trump watchers” saw his “personal reaction to Cruz [as] par for the course,” for Trump, who “has gone after morning show hosts like Mika Brzezinski, lawmakers from his own party, like Arizona Republican Sen. John McCain, members of his own Cabinet...and even taken on the NFL. And it was in line with how he has reacted to individuals who criticize him personally for years.” In a profile of Cruz, the AP (10/1, Coto) says she has risen “to international prominence as a target of Twitter attacks.” The AP adds that Cruz’s critics “have questioned her management style, noting that some early supporters – including people who occupied key positions – have resigned or been dismissed.” 

Rosselló Says A Surge Of Fuel And Supplies Has Begun Reaching Puerto Rico. The New York Times (10/1, Fausset) reports that Rosselló said Sunday that “a surge of fuel and food supplies and federal government personnel has begun to arrive” on the island. According to Rosselló, “over the next two days, more than half a million barrels of diesel fuel and nearly a million barrels of gasoline would reach Puerto Rico.” In addition, Rosselló “said that the Defense Department had increased its footprint on Puerto Rico to 6,400 people, from roughly 4,600 two days earlier, with more coming, and that other federal agencies were also sending more staff to aid in the island’s recovery.” On the CBS Weekend News (10/1, story 2, 2:20, Quijano), correspondent David Begnaud reported that Rosselló “warned” Sunday “that he believes there could be a mass exodus of Puerto Ricans to the US mainland unless Congress passes a financial aid package soon.” Tom Llamas reported in the lead story for ABC World News Tonight (10/1, lead story, 2:35) that FEMA has approved “63,000 applications for $7 million worth of assistance,” and “delivered 2 million liters of water and 1 million meals.” Alex Perez added that Navy hospital ship Comfort is “arriving this week. 6,400 troops already on the ground. With communications crippled, the general now in charge of military operations here, says the challenge is finding where the needs are so they can be met.” Ron Mott presented a more negative picture on NBC Nightly News (10/1, story 2, 1:50, Snow), saying, “We spent the day looking for people getting emergency aid that’s supposed to be flowing out of 11 FEMA distribution centers to local authorities around the island. What we found was confusion. Local officials couldn’t point us to the centers where people could get relief supplies.” Guaynabo Mayor Casts Doubt On Cruz’s Claims. The Daily Caller (9/30) reports that Guaynabo Mayor Angel Perez on Saturday “cast serious doubt” on Cruz’s claims. Perez said “that his experience with the federal government has been different from Cruz’s, in part because – unlike Cruz – he has been participating in meetings with officials from the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) and other federal agencies.” Perez said, “My experience is different. I have been participating in different meetings at the headquarters of FEMA and our government and the help is coming in and right now my experience is different from hers. I’m receiving help from the government, we are receiving assistance from FEMA, I got people over here helping us with applications for the people that have damage in their houses. And we have here in Guaynabo, we have thousands of people that lost partially or totally their houses.” 

Residents Scramble For Food, Water, Fuel As Shortages Grip Puerto Rico. Reuters (10/1, Respaut, Brown) highlights shortages on the island, reporting that residents are “scrambl[ing] for all the staples of modern society – food, water, fuel, medicine, currency – in a grinding survival struggle that has gripped Puerto Ricans across social classes.” Reuters adds that “severe shortages have thrown even relatively affluent Puerto Ricans into the same plight as the hundreds of thousands of poor residents here.” On The CBS Weekend News (10/1, story 12, 1:55, Quijano), Dr. John LaPook reported from an elementary school that is serving as a shelter for people who “have been displaced, really no place to go because of the hurricane.” The New York Times (10/1, Healy) reports that on the island of Vieques, eight miles east of Puerto Rico, “solitude used to be an allure of life,” but in Maria’s wake, “that solitude is a big problem.” Vieques’ 9,000 residents “have been largely cut off from the world for 11 days since Hurricane Maria hit, with no power or communications and, for many, no running water.” The Wall Street Journal (10/1, Hernandez) highlights the impact Maria has on the beachside town of Humacao, about an hour southeast of San Juan. A front-page story in the Washington Post (10/1, A1, Schmidt, Hernández) reports that “an unknown number of families are still trapped in this part of Utuado, much of which is inaccessible nearly two weeks after the storm.” The Post says that if aid has been “slow to reach Puerto Rico as a whole, getting help to isolated communities such as Utuado has been taking even longer” to reach “these rural neighborhoods, tucked between mountain ranges and nestled along murky river beds.” Hector Ruiz, a utility worker hired by the Utuado municipality to clear its roads, “estimated that it will take at least one more month to make the entire highway in Utuado accessible.” 

## After Trump Again Calls To End Protests, Fewer NFL Players Kneel During Anthem. 

On ABC World News Tonight (10/1, story 7, 1:35, Llamas), Ron Claiborne reported, “Across the NFL, players once again taking a knee during the national anthem” on Sunday. “The new protests following the President’s tweet on Saturday, ‘Very important that NFL player stand tomorrow and always for the playing of our national anthem. Respect our flag and our country!’ Oakland’s Marshawn Lynch getting ready for his game with a shirt reading, ‘Everybody versus Trump.’ In San Francisco, 30 49ers players once again protesting and taking a knee, like their former Quarterback Colin Kaepernick, who initially sparked the uproar with his protests against alleged police mistreatment of minorities. ... But today, far fewer players knelt during ‘the Star-Spangled Banner.’ No owners joined them. Where there were protests, the reaction in the stands was far more muted than a week ago.” On the CBS Weekend News (10/1, story 6, 1:50, Quijano), Tony Dokoupil reported that Trump “first raised the issue last month, re-upped it in tweets all week, and drew a new line in the sand late Saturday. ‘Very important that NFL players stand tomorrow and always,’ he wrote. ‘Respect our flag.’” Dokoupil added, “Last week, more than a hundred NFL players sat, knelt or raised their fist during the anthem. Some followed this afternoon, though more opted to stand linking arms, praying, even singing. The controversy has also spread to high schools. On Friday, two players in Texas were kicked off their team for protests during the anthem. Their coach is a veteran.” Under the headline “Fewer NFL Players Kneel During Anthem As Trump Repeats Call For Protest To End,” Reuters (10/1, Radnage, Woodall) reports, “Several dozen NFL players, fewer than last week, chose to kneel during the US national anthem before league games on Sunday, a day after...Trump again demanded an end to a protest he sees as a sign of disrespect for the flag. At least 40 players, most of them on the San Francisco 49ers, bent a knee during pre-game renditions of the” anthem “in the 14 [NFL] games played so far on Sunday, compared with 180 players in all 16 games a week earlier.” The Wall Street Journal (10/1, Beaton) headlines its report “NFL Protests Are More Muted.” The Washington Times (10/1, Richardson) reports that during a game played Sunday in London, England, “three Miami Dolphins knelt during the anthem, then stood for ‘God Save the Queen.’” Breitbart (10/1, Gwinn) reports that the Baltimore Ravens took “a knee before the playing of the anthem, and then [stood] during it. In response, a stream of boos...descended on the players from the assembled crowd at M&T Bank Stadium.” The Washington Post (10/1, Boren, Kilgore) reports that on Sunday, “NFL teams and players demonstrated again in a variety of ways, from players making individual statements along sidelines to pregame attire aimed at Trump to entire teams kneeling before the anthem or locking arms during the song.” 

Ryan: On Racial Issues, Trump’s “Heart’s In The Right Place.” House Speaker Paul Ryan on Sunday was asked on CBS’ Face The Nation (10/1, Dickerson) about race in America, in the context of the recent violence in Charlottesville, Virginia; the NFL protests; and other events. Ryan said of Trump, “I know his heart’s in the right place.” Ryan said he knew this after “some candid conversations about this, especially during that time” around the Charlottesville unrest, and that “what matters is that we have to show people that we are inclusive society, that we want everyone to succeed.” Ryan also said he thinks NFL players had a right to express themselves under the First Amendment. He added that people who think the kneeling of NFL players was disrespectful to the flag don’t “see the point” the players are trying to make. 

Sanders: NFL Protests Are About Criminal Justice Reform. Sen. Bernie Sanders on Sunday was asked on CNN’s State Of The Union (10/1, Tapper) about the ongoing feud between Trump and NFL players. Sanders said, “Let’s not worry about the politics of what’s going on,” but instead discuss “why players are doing what they’re doing.” He added that there is a criminal justice crisis in the US, saying the nation has more people “in jail than any other major country on earth.” Sanders said he thinks the players are “talking about...the need for criminal justice reform.” 

Vincent: NFL Leadership Has Been Slow To Detail League Policy On Protests. In a Wall Street Journal (10/1, Vincent) op-ed, former Major League Baseball commissioner Fay Vincent discusses the NFL anthem protests, saying that in sports, it’s up to commissioners to offer a response to the pressure from the public and to specify what is acceptable behavior on the part of a league’s players. Commissioners, says Vincent, must rapidly explain that the disruption of games or the offending of paying customers crosses a line. Vincent says that the NFL has yet to address these issues, and he suggests that ex-Secretaries of State James Baker or Condoleezza Rice would perhaps be a good choice to, on the NFL’s behalf, offer a statement of league governance regarding the protests. 

Citing Anthem Protests, Renacci Canceled Ad Buy Slated For Sunday NFL Game. The Cleveland Plain Dealer (9/29, Richardson) reported that Rep. Jim Renacci (R-OH), who is mounting a 2018 bid to succeed term-limited Gov. John Kasich (R-OH), on Friday said “he would pull a $20,000 ad buy scheduled to air during National Football League games this weekend in response to player protests.” Renacci “said he was pulling the ads from Sunday’s Cincinnati Bengals-Cleveland Browns matchup after players last week knelt during the national anthem in response to President Donald Trump’s attacks on their earlier protests.” In a news article, the Columbus (OH) Dispatch (9/29, Ludlow) flatly asserted that Renacci “is wrapping himself in red, white and blue in quickly canceling a TV spot his campaign had purchased during the [Bengals-Browns] game on Sunday.” In a statement, Renacci – running in a crowded GOP primary – said, “While the First Amendment clearly affords NFL players and officials the freedom to engage in this appalling behavior, having the right to do something does not mean it’s the right thing to do. ... And while the right to speak and protest peacefully is a fundamental freedom that we as Americans enjoy, protesting the most sacred symbols of those freedoms is both sadly ironic and an inexcusable, offensive display of contempt for what our nation stands for.” 

## Trump: Tillerson “Wasting His Time” Talking To North Korea. 

Media coverage of President Trump’s tweets Sunday about North Korea is critical with reports casting the President as undercutting Secretary of State Tillerson. NBC Nightly News (10/1, story 3, 1:15, Snow), for example, reported President Trump “appeared to undermine the diplomatic channel announced just yesterday by the Secretary of State,” tweeting (10/1), “I told Rex Tillerson he’s wasting his time trying to negotiate with Little Rocket Man.” He added, “Save your energy, Rex, we’ll do what has to be done.” While NBC said the White House “won’t say” if Trump is “suggesting military action or taunting Kim Jong-Un,” ABC World News Tonight (10/1, story 2, 2:45, Llamas) said Trump “not only taunted Kim Jong-un, he publicly undercut” Tillerson after he visited China, “trying to broker an end to North Korea’s nuclear program.” The Los Angeles Times (10/1, Wilkinson, King) too says Trump “undercut his top diplomat” in a “stunning rebuke” that marked “the latest incident in which Trump has publicly contradicted Tillerson and quickly dashed any hope for progress in easing perilously volatile tensions” with North Korea. USA Today (10/1, Slack) similarly says Trump “appeared to undercut his own secretary of State’s diplomatic efforts to resolve the nuclear standoff,” and the New York Times (10/1, Baker) says he “seemed to undercut his own secretary of state on Sunday as he belittled the prospect of a diplomatic resolution.” Bloomberg News (10/1, Niquette, Wadhams) says Trump’s “admonishment” of Tillerson for “wasting his time’” in seeking negotiations with North Korea “further highlighted differences within the administration on how best to get Kim Jong Un to halt his nuclear weapons program.” State Department spokeswoman Heather Nauert, however, tweeted after Trump’s comment that while diplomatic channels are open “for now” to Kim, “they won’t be open forever.” According to the AP (10/1, Lee), the tweets are “raising speculation about whether Trump could be undermining efforts to maintain channels of communication or somehow bolstering the diplomat’s hand in possible future talks.” The Hill (10/1, Manchester) reports the President’s tweets came “amid the escalating crisis on the Korean Peninsula.” The Washington Post (10/1, Nakamura) reports the President “has taken an increasingly hard-line stance toward Pyongyang over its nuclear weapons and ballistic missile tests,” while the Wall Street Journal (10/1, Schwartz) notes it was not the first time Trump and Tillerson have sent differing signals about North Korea, as well as other topics. Reuters (10/1, Chiacu, Holland) reports Trump tweeted that his predecessors had all “failed” on North Korea by “Being nice to Rocket Man,” so “why would it work now?” The Washington Examiner (10/1, Feldscher) reports Trump “alluded to attempts to make peace with Kim not working over the last several administrations,” but noted that Kim “has only been in power since his father died in 2011.” The New York Post (10/1, Moore), however, says it is “unclear whether Trump was referring to the Kim family, which has ruled North Korea since 1948, or just Kim Jong Un, who is just 33-years-old and took over from his father Kim Jong Il in 2010.” Breitbart (10/1, Wong) reports Trump’s tweets “suggest he is opposed to trying to negotiate with Kim Jong-Un,” but cautioned that he “could also be acting as if he is opposed to Tillerson’s efforts, in a good cop, bad cop routine.” Former State Department officials Aaron David Miller and Richard Sokolsky write for Politico Magazine (10/1) that “even if they’re playing good cop/bad cop, this is a shocker: Donald Trump is basically announcing that any negotiations with North Korea are worthless. This not only undercut Tillerson personally, but also undermines US interests and the secretary of state’s sensible decision to talk to the North Korean regime.” They argue what while many have called for Tillerson to resign, “it’s magical thinking to believe that Tillerson’s successor could fundamentally alter the downward trajectory of the State Department or do much more to fix the world’s problems. As long as Donald Trump is president, more likely than not, the Department of State is going to remain closed for the season.” Politico (10/1, Toosi, Cohen) reports Trump’s tweet “drew some startled reactions in the diplomatic field.” Richard N. Haass, president of the Council on Foreign Relations, tweeted, “Diplomacy not a favor we dispense but a critical national security tool for ourselves. Potus truly misguided here-& SecState should resign.” Carl Bildt, co-chair of the European Council on Foreign Relations, tweeted: “President Trump spectacularly shot down SecState Tillerson after important Beijing talks. How long can this last?” 

NYTimes Analysis: Trump “Relishes” Public Fights. Peter Baker writes in a New York Times (10/1) analysis that while “opponents, independent analysts and even some of his own advisers winced at his latest outbursts,” President Trump has recently criticized the mayor of San Juan, Puerto Rico, “excoriating kneeling football players,” and undercut “his own secretary of state.” Trump, however, “was convinced that he was putting points on the board, according to those close to him.” Baker writes that Trump’s “view of politics is unlike that of any president in modern times. Where other occupants of the Oval Office might go out of their way to avoid public fights with hurricane victims, popular athletes or members of their own team, Mr. Trump relishes them. He thinks they make him look strong.” 

Poll: Trump Foreign Policy Splits Republican Party. The Washington Post (10/1, Balz, Guskin) reports President Trump’s “often-controversial foreign policy pronouncements, which have generated criticism abroad, have produced sharp divisions within the Republican coalition, with the party badly split on the issues of trade, immigration, climate change and the value of US alliances, according to a new poll by the Chicago Council on Global Affairs.” The poll’s survey found that Trump’s “most fervent supporters solidly support his views on these issues, but Republicans with less favorable impressions of the president are far less enthusiastic and are more closely aligned in their attitudes with the overall population.” 

Report: Trump Ordered “Pressure” Campaign Early In Administration. The Daily Caller (10/1, Pickrell) reports President Trump “quietly signed a government directive ordering a sweeping pressure campaign on North Korea early on in his administration to derail the rogue regime’s nuclear plans,” according to a report Saturday by the Washington Post. The Caller writes, “It turns out the Trump administration has a very clear strategy for dealing with the rogue regime. The Department of Defense has been targeting North Korean spies and hackers, the Department of State has been encouraging foreign governments to cut ties with Pyongyang at every opportunity, and the Department of the Treasury has been tightening the noose on North Korea’s economy through escalating sanctions on the regime and its supporters.” At the same time, the US has been “keeping the door open for negotiation.” 

Italy Becomes Fifth Country To Expel North Korean Ambassador. The Washington Post (10/1, Fifield) reports Italy “has become the latest country to expel a North Korean ambassador,” saying that isolation was “inevitable” if Pyongyang continued to push ahead with its nuclear weapons program. Italian Foreign Minister Angelino Alfano said the North Korean ambassador in Rome, Mun Jong Nam, had been ordered to leave. “We want to make Pyongyang realize that their isolation is inevitable if they don’t change tack,” Alfano told Italian newspaper la Repubblica in an interview published Sunday. 

North Korean Ship Carrying Weapons For Egypt Seized. The Washington Post (10/1, Warrick) reports that last August, “a secret message was passed from Washington to Cairo warning about a mysterious vessel steaming toward the Suez Canal.” The freighter named Jie Shun “was flying Cambodian colors but had sailed from North Korea, the warning said, with a North Korean crew and an unknown cargo shrouded by heavy tarps.” Egyptian officials seized a cache of “more than 30,000 rocket-propelled grenades,” the “largest seizure of ammunition in the history of sanctions” against North Korea. A UN investigation ultimately “uncovered a complex arrangement in which Egyptian business executives ordered millions of dollars worth of North Korean rockets for the country’s military while also taking pains to keep the transaction hidden, according to US officials and Western diplomats familiar with the findings.” The incident “prompted the latest in a series of intense, if private, US complaints over Egyptian efforts to obtain banned military hardware from Pyongyang, the officials said.” 

Group: Kim Jong Un’s Nephew Was In Danger After Father’s Assassination. The Wall Street Journal (10/1, Gale) reports that when Kim Jong Nam, the exiled half brother of North Korean leader Kim Jong Un, was assassinated in a Malaysian airport on Feb. 13, his 21-year-old son, Kim Han Sol, was believed to be the next target. A group of North Korean dissidents known as the Cheollima Civil Defense moved quickly to get Kim Han Sol, his mother, and sister out of their Macau home and fly them to a secure location. 

Former WPost Reporter: China Losing Leverage Over Kim. Blaine Harden, former Post reporter and consultant to the Frontline documentary “North Korea’s Deadly Dictator” airing on PBS on Oct. 4, writes in the Washington Post (10/1) that “to the frustration of President Trump, China seems to be losing leverage over the young dictator next door.” While the Kim regime “has become more dependent than ever on Chinese trade,” that dependence is “clearly not swaying the behavior of Kim Jong Un.” 

# Editorial Wrap-Up 

## New York Times. 

“Actually, A Health Care Deal Is Possible.” A New York Times (10/2, Board) editorial says Sen. Lamar Alexander, a Republican, and Sen. Patty Murray, a Democrat, “have resumed negotiations that offer a more productive path, one that could preserve the best of Obamacare while offering adjustments that both parties can accept.” If successful, the Times says, Alexander and Murray could “offer Congress a way out of the morass with a modest bill that could help strengthen the A.C.A.’s individual insurance markets, which are used by about 10 million people, without overhauling the whole system in ways that could deprive millions of people of subsidized care.” The Times stresses that any healthcare “deal will involve compromise,” and that Republican lawmakers “might benefit even more than they realize.” 

“Discrimination Inside The N.Y.P.D.” In an editorial, the New York Times (10/2, Board) points to a lawsuit filed last week accusing the New York Police Department’s intelligence division of discrimination as a sign “that the system needs some revision.” Notably, the Times says, the NYPD labor relations department reportedly has “‘no set policy’ on promotions for detectives,” and frustration over that lack of a policy “runs especially deep among black officers in the intelligence division, which covers terrorism and other major crimes.” Regardless of the outcome of the lawsuit, the Times concludes, it has at least put the department “on notice that it needs to develop a transparent and objective system.” 

“Goodbye Seal, Goodbye Flag.” The New York Times (10/2, Board) editorializes on Staten Island’s efforts to change the borough flag, noting that borough president James Oddo and Emil Micha, a senior adviser, reportedly designed a new flag that “had finally found favor at City Hall” last week. The Times wonders whether a new flag will “make Staten Islanders feel better about their place in the sun, or at least in the big city,” and says while it may be “too early to tell,” the move is “a tonic for the borough president.” 

## Washington Post. 

“Will Trump’s Tax Cuts Profit Trump?” In an editorial, the Washington Post (10/1) writes that President Trump may benefit financially from Republicans’ tax proposal, as evidenced by the Urban-Brookings Tax Policy Center report released Friday “showing that, by 2027, the GOP tax plan would provide massive benefits to upper-income taxpayers even as it smacked large sections of the middle class with a net tax hike.” The Post argues that because Trump has refused to release his tax returns, “it is impossible to know for sure” whether he will benefit from the plan. The Post concludes that Congress should consider a tax plan “only after” Trump publishes his returns. 

“The Republican Rot Runs Deeper Than Roy Moore.” In an editorial, the Washington Post (10/1) says, “It was dispiriting that Roy Moore won the” GOP primary runoff “the same week that Sen. Bob Corker (R-Tenn.) announced he would be leaving it. But the rot runs deeper than either event would suggest. When Senate leadership is content with the kind of process and dishonesty we witnessed with health-care and now tax ‘reform,’ neither event should come as a big surprise.” The Post says “Moore is unfit to be a senator” and there are “similarities between Mr. Trump and the insurgent judge. Both have questioned Barack Obama’s citizenship and displayed disdain for the rule of law,” for example. The Post adds that “if the Republican leadership is afraid of what Mr. Moore could bring to Washington, it may want to reconsider the wisdom of opening the door to his hate-filled appeals and disruptive behavior by backing Mr. Trump in the first place.” 

“The Guggenheim Caves To Threats – And Squashes Free Expression.” In an editorial, the Washington Post (10/1) writes that the recent decision of the Guggenheim Museum to remove three pieces from an upcoming art exhibition that had sparked protests from animal rights activists signified a surrender to threats and a disregard for free expression. The Post concludes that the Guggenheim’s decision “sends a chilling message about artistic freedom, which could set a troubling precedent the next time some other institution plans to display something someone else doesn’t like or approve of.” 

## Wall Street Journal. 

“Tax Policy Center Propaganda.” In an editorial, the Wall Street Journal (10/1) writes that a Tax Policy Center report released Friday assessing Republicans’ tax plan offered an impossibly specific analysis that criticized the proposal – particularly, the plan’s effect on reducing government revenues and benefiting the top 1 percent of taxpayers – without sufficient evidence. The Journal contends that the Tax Policy Center has a progressive bias and creates anti-tax reform propaganda. 

“Trump’s Excellent Judges.” In an editorial, the Wall Street Journal (10/1) applauds President Trump for his four latest judicial nominations for the Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals – Don Willett, James Ho, Stuart Duncan, and Kurt Engelhardt. The Journal praises each judge’s legal achievements and argues that their nominations highlight Trump’s greatest political success as he rapidly remakes the federal appellate and district courts with qualified, conservative picks. 

“Arbitration Is Back At The Supreme Court.” In an editorial, the Wall Street Journal (10/1) urges the Supreme Court to hear challenges to an Obama-era National Labor Relations Board (NLRB) opinion that prohibits arbitration class-action waivers in employment contracts. According to the Journal, the court has repeatedly ruled that the Federal Arbitration Act preempts state laws and court rulings against forced arbitration, and urges the court to reinforce previous rulings on the issue. 

# Big Picture 

## Headlines From Today’s Front Pages. 

Wall Street Journal: 

Trump Tells Tillerson Talking To North Korea Is Waste Of Time At The Center Of The Equifax Mess: Its Top Lawyer The Man Who Exposed College Basketball Hedge Funds: Not Dead Yet 

New York Times: 

Catalonia’s Independence Vote Descends Into Chaos And Clashes As Catalans Voted, ‘Dying With Fear’ At High School Turned Polling Place Trump Says Tillerson Is ‘Wasting His Time’ On North Korea Back At Full Strength, Supreme Court Faces A Momentous Term SI Newhouse Jr., Who Turned Condé Nast Into A Magazine Powerhouse, Dies At 89 

Washington Post: 

Assailed Over Maria Relief, Trump Stays His Course Crucial Term For Top Court Kicks Off President Contradicts Tillerson On N. Korea Illicit Cargo Exposes N. Korea’s Arms Trade In Catalonia, A Chaotic Yes A Mountain Of Worry In Puerto Rico 

Financial Times: 

Catalans Defy Madrid To Register Clear Vote For Independence Puerto Ricans Wrestle With Question Of Whether To Leave WTO Chief Warns Of Risks To Trade Peace 

Washington Times: 

Benghazi Suspect’s Criminal Trial To Test Speed Of U.S. Courts Vs. Military Tribunals Tormenting Manafort Is Seen As Weissmann’s Way To Snare Big Prosecution Targets For Mueller Successful Border Enforcement Saves Habitat, Visitor Security On National Park Service Land With Gorsuch filling out bench, Supreme Court ready to Break Ground On High-Profile Cases Trump, Aides Accuse Media Of Misrepresenting Federal Response To Puerto Rico Disaster Struggling Venezuelans Stop Putting Faith In Maduro’s Heated Anti-American Rhetoric 

Story Lineup From Last Night’s Network News: 

ABC: Hurricane Recovery-Puerto Rico; White House-Trump Tweets; OJ Simpson Parole; Terror Attacks Abroad; Spain-Catalonia Protest; Ship Sinking Report; NFL Kneeling Protest; Air France-Emergency Landing; Florida-Murder Manhunt; Netflix Phishing; Pro Rugby Player Prank; Veteran Returns Home. 

CBS: OJ Simpson Parole; Hurricane Recovery-Puerto Rico; Hurricane Recovery-Florida Keys; Ship Sinking Report; White House-Tax Reform; NFL Kneeling Protest; France Terror Attack; Canada Terror Attack; Spain-Catalonia Protest; Rep. Scalise Recovered; Hurricane Irma-Lawsuits On Chemical Companies; Hurricane Recovery-Puerto Rico Shelters. 

NBC: OJ Simpson Parole; Hurricane Recovery-Puerto Rico; White House-Trump Tweets; Canada Terror Attack; France Terror Attack; Spain-Catalonia Protest; Opioid Epidemic; Air France-Emergency Landing; Supreme Court Back In Session; Pinball Machine. 

Network TV At A Glance: 

Hurricane Recovery – 9 minutes, 5 seconds OJ Simpson Parole – 8 minutes Spain-Catalonia Protest – 5 minutes Terror Attacks Abroad – 4 minutes, 15 seconds 

Story Lineup From This Morning’s Radio News Broadcasts: 

ABC: OJ Simpson Parole; Hurricane Recovery-Puerto Rico; Spain-Catalonia Protest. 

CBS: Hurricane Recovery-Puerto Rico; OJ Simpson Parole; Terror Attacks Abroad; Spain-Catalonia Protest; Trump-North Korea Tweet; NFL Kneeling Protest; Wall Street News. 

FOX: Hurricane Recovery-Puerto Rico; GOP Congress-Tax Reform; 

NPR: Hurricane Recovery-Puerto Rico; Trump-North Korea Tweet; Supreme Court-Gerrymandering; Terror Attacks Abroad. 

# Washington Schedule 

## Today’s Events In Washington. 

White House: 

PRESIDENT TRUMP — Leads a deregulation summit; meets with the governors of Kentucky, Mississippi, Maine, and New Hampshire; welcome Prime Minister Prayut Chan-o-cha and Madam Chan-o-Cha of Thailand; has dinner with Republican Members of Congress. VICE PRESIDENT PENCE — No public schedule announced. 

US Senate: 3:00 PM Senate votes on FCC nominee – Senate convenes and proceeds to executive session to resume consideration of the nomination of Ajit Varadaraj Pai to be a Federal Communications Commission member, followed by a vote on the nomination * Cloture motion on the nomination passed by 55 votes to 41 last week Location: Washington, DC http://www.senate.gov/ 

US House: 12:00 PM House of Representatives meets for legislative business Location: Washington, DC http://www.house.gov/ 5:00 PM House Rules Committee hearing – Hearing on ‘H.R. 36 – Pain-Capable Unborn Child Protection Act’ Location: U.S. Capitol, H-313, Washington, DC http://www.rules.house.gov/ https://twitter.com/RulesReps 

Other: 1:30 PM Dem Rep. David Cicilline speaks on President Trump’s ‘deregulation agenda’ in Public Citizen call – Democratic Rep. David Cicilline speaks on Public Citizen press call, making the case for ‘robust regulation and enforcement’, and highlighting what they describe as ‘conflicts of interest at the heart of President Donald Trump’s deregulatory agenda’. Other speakers include Consumer Federation of America Legislative Director and General Counsel Rachel Weintraub, KidsAndCars.org President and founder Janette Fennell, Coalition for Sensible Safeguards Coalition Manager Michell McIntyre, and Public Citizen President Robert Weissman * During the call, Rep. Cicilline unveils new legislation requiring disclosure of conflicts Location: TBD www.citizen.org https://twitter.com/public_citizen 6:00 PM IFES 2017 Democracy Awards Dinner – International Foundation for Electoral Systems 8th Annual Charles T. Manatt Democracy Awards presentation, awarded each year to one Democrat, one Republican, and a member of the international community who ‘demonstrate the dedication to democracy and human rights embodied by Charles Manatt’ Location: Four Seasons Hotel, 2800 Pennsylvania Ave NW, Washington, DC www.ifes.org https://twitter.com/IFES1987 

# Last Laughs 

## Late Night Political Humor. 

No late-night talk show aired on Sunday night.  

> Copyright 2017 by Bulletin Intelligence LLC Reproduction or redistribution without permission prohibited. Content is drawn from thousands of newspapers, national magazines, national and local television programs, radio broadcasts, social-media platforms and additional forms of open-source data. Sources for Bulletin Intelligence audience-size estimates include Scarborough, GfK MRI, comScore, Nielsen, and the Audit Bureau of Circulation. Data from and access to third party social media platforms, including but not limited to Facebook, Twitter, Instagram and others, is subject to the respective platform’s terms of use. Services that include Factiva content are governed by Factiva’s terms of use. Services including embedded Tweets are also subject to Twitter for Website's information and privacy policies. The Department of the Interior News Briefing is published five days a week by Bulletin Intelligence, which creates custom briefings for government and corporate leaders. We can be found on the Web at BulletinIntelligence.com, or called at (703) 483-6100.

# Conversation Contents 

## U.S. Department of the Interior News Briefing for Monday, September 25, 2017 

# Bulletin Intelligence <Interior@bulletinintelligence.com> 

## From: Bulletin Intelligence <Interior@bulletinintelligence.com> 

## Sent: Mon Sep 25 2017 05:00:52 GMT-0600 (MDT) 

## To: <Interior@bulletinintelligence.com> 

## Subject: U.S. Department of the Interior News Briefing for Monday, September 25, 2017  

> Mobile version and searchable archives available here. Please click here to subscribe.
> DATE: MONDAY, SEPTEMBER 25, 2017 7:00 AM EDT

# Today's Table Of Contents 

DOI In The News 

• Austin (TX) American Statesman: Secretary Of Interior Ryan Zinke Visits Austin To Talk Harvey. • CNN: Hunting Is Down In The US. The Trump Administration Wants To Change That. • Payson (AZ) Roundup: All-out Effort To Save Forests, Reduce Fuels Urged. • Ruidoso (NM) News: New BLM Pilot Approach Uses Outcome-based Grazing. • Casper (WY) Star-Tribune: Interior Department Likely To Propose Big Changes To Sage Grouse Management Soon. • Grand Forks (ND) Herald: Grand Forks To Host Trump Advisers During North Dakota Petroleum Council Meeting. • Government Executive: Agencies Begin White House-Mandated Training For Every Fed On Consequences Of Leaks. • Motherboard: The Interior Secretary’s Favorite Horse, ‘Tonto,’ Has Been Very Busy. • The Atlantic: Additional Coverage: Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke Proposes Shrinking Monuments. • Northwest Arkansas Democrat-Gazette: Additional Coverage: State Receives Federal Grant. • Lexington (KY) Herald-Leader: Donald Trump Should Make Camp Nelson A National Monument To Black Soldiers. • Washington Free Beacon: Time Is Running Out To Save The Eisenhower Memorial. 

Bureau Of Indian Affairs 

• Report Uncovers Numerous Safety Violations At Tribal Schools. • Winnebago Tribe Hoping To Reclaim Land In Iowa. Bureau Of Land Management 

• Arizona Daily Star: Purchase Opens 32,600 Acres Near Coronado Forest To Hiking, Hunting. • E&E Publishing: Fracking Rule May See Jumbled Comeback As Court Tosses Case. • Associated Press: BLM Sale In Wyoming Nets $38.7 Million In Bonus Bids. • Denver Post: Colorado’s Wild Horses Face A New Danger On The Range: Trump Budget Cuts. • Pueblo (CO) Chieftain: Rough Edges: Inmates Train Mustangs, Learn Life Lessons At Wyoming Corrections Facility. • Bend (OR) Bulletin: Private House On Public Land Causes Problems; Bend Business Owner Buys Home Built Inadvertantly On BLM Land. • Los Angeles Times: The Myths Used To Needlessly Delay The Cadiz Water Project, Debunked. • Grand Junction (CO) Daily Sentinel: Methane Rule Delay, Repeal Will Hurt Western Colorado. 

Bureau Of Reclamation 

• Water Bailout? 

Fish And Wildlife Service 

• U.S. News & World Report: African Wildlife Protectors Get A Hand In Detective Training. • U.S. News & World Report: Scientists: Desert Turtle Endangered, 100 Left In Arizona. • Washington Times: Nighttime Football Games Return To Kauai After 7 Years. • U.S. News & World Report: More Grizzly Bears Roaming Outside National Parks In Wyoming. • U.S. News & World Report: Monarch Butterflies Might Vanish From Northwest Summers. • Arctic (AK) Sounder: 64 Walruses Found Dead At Point Lay Haulout. • The Hill: Senate Environmental Consultation Bill A Classic Case In Overreaction. • Roanoke (VA) Times: Curry: Wildlife Lovers Savor Candy Darter Study Story. 

National Park Service 

• Washington Post: Melania Trump Hosts Her First Event In The Garden Michelle Obama Founded. • U.S. News & World Report: Park Service Announces Grant For Giffords Shooting Memorial. • Missoulian (MT): Glacier Park Plans To Begin Stabilization Efforts On Sperry Chalet In October. • Associated Press: Archaeologists: More Protections Needed For Chaco Region. • U.S. News & World Report: All Of Blue Ridge Parkway Open After Irma’s Heavy Rains. • Naples (FL) Daily News: Big Cypress, Everglades, State Parks Face Long Recovery. • Florida Times-Union: Cumberland Island Extends Cancelation Of Camping Reservations Through Oct. 11. • Mount Desert (ME) Islander: Park Seeks Wiggle Room On Boundary. • KPAX-TV Missoula (MT): 10 New U.S. Citizens Take Oath Of Allegiance In Glacier Park. • U.S. News & World Report: Officials To Decide Fate Of Peninsula Mountain Goats. • Fresno (CA) Bee: A Good Wildfire On Display At Yosemite National Park. • U.S. News & World Report: Lawsuit Filed To Stop Mining Near Yellowstone In Montana. • Northwest Indiana Post-Tribune: Indiana Dunes Hoping For ‘Dark Sky’ Designation. • Chattanoogan (TN): Plan For Moccasin Bend National Archaeological District Completed. • Knoxville (TN) News Sentinel: Cabin Restoration Completed At Historic Elkmont In Great Smoky Mountains National Park. • Carteret County (NC) News-Times: Cape Lookout Lighthouse Modernization Completed. • Bristol (VA) Herald Courier: Local Residents Recognize Overmountain Men In Ceremony. • Fairbanks (AK) News-Miner: Adventure Time: Fourth-graders From Joy Elementary Visit Denali National Park. • Washington Post: The Washington Monument Will Endure. 

Office Of Insular Affairs 

• Miami Herald: Hurricane Maria Heads North As It Departs Caribbean. • Wall Street Journal: Puerto Rico’s Governor Says Cost To Rebuild After Marie Will Be More Than $7 Billion To $8 Billion. • WBUR-FM Boston: ‘We Need Help’: U.S. Virgin Islands Governor On Devastation After Maria And Irma. • ABC: Media Analyses: Trump Raising Rhetoric Against North Korea. • CBS: US Warplanes Conduct “Show Of Force” Ahead Of North Korean Official’s UNGA Address. • Quartz: North Korea Threatened A Hydrogen Bomb Test In The Pacific—which Is No Stranger To Nuclear Blasts. • Radio New Zealand: Palau Signs UN Treaty Prohibiting Nuclear Weapons. • Armen Press (ARM): Armenia Establishes Diplomatic Ties With Palau And Micronesia. 

US Geological Survey 

• Reuters: USGS Says Cannot Confirm If North Korea Quake Natural Or Manmade. • Fulton (MO) Sun: Katharine Hayhoe Talks Climate Science. 

Top National News 

• Washington Post: Trump Ignites Backlash With Tweets On Sports. • CNN: Trump, Kim Ratchet Up Public Criticism. • ABC: Puerto Rico Issues Evacuation Order For 70,000 People With Dam In Danger Of Failing. • Washington Post: Graham And Cassidy Plan Changes To Bill As More GOP Senators Express Doubts. • Politico: Trump, Pence Urge GOP To Repeal Obamacare As McCain Opposes Healthcare Bill. • ABC: New Travel Restriction Policy Adds Chad, North Korea, Venezuela To List; Sudan Removed. • The Hill: Trump: Border Wall Will Be “See Through.” • The Hill: Trump Focuses On Tax Reform, Promising “Largest Tax Cut” In US History. 

Editorial Wrap-Up 

• New York Times. - “Puerto Rico Is American. We Can’t Ignore It Now.” - “The Day The Real Patriots Took A Knee.” - “In Germany, A Victory For Angela Merkel And Populism.” • Washington Post. - “The Is What The Flag Stands For, Mr. President.” - “Amid The Russia Probes, Trump Makes An Important Nomination.” - “Good Luck Not Rolling Your Eyes At The Virginia Candidates’ Magic Math.” • Wall Street Journal. - “The Politicization Of Everything.” - “Restoring Due Process.” - “Merkeldämmerung.” 

Big Picture 

• Headlines From Today’s Front Pages. 

Washington Schedule 

• Today’s Events In Washington. 

Last Laughs 

• Late Night Political Humor. 

# DOI In The News 

## Secretary Of Interior Ryan Zinke Visits Austin To Talk Harvey. 

The Austin (TX) American Statesman (9/23, Goldenstein) reports that “about 16,000 Texans are still displaced and living in hotels and other temporary housing because of Hurricane Harvey, federal officials said Saturday.” Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke on Saturday came to Austin to “visit the Federal Emergency Management Agency’s Joint Information Center and receive a department update on relief efforts at a local U.S. Geological Survey office.” Zinke said “that recovery will be a ‘marathon, not a sprint,’ that lasts for years.” He said, “This is going to take a long time for recovery. I would say we’re probably at 20 percent.” 

## Hunting Is Down In The US. The Trump Administration Wants To Change That. 

CNN (9/22, Green) reports on the Interior Department’s efforts to promote hunting and fishing on public lands. The article notes that “a US Fish and Wildlife Service survey released last week found that there are 2.2 million fewer hunters in America now than in 2011.” According to the article, Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke’s “passion for expanding hunting rights on public lands is both personal and political.” However, “despite Zinke’s clear efforts to woo hunters and anglers, not all of his decisions have gone over well with the conservationist-minded group.” One example is “Zinke’s leaked recommendations to the White House to shrink the boundaries of national monuments and open up some of the land to the fossil fuel industry and loggers.” Also reporting are NPR (9/23, Simon), the Morristown (NJ) Daily Record (9/24, Stabile), the Orangeburg (SC) Times And Democrat (9/25), the Nevada (MO) Daily Mail (9/22, White), and the New Bedford (MA) Standard-Times (9/23, Folco). 

## All-out Effort To Save Forests, Reduce Fuels Urged. 

The Payson (AZ) Roundup (9/22, Aleshire) reports that “nearly 50,000 wildfires have burned 8 million acres across the country so far this year, prompting Secretary of the Interior Ryan Zinke to order the Forest Service and the Bureau of Land Management to give thinning, fuel reduction and forest restoration projects top priority.” Zinke said, “This administration will take a serious turn from the past and will proactively work to prevent forest fires through aggressive and scientific fuels reduction management to save lives, homes and wildlife habitat. It is well settled that the steady accumulation and thickening of vegetation in areas that have historically burned at frequent intervals exacerbates fuel conditions and often leads to larger and higher-intensity fires. These fires are more damaging, more costly, and threaten the safety and security of both the public and firefighters.” Additional coverage was provided by the Payson (AZ) Roundup (9/22). 

## New BLM Pilot Approach Uses Outcome-based Grazing. 

The Ruidoso (NM) News (9/22) reports that “officials with the Bureau of Land Management announced a new initiative this week to provide grazing permit holders an unprecedented level of flexibility in the management of livestock while also protecting the public lands.” Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke said in the release announcing the program, “Farmers and ranchers know the wildlife and the land they work better than anyone, it only makes sense that we would enlist them in conservation efforts. One of my top goals is for the government to be a better neighbor, land manager, and partner. I think it’s is a great step in that direction. I applaud the team at BLM for coming up with this innovative program.” Additional coverage was provided by KTVN-TV Reno, NV (9/22). 

## Interior Department Likely To Propose Big Changes To Sage Grouse Management Soon. 

The Casper (WY) Star-Tribune (9/23, Richards) reported that a rule meant to prevent the sage grouse bird from going extinct required the bird’s habitat to be improved or at least not harmed. The Department of the Interior is likely to propose a new rule. Oil and gas companies fear an arbitrary measuring stick when it comes to a new rule as conversationalists fear that the likely rule may erode “the protections that they fought to include in federal plans.” Proposed changes to sage grouse management “would be filed Oct. 30, kicking off a 60-day public comment period.” Politico Morning Energy (9/22, Adragna) reports that “on the two-year anniversary of the Obama administration deciding the sage grouse didn’t warrant Endangered Species Act protection, several dozen local elected Western officials today sent Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke a letter urging him to leave existing protection plans in place.” They wrote, “We urge you to listen to us, as well as the governors, ranchers, sportsmen, industry officials, conservationists and other stakeholders who invested years of work into these management plans — and allow those plans to stay intact.” Additional coverage was provided by the Grand Junction (CO) Daily Sentinel (9/25, Webb). 

## Grand Forks To Host Trump Advisers During North Dakota Petroleum Council Meeting. 

The Grand Forks (ND) Herald (9/23, Baumgarten) reports that the North Dakota Petroleum Council will host its 36th annual meeting on Sept. 26 through 28 at the Alerus Center in Grand Forks. It will “feature more than 20 panelists and speakers, including Vincent DeVito, counselor on energy policy for the U.S. Department of Interior, and Stephen Moore, a policy adviser for Trump.” 

## Agencies Begin White House-Mandated Training For Every Fed On Consequences Of Leaks. 

Government Executive (9/21, Katz) reports that federal employees are starting training on the consequences of leaks. The campaign against “the unauthorized disclosure of unauthorized information,” as well as “controlled unclassified information,” came at the direction of the White House. National Security Adviser H.R. McMaster “last week sent a directive—subsequently obtained by several media outlets—to all federal agencies demanding they train their employees on the ‘serious consequences’ of improper leaks of such information by Sept. 22.” 

## The Interior Secretary’s Favorite Horse, ‘Tonto,’ Has Been Very Busy. 

Motherboard (9/22, Emerson) reports on Tonto, the horse that Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke rode in to work on his first day in March. The author submitted a public records request to the US Park Police and received “20 pages of documents.” 

## Additional Coverage: Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke Proposes Shrinking Monuments. 

Additional coverage of the review of national monuments was provided by The Atlantic (9/24, Felton), the National Review (9/25, Pendley), the Huffington Post (9/22, Brune, Contributor), the Salt Lake (UT) Tribune (9/23, Bare), the Las Vegas Sun (9/24, Gonzalez), the Durango (CO) Herald (9/22, Sybert, Petersen), the Silver City (NM) Sun-News (9/19), the Sidney (MT) Herald (9/23, Denowh), the Palm Springs (CA) Desert Sun (9/22, Kim), the New Bedford (MA) Standard-Times (9/23), the Las Cruces (NM) Sun-News (9/24, Dash), the Colorado Springs (CO) Business Journal (9/22, Hazlehurst), the Salt Lake (UT) Tribune (9/22, Gehrke), the Durango (CO) Herald (9/22, Lopez-Whiteskunk), Business Insider (9/24, Nickelsburg), and KRWG-FM Las Cruces (NM) Las Cruces, NM (9/23, Hendrickson). 

## Additional Coverage: State Receives Federal Grant. 

Additional coverage of the money distributed to states from the Land and Water Conservation Fund was provided by the Northwest Arkansas Democrat-Gazette (9/24), the Bedford (IN) Times-Mail (9/22), KTUU-TV Anchorage (AK) Anchorage, AK (9/21, Maguire), and WBKO-TV Bowling Green (KY) Bowling Green, KY (9/22). 

## Donald Trump Should Make Camp Nelson A National Monument To Black Soldiers. 

In his column for the Lexington (KY) Herald-Leader (9/22, Eblen), Tom Eblen supports Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke’s recommendation to elevate the Camp Nelson Civil War Heritage Park to a national monument. Eblen asserts that “it is a natural monument to freedom that should also become a national one.” 

## Time Is Running Out To Save The Eisenhower Memorial. 

In a piece for the Washington Free Beacon (9/24, Meadowcroft) reports, Micah Meadowcraft writes that “a final, superficial design change” to the proposed Dwight D. Eisenhower Memorial was approved by the U.S. Commission of Fine Arts Wednesday morning. Meadowcraft says that “if the Gehry design is to be scrapped and something more like a monument and less like a disappointing sculpture garden is to be built, it will be up to Secretary of the Interior Ryan Zinke to decline to sign off on the project, on his own judgment or by direction of President Trump.” 

# Bureau Of Indian Affairs 

## Report Uncovers Numerous Safety Violations At Tribal Schools. 

The Gloucester (MA) Times (9/23, Murakami) reports that “16 months after the first of two” General Accounting Office reports, “and six years after Indian Affairs auditors identified problems putting students at risk, the issues persist.” The article says that “in another report this month, the GAO said that of 50 recommendations it made in the past two years to fix numerous problems, including student safety issues, only one has been fully implemented.” The issues have “caught the attention of senators., who are vowing to keep the heat on agencies responsible for Native American education, health and economic development.” 

## Winnebago Tribe Hoping To Reclaim Land In Iowa. 

The AP (9/24) reports that “the Winnebago Tribe is hoping to reclaim land in Iowa that was once part of its reservation in northeast Nebraska, but local hunters are concerned they might lose access.” Rep. Steve King “introduced a bill earlier this month to transfer the land to the Bureau of Indian Affairs, where it would be held in trust for the tribe.” Tribal officials “say they would keep the land as hunting ground and habitat for wildlife.” Additional coverage was provided by the Sioux City (IA) Journal (9/24, Hytrek). 

# Bureau Of Land Management 

## Purchase Opens 32,600 Acres Near Coronado Forest To Hiking, Hunting. 

The Arizona Daily Star (9/24, Windes) reports that “the Interior Department’s purchase of a plot of private land will allow public access to 32,600 acres of previously isolated forest land, a move that drew praise from wilderness advocates and hunters alike.” The acquisition “announced Wednesday opens up two parcels of public land, one in the Coronado National Forest and one northwest of Safford, that had been inaccessible because they were surrounded by private property.” The Bureau of Land Management “worked with the Arizona Game and Fish Department, the South Eastern Arizona Sportsmen Club and the Trust for Public Land over several years to acquire the land needed for access.” Also reporting are the Eastern Arizona Courier (9/23) and the Havasu (AZ) News-Herald (9/21, Windes). 

## Fracking Rule May See Jumbled Comeback As Court Tosses Case. 

E&E Publishing (9/22, Gilmer) reported that the 10th US Circuit Court of Appeals dismissed a case Thursday over a Department of the Interior fracking rule, which emanated from the Obama Administration. Although the lower court struck down the regulation with a 2016 ruling, the 10th Circuit overturned the lower court’s decision allowing the rule to take effect. However, the Trump Administration is working to rescind the regulation. The court dismissed the case without ruling on the main “legal question of whether the federal government has authority over the oil and gas extraction process.” The regulation faced opposition after passage wherein “Wyoming and other states argued that it was beyond BLM’s authority because the Safe Drinking Water Act put EPA in charge of fracking, and the Energy Policy Act of 2005 subsequently assigned that power to state overseers.” PennEnergy (9/22, Snow) reported that the court’s ruling gained positive responses from those interested in both sides of the case. Independent Petroleum Association of America President Barry Russell said that the “decision confirms what IPAA has advocated all along: Dismissing the appeal would protect independent producers from the uncertainty of whether it was necessary to comply with regulations that are certain to be revoked.” Russell also said, “All three judges ruled unanimously that it would be a waste of judicial resources to proceed with this case.” Western Energy Alliance President Kathleen Sgamma said, “We’re pleased that after today, IPAA and [WEA] are even closer to finally putting BLM’s ill-conceived fracing rule to bed.” Earthworks Energy Program Director Bruce Baizel said, “this decision is two victories in one. It means BLM can start enforcing a rule to protect water, public health, and communities threatened and harmed by fracing on public lands.” Baizel also said, “the second victory...is that in the eyes of the court and the eyes of the Trump administration, the public’s land managers have the authority to regulate drilling on the lands the public owns.” UPI (9/22, Graeber) also reported. 

## BLM Sale In Wyoming Nets $38.7 Million In Bonus Bids. 

The AP (9/23) reported that the Bureau of Land Management’s oil and gas lease sales in Wyoming brought $38.7 million in bonus bids. Bids were made on 106,000 acres out of 113,000 Thursday. The bonus bid funds will be split between the federal government and Wyoming. Parcels were offered in Niobrara, Big Horn, Goshen, Sheridan, Washakie, and other counties. The Casper (WY) Star-Tribune (9/24, Richards) reports that “the news comes on the heels of a push from conservation advocates to rehash the federal leasing program, holding leasees to a higher standard so that oil and gas firms aren’t gathering up parcels of land that they don’t intend to drill in a timely manner.” The petitioners would “also like royalty rates for production to be in-line with revenue made on state and private land, leasing to cease on lands that do not have a strong potential for oil or gas production, and the minimum leasing bid to be increased.” Additional coverage was provided by the Casper (WY) Star-Tribune (9/22, Richards). 

## Colorado’s Wild Horses Face A New Danger On The Range: Trump Budget Cuts. 

The Denver Post (9/23, McGhee) reports that in Colorado, “rapid population growth of the herds has resulted in ranchers’ complaints that the animals consume forage and water needed for cattle; an exploding numbers of horses and burros that challenge the BLM’s ability to manage them on and off the range; and anxiety among advocates who fear the government will legalize their slaughter.” Advocates claim “contraceptive drugs can halt galloping herd growth, but the BLM says the drugs are difficult to administer and require frequent reapplication.” The Trump Administration has “proposed a $10 million reduction to the government’s wild horse management program, a cut that advocates fear will place the horses in jeopardy of wholesale destruction.” 

## Rough Edges: Inmates Train Mustangs, Learn Life Lessons At Wyoming Corrections Facility. 

The Pueblo (CO) Chieftain (9/23, Schmelzer) reports on the Honor Farm’s mustang program. In 1988, the Department of Corrections partnered with the Bureau of Land Management and “created the mustang program — the second mustang program for inmates established in the country and one of six total in the nation.” According to the article, “in the program’s 29 years, nearly 1,500 men and 4,000 mustangs and burros have completed the program.” 

## Private House On Public Land Causes Problems; Bend Business Owner Buys Home Built Inadvertantly On BLM Land. 

The Bend (OR) Bulletin (9/24, Hamway) reports that “nearly a decade after the co-founders of a prominent Bend biotechnology company inadvertently purchased a private home located on public land, the situation is approaching a conclusion.” In 2008, Chuck McGrath and Jennipher Grudzien, co-founders of Grace Bio-Labs Inc., “bought a remote, two-story log home southeast of Prineville.” In June, the Bureau of Land Management “sent out a letter requesting public input, the first public step toward resolving the situation.” The BLM will “prepare an environmental assessment that examines the benefits of three different options: leaving the land as is, removing the house and other structures, or selling the land to McGrath and Grudzien.” Jeff Kitchens, field manager for the Prineville district of the Bureau of Land Management, “said he’s hopeful the agency can issue a decision by the end of the year.” 

## The Myths Used To Needlessly Delay The Cadiz Water Project, Debunked. 

In a piece published by the Los Angeles Times (9/22, Hernandez, Rodriguez), Tracy Rafter Hernandez, chief executive of the Los Angeles County Business Federation, and Carlos Rodriguez, chief executive of the Baldy View chapter of the Building Industry Assn. of Southern California, writes that “for nearly a decade, the Cadiz Valley Water Conservation, Recovery and Storage Project, which will create a new water supply for 400,000 people and thousands of jobs, has followed the entire California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) review and approval process from start to finish — public comment periods, public hearings, board approvals and litigation, all of which concluded last year, when the 4th District Court of Appeal sustained every approval of the project and concluded that it could be operated safely and sustainably.” The authors say “it’s disappointing that Sen. Dianne Feinstein (D-Calif.) and her allies, including state Assemblywoman Laura Friedman (D-Glendale), continue to perpetuate a series of myths about the Cadiz project as part of a campaign to derail it, including in a recent op-ed article for the Los Angeles Times.” The two provide “a few examples of the most common myths.” They “urge California’s leaders to continue to stand up for jobs, for citizens who need water, and for our state’s strong environmental review laws by rejecting sustained efforts to change the rules of the game for Cadiz or any other CEQA-approved project.” 

## Methane Rule Delay, Repeal Will Hurt Western Colorado. 

In a guest column for the Grand Junction (CO) Daily Sentinel (9/24, Otero) youth Sunday school teacher, youth volunteer coach and outdoor enthusiast Gabriel Otero suggests that “Congressman Scott Tipton continues to vote against the best interests of his constituents.” Otero writes that Tipton voted to defund the BLM methane waste prevention rule. The rule “has survived a U.S. Senate vote to permanently get rid of it and a lawsuit from oil industry trade groups seeking to prevent it from going into effect.” Otero states that “oil and gas aren’t going away anytime soon, but in the meantime, we must extract them in a responsible and environmentally conscious manner.” 

# Bureau Of Reclamation 

## Water Bailout? 

Colorado River Tribes Pose Statewide Leasing Idea. The Arizona Daily Star (9/24, Davis) reports on “a complex plan to send tribal water from the Colorado River into Arizona’s heartland to support existing residents and future development.” The Colorado River Indian Tribes “want to lease more river water than is delivered each year to the city of Tucson to various water agencies, utilities and the feds.” But “for that, they want more money than they now make from their alfalfa fields, where the water currently goes.” However, “the negotiations are now on hold, partly because of a separate power struggle between the CAP and the Arizona Department of Water Resources that’s kept their leaders from speaking to one another.” Fish And Wildlife Service 

## African Wildlife Protectors Get A Hand In Detective Training. 

The AP (9/23, Brasch) reports that African conservation officers came to Commerce City, Colorado “to train with their U.S. counterparts” at the National Wildlife Property Repository. Coleen Schaefer, a specialist with the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, “led the delegation of 42 conservation officials through the warehouse.” During the training at the repository, USFWS IT specialist Mike McCloud “led the delegation through techniques to keep evidence secure and carefully cataloged.” 

## Scientists: Desert Turtle Endangered, 100 Left In Arizona. 

The AP (9/24, Windes) reports that the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service announced the designation of the Sonoyta mud turtle as endangered last Wednesday, “citing threats from climate change to loss of habitat for the southern Arizona animal, whose numbers are believed to have dwindled to as low as 100 turtles.” Steve Spangle, a field supervisor with Fish and Wildlife’s Arizona Ecological Services, said in a release announcing the listing, “The Sonoyta mud turtle is clearly in danger of extinction.” He added, “Protecting it under the Endangered Species Act will marshal increased attention and the resources needed by our U.S. and Mexican conservation partners to improve and expand its dwindling habitat and populations.” 

## Nighttime Football Games Return To Kauai After 7 Years. 

The AP (9/23) reports that “an agreement has paved the way for the first nighttime football games during fledgling seabirds season on Kauai in seven years.” The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service “signed a deal Friday with Kauai County allowing four night games this football season.” according to the article, “the first game was played Friday night, followed by games on Sept. 30, Oct. 7 and Nov. 4.” 

## More Grizzly Bears Roaming Outside National Parks In Wyoming. 

The AP (9/22, Moen) reports that “a growing number of grizzly bears are moving outside their established habitat in and around Yellowstone National Park in Wyoming, causing more conflicts with humans, according to wildlife managers.” The article says that “the conflicts in Wyoming resulted in 39 grizzly bears being captured by state game managers in 2016,” and “twenty-two were killed for various reasons, such as a history of problems.” 

## Monarch Butterflies Might Vanish From Northwest Summers. 

The AP (9/23, Cary) reports that “a study published recently in the journal Biological Conservation documents the steep decline of the population of migrating monarchs in the West.” The study “puts the risk at 72 percent that not enough of the monarchs will be migrating in the West within 20 years to sustain the population. In 50 years, the risk is 86 percent.” The study was paid for by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, “which is considering whether to list the monarch butterfly as a threatened species under the Endangered Species Act.” 

## 64 Walruses Found Dead At Point Lay Haulout. 

The Arctic (AK) Sounder (9/22) reports that “dozens of walruses were found dead earlier this month at their seasonal haulout near Point Lay.” The article notes that “the findings came just about a day after locals said they saw an airplane they believed to be flying inappropriately over the herd, which comes to shore each year once the sea ice recedes past the continental shelf and it becomes too deep for them to feed.” Andrea Medeiros, a spokesperson for the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, said, “We had heard from the community that they had seen an aircraft flying over the animals at [an altitude] they believed to be too close, and circled the animals. The community is very concerned about these animals when they are onshore and don’t want people to disturb them by flying over or trying to approach in any way, like using a boat.” 

## Senate Environmental Consultation Bill A Classic Case In Overreaction. 

In an op-ed for The Hill (9/22, Super), David A. Super, a professor of law at Georgetown Law, argues that S. 605, the “Litigation Relief for Forest Management Projects Act,” would “severely limit environmental review of projects that could badly damage vulnerable wildlife.” Super claims that the problem that the legislation is seeking to address is “a small one,” and S. 605 is “a classic case of overreaction.” Instead, Super says that the sponsors of the bill “should establish reasonable standards for when to reopen environmental consultations.” 

## Curry: Wildlife Lovers Savor Candy Darter Study Story. 

In an op-ed for the Roanoke (VA) Times (9/23, Curry), Tierra Curry, a senior scientist with the Center for Biological Diversity, argues that “the work of closely studying” the candy darter “wouldn’t be happening if Americans were not allowed to petition the government to protect rare wildlife and to enforce our country’s essential environmental laws like the Endangered Species Act.” However, she warns that “some in Congress are working to undermine the Act and its lifesaving protections.” She urges voters to tell elected officials that “you care about saving threatened wildlife and the laws that ensure we don’t sacrifice the heritage of future generations for short-term economic gains.” 

# National Park Service 

## Melania Trump Hosts Her First Event In The Garden Michelle Obama Founded. 

The Washington Post (9/22, Thompson) reports First Lady Melania Trump “held her first event in the White House Kitchen Garden on Friday, donning a plaid shirt and coordinating red gloves to pull up leeks and plant kale along with children from a local Boys & Girls Club.” According to the Post, “the garden, which then-first lady Michelle Obama established in 2009 as part of her healthy eating initiative, is closely identified with the previous administration, so Trump’s decision to embrace it is noteworthy.” The Post adds that the First Lady “hosted 10 children in the garden Friday, a much smaller group than Obama often welcomed, but her gathering, in 80-degree temperatures, felt much like the garden events of the past, with White House chefs and National Park Service staff members on hand.” The CBS Evening News (9/22, story 11, 0:20, Mason) briefly reported “Mrs. Trump told the kids she’s a big believer in healthy eating and intends to keep the garden.” Also reporting are the AP (9/22, Kellman) and Politico (9/22, Evich). 

## Park Service Announces Grant For Giffords Shooting Memorial. 

The AP (9/22) reports that the National Park Service is “giving over $61,000 for the development of a memorial honoring the victims and survivors of the 2011 Tucson shooting that left six dead and 13 injured, including former U.S. Rep. Gabby Giffords.” U.S. Rep. Raul Grijalva “said Friday that the grant will be used for the January 8th Memorial park in downtown Tucson.” According to the article, “a foundation set up to take charge of the memorial has spent several years raising money for a $5 million monument that would include carved symbols along a dark red steel wall, items from makeshift memorials following the shooting and areas to reflect.” Additional coverage was provided by the Arizona Daily Star (9/24) and KTAR-FM Glendale, AZ (9/22). 

## Glacier Park Plans To Begin Stabilization Efforts On Sperry Chalet In October. 

The Missoulian (MT) (9/24, Backus) reports that “stabilization efforts on the four stone walls that remain of the historic Sperry Chalet dormitory are expected to get underway in early October.” However, “for the dormitory to stand a chance of being rebuilt, a park historic preservation crew will have to win the race against upcoming winter conditions to brace the walls with a series of large beams and plywood.” Glacier Park spokesperson Lauren Alley said, “We have to be able to protect those walls from both the wind and being pushed sideways by this winter’s snowfall. October is our window for getting that work accomplished.” 

Sperry Chalet Worth Trying To Rebuild. In an editorial, the Daily Inter Lake (MT) (9/24) supports efforts to rebuild Sperry Chalet, “the historic backcountry lodge that was destroyed by the Sprague Fire the evening of Aug. 31.” The paper acknowledges that “it will be a tall order gathering the money it will take to restore or replace the 103-year-old backcountry building.” But it argues that “it makes sense to pursue a rebuild of the lodge.” 

## Archaeologists: More Protections Needed For Chaco Region. 

The AP (9/22, Bryan) reported that Friday researchers, archaeologists, and professors called for additional protections from oil and gas development in the Chaco Culture National Historical Park and a large adjacent area. The scientists said the industry may destroy portions of the landscape, which could assist in understanding ancient civilizations that used to live in the region. Scientists also said they are using new satellite and laser-imaging technology that could allow for more discoveries in the area. 

## All Of Blue Ridge Parkway Open After Irma’s Heavy Rains. 

The AP (9/22) reports that “the entire Blue Ridge Parkway has reopened after the heavy rains of Hurricane Irma forced the closure of some parts of it.” The National Park Service “said the last of the debris from the storm was cleared away Thursday at Craggy Gardens near Asheville.” The parkway was “open for travel Friday, the first day of fall.” 

## Big Cypress, Everglades, State Parks Face Long Recovery. 

The Naples (FL) Daily News (9/24, Staats) reports that Hurricane Irma “mangled Florida’s national and state parks, turning places meant to be enjoyed into disaster zones that could take weeks or longer to reopen.” The National Park Service has “sent some 380 workers from 95 national parks in 35 states to 15 parks in Irma’s path in Georgia, South Carolina, Florida and the Caribbean.” At Big Cypress National Preserve, “crews have been clearing downed trees along Turner River Road, which had water too high to access for more than a week after the storm,” according to Park Service Ranger Brett Everitt. He “couldn’t provide a timeframe for reopening Big Cypress, but the Park Service reported a big step in that direction Friday with the restoration of power in Ochopee and the water plant coming back online.” Additional coverage was provided by the AP (9/25). 

## Cumberland Island Extends Cancelation Of Camping Reservations Through Oct. 11. 

The Florida Times-Union (9/23, Dickson) reports that “with Cumberland Island National Seashore still closed because of damage from Tropical Storm Irma, the park is extending the cancellation of camping reservations two more weeks through Oct. 11.” The National Park Service “said Saturday the docks in St. Marys that are needed for access to the island were badly damaged and that crews are still working on the island itself.” The article notes that “the ferries that serve the island were placed in sheltered mooring during the storm and came through undamaged.” 

## Park Seeks Wiggle Room On Boundary. 

The Mount Desert (ME) Islander (9/23, Broom) reports that Acadia National Park “wants to be able to make minor adjustments to its boundary without having to get congressional approval.” According to the article, “a bill currently inching its way through Congress would validate Acadia’s annexation of 1,441 acres on the Schoodic Peninsula, including the Schoodic Woods Campground, in 2015, but it would prohibit any future expansion of the park or other alterations of its boundary.” Acadia and National Park Service officials back “the bill but would like for the park to have the same boundary adjustment wiggle room that most other national parks have.” 

## 10 New U.S. Citizens Take Oath Of Allegiance In Glacier Park. 

KPAX-TV Missoula, MT (9/24, Miller) reports that “U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services hosted a Naturalization Ceremony in the Apgar Amphitheater on Friday as 10 new citizens from across the world took the Oath of Allegiance.” Fridays event was the second Naturalization Ceremony that Glacier National Park has hosted. Glacier National Park’s Deputy Superintendent Eric Smith said, “It’s really an honor to be part of the process and for that process to take place here instead of a courtroom. It is a very solemn and formal process that is at the end of a long and arduous process.” 

## Officials To Decide Fate Of Peninsula Mountain Goats. 

The AP (9/23, Bush) reports that this summer, the National Park Service “published four plans for goat management” at Olympic National Park. Park officials have “produced a nearly 500-page document that seemingly examines every angle, secured some funding for goat removal and wrangled other government agencies to participate.” Officials “favor capturing as many mountain goats as possible over several years, transporting them to the North Cascades and killing goats that evade seizure.” 

## A Good Wildfire On Display At Yosemite National Park. 

The Fresno (CA) Bee (9/22, George) reports that Yosemite National Park officials “aimed to help people better understand wildfire during a Thursday tour of the Empire Fire, which has burned more than 6,300 acres off Glacier Point Road.” KGPE-TV Fresno, CA (9/22, Valera) reports that “Yosemite’s fire ecologist Kristen Shive said fires like the Empire Fire are needed to prevent” bigger “fires from happening.” 

## Lawsuit Filed To Stop Mining Near Yellowstone In Montana. 

The U.S. News & World Report (9/22) reports that “opponents of mining near Yellowstone National Park filed a lawsuit Friday challenging a decision by Montana environmental regulators to allow a Canadian company to explore for precious metals just north of the park.” The Park County Environmental Council and Greater Yellowstone Coalition “sued the Montana Department of Environmental Quality and Lucky Minerals, Inc. in state district court in Montana’s Park County.” Lucky Minerals was “given approval to drill on private land in the Absaroka Mountains to assess its prospects for mining of copper, gold, silver and molybdenum deposits.” Additional coverage was provided by Montana Public Radio (9/22, Cates-Carney). 

## Indiana Dunes Hoping For ‘Dark Sky’ Designation. 

The Northwest Indiana Post-Tribune (9/24, Anderson) reports on the effort to get Indiana Dunes National Lakeshore designated as an International Dark Sky Park. Among the supporters of the push are Rep Pete Visclosky, and state House Minority Leader Scott Pelath, “who both wrote letters advocating for the Dunes to receive an International Dark Sky Park designation.” 

## Plan For Moccasin Bend National Archaeological District Completed. 

The Chattanoogan (TN) (9/22) reports that “a General Management Plan for the Moccasin Bend National Archaeological District received final authorization from the National Park Service.” According to the article, “Chickamauga and Chattanooga NMP is looking forward to implementing the plan which includes establishment of a visitor center on Hamm Road, as well as archaeological site protection, guided interpretation, and improved access to the Brown’s Ferry site to better interpret the American Indian history of Moccasin Bend.” 

## Cabin Restoration Completed At Historic Elkmont In Great Smoky Mountains National Park. 

The Knoxville (TN) News Sentinel (9/22, Ahillen) reports that a National Park Service project is renovating the Elkmont Historic District of Great Smoky Mountains National Park. According to the article, “four structures have been opened this weekend after nearly a year of restoration at the district off Little River Gorge Road.” The National Park Service is “working to preserve more than a dozen buildings.” 

## Cape Lookout Lighthouse Modernization Completed. 

The Carteret County (NC) News-Times (9/24) reports that “the Coast Guard and National Park Service completed the Cape Lookout Lighthouse solar modernization Friday.” The project “involved removing the previous optic, which was powered by a sub-cable, and replacing it with a solar-powered multi-tier LED optic, the Coast Guard said in a press release.” 

## Local Residents Recognize Overmountain Men In Ceremony. 

The Bristol (VA) Herald Courier (9/23, Sorrell) reports that “local residents recognized the service of two Revolutionary War veterans from Southwest Virginia on Saturday as Overmountain Victory Trail festivities continue in the region.” The two men, Gen. William Campbell and John Broddy, were “honored during wreath-laying ceremonies.” Ben Richardson, of the National Park Service, provided the keynote address Saturday. 

## Adventure Time: Fourth-graders From Joy Elementary Visit Denali National Park. 

The Fairbanks (AK) News-Miner (9/24, Capps) reports that three classes of fourth-graders from a Fairbanks school traveled to Denali National Park “earlier this month, thanks to a grant from the National Park Foundation, submitted by the Alaska Public Lands Information Center in Fairbanks.” The grant was part of the National Park Foundation’s Every Kids In A Park program. 

## The Washington Monument Will Endure. 

In an op-ed for the Washington Post (9/22, Lamar), Eric Lamar, a D.C. tour guide, empathizes with visitors who are upset with the closure of the Washington Monument. But he urges those who are “frustrated” to “pause and remember that like the monument, Washington’s life was a series of setbacks and defeats requiring fortitude, persistence and no small amount of courage.” Lamar concludes: “The Washington Monument may be down for a bit, but like the man, it will endure, stronger for the hardship.” 

# Office Of Insular Affairs 

## Hurricane Maria Heads North As It Departs Caribbean. 

“Hurricane Maria finally began departing the Caribbean Friday afternoon, leaving a wake of destruction that left at least 30 dead and crippled Puerto Rico,” the Miami Herald (9/22, Staletovich) reports, and in the National Hurricane Center’s 5 p.m. advisory, “forecasters said Maria was passing offshore east of the southeastern Bahamas with sustained winds remaining at 125 mph. The storm was located about 395 miles east-southeast of Nassau.” Meanwhile, Reuters (9/22, Graham, Respaut) reports Maria “skirted past the Turks and Caicos Islands on Friday, leaving devastation in its wake that included fresh flooding on Puerto Rico two days after pummeling the U.S. island territory.” Reuters adds that “Maria, which ranked as the most powerful hurricane to strike Puerto Rico in nearly a century, has killed at least six people there and claimed 19 lives on several other Caribbean islands, according to government officials and local news media accounts.” ABC World News Tonight (9/22, story 2, 0:30, Muir) in a brief report tracked “the possible paths for Hurricane Maria as it then moves toward the East Coast.” Rob Marciano said Maria is currently “a Cat 3 and will weaken as it gets a little father north; it’ll be a Cat 1 by Wednesday, but just abreast of North Carolina.” Marciano added “the forecast cone getting close to the US and our spaghetti models a little bit more spread out, so some uncertainty. And there could be some direct impacts from Maria in the US by the end of next week.” 

NYTimes Reflects On Status Of Caribbean Nations After Hurricanes. “After two major hurricanes tore through the Caribbean in less than two weeks, some of the most idyllic – and tourism-dependent – destinations have been devastated,” the New York Times (9/22, Rosenbloom) says, and while “ferocious storms are nothing new to these islands,” hurricanes Maria and Irma left “cities, and some islands...almost entirely in ruins.” According to the Times, “In the hardest-hit places, including Dominica, Puerto Rico, Barbuda, St. Martin and the U.S. Virgin Islands, a slow and arduous recovery lies ahead.” The Times breaks down the status of the various Caribbean nations and highlights that from Maria, “in Puerto Rico, at least 10 people died. The storm brought catastrophic flooding, destroyed homes and infrastructure, and left people without power, clean water and essential services. In Dominica, at least 15 people were killed.” 

## Puerto Rico’s Governor Says Cost To Rebuild After Marie Will Be More Than $7 Billion To $8 Billion. 

The Wall Street Journal (9/24, De Cordoba) says that while the Puerto Rican government does not yet have an estimate for the cost of reconstruction, Gov. Ricardo Rosselló said it will be “north of the $7 billion to $8 billion” cost to rebuild after Hurricane Georges in 1998. The New York Times (9/24, Robles, Ferré-Sadurní) says Maria left “a rich agricultural region looking like the result of a postapocalyptic drought.” Maria “wiped out about 80 percent of the crop value in Puerto Rico – making it one of the costliest storms to hit the island’s agriculture industry, said Carlos Flores Ortega, Puerto Rico’s secretary of the Department of Agriculture.” The storm “took out entire plantations and destroyed dairy barns and industrial chicken coops.” According to preliminary figures, the island “suffered a loss of $780 million in agriculture yields.” Citing Puerto Rico’s “$73 billion in debt,” Axios (9/24, Pandey) says the federal government “will have to take a significant role in the recovery process to give the US territory a chance at bouncing back.” USA Today (9/23, Jervis) reports on the relief efforts of FEMA teams in Puerto Rico in the wake of Hurricane Maria. The teams were already on the island and “sprung into reconnaissance and search-and-rescue missions as soon as Maria’s winds died down.” Eva Pilgrim said on ABC World News Tonight (9/24, story 6, 1:50, Llamas) that officials across Puerto Rico are “describing conditions as ‘apocalyptic.’” David Begnaud said on the CBS Weekend News (9/24, story 6, 2:10, Quijano), “We’re told there are still people in areas of the island that need to be rescued, but they have no way of calling for help.” The Washington Post (9/24, A1, Schmidt, Achenbach) reports in a front-page story that four days after the storm, “regions outside of San Juan remained completely disconnected from the rest of the island – and the world.” As “the challenge of accessing the essentials of modern life – gasoline, cash, food, water – began to sink in” for residents, “government officials had no answers for them. Estimates for the return of electricity and basic services will be measured not in days but in weeks and months.” On NBC Nightly News (9/24, story 5, 2:45, Snow), Gabe Gutierrez reported on “a FEMA search and rescue team from South Florida.” Gutierrez said there is “an urgent rush to clear these roads and open up lines of communication. But the more people we speak with, it’s clear this recovery won’t be measured in weeks, but months, even years.” The AP (9/24, Coto) says that as authorities worked to asses the damage, Jenniffer González, Puerto Rico’s nonvoting representative in Congress, said Sunday that Maria “set the island back decades.” González said, “The devastation in Puerto Rico has set us back nearly 20 to 30 years. ... I can’t deny that the Puerto Rico of now is different from that of a week ago. The destruction of properties, of flattened structures, of families without homes, of debris everywhere. The island’s greenery is gone.” The AP Adds that federal aid has “begun moving into Puerto Rico, welcomed by local officials who praised the Trump administration’s response but called for the emergency loosening of rules long blamed for condemning the US territory to second-class status.” A New York Times (9/24) editorial urges federal help for Puerto Rico, arguing that while it “cannot vote for president and has no voting representatives in Congress,” its citizens “are entitled to the same federal emergency funds and resources that Washington has been funneling to the far more politically powerful and economically resilient states of Texas and Florida in their hurricane miseries.” 

Dam Weakened By Maria’s Rains Is In Danger Of Failing. Reuters (9/24, Graham, Respaut) reports that Guajataca Dam in the northwest of the island was damaged by Maria’s heavy rains and was “in danger of bursting at any time.” With around 70,000 people living downstream from the damn, Gov. Rosselló “reiterated his request on Saturday that people leave the area as soon as possible.” However, USA Today (9/24, Dorell) reports that according to local officials, the dam “is holding and unlikely to threaten the lives of all 70,000 people ordered to relocate.” Juan Morales Vega, public security director in the town of Isabela, “said the Guajataca dam in Quebradillas continues to hold despite reports of a fissure and partial breach, according to local paper El Vocero de Puerto Rico.” Carlos Román, the special assistant to the executive director of the Center for Emergency Management in Quebradillas, “told El Vocero that alerts for the towns of Isabela and Quebradillas were overblown.” 

Tropical Storm Watches Issued For North Carolina, Virginia Coasts. ABC World News Tonight (9/24, story 7, 0:40, Llamas) reported that Maria is currently “a Category 2 storm, about four hundred miles southeast of Cape Hatteras.” The Washington Post (9/24, Porter) reports that Maria is “still expected to remain off shore but sideswipe coastal locations with tropical storm conditions beginning on Tuesday,” and “tropical storm watches have been issued for the entire North Carolina coast and parts of the extreme southern end of the Virginia coast.” 

## ‘We Need Help’: U.S. Virgin Islands Governor On Devastation After Maria And Irma. 

WBUR-FM Boston (9/21) reports that U.S. Virgin Islands Governor Kenneth Mapp talked about the recovery effort following the passage of Hurricane Maria. Mapp said, “We need help. With our FEMA partners and our cruise ship partners, we’re bringing in a lot of food, water, tarpaulins, personal hygiene packs, cots and blankets. That’s really the immediacy of the need. We’re asking folks who can to go to USVI Recovery and they can donate there.” He added, “I was able to speak to our Administrator William Brock Long of FEMA, and had a very good conversation with him, as well as the Secretary of Interior Ryan Zinke, as we coordinate the relief for St. Croix.” Additional coverage was provided by the Virgin Islands Daily News (9/21, O'CONNOR), and the Allentown (PA) Morning Call (9/21). 

## Media Analyses: Trump Raising Rhetoric Against North Korea. 

ABC World News Tonight (9/24, story 4, 2:10, Llamas) reported that the “volley of insults” between President Trump and North Korea has reached “an alarming level.” On Saturday, Trump tweeted, “Just heard Foreign Minister of North Korea speak at UN. If he echoes thoughts of Little Rocket Man, they won’t be around much longer!” That tweet followed North Korean Foreign Minister Ri Yong-ho “slamm[ing]” Trump at the UN, calling him “a mentally deranged person” who “committed an irreversible mistake.” USA Today (9/24, Cummings) similarly reports that Trump “sent another belligerent tweet directed at North Korea Saturday night,” referring to Ri’s remarks at the UN. USA Today says the President “has been engaged in an escalating war of words with North Korea and its leader.” Reuters (9/24, Choi, Nichols) says the President “dialed up the rhetoric against North Korea again at the weekend” as he Kim Jong-un “have traded increasingly threatening and personal insults.” Analysts say the “escalation in rhetoric is increasing the risk of a miscalculation by one side or the other that could have massive repercussions.” John Dickerson said on the CBS Weekend News (9/24, story 3, 2:15, Quijano), “The tension, of course, is one of the ways the US thinks it might get the North Koreans to the negotiating table – if the North Koreans take seriously the overwhelming force the US could deploy, if things got to a military pass.” A front-page New York Times (9/24, A1, Davis) analysis says Trump’s “willingness to casually threaten to annihilate a nuclear-armed foe was yet another reminder of the steep risks inherent in his brute-force approach to diplomacy.” However, it has also “led to a deep uncertainty about whether Mr. Trump is all talk or actually intends to act. The ambiguity could be strategic, part of an effort to intimidate Mr. Kim and keep him guessing. Or it could reflect a rash impulse by a leader with little foreign policy experience to vent his anger and stoke his supporters’ enthusiasm.” Toluse Olorunnipa of Bloomberg News said on CNN’s Inside Politics (9/24), “It does not seem like they’re trying to dial things pack. It seems like both President Trump and the leader of North Korea are trying to ratchet things up as much as possible. Both have sort of fragile egos, egos that they believe have been challenged by one another and the President seems to be wanting to move that forward and ratchet things up significantly.” The Washington Post (9/24, Morello), meanwhile, reports that other US officials “were more restrained in their words Sunday.” Treasury Secretary Mnuchin “repeated the insistence that all options, including military force, remain on the table,” but “lingered more on discussing how he has greater authority to punish countries, companies and individuals who trade with North Korea under an executive order signed by Trump last week. And he downplayed the likelihood of nuclear war.” Mnuchin said on and ABC’s This Week (9/24, Raddatz), “The President doesn’t want to be in a nuclear war. And we will do everything we can to make sure that doesn’t occur.” On CNN’s State Of The Union 

(9/24, Tapper), Mnuchin said the executive order signed last week by the President “gives the Treasury more authorities than we’ve ever had before” by allowing for us to “block many transactions with anybody that does trade or other significant business with North Korea.” Reuters (9/24) also reports Mnuchin’s comments Sunday. According to the Washington Post (9/24, Denyer), “The view from China could hardly be much worse: the leaders of North Korea and the United States threatening to rain down total destruction on each other, while US bombers and fighters stage a show of military might close to China’s shores.” While in public China’s foreign ministry “has calmly advocated restraint,” experts said Sunday that in private it “is as frustrated with North Korea, and with the situation, as it has ever been.” 

## US Warplanes Conduct “Show Of Force” Ahead Of North Korean Official’s UNGA Address. 

Leading the CBS Weekend News (9/23, lead story, 1:25, Ninan), correspondent Reena Ninan reported that “American bombers and fighter jets flew off the coast of North Korea today in a show of force.” The flight “was the furthest north of the demilitarized zone between North and South Korea that US warplanes have flown in the 21st century.” The Pentagon said the move “was in response to North Korea’s, quote, ‘reckless behavior.’” Shortly after, North Korean Foreign Affairs Minister Ri Yong Ho, at the United Nations General Assembly, escalated the “war of words” with President Trump. In video footage, Ri asserted, “None other than Trump himself is on a suicide mission.” Calling Ri’s address the culmination of “an extraordinary week of militaristic threats from both nations before an organization founded to maintain international peace and security,” the Washington Post (9/23, Morello) reports Ri said Trump’s belittling of Kim with the nickname “little rocketman” rendered “our rockets’ visit to the entire U.S. mainland inevitable.” He pointed to a hydrogen bomb that can be affixed to an intercontinental ballistic missile capable of reaching the mainland US, and warned, “Trump might not have been aware what is uttered from his mouth, but we will make sure that he bears consequences far beyond his words, far beyond the scope of what he can handle even if he is ready to do so.” The Post says the “rhetoric between Trump and Kim has grown exceptionally personal,” and the heated exchanges “come at a time when diplomatic pressure may be starting to bear fruit,” as Secretary of State Tillerson suggested last week. The Wall Street Journal (9/23, Fassihi, Kesling) similarly says Ri’s address to the UNGA dampened hopes that North Korea may be open to diplomacy. The Journal says many foreign leaders addressed the North Korean threat in their addresses to the Assembly this week, but the North Korean minister’s speech was one of the most anticipated. Reuters (9/24) reports that later on Saturday, Trump tweeted, “Just heard Foreign Minister of North Korea speak at U.N. If he echoes thoughts of Little Rocket Man, they won’t be around much longer!” Reuters says that it was not apparent “from Trump’s latest tweet if he was referring to Ri and Kim, or North Korea more broadly.” 

China To Impose Restrictions On Oil, Natural Gas Exports To North Korea. The Wall Street Journal (9/23, Chin) reports China’s Commerce Ministry said in a late Friday online statement that beginning Jan. 1, it will cap refined petroleum exports to North Korea at two million barrels a year, and prohibit natural gas exports entirely. The ministry announced China will also prohibit North Korean textile imports, a key source of revenue that earned the nation $760 million last year, according to US officials. 

Seismic Activity Detected Near North Korea’s Nuclear Test Site. The Washington Post (9/23, Denyer) reports the US Geological Survey detected a 3.5-magnitude earthquake in northern North Korea on Saturday afternoon. The seismic activity was detected near North Korea’s known nuclear test site; however, “experts said seismic data suggested that it was probably not caused by a new nuclear test, although it could have been a delayed geological reaction to the last test nearly three weeks ago.” Furthermore, there were no reports of radiation detected around the site. Still, the seismic activity was similar to that detected after North Korea’s Sept. 3 underground nuclear test, so when the China Earthquake Administration initially attributed the tremor to a “suspected explosion,” the incident “immediately set off alarm bells,” the New York Times (9/23, Sang-Hun) reports. While the tremor appears, at least for now, “to have been a false alarm,” as of Saturday afternoon the Chinese agency had not modified its initial assessment. The Wall Street Journal (9/23, Chin) reports the US Geological Survey also declined to publicly determine the source of the tremor, saying in a statement that it “cannot conclusively confirm at this time the nature (natural or human-made) of the event.” The Korea Meteorological Administration in Seoul, however, offered a different initial assessment: “We have determined that this was caused by a natural earthquake, not a big one at that, and had nothing to do with any explosion.” 

US Olympic Committee Addresses Concerns Over North Korean Threat. In a letter sent to potential Winter Olympic athletes that was obtained by the AP (9/22, Pells), US Olympic Committee Chief Security Officer Nicole Deal said heightening US-North Korean tensions will likely persist for the foreseeable future, and while they “should not be dismissed as insignificant,” they should not be “feared as precursors of an inevitable conflict.” The AP says Deal’s remarks signal that the US Team is not “considering skipping the Pyeongchang Games for security reasons.” In a separate statement issued publicly on Friday, US Olympic Committee chief executive Scott Blackmun asserted, “We will continue to work with our State Department and local organizers to ensure that our athletes, and our entire delegation, are safe.” Earlier this week, “France’s sports minister suggested the country’s athletes would stay home if security could not be guaranteed,” prompting the International Olympic Committee to attempt to assuage security concerns. 

WPost A1: Poll Finds Americans More Confident In Military Than Trump On North Korean Crisis. In a front-page article, the Washington Post (9/24, Clement, Rucker) reports on a new Washington Post-ABC News poll that found about “three-quarters of the public supports tougher economic sanctions on North Korea in an attempt to persuade it to give up its nuclear weapons, while just about one-third think the United States should offer the isolated country foreign aid or other incentives.” The poll also found “37 percent of adults trust Trump either ‘a great deal’ or ‘a good amount’ to responsibly handle the situation with North Korea,” compared to 72 percent who “trust U.S. military leaders, including 43 percent saying they trust them ‘a great deal.’” Confidence in Trump’s handling of the crisis was also “colored sharply by partisanship,” with 11 percent of Democrats and 36 percent of independents trusting Trump to react responsibly, compared to more that three-quarters of Republican respondents. 

## North Korea Threatened A Hydrogen Bomb Test In The Pacific—which Is No Stranger To Nuclear Blasts. 

Quartz (9/22, Mollman) reports that North Korea “warned Sept. 21 it might detonate a hydrogen bomb over the Pacific Ocean in response to threats made by US president Donald Trump as he addressed the United Nations General Assembly on Sept. 19.” According to the article, “if North Korea did decide—and manage—to detonate its own hydrogen bomb in the Pacific, it would...put at risk people on ships or even land, depending on the location, not to mention create long-lasting environmental damage.” 

## Palau Signs UN Treaty Prohibiting Nuclear Weapons. 

Radio New Zealand (9/22) reports that “Palau’s president Tommy Remengesau has signed the UN treaty on the prohibition of nuclear weapons.” UN Secretary General Antonio Guterres “described the treaty as a product of increasing concern over the risk posed by the continued existence of nuclear weapons, including the catastrophic humanitarian and environmental consequences of their use.” Remengesau also “condemned North Korea’s threats against Guam describing them as intimidation of the entire Pacific region.” 

## Armenia Establishes Diplomatic Ties With Palau And Micronesia. 

The Armen Press (ARM) (9/22) reports that “on the sidelines of the session of the UN General Assembly, foreign minister of Armenia Edward Nalbandian and Palau’s minister of state Faustina Rehuher-Marugg on September 21 signed the protocol on establishing diplomatic relations between the two countries with the presence of President of Palau Tommy Remengesau, press service of the Armenian ministry told Armenpress.” After the signing ceremony, they “held a meeting discussing issues relating to the cooperation within the frames of international organizations.” The article notes that “on the same day, the Armenian FM and Secretary of foreign affairs of Micronesia Lorin Robert signed the protocol on establishment of diplomatic ties between the two countries.” 

# US Geological Survey 

## USGS Says Cannot Confirm If North Korea Quake Natural Or Manmade. 

Reuters (9/23, Feast) reports that the U.S. Geological Survey “said on Saturday it could not conclusively confirm whether a magnitude 3.5 earthquake detected in North Korea was manmade or natural.” USGS placed “the epicenter of the quake 22 km (14 miles) east-northeast of Sungjibaegam, North Korea, near the country’s main nuclear test site.” The article notes that “Chinese earthquake officials earlier said the tremor was a “suspected explosion”, while South Korean officials and CTBTO, the nuclear proliferation watchdog, both said they believed it was a natural quake.” 

## Katharine Hayhoe Talks Climate Science. 

The Fulton (MO) Sun (9/24, Wilbers) reports that Katharine Hayhoe, the director of the Climate Science Center at Texas Tech University, and member of the Department of Interior’s South-Central Climate Science Center, gave a talk Wednesday at Westminster College’s Hancock Symposium. Hayhoe discussed climate science and focused “three common myths she thinks, contribute” to an “ideological divide” on the issue. 

# Top National News 

## Trump Ignites Backlash With Tweets On Sports. 

President Trump posted several tweets about sports on Saturday, prompting widespread criticism from athletes and business leaders that media analyses said distracted from other important political issues. Reporting was almost uniformly negative toward the President, with even conservative outlets and generally nonpartisan sports icons questioning his decision to rescind the NBA Championship invitation to the Golden State Warriors to visit the White House and his call for the NFL to fire players who protest the National Anthem. In a front-page article, the Washington Post (9/23, A1, Kilgore, Phillip) reports the President “turned professional sports into a political battleground Friday night into Saturday, directing full-throated ire toward African American athletes who have spoken out against him and prompting a sharp rebuttal from the National Football League and several prominent sports figures.” The Post says that “in a span of roughly 12 hours, as the sports world would typically be gearing up for college football and baseball’s pennant races, Trump ensnared and agitated the most powerful sports league in North America and angered NBA superstars Stephen Curry and LeBron James. His comments set the stage for potential mass protest Sunday along NFL sidelines.” Reuters (9/23, Goldberg, Schectman) reports Trump at an Alabama rally for Sen. Luther Strange began by calling on NFL owners to fire players who protest the flag and then in two tweets on Saturday said, “If a player wants the privilege of making millions of dollars in the NFL, or other leagues, he or she should not be allowed to disrespect our Great American Flag (or Country) and should stand for the National Anthem. If not, YOU’RE FIRED. Find something else to do!” In addition, USA Today (9/23, Amick) reports that “less than a day after so many prominent members of the Warriors reiterated their stance that they didn’t want to visit to White House to celebrate their title, and just hours after Trump’s inciteful rally in Alabama where he took aim at NFL players who protest the national anthem, he wasted no time in taking to Twitter – again.” Trump said, “Going to the White House is considered a great honor for a championship team. Stephen Curry is hesitating, therefore invitation is withdrawn!” The Wall Street Journal (9/23, Radnofsky, Beaton) characterizes the President’s action as unusual and the Daily Caller (9/23, Pfeiffer) laments that “instead of the focus being on Republican struggles to pass health care and tax reform or the growing threat of a nuclear North Korea, Trump is now facing off in a battle against black athletes, which liberal journalists are already framing as racist.” Bloomberg News (9/22, Jacobs) emphasizes that the President’s “criticisms, directed primarily at black athletes, came after Trump fanned racial flames in August by repeatedly equating the actions of both sides after the death of a woman who was protesting against a demonstration by neo-Nazis, white supremacists and Confederate heritage groups in Charlottesville, Virginia.” The New York Times (9/23, A1, Belson, Davis) reports on its front page that although “many fans on social media were supportive of the president, the reaction from many athletes was immediate and impassioned, particularly among African-American football and basketball players who have criticized Mr. Trump on race.” On the CBS Weekend News (9/23, story 4, 2:20, Ninan), Tony Dokoupil said “the President’s comments stirred fury online” while Politico (9/22, Griffiths, Jackson) reports Trump’s tweets “drew an unusually blunt rebuke from National Football League commissioner Roger Goodell, who said the ‘divisive comments’ show a ‘lack of respect’ for the nation’s most popular sport.” USA Today (9/23, Sports) reports Goodell in a statement added, “The NFL and our players are at our best when we help create a sense of unity in our country and our culture. There is no better example than the amazing response from our clubs and players to the terrible natural disasters we’ve experienced over the last month.” The AP (9/23, Lucey) reports DeMaurice Smith, the executive director of the NFL Players Association, also “angrily denounced” Trump, tweeting: “We will never back down. We no longer can afford to stick to sports.” Smith added the player’s union is committed to “protecting the constitutional rights of our players as citizens as well as their safety as men who compete in a game that exposes them to great risks.” USA Today (9/23, Sports) reports NFL Players Association President Eric Winston tweeted, “I am extremely disappointed in the statements made by the President last night.” Winston added, “The comments were a slap in the face to the civil rights heroes of the past and present, soldiers who have spilled blood in countless wars to uphold the values of this great nation and American people of all races, ethnicities, genders and sexual orientations who seek civil progress as a means to make this country, and this world, a better place.” The Hill (9/23, Seipel) reports Trump “fired back” late Saturday, tweeting, “Roger Goodell of NFL just put out a statement trying to justify the total disrespect certain players show to our country. Tell them to stand!” Meanwhile, the New York Times (9/23, Hoffman) says Trump’s remarks drew an “intense reaction from athletes,” who “have begun firing back” at the President. According to the Times, “the response from players was swift,” while the AP (9/23, Lucey, Reynolds) similarly reports that the President’s remarks “drew sharp responses from some of the nation’s top athletes,” and The Hill (9/23, Manchester) states that he “caught flak on Saturday after ratcheting up his barbs on NFL and NBA players, prompting criticism from various professional athletes.” The Washington Times (9/23, Blake) reports that after Trump “singled out” Curry, the Golden State Warriors’ “star athlete,” the team on Saturday in a statement said, “While we intended to meet as a team at the first opportunity we had this morning to collaboratively discuss a potential visit to the White House, we accept that President Trump has made it clear that we are not invited.” The Warriors added, “We believe there is nothing more American than our citizens having the right to express themselves freely on matters important to them. We’re disappointed that we did not have an opportunity during this process to share our views or have open dialogue on issues impacting our communities that we felt would be important to raise.” However, the team said it will still visit Washington, DC, but will use the trip “to celebrate equality, diversity and inclusion – the values that we embrace as an organization.” The Hill (9/23, Greenwood) “Briefing Room” blog reports that NBA Commissioner Adam Silver “said Saturday that he is ‘disappointed’ that the Golden State Warriors won’t be visiting the White House in February, after the team canceled the plans amid a feud with President Trump.” In a statement, Silver said, “I was in favor of the team visiting the White House and thought it was a rare opportunity for these players to share their views directly with the President.” Silver added, “I am disappointed that that will not happen. More importantly, I am proud of our players for taking an active role in their communities and continuing to speak out on critically important issues.” The Daily Caller (9/23, Hookstead) states that “it’ll be interesting to see if this becomes a popular trend for sports teams as long as Trump is in the White House.” The Hill (9/23, Thomsen) reports in its “Briefing Room” blog that Curry on Saturday “fired back” at the President and “said it was ‘surreal’ for him to wake up and see that Trump had revoked his invitation.” Curry asserted, “I don’t know why he feels the need to target certain individuals rather than others.” He added, “I have an idea of why, but, it’s just kind of beneath, I think, a leader of a country to go that route. It’s not what leaders do.” The Hill (9/23, Manchester) “Briefing Room” blog notes Curry “told reporters on Friday that he did not want to visit the White House.” Curry said, “by not going, hopefully it will inspire some change for what we tolerate in this country and what we stand for, what is accepted and what we turn a blind eye toward.” The San Francisco Chronicle (9/23, Ting) reports Curry’s teammate Draymond Green became “the first Warriors player to weigh in on...Trump’s decision to disinvite the reigning champs to the White House,” tweeting that he is “still wondering how this guy is running our country,” while Breitbart (9/23, Huston) reports “NBA star LeBron James” joined in “to slam the president, saying, ‘U bum @StephenCurry30 already said he ain’t going! So therefore ain’t no invite. Going to White House was a great honor until you showed up!’” Nonetheless, Breitbart highlights that “James’ claim does not stand on a firm historical footing,” as “players have been refusing White House visits for many decades before Donald Trump’s first year in office.” USA Today (9/23, Neuharth-Keusch) reports “this isn’t the first time that James, one of the world’s most influential athletes, has spoken out against Trump, his most recent comments coming in the wake of the violent rallies in Charlottesville, Va. last month.” The Hill (9/23, Thomsen) “Briefing Room” blog reports that later on Saturday, “the Cleveland Cavaliers star said in a video...that he was ‘frustrated’ because ‘this guy that we’ve put in charge has tried to divide us once again.’” James asserted, “We all know what happened at Charlottesville and the divide that caused and now it’s even hitting more home for me now because he’s now using sports as the platform to try and divide us.” A number of other basketball icons also criticized Trump. In its “Briefing Room” blog, The Hill (9/23, Carter) reports Houston Rockets point guard Chris Paul, the president of the NBA Players Association, “said Saturday President Trump isn’t ‘man enough’ to call athletes a ‘son of a b----’ to their faces after Trump used the term to describe athletes who kneel during the national anthem.” The Hill (9/23, Carter) “Briefing Room” blog reports that former Los Angeles Lakers player Kobe Bryant tweeted, “A #POTUS who’s name alone creates division and anger. Who’s words inspire dissension and hatred can’t possibly ‘Make America Great Again.’” In addition, ESPN (9/23) highlights how numerous “former and present NFL players, and front-office executives, reacted on social media,” which included “Seattle Seahawks star Richard Sherman,” Washington Redskins linebacker Zach Brown, Buffalo Bills running back LeSean McCoy, Tampa Bay Buccaneers wide receiver Desean Jackson, Lions tight end Eric Ebron, and former Heisman Trophy winner Reggie Bush, according to The Hill, which also shared criticism from the co-owners of the New York Giants, the CEO of the San Francisco 49ers, the CEO of the Green Bay Packers, the owner of the Miami Dolphins, and the owners of the Philadelphia Eagles, Buffalo Bills, Indianapolis Colts, and Seattle Seahawks. USA Today (9/23, Martinelli) reports the mother of former San Francisco 49ers quarterback Colin Kaepernick, Teresa Kaepernick, also “responded to Trump’s remarks about her son with some sass.” The Hill (9/23, Greenwood) reports in its “Briefing Room” blog she said in an interview with Deadspin that “it was ‘disappointing’ that Trump took aim at the NFL during a fiery campaign rally in Alabama Friday night, and accused him of playing to ‘racist people’ in the crowd of supporters.” She additionally compared Trump’s behavior to being “like a bully on a playground.” Meanwhile, USA Today (9/23, Jones) reports Trump’s “could end up amplifying the number of demonstrations,” which extended to baseball, The Hill (9/23, Thomsen) “Briefing Room” blog reports, as the Oakland Athletics on Saturday “tweeted a statement in support of players who kneel during the national anthem moments after” catcher and rookie Bruce Maxwell “became the first major league baseball player to kneel during the national anthem Saturday night, one day after President Trump attacked NFL players who did the same.” New York Yankees pitcher CC Sabathia told the New York Daily News (9/23, Mazzeo) that “if the Yankees wind up winning the championship this season,” he would not visit the White House. He added, “I just don’t believe in anything that is Trump. So there wouldn’t be any reason for me to go at all.” The Hill (9/23, Delk) reports the NAACP additionally “spoke out in defense of NBA All-Star Stephen Curry,” tweeting, “A hero dissed by a .... fill in the blank #TakeAKnee.” According to The Hill (9/23, Lorenz), Milo Yiannopoulos also “disagree[d] with Trump’s statement that athletes who kneel during the national anthem should be fired.” In an interview, Yiannopoulos said, “I don’t think that people should be punished for kneeling during the national anthem. I think what should happen to them is they should be laughed at as attention seekers. ... I don’t think they deserve to be fired.” 

UNC Men’s Basketball Championship Team Skipping White House Visit Due To Scheduling Conflict. The AP (9/23) reports a spokesman for the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill men’s basketball team, which won the national NCAA championship in April, announced Saturday that it “will not visit the White House because of a scheduling conflict.” The spokesman “said...that Hall of Fame coach Roy Williams and the players were willing to go, and the university and White House tried ‘eight or nine’ dates but none worked.” 

Sports Columnists, Pundits Savage Trump Over Remarks. New York Times (9/23, Powell) sports columnist Michael Powell lauds the athletes who are responding to Trump and says that “in the surest and most striking sign of tectonic movements, N.F.L. Commissioner Roger Goodell, as careful and conservative a leader as you’ll find in pro sports, felt compelled to call out the president on Saturday.” Washington Post (9/23, Jenkins) sports columnist Sally Jenkins argues that while the NFL’s response to the President’s “spit-foaming is hardly a test case for whether the republic will stand,” the league “is a maker of manners in this country, so it means something that Commissioner Roger Goodell and others are getting it right, striking the perfect calm but resistant tone in response to Trump’s gutter-mouthing, a tone that says, ‘We’re not your personal WrestleMania, and don’t use us for your sham body slams.’” She adds that the NFL, when “faced with whether to play to the basest instincts of the audience, declined. It adhered to civility.” Jenkins concludes that when “confronted with Trump’s vulgarity, rather than take him head on, [the NFL] chose simply to outclass him.” The Hill (9/23, Carter) reports ESPN anchor Jemele Hill, who “called Trump a ‘white supremacist’ and a ‘bigot’ in a series of tweets earlier this month” that prompted the White House to call for her dismissal, predicted the President’s comments “will only incite more player protests, not quell them.” In his Sports Illustrated (9/23, King) column, Peter King says “on the same day the media was filled with stories about a 27-year-old former NFL player who committed suicide and was found to have severe degenerative brain damage – likely much or all of it from football – the president decried how big hits have been taken out of the game.” While he admits that on the issue of tougher hits and opposing anthem protests, “the president might have the support of his core voters,” King contends “Trump’s longing-for-the-day-of-yore rhetoric in a speech in Alabama Friday night is the kind of anti-football, anti-player divisiveness that, frankly, no player or owner should stand for.” He adds that “Trump, apparently, is the only person in America who wants to see a more dangerous game of football.” USA Today (9/23, Bell) NFL columnist Jarrett Bell hails Trump’s remarks as “fresh fuel for NFL players to engage in Colin Kaepernick-styled national anthem protests.” Bell asserts that “when the President of the United States, in all of his ignorance, urges his base of supporters to walk out on your game, your livelihood, your principles – because a number of NFL players have exercised their right to express discontent with some major inequalities of the American way – it is way past time to provide a determined response.” Bell adds “the rapid reactions from NFL commissioner Roger Goodell and NFL Players Association executive director DeMaurice Smith – who rarely agree on anything – was an encouraging sign of leadership that supplemented the voices from the players.” USA Today (9/23) sports columnist Christine Brennan contends that “by unleashing his own despicable brand of fire and fury against the National Football League and the First Amendment rights of its players Friday night, President Donald Trump exhibited his failure to grasp the lesson every schoolyard bully learned long ago: Don’t pick on the football players.” Brennan adds it was noteworthy “that Trump mustered more anger Friday over Kaepernick’s personal decision to not stand for the anthem than he did for the neo-Nazis and white Supremacists who marched in Charlottesville’s deadly protest last month.” 

WPost: MLB Needs To Raise Netting To Protect Bystanders From Foul Balls. The Washington Post (9/23) editorializes another young girl was injured Wednesday at Yankee Stadium when she was hit by “a 105-mph foul ball,” which illustrates why Major League Baseball has to take action to prevent more injuries from taking place. The Post asserts “player after player has since insisted that stadiums need more netting to protect fans from incoming foul balls” and argues “a large number of injuries would nevertheless be prevented if major league ballparks installed more extensive netting.” The Post concludes that “MLB should look to stadiums in Japan, where netting often reaches from foul pole to foul pole. And the next time the organization issues an obvious safety finding, it should come in the form of a requirement, not a mere recommendation.” 

## Trump, Kim Ratchet Up Public Criticism. 

President Trump on Friday responded to the first public criticism directly from North Korean leader Kim Jong-un. Media coverage, which included nearly four and a half minutes on the network newscasts, cast both of their remarks as a dangerous escalation in rhetoric. Reporting also highlighted that North Korea says that it is currently preparing to conduct a hydrogen bomb test over the Pacific Ocean, which analyses warn would further inflame the tense region. CNN’s Situation Room (9/22, 6:05 p.m. EDT, Acosta) reported that a few hours after Kim described Trump as a “rogue,” “gangster,” “frightened dog,” and “a ‘dotard,’ which essentially means an old, senile lunatic,” the President tweeted, “Kim Jong Un of North Korea, who is obviously a madman who doesn’t mind starving or killing his people, will be tested like never before!” The Washington Post (9/22, Gearan, Phillip) reports “the back-and-forth between the United States and North Korea is the latest in a series of events escalating tensions between the two nations.” In a separate article, the Washington Post (9/22, Nakamura, Gearan) reports the comments came a day after Trump signed new sanctions that “seek to leverage the dominance of the U.S. financial system by forcing nations, foreign companies and individuals to choose whether to do business with the United States or the comparatively tiny economy of North Korea. U.S. officials acknowledged that like other sanctions, these may not deter North Korean leader Kim Jong Un’s drive to threaten the United States with a nuclear weapon, but are aimed at slowing him down.” Treasury Secretary Mnuchin asserted Trump’s executive order “significantly expands Treasury’s authority to target those who enable this regime...wherever they are located.” Reuters (9/22, Heavey) reports that in an Thursday interview with CNBC that aired Friday, Commerce Secretary Ross said China’s steps to restrict trade with North Korea “would “be very” good if they succeed in cutting off imported goods, and showed lessening support from China toward Pyongyang.” Ross added, “Even more importantly, it sent a very powerful message to North Korea that China is not being as supportive of them as it had been.” Although “North Korea has long cultivated an image of defiant belligerence, punctuating its propaganda and diplomacy with colorful threats, insults and bluster,” a front-page New York Times (9/22, A1, Sang-Hun) article cautions Kim’s personal statement “pushed his government’s brinkmanship to a new, potentially more perilous level.” According to the Times, “in a country where the leader is essentially portrayed as a god, Mr. Kim’s decision to respond personally to Mr. Trump’s speech to the United Nations General Assembly and pledge reprisals escalated the standoff over the North’s nuclear program in a way that neither he nor his predecessors had done before.” Brian Todd of CNN’s Situation Room (9/22, 5:22 p.m. EDT, Acosta) asserted, “Never before have we seen this North Korean leader put his own name on a statement like this, and go after leader in such a personal and public way.” Todd added that US and South Korean officials are now “dissecting his words,” as well as “a threat by the foreign minister about testing a hydrogen bomb.” He also warned that US officials and analysts “believe the last nuclear bomb North Korea tested this month could have been a hydrogen bomb, which would be a game changer. Why? Because the blast may have been nearly 10 times more powerful than the atomic bomb dropped on Hiroshima, which killed an estimated 150,000 people.” Bloomberg News (9/21, Kang, Kim) reports Trump “expanded on those comments at a political rally in Alabama Friday night, saying Kim may be ‘smart, he may be strategic’ or he may be ‘totally crazy,’ but no matter what, Americans will be protected.” In his speech, which was broadcast by Fox News Tucker Carlson Tonight (9/22, 8:12 p.m. EDT, Carlson), the President stressed his commitment to “always defend[ing] America’s interest above all else,” and lamented, “When you look around the world, you have so many where they don’t respect their people. but we want nations that cooperate together to work for all people. That’s what we care about, all people. We can’t have mad men out there shooting rockets all over the place.” Trump added, “And, by the way, Rocket Man should have been handled a long time ago.” He pledged to “handle it, because we have to handle it. Little Rocket Man. We are going to do it. Because we really have no choice [since Kim is] talking about a massive weapon exploding over the ocean. The Pacific Ocean. Which causes tremendous, tremendous calamity.” On CNN’s Situation Room (9/22, 5:41 p.m. EDT, Acosta), senior political analyst Mark Preston said that “the unpredictability of the North Korean leader is, I think, the biggest wildcard and what concerns me the most, and probably concerns our intelligence officials the most as well. I do think, though, from a United States standpoint, trading barbs back and forth with the leader of North Korea is very ineffective. I think silence is deafening in many ways.” He called for tougher sanctions and “really pressuring China behind the scenes to take a more leadership role in this.” Senior congressional correspondent Manu Raju said US lawmakers are concerned that with his rhetoric, “the President painted himself in a corner here, and has given Kim Jong-un an excuse to move forward in a way that he may not have had otherwise.” Meanwhile, Sen. Ed Markey said on CNN’s Situation Room (9/22, 5:17 p.m. EDT, Acosta), “I think that we should be concerned that this escalatory rhetoric between two leaders of countries that have nuclear weapons is slipping very quickly into something that could become dangerous for the planet. And, again, if he detonates a hydrogen bomb into the atmosphere – that’s why we had the atmospheric nuclear test ban in 1963.” On whether the US should consider a military option, Markey stated, “No. There is no military option. None. If we take a strike at North Korea, it could very quickly escalate into the deaths of hundreds of thousands or millions of people in South Korea and in other countries in that region. The only answer is to go to final sanctions on the North Koreans.” On CNN’s Situation Room (9/22, 6:13 p.m. EDT, Acosta), Rep. Ruben Gallego said, “The problem is this is bluster, but it could easily get into what we call miscalculation, where one side decides they have to take some type of preemptive action to either protect themselves or get some kind of advantage. But the President did some correct things. He finally entered into a sanctions regime” that “can be helpful in compelling North Korea to the floor. Now he has to follow it through with our allies and make sure they’re enforced.” CNN’s Situation Room (9/22, 5:52 p.m. EDT, Acosta) previewed “Trump and Twitter,” a special report about the President’s tweeting more generally. Former CIA Director Gen. Michael Hayden told chief innovation correspondent Bill Weir, “If I’m the head of a hostile or even friendly intelligence service, I got a new office over here – follow that account. Tell me what this man is saying. It’s tremendously revealing. we know the President’s hot buttons. We know his vulnerabilities. We know what upsets him. We know what he demands from his subordinates. We even know his sleep patterns based upon his Twitter usage. That’s a tremendous gift to a foreign power.” 

North Korea Says Hydrogen Bomb Test In Preparation. The Wall Street Journal (9/22, Cheng) reports North Korean Foreign Minister Ri Yong Ho said Friday that North Korea “might consider a historic aboveground test of a hydrogen bomb over the Pacific Ocean” in retaliation for Trump’s remarks at the UN General Assembly this week. Kristen Welker, the White House correspondent for NBC Nightly News (9/22, story 5, 2:00, Holt), asserted the “threat to test a hydrogen bomb over the Pacific” – rather than the “series of potentially dangerous verbal volleys” between Trump and Kim – is “raising alarm bells.” She added, “If North Korea launched a bomb, Pentagon officials say, under one scenario, advanced radars and satellites all over the world would detect the launch, giving the US the military options to intercept it or shoot it down before any radioactive material could do harm. But there are no guarantees.” CNN’s Situation Room (9/22, 6:08 p.m. EDT, Acosta) Pentagon correspondent Barbara Starr said that “North Korea already is getting ready for its next missile launch, according to Administration officials, possibly a missile that could hit the US. Kim Jong-un now threatening the ‘highest level of hard-line countermeasure in history’ following President Trump’s speech at the UN.” Meanwhile, Starr said such a test “could change everything,” and that the US intelligence community is now watching “for very particular signs” of such a weapon. Yet North Korea is seemingly undeterred, Starr added, and “all indications are to continue to proceed with their weapons program.” A senior Administration official told Reuters (9/22, Spetalnick) that a hydrogen bomb test would be a “game-changer,” but while the official did not give “too much credence” to the threat because “there’s a certain amount of bluster that’s taken for granted when you’re dealing with North Korea,” the US “to some extent [does] take it seriously.” Meanwhile, Reuters (9/22, Heavey) reports Trump and South Korean President Moon Jae-in “agreed to strengthen their defense posture amid rising tensions with North Korea, the White House said on Friday.” In a statement, the White House said “Trump and Moon, who met on Thursday, committed to strengthen their ‘combined defense posture, including through South Korea’s acquisition and development of highly advanced military assets’ and ‘agreed to the enhanced deployment of U.S. strategic assets in and around South Korea on a rotational basis.’” In a front-page article, the New York Times (9/22, A1, Baker, Sanger) examines some of the “pre-emption options” presented by aides to Trump, which “included cyberattacks against military or dual-use facilities, according to senior officials.” The Times adds Defense Secretary Mattis “noted that the United States had not attempted to destroy the unarmed missiles that have been tested so far, because they were not on track to hit American territory, or allies like Japan.” According to the Times, “so far, the president has declined to explicitly lay out a red line that, if crossed, would provoke some sort of action.” A senior official “said that acting to prevent an atmospheric test, which would risk radiation spreading in the winds toward populated areas, could well result in a very different decision.” However, the Times admits “such an operation would be highly risky even if it would be far more surgical than Mr. Trump’s threat this week to ‘totally destroy North Korea’ if forced to defend the United States or its allies.” ABC World News Tonight (9/22, story 5, 2:25, Muir) broadcast Secretary of State Tillerson, who in an interview with David Muir on “Good Morning America” was asked how the US would respond if North Korea detonated a hydrogen bomb. Said Tillerson, “Well, we will continue our efforts in the diplomatic arena, but all of our military options, as the President has said, are on the table.” Tillerson added that “once we can assess the nature of this threat, the President will make a decision regarding the appropriate actions,” broadcast CNN’s Situation Room (9/22, 5:07 p.m. EDT, Acosta), which said that, “despite the apocalyptic rhetoric” between Trump and Kim, Tillerson insisted that “the US has not given up on finding a diplomatic solution.” Reuters (9/22, Chiacu) reports Tillerson asserted, “We are quite challenged but our diplomatic efforts continue unabated. ... We have put in place the strongest economic sanctions ever to have been assembled against...Kim Jong Un.” Tillerson added, “he is being tested with the sanctions, voices from every corner of the world.” The AP (9/22, Burns, Pennington) reports Susan Thornton, the acting secretary of state for East Asia and the Pacific, “said Friday a North Korean H-bomb test in the Pacific would be ‘outrageous.’” Thornton added that such action “would draw a ‘concerted and determined international response’ but declined to be specific.” According to the Wall Street Journal (9/22, Cheng), the threat also prompted criticism from both Russia and China, which called on North Korea and the US to deescalate the situation. Reuters (9/22, Nichols) reports that at a news conference on Friday, Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov said “the exchange of threats is quite bad, unacceptable” He added, “We have to calm down the hot heads.” In a separate article, Reuters (9/22, Nichols, Brunnstrom) reports Lavrov also “again pushed a proposal by Moscow and Beijing for a dual suspension of North Korean weapons tests and the U.S.-South Korean military drills to kick-start talks.” In addition, although “China has tightened the financial screws on North Korea under U.N. sanctions approved in recent weeks,” the Washington Post (9/22, A1, Gearan, Denyer) in a front-page article reports China on Friday “disputed Trump’s claim that it has joined a new round of punishing economic sanctions against its communist ally.” While Trump said Thursday that Chinese President Xi Jinping “had ordered Chinese banks to cease conducting business with North Korean entities,” Lu Kang, a spokesman with China’s Foreign Ministry, “denied that Beijing had agreed to go that far.” The Post adds that Lu instead “appealed for calm” and insisted, “What’s needed now is to implement the U.N. resolutions strictly and positively explore channels to solve problems via talks, rather than provoking each other and adding oil to the fire.” 

US-Japanese Navies Conduct Drills Off Korean Peninsula. Reuters (9/22, Kelly, Kubo) reports “the U.S. Navy carrier Ronald Reagan is conducting drills with Japanese warships in seas south of the Korean peninsula, Japan’s military said on Friday, in a show of naval power as Pyongyang threatens further nuclear and missile tests.” Reuters adds that “the Reagan strike group will conduct a separate drill with the South Korean Navy in October, the defense ministry said in a statement distributed to South Korean lawmakers on Monday.” 

White House Aides Appealed To Trump To Tone Down UN Rhetoric. The Los Angeles Times (9/22, Bennett) reports “senior aides to President Trump repeatedly warned him not to deliver a personal attack on North Korea’s leader at the United Nations this week, saying insulting the young despot in such a prominent venue could irreparably escalate tensions and shut off any chance for negotiations to defuse the nuclear crisis.” According to the Times, “some of Trump’s top aides, including national security advisor H.R. McMaster, had argued for months against making the attacks on North Korea’s leader personal, warning it could backfire.” The Times says “some advisors now worry that the escalating war of words has pushed the impasse with North Korea into a new and dangerous phase that threatens to derail the months-long effort to squeeze Pyongyang’s economy through sanctions to force Kim to the negotiating table.” 

Army Investigating Fake South Korean Evacuation Order. The Washington Post (9/22, Lamothe) reports counterintelligence officials from the US Army in South Korea “are investigating fake mobile alerts and social media messages warning American military families and Defense Department personnel of orders to evacuate the volatile peninsula on Thursday.” The officials in a Facebook post stated that US Forces Korea “did NOT send this message” and they “warned that Americans living in South Korea with U.S. troops and Defense Department employees should confirm that any evacuation-related communications are legitimate before acting.” 

South Korean Preppers Revise Emergency Plans As Tensions Rise. The Wall Street Journal (9/22, Lee) reports that while most South Koreans do their best to ignore the belligerence and threats from North Korea, preppers in the country are revising their disaster plans as tensions escalate. 

WSJournal Reflects On Life In North Korea. In a more than 2,100-word article, the Wall Street Journal (9/22, Lyons, Cheng) reflects on a recent visit to North Korea and shares what its reporters saw on their closely monitored trip to Pyongyang earlier this week. 

US Government Bonds Strengthen On North Korea Tensions. The Wall Street Journal (9/22, Banerji) reports US government bonds strengthened Friday as the yield on the benchmark 10-year US Treasury note declined from 2.278 percent on Thursday to 2.262 percent. The Journal attributes this change to market concerns over North Korea’s threat to test a hydrogen bomb over the Pacific Ocean. 

WPost, WSJournal: Trump Should Allow Sanctions To Work, Stay Out Of Gutter. The Washington Post (9/22) editorializes that President Trump “appears to have embarked on a two-track approach to pressuring North Korea into restraining its nuclear weapons and missile programs” by focusing on “ever-tightening economic sanctions that, if properly implemented, could further isolate North Korea from world finance and trade” in addition to “a game of chicken to see who can hurl the harshest and most absurd rhetorical insults.” The Post asserts that while Kim Jong Un’s regime may avoid the penalties, “sanctions and coercive diplomacy, however difficult, offer the best available approach, given the unappealing alternatives.” However, the Post criticizes Trump for escalating “the food fight” with Kim and asserts the President “ought to focus on making his sanctions work and quit imitating the supposed madman he is trying to pressure.” In an editorial, the Wall Street Journal (9/22) hails the latest sanctions on North Korea and argues Kim Jong Un’s threat to test a hydrogen bomb over the Pacific Ocean proves his regime is rattled. The Journal calls on China to live up to its commitments to avoid war, which the editorial acknowledges needs to be a last resort to prevent North Korea’s nuclear program from advancing further. 

## Puerto Rico Issues Evacuation Order For 70,000 People With Dam In Danger Of Failing. 

In ABC World News Tonight ’s (9/22, lead story, 3:00, Muir) lead broadcast, Rob Marciano reported Puerto Rican officials on Friday instituted a flash flood emergency in response to Hurricane Maria, which cracked the Guajataca Dam, “forcing 70,000 people to evacuate immediately.” In a front-page article, the Washington Post (9/22, A1, Schmidt, Zezima, Somashekhar, Cassady) reports Puerto Rico Gov. Ricardo Rosselló said the dam had suffered a “fissure” and called on residents in municipalities of Quebradillas, Isabela, and part of San Sebastian to evacuate. While the status of the dam was unclear Friday evening, the Wall Street Journal (9/22, Kamp) reports the National Weather Service has warned of its imminent failure and called on Puerto Ricans to move to higher ground. According to the New York Times (9/22, Times), “the news about the dam was a dramatic sign that the scale of troubles left behind by the storm were just being understood.” On NBC Nightly News (9/22, story 2, 2:25, Holt), Gabe Gutierrez reported that elsewhere “the floodwaters are receding, but many communities are still inundated.” In Toa Baja, 30 miles west of San Juan, Gutierrez said, “The town’s mayor tells us at least eight people drowned here and authorities have rescued 4,000 to 5,000 trapped by floodwaters. Without working cellphones, he’s coordinating with rescue crews from Florida and Virginia by word of mouth.” The New York Times (9/22, A1, Robles, Alvarez, Walsh) reports in a front-page article that “with everyone from the governor of Puerto Rico to the mayor of San Juan predicting that it could take four to six months to resume electrical service, people [are] contemplating empty refrigerators, campfire cooking, bathing in their own sweat and perhaps wrangling for fresh water on an island accustomed to hard times but nothing like what the future may bring.” According to the Times, “the biggest long-term obstacle was the prospect of months without power.” In the lead CBS Evening News (9/22, lead story, 2:20, Mason) segment, David Begnaud also reported residents are “trying to cope without power. Outdated and fragile, most of Puerto Rico’s power lines are above ground, no match for Maria.” Puerto Rico Electric Power Authority CEO Ricardo Ramos predicted that the island could be without power for months. He added, “If we go back to history under Hurricane Hugo, it took six months to restore power to everyone.” The Wall Street Journal (9/22, De Córdoba, Campo-Flores) reports Rosselló said, “It has been difficult to see the deterioration of infrastructure in Puerto Rico. ... But it has been even more difficult finding citizens who have lost everything.” NBC Nightly News ’ (9/22, story 3, 1:20, Holt) Gadi Schwartz reported that for the first responders, Maria has been “yet another disaster in what seems like an unrelenting season of catastrophe.” Schwartz added, “So many organizations have been stretched thin. FEMA supporting more than 30,000 people in disaster zones. The Red Cross deploying more than 5,000 workers and nearly its entire vehicle fleet. Samaritan’s Purse, a North Carolina nonprofit, responding to their third hurricane in the last few weeks with 50,000 pounds of emergency supplies to Puerto Rico.” The Washington Post (9/22, O'Keefe) reports that in the days ahead, Puerto Rico “is set to ask for several billion dollars in federal relief after two major hurricanes, as officials acknowledge that the months-long recovery may compel more residents to abandon an already economically distressed island.” Sen. Marco Rubio said, “We have to begin to think in the worst possible terms, between power restoration, critical infrastructure, housing assistance, the need to airlift critical medical patients out of the island to the mainland, seniors, things like that.” Rep. Darren Soto (D), “the first Floridian of Puerto Rican descent to serve in Congress,” said Thursday, “We’ve anticipated we’ll see tens of thousands of folks here at least temporarily,” he said. “Many were, I’m sure, already contemplating the move, but this will push them over the top.” 

Knicks Player Donates, Raises Money For Puerto Rico. USA Today (9/22, Tsuji) reports New York Knicks forward Carmelo Anthony has “set up a donation page and has contributed $50,000” to Puerto Rico and is trying to $1 million. In his statement, Anthony said “his father is Puerto Rican so he has family on the island, and that since the power has been knocked out after Hurricane Maria...he hasn’t heard from them. He’s also thinking of all the people struggling to recover.” New York Governor Assembles Delegation To Puerto Rico To Assess Damage From Hurricane Maria. CNBC (9/22) reports online that the devastation Hurricane Maria caused on Puerto Rico “is nothing short of catastrophic.” Six people are confirmed dead, and the island’s infrastructure sustained a “ruinous blow.” After the hurricane struck, “New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo immediately assembled a delegation of administration officials and emergency response experts, including 60 members of the National Guard, to do a reconnaissance of the destruction. The relief flight, donated by JetBlue – the largest airline in Puerto Rico – departed from John F. Kennedy International Airport to San Juan Airport early on Friday.” President Trump said he will visit the island “to see the damage firsthand and disclosed that his Homeland Security adviser, Tom Bossert, has been helping him actively prepare the government’s response to Hurricane Maria.” 

## Graham And Cassidy Plan Changes To Bill As More GOP Senators Express Doubts. 

With several senators from both the conservative and centrist wings of the Republican caucus saying over the weekend that they will not support, or have not yet committed to supporting, the Graham-Cassidy healthcare bill, the Washington Post (9/24, A1, Sullivan, Cunningham, Phillip) reports that Sens. Lindsey Graham and Bill Cassidy “plan to release a revised version of their bill Monday sending more health-care dollars to the states of key holdouts” Sens. Susan Collins and Lisa Murkowski. But while Murkowski has been on the fence, “Republicans close to the process have long counted Collins as an eventual ‘no,’ with some predicting that little could be done to the bill to change her mind.” Sean Sullivan, one of the writers of the Post report, tweeted, “There is pessimism tonight among some Rs close to the process that these changes to Cassidy-Graham will move Collins from likely no to yes.” Bloomberg News (9/24, Dopp) reports that the revised bill “also changes language regarding pre-existing conditions. ... States would have to describe how their health plans ‘shall maintain access to adequate and affordable health insurance coverage for individuals with pre-existing conditions.’ The original language said each state had to show how it ‘intends’ to have adequate and affordable access to coverage.” The Hill (9/24, Sullivan) reports that in a Sunday evening statement, Senate Minority Leader Schumer said, “Despite an attempt to appear to add money for a select few states, this bill is just as bad for those states and the rest of the states because it still contains a massive cut to Medicaid, and would throw our health insurance system into chaos while raising premiums. It still takes away protections for those with preexisting conditions and further weakens consumer protections.” NBC Nightly News (9/24, story 3, 2:30, Snow) reported earlier that passage of the bill is “looking more and more difficult now with two more Republicans today saying [that] they have big problems with this bill.” NBC’s Kelly O’Donnell reported, “Signs point to outright opposition and wavering reluctance from a few Republicans whose votes are critical.” Collins: “Well, it is hard for me to envision getting to yes on this bill because my concerns are so fundamental.” Sen. Rand Paul: “This is a bad idea. It’s not repeal.” The AP (9/24, Fram) reports that Sen. Ted Cruz “also voiced opposition, underscoring the bill’s problems with both ends of the GOP spectrum.” At a Texas event, Cruz said, “Right now, they don’t have my vote.” USA Today (9/24, Kelly) reports that Cruz also said that he does not think that fellow conservative Sen. Mike Lee is on board yet, either. ABC World News Tonight (9/24, story 8, 0:25, Llamas) said in a brief update that the legislation is “in critical condition.” John Dickerson said on the CBS Weekend News 

(9/24, story 3, 2:15, Quijano), “There don’t look like there are enough Republicans to support it because of its structural policy flaws.” The New York Times (9/24, Kaplan) reports that with no Democrats expected to back the bill, GOP leaders can afford to lose only two members of their caucus, and both Paul and Sen. John McCain have announced their opposition – though the Wall Street Journal (9/24, A1, Radnofsky, Mann) says that only McCain said that his vote was totally out of reach. The Washington Post (9/24, Costa) reports that Paul “continues to engage with President Trump and Senate leaders, giving proponents of the latest GOP bill a glimmer of hope.” He “signaled Sunday that he is willing to consider a ‘narrow’ version of the legislation.” Paul said on NBC’s Meet The Press (9/24, Todd), “I have always been a yes for repeal, but the bill unfortunately keeps most of the Obamacare spending, almost all of it, and just reshelves it and block grants it to the states.” Jonathan Swan of Axios (9/24) writes that Paul wants the legislation to “cut the Affordable Care Act spending way back” and “scrap way more Affordable Care Act regulations. ... Paul’s list of demands suggest he’s not an absolute no, but his conditions may be impossible to meet.” Washington Post congressional reporter Paul Kane tweeted, “Chasing a ghost – if you successfully buy off Murkowski with more $$$, how do you placate Rand, who wants less $$$?” On CNN’s State Of The Union (9/24, Tapper), Collins declined to confirm a “no” vote, saying she was waiting on an analysis from the Congressional Budget Office. Collins noted that the Affordable Care Act is “flawed” and that she sees “the work we’re doing in the health committee as the path forward.” Collins also joined CBS Face the Nation to talk about the bill. However, Politico (9/24, Robillard) reports that she said “it was ‘very difficult for me to imagine a scenario’ where she votes for Graham-Cassidy.” NBC’s Benjy Sarlin tweeted, “We may see some more ‘Psh, I totally wasn’t going to vote for that’ comments if Collins/Murkowski officially kill it. Still kinda alive now.” 

Trump: “I Don’t Know What They’re Doing,” But “Eventually We’ll Win.” The Washington Post (9/24, Phillip) reports that President Trump “left open the possibility that the latest Republican effort to repeal and replace the Affordable Care Act might not be successful” at this time, and said “that his first priority has always been on overhauling the tax code.” The Hill (9/24, Conradis) reports that Trump told reporters, “I have been watching for seven years at the Republicans that have been saying ‘repeal and replace’ and then you have John McCain voting ‘no’ for whatever reason. ... So I don’t know what they’re doing, but you know what? Eventually we’ll win, whether it’s now or later.” White House Director of Legislative Affairs Marc Short said on Fox News Sunday 

(9/24, Wallace) that the bill “is not dead” and “we’re trying to win over the last couple of senators to get there.” Short said on NBC’s Meet The Press (9/24, Todd) that special interests were making decisions on healthcare, and that they should “push it to the states” to make decisions. He said that “preexisting conditions are protected by this legislation.” 

Graham Says GOP Will “Get The Votes Next Week.” Politico (9/24, Robillard) reports that Graham said on ABC’s This Week that “the GOP would manage to round up the 50 votes necessary to pass Obamacare repeal through the Senate by the end of the next week. but their path to 50 is unclear.” Graham said, “I think we’re going to get the votes next week.” When asked on ABC’s This Week (9/24, Raddatz) about criticism of the bill from some insurance groups, Graham said, “I would have been surprised if these people were for our bill, because we take money away from them, [and] give to it state governments to design systems that will deliver a better outcome.” 

McCain Says His Stance Is Not About Trump. The Washington Examiner (9/24, Leonard) reports that McCain “defended his vote against the Republican healthcare bill this summer, saying that his decision was not rooted in antagonism against President Trump for mocking his military record.” McCain told CBS’ 60 Minutes (9/24, Stahl), “If I took offense at everybody who has said something about me, or disparaged me or something like that – life is too short. You’ve gotta move on. And on an issue of this importance to the nation, for me to worry about a personal relationship, then I’m not doing my job.” 

Some Democrats Wonder If Party Strategy Failed On Healthcare. The Washington Post (9/24, Weigel) reports, “This week, as Senate Republicans scrambled one more time to unravel the Affordable Care Act on a party-line vote, some Democrats asked whether it all could have been prevented with a little more strategy.” They wonder if the agreement that Schumer and House Minority Leader Pelosi reached with Trump “on the debt limit that cleared the calendar” gave the GOP time to revisit healthcare, or if Sen. Bernie Sanders’ announcement of a Medicare For All bill energized conservatives. One Democratic voter at an Iowa event told the Post, “That should have waited. They should have gotten this bill put down and decided what to do from there.” Sen. Cory Booker said on MSNBC’s Politics Nation (9/24) that “every member of the Democratic caucus knows that right now what we need to be focused on is protecting and defending the Affordable Care Act. And actually working in a bipartisan manner to make it batter, which we had going on.” Several Democratic senators tweeted about the bill on Sunday. Sen. Catherine Cortez Masto tweeted, “#GrahamCassidy is not about Republicans and Democrats, it’s about life and death. Stop playing politics with healthcare.” Sen. Kamala Harris tweeted, “Don’t stop calling, writing letters, and tweeting, telling Senators to vote NO on #GrahamCassidy. This isn’t over until Sept 30th.” Sen. Ron Wyden tweeted, “As ranking member on cmte w/jurisdiction over health care, I’ve seen a lot of health care proposals. #GrahamCassidy is BAD POLICY & cruel.” 

Dionne: GOP Rushing Bill In Search Of “A Win.” E.J. Dionne writes in his Washington Post (9/24) column, “There is only one reason the Senate even considered a vote this week: The GOP base, and particularly the party’s donor class, wants repeal. ... Republicans scheduled a quickie, last-minute hearing this week for show. Because Trump and his party want ‘a win,’ they’re willing to wreak havoc on the insurance markets, state governments and people’s lives to get it.” 

## Trump, Pence Urge GOP To Repeal Obamacare As McCain Opposes Healthcare Bill. 

Politico (9/22, Nelson) reports President Trump on Friday “warned Republicans...to fall in line behind last-ditch legislation in the Senate to repeal and replace Obamacare, writing online that any GOP lawmaker who votes against the bill will be remembered as ‘the Republican who saved Obamacare’” and he “singled out” Sen. Rand Paul. The President tweeted, “Rand Paul, or whoever votes against Hcare Bill, will forever (future political campaigns) be known as ‘the Republican who saved ObamaCare.’” The Indianapolis Star (9/22, Cook, King, Groppe, Lange) reports Vice President Pence on Friday also “turned his attention to health care” on a visit to Indiana “to drum up support for tax reform,” as he “called on Congress to pass the Graham-Cassidy health care bill.” Speaking in Anderson, Pence “acknowledged the effort would not be easy” and admitted “some have gone so far as to announce their opposition already,” but said he and Trump “remained ‘undeterred’ and could not ‘in good conscience abandon this cause.’” The Vice President added, “A vote against Graham-Cassidy is a vote to save Obamacare. ... The Republican majority in Congress in particular was not elected to save Obamacare, they were elected to repeal and replace it – and it’s time for every member of the Republican majority to keep their word to the American people.” Meanwhile, The Hill (9/22, Greenwood) reports White House counselor Kellyanne Conway said Friday on “Fox & Friends” that the White House is “increasingly optimistic about the chances to pass Graham-Cassidy,” which she hailed as “an innovative solution that would still preserve many of the most important components of repealing and replacing ObamaCare, doing away with those draconian taxes and penalties – saving about $300 billion in taxes, $485 billion in spending.” However, the New York Times (9/22, A1, Kaplan, Pear) in a front-page article reports Sen. John McCain on Friday “announced...he would oppose the latest proposal to repeal the Affordable Care Act, leaving Republican leaders with little hope of succeeding in their last-ditch attempt to dismantle the health law and fulfill their longstanding promise to conservative voters.” The Times characterizes McCain’s decision as “a slightly less dramatic reprise of his middle-of-the-night thumbs-down that killed the last repeal effort in July.” The Washington Post (9/22, A1, Sullivan, Eilperin) says on its front page that McCain’s announcement left “the latest Republican effort to dismantle the Affordable Care Act...on the brink of failure” with Senate Majority Leader McConnell and the President backed “into a difficult corner” because “they must now decide whether to continue to pursue a vote that increasingly appears likely to fail, or short-circuit the endeavor and deal with the backlash after another unsuccessful try.” ABC World News Tonight ’s (9/22, story 4, 2:40, Muir) Mary Bruce reported “McCain might have just killed this new repeal, because Republicans can only afford to lose two votes. Rand Paul has already said no. And McCain did this even though his own best friend in the Senate, Lindsey Graham, is one of the architects.” In a front-page article, the Wall Street Journal (9/22, A1, Armour, Peterson) reports McCain in his statement said, “I cannot in good conscience vote for the Graham-Cassidy proposal. I believe we could do better working together, Republicans and Democrats, and have not yet really tried,” He added, “I take no pleasure in announcing my opposition. Far from it. The bill’s authors are my dear friends, and I think the world of them. I know they are acting consistently with their beliefs and sense of what is best for the country. So am I.” In addition, Politico (9/22, McCaskill) reports Sen. Rand Paul, “a definitive ‘no’ on Senate Republicans’ last-ditch effort to repeal and replace Obamacare,” in a series of tweets said Friday that despite the President’s remarks, he “won’t be bribed or bullied” into voting for the legislation. Paul asserted, “No one is more opposed to Obamacare than I am, and I’ve voted multiple times for repeal. The current bill isn’t repeal.” He added, “I won’t vote for Obamacare Lite that keeps 90% of the taxes & spending just so some people can claim credit for something that didn’t happen” Paul continued, “Calling a bill that KEEPS most of Obamacare ‘repeal’ doesn’t make it true. That’s what the swamp does. I won’t be bribed or bullied.” On the CBS Evening News (9/22, story 3, 2:10, Mason), chief congressional correspondent Nancy Cordes said the “GOP repeal effort has been just as rushed as past attempts, leaving” Sen. Cory Gardner and other Republican senators “scrambling to figure out what it would mean for their states before next Saturday’s vote deadline.” She added that “with McCain and...Paul opposed, GOP leaders can’t afford to lose another senator.” In the lead NBC Nightly News (9/22, lead story, 2:20, Holt) segment, Capitol Hill correspondent Kasie Hunt reported that “in the spotlight: undecided Sen. Lisa Murkowski,” which prompted the Vice President to go on Alaska radio “to keep up the pressure.” Pence said, “I probably don’t need to tell the people of Alaska about the failings of national socialized healthcare.” Hunt added Pence also lobbied Sen. Susan Collins, but the AP (9/22, Villeneuve) reports Collins “said Friday she’s ‘leaning against’ a new Republican proposal to eliminate the Affordable Care Act but is waiting on an analysis by the Congressional Budget Office before making a final decision.” When asked about Trump’s tweet on Friday, Collins “said she wants to fix serious issues in the health care law.” According to the AP, Collins’ comments came as Maine Gov. Paul LePage met with Pence in Washington, DC “to promote the legislation. LePage said the bill represents the ‘best chance’ to reform the current system and to return decision-making on health care funding to the states.” According to the Washington Post (9/22, Sullivan), “consumer health organization” Community Catalyst Action Fund, which is “trying to defeat the latest Republican attempt to dismantle the Affordable Care Act,” on Friday launched a nearly $200,000 radio advertising campaign focused on pressuring McCain, Murkowski, Collins and fellow Sens. Rob Portman and Shelley Moore Capito to oppose the legislation. 

Trump Criticizes McCain For “Terrible” Opposition To Repeal And Replace. The Hill (9/22, Byrnes) reports that in his speech at a campaign rally in Huntsville, Alabama on Friday, Trump “chided” McCain over his “totally unexpected” and “terrible” opposition and insisted that when it comes to repealing and replacing Obamacare, “We’re going to do it eventually.” 

Schumer Thanks McCain For Opposition, But Warns Democrats Against Celebrating. 

Politico (9/22, Schor, Caygle) reports Senate Majority Leader Schumer in a statement thanked McCain for his “courage” in opposing the healthcare bill and asserted he has “assured Senator McCain that as soon as repeal is off the table, we Democrats are intent on resuming the bipartisan process.” However, Politico says that Schumer “signaled” Democrats not to celebrate and “they reminded each other in public and private on Friday that, McCain’s opposition aside, only the Sept. 30 expiration of Republicans’ ability to push through repeal with 50 votes can give Obamacare supporters room to breathe easy.” Hurricane-Puerto Rico – 7 minutes, 25 seconds 

Story Lineup From This Morning’s Radio News Broadcasts: 

ABC: White House-NFL Clash; White House-New Travel Restriction; Tennessee Church Shooting; Hurricane. 

CBS: White House-NFL Clash; White House-New Travel Restriction; Tennessee Church Shooting; US Gasoline Price; Wall Street News. 

FOX: White House-New Travel Restriction; White House-NFL Clash; Tennessee Church Shooting. 

NPR: Tennessee Church Shooting; Germany Election Result; White House-NFL Clash; Hurricane. 

# Washington Schedule 

## Today’s Events In Washington. 

White House: 

PRESIDENT TRUMP — Makes an announcement on the Trump Administration’s commitment to equipping the American workforce for jobs of the future; has dinner with grassroots leaders. VICE PRESIDENT PENCE — Visits NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center; participates in a US Senate Rally for Luther Strange. 

US Senate: 10:00 AM Senate Finance Committee hearing on ‘Graham-Cassidy-Heller-Johnson’ health care reform proposal – Hearing on ‘Graham-Cassidy-Heller-Johnson Proposal’ * Congressional Republicans are rushing for a vote on the proposal to repeal and replace the Affordable Care Act – spearheaded by Republican Sens. Lindsey Graham and Bill Cassidy and co-sponsored by Republican Sens. Dean Heller and Ron Johnson – before the end of the fiscal year 30 Sep, after which the Senate parliamentarian has ruled that any attempt to repeal ‘Obamacare’ could not be done under the budget reconciliation process and would therefore need 60 votes to overcome procedural votes in the Senate rather than just 51 (or 50, with a casting vote from Vice President Mike Pence) Location: Rm 215, Dirksen Senate Office Bldg, Washington, DC http://finance.senate.gov 4:00 PM Senate votes on NLRB nominee, and has goal of passing ‘Obamacare’ repeal bill by the end of the week – Senate convenes, with agenda including resumption of consideration of the nomination of William Emanuel to be a National Labor Relations Board member, including a vote * Agenda for the week due to include a new proposal to repeal and replace the Affordable Care Act – spearheaded by Republican Sens. Lindsey Graham and Bill Cassidy and co-sponsored by Republican Sens. Dean Heller and Ron Johnson – after the Senate parliamentarian ruled that the ‘budget reconciliation process’ on such a measure expires at the end of the fiscal year 30 Sep, meaning any procedural votes in the chamber after that date would need 60 to pass rather than just 51 (or 50, with a casting vote from Vice President Mike Pence). The proposal has been criticized for lacking protection for people with pre-existing medical conditions, although President Donald Trump has claimed that it does cover them. Between two and four Senate Republicans are likely to oppose the bill, which could see it fall short of the 50-vote threshold Location: Washington, DC http://www.senate.gov/ 

US House: 10:00 AM Reps. Lewis, Kelly, and Demetrius Nash on gun violence. – News conference with Reps. John Lewis & Robin Kelly and Demetrius Nash of Chicago on gun violence prevention. Location: House Triangle. 2:00 PM House of Representatives returns after District Work Period Location: Washington, DC http://www.house.gov/ 2:00 PM House GOP millennial task force hearing on ‘Challenges and Opportunities within the Hydropower Workforce’ – House Republican Policy Committee Millennial Task Force hearing on ‘Challenges and Opportunities within the Hydropower Workforce’, held by Committee Chairman Luke Messer and Task Force Chair Elise Stefanik, with panelists including Citizens for Responsible Energy Solutions Director of Policy Charles Hernick, Oak Ridge National Laboratory Research and Development Associate Adam Witt, and Brookfield Renewable Director of Northeast Operations Justin Truedell Location: Rayburn House Office Building, Rm 2261, Washington, DC http://policy.house.gov/ https://twitter.com/GOPpolicy 5:00 PM House Rules Committee hearing – Hearing on ‘H.R. 2824 – Increasing Opportunity through Evidence-Based Home Visiting Act’ and ‘H.R. 2792 – Control Unlawful Fugitive Felons Act of 2017’ Location: U.S. Capitol, H-313, Washington, DC http://www.rules.house.gov/ https://twitter.com/RulesReps 7:15 PM House Democratic Caucus holds informal reception with media – House Democratic Caucus Chairman Joe Crowley and Vice Chair Linda Sanchez host latest informal, off-the-record reception with reporters and representatives, giving the Capitol Hill press corps an opportunity to socialize with Democratic members Location: HVC-200, U.S. Capitol, Washington, DC http://www.dems.gov/ https://twitter.com/HouseDemocrats 

Other: 12:00 PM Event for media to view NASA spacecraft that will ‘touch the sun’ – NASA hosts event for media to see the agency’s Parker Solar Probe – humanity’s first-ever mission to explore the sun’s outer atmosphere – and learn about the mission, held at the Johns Hopkins University where the probe is being built * The spacecraft is in full flight configuration, complete with its revolutionary heat shield, and members of the engineering and science teams are available for interviews Location: Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory, Laurel, MD http://www.nasa.gov https://twitter.com/NASA 12:30 PM Democratic Rep. Sander Levin speaks on ‘International Trade Policy’ at the Council on Foreign Relations Location: Council on Foreign Relations, 1777 F St NW, Washington, DC www.cfr.org https://twitter.com/CFR_org #CFRLive 2:00 PM ‘Mental Health & The Opioid Crisis’ NPC Newsmaker news conference – ‘Mental Health & The Opioid Crisis’ National Press Club Headliners Newsmaker news conference, with Democratic Rep. Tim Ryan, UCSF Benioff Children’s Hospital Marriage and Family Therapist Jackie Schalit, Kaiser Permanente psychologist Kenneth Rogers, and Oriana House Clinical Coordinator Cuyler Costanzo – discussing the opioid crisis and ‘what they see as the lack of parity between mental health and physical healthcare’ Location: The National Press Club, 529 14th St NW, Washington, DC http://press.org/ https://twitter.com/PressClubDC 2:00 PM Urban Institute discussion on the role of community development financial institutions – ‘Building Healthier Economies with CDFIs’ Urban Institute discussion, in collaboration with JPMorgan Chase, to highlight the role community development financial institutions play nationally in creating equity and restarting economic growth. Speakers include Republican Rep. Scott Tipton, JPMorgan Chase Executive Director Colleen Briggs, Access to Capital for Entrepreneurs President and CEO Grace Fricks, Chicago Community Loan Fund President Calvin Holmes, National Association for Latino Community Asset Builders Executive Director Noel Poyo, Community Ventures President and CEO Kevin Smith, Urban Institute Senior Research Associate Brett Theodos, and Urban Institute President Sarah Rosen Wartell Location: Newseum, 555 Pennsylvania Ave NW, Washington, DC www.urban.org https://twitter.com/urbaninstitute 4:30 PM Liberian President Sirleaf delivers public address on Capitol Hill – Liberian President Ellen Johnson Sirleaf delivers public address on Capitol Hill, hosted by the U.S. Institute of Peace, International Republican Institute, International Foundation for Electoral Systems, National Democratic Institute, National Endowment for Democracy, and Democratic Sen. Chris Coons. She reflects on U.S. support for Liberia under her administration, and calls on the U.S. to ‘continue its support for democracy, human rights, and good governance in Africa and around the world’. Other event participants include Sen. Coons and Republican Rep. Ed Royce Location: U.S. Capitol Visitor Center, Auditorium, Washington, DC www.usip.org https://twitter.com/USIP #SirleafDC 

# Last Laughs Conversation Contents 

## August 15 -- Greenwire is ready 

# "E&E News" <ealerts@eenews.net> 

## From: "E&E News" <ealerts@eenews.net> 

## Sent: Tue Aug 15 2017 11:31:33 GMT-0600 (MDT) 

## To: @fws.gov> 

## Subject: August 15 -- Greenwire is ready (b) (6) Conversation Contents 

## U.S. Department of the Interior News Briefing for Monday, August 14, 2017 

# Bulletin Intelligence <Interior@bulletinintelligence.com> 

## From: Bulletin Intelligence <Interior@bulletinintelligence.com> 

## Sent: Mon Aug 14 2017 05:01:20 GMT-0600 (MDT) 

## To: <Interior@bulletinintelligence.com> 

## Subject: U.S. Department of the Interior News Briefing for Monday, August 14, 2017  

> Mobile version and searchable archives available here. Please click here to subscribe.
> DATE: MONDAY, AUGUST 14, 2017 7:00 AM EDT

# Today's Table Of Contents 

DOI In The News 

• New York Times: 27 National Monuments Are Under Review. Here Are Five To Watch. • Atlanta Journal-Constitution: Additional Coverage: Trump Appointee Wants More Hunting And Fishing On Federal Lands. • Santa Fe New Mexican: We Cannot Let Heinrich, VeneKlasen, Zinke And The Trumps Define Wilderness. • Grand Junction (CO) Daily Sentinel: They Protest Too Much, Methinks. 

Bureau Of Indian Affairs 

• BIA, FWS Improved Dam Hazard Readiness, Watchdog Says. • Drilling Halted At Van Hook Oil Well Site. • Activists Challenge Federal Officials Over Proposed Elk Grove Casino. • Washington’s Wild Grouse Chase. • Tribe Appeal Pushed Back. • Cobell Family Welcomes Presidential Medal Of Freedom To Browning. 

Bureau Of Indian Education 

• Piece By Piece: New Bug-O-Nay-Ge-Shig School Comes Together In Sections. 

Bureau Of Land Management 

• U.S. News & World Report: US Cattle Grazing Plan For Idaho National Monument Approved. • Grand Junction (CO) Daily Sentinel: BLM To Remove Horses Southeast Of Rangely. • Salt Lake (UT) Tribune: Human Activity — Racing Included — Is Shrinking The Bonneville Salt Flats, U. Bureau Of Ocean Energy Management 

• Offshore Air Gun Blasts Spark Debate. • Researchers Eye Marine Mammals In Offshore Surveys. • URI/BOEM Visit Block Island | Block Island Times. • Comment Period On Seismic Testing Leases Near Grand Strand Closing Aug. 17. • OBX Says No To Offshore Drilling. • Service Companies Shift To Wind To Weather Downturn. • Survey Says...Offshore Seismic Is Safe. 

Bureau Of Reclamation 

• U.S. And Mexico Finalizing Colorado River Water-sharing Deal. • Federal Judge Clears Way For Completion Of Water Project. • Hydroelectric Plant Coming; 7.5 MW Facility Should Be Online Next Spring. 

Fish And Wildlife Service 

• New York Times: In South Texas, Threat Of Border Wall Unites Naturalists And Politicians. • U.S. News & World Report: Federal Money Targets Water Pollution From Vessel Sewage. • U.S. News & World Report: Wildlife Agency: Review Won’t Jeopardize Panther Protections. • Bradenton (FL) Herald: Sen. Bill Nelson Introduces Manatee Protection, Research Bill. • Bend (OR) Bulletin: Deschutes Conservation Planning Picks Up This Week; Public Meetings Slated For Madras, Bend This Week. • Detroit News: Saving Detroit River Is Dingell’s Legacy. • Arizona Republic: Wolf Recovery Plan Is Biased. 

National Park Service 

• International Falls (MN) Daily Journal: National Parks Plan For Solar Eclipse. • Washington Post: Park Police Briefly Detain Two Youths For Selling Bottled Water On Mall. • U.S. News & World Report: US Mint To Feature Georgia’s Largest Island On A Coin. • U.S. News & World Report: Fire Blocks Route For Dozens In Glacier National Park Chalet. • Fort Collins (CO) Coloradoan: What’s In The Worst Shape At Rocky? The Stuff You Can’t See. • U.S. News & World Report: Florida Congressman Helps Kill 5 Pythons In Everglades. • Arkansas Democrat Gazette: Hopes High 1919 Events Make Parks List. • Olympian (WA): Here’s Your Chance To Weigh In On Plans To Move, Kill Mountain Goats In Olympic National Park. • Bradenton (FL) Herald: Volunteers Help To Restore Shoreline At De Soto National Memorial. • U.S. News & World Report: America’s National Parks Offer Valuable Learning Experiences For Children. • Modesto (CA) Bee: We’re Suffocating Yosemite; It’s Time To Consider A Reservation System For All Visitors. 

Office Of Insular Affairs 

• NBC: Trump: North Korea Will “Truly Regret” Attack On Guam, Warns US Military “Locked And Loaded.” • New York Times: Trump To Launch Investigation Of China Trade Policies Amid Growing Frustration With Beijing Over North Korea. 

US Geological Survey 

• Seattle Post-Intelligencer: With 8 Threatening Volcanoes, USGS Says California Deserves Close Monitoring. 

Top National News 

• CNN: Trump, White House Under Bipartisan Criticism For Response To Charlottesville Violence. • Washington Post: Trump Condemns “Hatred, Bigotry” After Charlottesville Violence, But Fails To Blame White Nationalists. • Washington Post: Trump: US May Consider Military Option To Venezuelan Crisis. • Politico: Trump: “Unacceptable” That McConnell, Senate Republicans Failed To Pass Healthcare Reform. • Bloomberg News: White House Committed To Releasing Tax Reform Outline In September. • Politico: Politico Analysis: Trump Aides Anticipating “Really Tough” September. • USA Today: US Labor Force Participation Continues To Rise. • Politico: Pruitt Calls For “Objective” Evaluation Of National Climate Assessment Report. 

Editorial Wrap-Up 

> • New York Times. - “The Hate He Dares Not Speak Of.” - “Mr. Macron’s Homefront Flub.” - “The Real Suspense In Kenya.” • Washington Post. - “The Specter Of Civil War In Venezuela.” - “Don’t Ignore A Major Threat To The Chesapeake Bay.” • Wall Street Journal. - “The Poison Of Identity Politics.” - “Dan Loeb’s Political Offense.” - “Philadelphia’s Soda Tax Bust.”

Big Picture 

> • Headlines From Today’s Front Pages.

Washington Schedule 

> • Today’s Events In Washington.

Last Laughs 

> • Late Night Political Humor.

# DOI In The News 

## 27 National Monuments Are Under Review. Here Are Five To Watch. 

The New York Times (8/11, Friedman, Popovich, McCann) reports Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke is “reviewing 27 national monuments to determine if previous administrations exceeded their authority in setting aside craggy vistas, ancient cliff dwellings and other large tracts of land for protection.” However, “not all of the monuments are truly in the administration’s cross hairs, and Mr. Zinke has already declared some of them safe from changes.” The article highlights five monuments to watch: Grand Staircase-Escalante, Bears Ears, Organ Mountains-Desert Peaks, Katahdin Woods and Waters, and Papahanaumokuakea. 

Free Map Denotes Katahdin Woods & Waters National Monument. The AP (8/13) reports that Maine Gov. Paul LePage “isn’t allowing signs on highways to direct motorists to the Katahdin Woods & Waters National Monument,” but now there’s a map. The Friends of Katahdin Woods & Waters National Monument has “created a new topographical map that identifies key features, like the loop road.” The maps are “available for free at the monument’s visitor stations in Millinocket and Patten and at the Katahdin Area Chamber of Commerce.” 

Whose National Monument Claims Are Disingenuous? Not Ours. In an op-ed for the Arizona Republic (8/11, Gosar), Rep. Paul A. Gosar attacks Rep. Raúl Grijalva for penning an op-ed criticizing a letter signed by 17 members of Congress providing comments on the review of national monuments. Gosar takes issue with Grijalva’s “eccentric far-left environmentalism” and his apparent conflicts of interest. Gosar urges Grijalva “to drop the partisan nonsense, debate these issues’ merits and let’s work together to solve problems facing hard-working Arizonans.” Scientists Urge No Changes To Cascade-Siskiyou Monument (Guest Opinion). In an op-ed for the Oregonian (8/13, Parker, Trail, Williams), Michael Parker, Ph.D., professor and chair of the biology program at Southern Oregon University; Pepper Trail, Ph.D., a fellow of the American Ornithological Society and conservation co-chair of the Rogue Valley Audubon Society; and Jack Williams, Ph.D., the senior scientist for Trout Unlimited and a former Rogue River-Siskiyou National Forest Supervisor, urge Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke to propose no changes to the Cascade-Siskiyou National Monument. They urge Zinke “to respect the science, the grassroots collaboration and the sustained support of Senators Jeff Merkley and Ron Wyden and Gov. Kate Brown.” In an editorial, the Klamath Falls (OR) Herald And News (8/13) also supports leaving the Cascade-Siskiyou National Monument alone. 

National Monuments Support Jobs, Innovation. In an op-ed for the Bozeman (MT) Daily Chronicle (8/12, Hayes), Marne Hayes, the executive director of Business for Montana’s Outdoors, writes that “Montana may have dodged a bullet” when Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke “declared the Missouri River Breaks safe from changes, but our western neighbors are still experiencing the fear and uncertainty of the ongoing review process.” According to Hayes, “that’s why business leaders from across the West converged in Montana last week to protest changes to western national monuments still in the crosshairs of Sec. Zinke’s review.” Hayes argues that “rolling back existing protections in any of these states is just not good for business. It also sets a dangerous precedent that undermines every other existing monument, including the Upper Missouri River Breaks.” 

Fleeing To The Mountains. In his column for the New York Times (8/12, Kristof), Nicholas Kristof writes that “public lands are at risk today.” According to Kristof, “more aggressively than past administrations,” the Trump Administration is “systematically handing over America’s public lands for private exploitation in ways that will scar the land forever.” Kristof encourages readers to visit public lands to get a sense of “what is being lost.” 

Additional Coverage. Additional coverage of the review of national monuments was provided by the Las Cruces (NM) Sun-News (8/11), the Daily Caller (8/11, Pearce), the Arizona Republic (8/13, Loomis), the Las Vegas (NV) Review-Journal (8/12, Brean), and Montana Public Radio (8/10, Ripley). 

## Additional Coverage: Trump Appointee Wants More Hunting And Fishing On Federal Lands. 

Additional coverage that Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke “wants to allow more hunting and fishing on federal wildlife refuges, relaxing regulations in some places, opening up moose and turkey hunting in other places,” was provided by the Atlanta Journal-Constitution (8/11), U.S. News & World Report (8/11), and the Roseburg (OR) News-Review (8/11, Urness). 

## We Cannot Let Heinrich, VeneKlasen, Zinke And The Trumps Define Wilderness. 

In an op-ed for the Santa Fe New Mexican (8/13, Bedner), Marc Bedner, a writer for Tea Party for Animals, writes opposes increasing access to the Sabinoso Wilderness for hunting. He argues that “increased public access to previously inaccessible areas is a threat to wild areas.” Bedner writes that “it is time for the 95 percent of the public who do not hunt to protect the few remaining wild areas and the wildlife who live there.” 

## They Protest Too Much, Methinks. 

In an op-ed for the Grand Junction (CO) Daily Sentinel (8/11, Walcher), Greg Walcher, president of the Natural Resources Group, writes that “nearly every new administration’s natural resources policy is immediately blasted by the environmental industry as a complete disaster,” and “in many cases, the bombast is so over-the-top that it loses all credibility.” Walcher highlights two recent examples: Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke’s “order to revise management plans for the greater sage grouse” and the Interior Department’s “proposed repeal of the Obama BLM’s rule against fracking.” According to Walcher, “the accusation that anyone would purposely destroy nature, whatever side they’re on, reveals more about the accuser than the accused.” He concludes that “calling each other names (wilderness-rapists, eco-nazis or any other) does not enlighten the conversation; it just reveals the insincere agenda of those who protest too much.” 

# Bureau Of Indian Affairs 

## BIA, FWS Improved Dam Hazard Readiness, Watchdog Says. 

Law360 (8/11, Powell) reports that “the Bureau of Indian Affairs and the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service have successfully implemented a slew of recommended measures for boosting emergency preparedness at high-hazard dams, the U.S. Department of the Interior’s Office of Inspector General said Thursday.” 

## Drilling Halted At Van Hook Oil Well Site. 

The Bismarck (ND) Tribune (8/11, Holdman) reports that “drilling of a series of oil wells near the Van Hook Resort boat ramp has been stayed by the federal government at the request of the Three Affiliated Tribes.” The tribe appealed the federal permitting of the well site, known as the Torpedo pad, “because it violates tribal setback requirements from the lake, said Tribal Chairman Mark Fox.” The Interior Board of Land Appeals “stayed the project in response to the tribe’s appeal Thursday.” 

## Activists Challenge Federal Officials Over Proposed Elk Grove Casino. 

The Elk Grove (CA) Citizen (8/11, Armstrong) reports that a casino watchdog group and “three Elk Grove residents are challenging the federal government’s decision to place land into trust for the proposed, $400 million Wilton Rancheria casino-resort in Elk Grove.” According to the article, “a record of decision approving the taking of 35.9 acres of land by Highway 99 and Kammerer Road into a federal trust for the tribe’s benefit was issued on Jan. 19.” However, “the plaintiffs seek to have that decision reversed, and have the land returned to the authority of the city of Elk Grove and the state.” 

## Washington’s Wild Grouse Chase. 

The Wall Street Journal (8/11) editorializes that regulatory relief is the Trump Administration’s biggest economic policy achievement so far and cites as a recent example of this the greater sage grouse. The Journal says the Interior Department is considering revising 15 Federal land-use plans to better protect the sage grouse, including reducing some restrictions that can benefit conservation efforts, and lauds collaborative models in the Agriculture Department, which runs a Sage Grouse Initiative. The editorial acknowledges that the Interior Department deserves credit for seeking ways to preserve the sage grouse’s habitat while still spurring economic development. Additional coverage of changes to sage-grouse management plans was provided by the Idaho Mountain Express (8/11, Moore). 

## Tribe Appeal Pushed Back. 

The Falmouth (MA) Enterprise (8/11, Houghton) reports that “a US Court of Appeals First Circuit judge agreed this week to extend the opening of the Mashpee Wampanoag Tribe’s pending appeal regarding its land in trust application.” Appellate judge O. Rogeriee Thompson “seeing no objections, agreed on Tuesday, August 8, to extend a deadline to November for the tribe to submit a status report.” 

## Cobell Family Welcomes Presidential Medal Of Freedom To Browning. 

KPAX-TV Missoula, MT (8/11, Van Middendorp) reports that “former President Barack Obama awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom to Elouise Cobell in 2016, four years after her passing in 2011.” Welcoming the medal to Browning earlier this week, Cobell’s sister Joy Ketah said, “this is home for us, for all of us, and y’know it’s good to have it back with the Blackfeet people first.” Bureau Of Indian Education 

## Piece By Piece: New Bug-O-Nay-Ge-Shig School Comes Together In Sections. 

The Bemidji (MN) Pioneer (8/13, Bowen) reports that “workers have been busy putting together a new, 45,000 square-foot Bug-O-Nay-Ge-Shig junior and senior high school using a new-to-the-area method that school and project leaders say is faster and cheaper than a more traditional build.” Mary Trapp, Bug-O-Nay-Ge-Shig’s superintendent, said that the Bureau of Indian Education and “school leaders drew up a $20 million construction plan several years ago that never came to fruition.” According to a Department of the Interior spokesperson, “the design that’s being realized now is about $14.5 million.” The piece also appears at the Park Rapids (MN) Enterprise (8/13, Bowen). 

# Bureau Of Land Management 

## US Cattle Grazing Plan For Idaho National Monument Approved. 

The U.S. News & World Report (8/11, Ridler) reports that “cattle grazing will continue” at Craters of the Moon National Monument and Preserve “following a challenge by an environmental group, federal officials announced this week.” The U.S. Bureau of Land Management said in a statement Wednesday said grazing on BLM-administered portions of the monument “not covered by lava flows will stay at about 99 percent of current levels.” The bureau said in a written statement, “The decision demonstrates the Trump Administration’s effort to support traditional uses such as grazing on public lands while providing opportunities for recreation and promoting conservation.” 

## BLM To Remove Horses Southeast Of Rangely. 

The Grand Junction (CO) Daily Sentinel (8/12, Webb) reports that the Bureau of Land Management has “approved a plan to remove up to 100 wild horses from private and other land southeast of Rangely this fall, a decision made more controversial due to activists’ concerns that animals could end up being euthanized.” The bureau “said Friday it plans to use a helicopter operation to round up horses that have strayed outside the designated Piceance-East Douglas Herd Management Area.” The decision, “which is subject to a 30-day appeal period, also will allow future gathers to remove other horses outside the management area.” Additional coverage was provided by the Craig (CO) Daily Press (8/11). 

## Human Activity — Racing Included — Is Shrinking The Bonneville Salt Flats, U. 

Researcher Says. The Salt Lake (UT) Tribune (8/12, Penrod) reports that “two years of research on unique ecosystem indicate speed racing, mining, government management and climate change may all be factors in depletion of salt crust” of the Bonneville Salt Flats. University of Utah geologist Brenda Bowen’s “research still is incomplete — her first paper is expected out this fall, and a final report isn’t due until 2018.” However, “the more data Bowen collects, she said, the more she’s convinced human activity is changing the landscape.” Meanwhile, Louise Noeth, a spokeswoman for the Save the Salt Coalition, “believes mismanagement by the Bureau of Land Management is at least partly responsible for the salt flats’ condition.” Hannah Cowan, a spokeswoman for the BLM, “said the agency stands by its decisions on managing the Bonneville Salt Flats.” 

# Bureau Of Ocean Energy Management 

## Offshore Air Gun Blasts Spark Debate. 

The Thibodaux (LA) Daily Comet (8/12, Magill) reports that “environmentalists and oil industry representatives are sparring over a new federal report that says high-powered air gun blasts used to search for oil in the Gulf of Mexico can harm whales and other sea creatures.” The Bureau of Ocean Energy Management “issued the preliminary environmental impact statement about two weeks ago as part of a settlement in a lawsuit filed by environmental groups.” Environmentalists point to “the report as proof the oil companies’ seismic testing harms marine life.” On the other hand, “oil industry representatives counter the practice is safe and that environmentalists have exaggerated the federal report’s findings.” 

## Researchers Eye Marine Mammals In Offshore Surveys. 

The Arctic (AK) Sounder (8/11, Oliver) reports that “bowhead whales and other marine mammals are the focus of a four-month survey project this summer in Arctic waters.” According to the article, “led jointly by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, the National Marine Fisheries Service, the Alaska Fisheries Science Center, the Department of Interior and the Marine Mammal Laboratory, the Department of Commerce, and the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management, this summer’s research is part of a series of years-long studies of the region’s biodiversity.” The project, Aerial Surveys of Arctic Marine Mammals, “aims to gather data about the populations of these animals in the Chukchi and Beaufort Seas, specifically in areas where there is potential for future oil and gas development.” 

## URI/BOEM Visit Block Island | Block Island Times. 

The Block Island (RI) Times (8/12, Shuman) reports that a research study is “being conducted examining the effects of the Block Island Wind Farm on recreation and tourism in the Ocean State.” Researchers were contracted by the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management “to conduct the study, which is titled ‘Identifying Indicators of Offshore Wind Benefits.’” BOEM will “use indicators gleaned from the research in National Environmental Policy Act analyses to evaluate the effects of proposed offshore wind energy facility development.” 

## Comment Period On Seismic Testing Leases Near Grand Strand Closing Aug. 17. 

The Myrtle Beach (SC) Online (8/11, Johnson) reports that “environmentalists say the best way to stop oil drilling off the South Carolina coast is for Gov. Henry McMaster to file a statement as the federal government solicits comments.” However, “McMaster, who has said before that he opposes offshore drilling, hasn’t sent in a comment yet — and the window closes Aug. 17.” According to the article, “the federal government relies heavily on the comments of governors as it reviews oil exploration. McMaster has previously said publicly that he is not in favor of oil drilling off the South Carolina coast, but has not yet submitted a comment to BOEM.” 

## OBX Says No To Offshore Drilling. 

Additional coverage that a hearing was held last Thursday in Manteo “to gather public comments on a new five-year plan to explore for oil and gas in the Atlantic” was provided by the Hampton Roads (VA) Virginian-Pilot (8/11, Hampton) and the Outer Banks (NC) Voice (8/11, Lay). 

## Service Companies Shift To Wind To Weather Downturn. 

Offshore Magazine (8/11, Livingston) reports “many industry analysts do not expect offshore exploration activities” to grow “until sometime in 2018 at the earliest.” Offshore adds that installed assets are expected to grow “45% less than 2014 levels.” Meanwhile, “offshore services contractors are quickly filling their backlogs with wind-related projects.” 

## Survey Says...Offshore Seismic Is Safe. 

In a piece for Forbes (8/11, Bradley), Robert Bradley Jr. dismisses fears that seismic surveying in the Atlantic Ocean will negatively impact marine life. He argues that “Atlantic drilling would create economic benefits at virtually no environmental cost.” Bradley concludes that “environmental groups who oppose seismic surveying are really fighting against good paying jobs – gainful employment that does not depend on government but free consumer choice.” 

# Bureau Of Reclamation 

## U.S. And Mexico Finalizing Colorado River Water-sharing Deal. 

USA Today (8/12, James) reports that U.S. and Mexican officials are “finalizing a water-sharing deal for the Colorado River, and a newly released summary of the accord’s key points shows negotiators have agreed on a cooperative approach geared toward boosting reservoir levels and trying to stave off a severe shortage.” The document, “which federal officials have circulated among water agencies, outlines a series of joint measures that build on the current 5-year agreement, which expires at the end of this year.” The article says that “the new accord – titled Minute No. 323 to the 1944 Mexican Water Treaty – is expected to be signed sometime this fall, perhaps as early as September, and would remain in effect through 2026.” 

## Federal Judge Clears Way For Completion Of Water Project. 

The AP (8/11, Nicholson) reports that “a federal judge has cleared the way for completion of a $244 million project to bring Missouri River water to residents of northwestern North Dakota, though the state of Missouri and the Canadian province of Manitoba can appeal.” U.S. District Judge Rosemary Collyer held Thursday “that the Northwest Area Water Supply project complies with federal environmental law.” Collyer wrote, “This court’s work is done because the Bureau of Reclamation has finally done its work.” Also reporting are Reuters (8/11, Aubin), the Bismarck (ND) Tribune (8/11), and Law360 (8/11, Rodriguez). 

## Hydroelectric Plant Coming; 7.5 MW Facility Should Be Online Next Spring. 

The Pueblo (CO) Chieftain (8/11, Pompia) reports that “in what’s being hailed as an historic moment for the Southeastern Colorado Water Conservancy District, construction of a hydroelectric generation plant at Pueblo Dam will begin in September.” The project is “the result of an agreement, signed Friday, between the district and the U.S. Bureau of Reclamation.” 

# Fish And Wildlife Service 

## In South Texas, Threat Of Border Wall Unites Naturalists And Politicians. 

The New York Times (8/13, Hardy) reports that the specter of a border wall “has loomed over the Rio Grande Valley since 2006, when President George W. Bush signed the Secure Fence Act authorizing 700 miles of fencing along certain stretches of the southern border.” But Presidents Trump’s election “has spurred renewed concern about the economic and environmental consequences of such a wall.” Current plans have the wall running “through countless pieces of private property and bisect[ing] several major wildlife refuges.” Due to the “anticipated resistance from private landowners, the first sections of the border wall most likely will be built on federal land.” Additional coverage of the border wall was provided by USA Today (8/12, Crow). 

## Federal Money Targets Water Pollution From Vessel Sewage. 

The AP (8/13) reports that “federal grants totaling $2.5 million has been awarded to prevent sewage pollution in Washington state waters.” The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service grants will be “used to add more locations where recreational boaters and other vessels can pump out their vessel sewage.” According to the article, “nearly $1.5 million will go to projects on the coast, while $1 million will be used for inland waters.” 

## Wildlife Agency: Review Won’t Jeopardize Panther Protections. The AP (8/13) reports that “wildlife officials say a federal review of the Florida panther’s endangered species status will not jeopardize protections for the big cats.” Panther biologist David Shindle said that the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service’s “review aims to gather the best available data on panther biology, habitat and conservation plans, as well as threats to their survival.” According to Shindle, “any change to the panther’s status would require separate action from the wildlife service.” 

## Sen. Bill Nelson Introduces Manatee Protection, Research Bill. 

The Bradenton (FL) Herald (8/12, Nealeigh) reports that “an email from Florida Democratic Sen. Bill Nelson’s campaign team signed by Nelson mourning the loss of Snooty the manatee also announced a new bill introduced by the senator.” On Aug. 3, Nelson introduced a bill “to authorize research and recovery activities to provide for the protection, conservation, and recovery of the Florida manatee, and for other purposes.” An email from Nelson for U.S. Senate said, “The outpouring of support that we’ve seen in the wake of Snooty’s tragic death shows just how beloved these gentle giants are. Yet despite the constant threats these iconic creatures continue to face throughout our state, the federal government has removed them from the endangered species list. Florida’s manatees are a special part of our state’s heritage, and I believe we should continue to protect them.” 

## Deschutes Conservation Planning Picks Up This Week; Public Meetings Slated For Madras, Bend This Week. 

The Bend (OR) Bulletin (8/13, Hamway) reports that “the next phase of the nearly decadelong process of creating a habitat conservation plan for the Deschutes River Basin will begin in Bend and Madras on Monday.” The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service will be “hosting a total of four meetings — two in Bend, two in Madras — where members of the public can learn about the process of creating a long-term plan that will meet the needs of farmers and other water users, while also ensuring that the Oregon spotted frog and other threatened species living in the basin will be protected in the future.” 

## Saving Detroit River Is Dingell’s Legacy. 

In a piece for the Detroit News (8/12, Finley), editorial page editor Nolan Finley writes that when John Dingell “weighs the impact of his life’s work, he doesn’t look to the Congressional Record, but to an undisturbed stretch of the Detroit River known as the Humbug Marsh,” which is now part of the Detroit River International Wildlife Refuge. Dingell, “who retired in 2015, is an avid outdoorsman who dreamed of seeing the Detroit River as again a haven for hunters and fishermen.” The refuge is planning “to open a visitor’s center in Humbug, and by spring hopes to complete a fishing pier that will stretch into the river and allow those without boats a chance at landing one of the trophy walleye or sturgeon that have returned to make the Detroit River a prime fishing venue.” 

## Wolf Recovery Plan Is Biased. 

In an editorial, the Arizona Republic (8/11) criticizes the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service’s draft wolf recovery plan. The paper argues that “states shouldn’t have veto power” over wolf releases, and that “without wolf releases, the recovery effort is doomed.” The paper asserts that “final language should make it clear that the states can offer input, but do not have veto power over releases.” 

# National Park Service 

## National Parks Plan For Solar Eclipse. 

The International Falls (MN) Daily Journal (8/12) reports that “America’s national parks will be premiere viewing sites for one of nature’s amazing natural phenomena, as a total solar eclipse crosses the continental United States on Aug. 21.” According to the article, “there are 21 parks and seven trails of the National Park System that are within the 60-to 70-mile-wide total eclipse pathway.” Also, “several national parks will stream live video during the eclipse.” Also covering the eclipse are MarketWatch (8/14), Newsday (NY) (8/11, Whitehouse), the Charleston (SC) Moultrie News (8/13), and the Times of Northwest Indiana (8/13). 

## Park Police Briefly Detain Two Youths For Selling Bottled Water On Mall. 

The Washington Post (8/11, Williams, Hermann) reports that “U.S. Park Police officers handcuffed a teenager and detained a second youth for attempting to sell bottles of water on the Mall this week, police officials acknowledged Friday.” The incident occurred “about 3 p.m. Tuesday near the intersection of Ninth Street and Constitution Avenue NW when a uniformed Park Police officer tried ‘to make contact with multiple individuals who were observed illegally selling water on the National Mall,’ according to a statement released by the Park Police.” The article notes that “Park Police were roundly criticized by city leaders earlier this summer after plainclothes officers handcuffed and detained two 17-year-olds and a 16-year-old for the same violation June 22.” On Friday, Park Police Chief Robert MacLean said in a statement, “In this incident, officers responded with a measured approach to ensure the safety of everyone involved. We hold ourselves to the highest standards of professionalism and strive to ensure that any contact with the public is tactful and considerate.” 

## US Mint To Feature Georgia’s Largest Island On A Coin. 

The AP (8/13) reports that “the federal government plans to pay tribute to Georgia’s largest barrier island by issuing a special coin.” The National Park Service “says 25-cent coins with a design recognizing Cumberland Island will be produced by the U.S. Mint next year.” The coin’s design “features a snowy egret perched on a branch with a salt marsh in the background.” It’s scheduled to be released in August 2018. 

## Fire Blocks Route For Dozens In Glacier National Park Chalet. 

The AP (8/12, Volz) reports that “a wildfire has cut off the return route for dozens of people staying in a Glacier National Park backcountry chalet, leaving them the choice of remaining until rangers tell them it’s safe or hiking out along a longer and more difficult trail, park officials said Friday.” Park rangers also “planned to lead out 39 other hikers who were staying in backcountry campsites near fires that broke out after a passing lightning storm on Thursday, Glacier spokeswoman Lauren Alley said.” Additional coverage of the fire danger at the park was provided by the Great Falls (MT) Tribune (8/11, Puckett) and the Missoulian (MT) (8/11, Backus). 

## What’s In The Worst Shape At Rocky? The Stuff You Can’t See. 

The Fort Collins (CO) Coloradoan (8/11, Marmaduke) reports that Rocky Mountain National Park will “celebrate its birthday next month with 102 candles and more than $75 million in deferred maintenance.” According to the article, “it’s the heftiest repairs backlog the park has seen in seven years, and a recent funding award from the Department of the Interior won’t do much to change that.” In the face of “a growing maintenance to-do list and an uncertain funding future, park officials say they’ll spend the next several years focusing on the nuts and bolts: waterlines and septic systems.” 

## Florida Congressman Helps Kill 5 Pythons In Everglades. 

The U.S. News & World Report (8/12) reports that Rep. Francis Rooney “helped catch and kill five invasive Burmese pythons during a nighttime hunt in the Everglades.” Rooney “joined hunters hired by the South Florida Water Management District in the wetlands Thursday night.” He “said it’s important for the state to continue funding the hunting program because pythons pose a threat to Everglades restoration efforts.” Rooney “also said he’d like the U.S. Department of Interior to allow python hunting within Everglades National Park as well.” Hopes High 1919 Events Make Parks List. 

The Arkansas Democrat Gazette (8/13, Mulder) reports on dual efforts to “erect a memorial to all those killed” in the Elaine Massacre of 1919 and to save the Centennial Baptist Church. Committees have been formed “dedicated to each task: the Elaine Massacre Memorial Committee, which has gained nonprofit status, and the Centennial Church Foundation, which is seeking such status.” However, “only the Centennial Church Foundation has made park service overtures to congressional members.” 

## Here’s Your Chance To Weigh In On Plans To Move, Kill Mountain Goats In Olympic National Park. 

The Olympian (WA) (8/11, Spegman) reports that “officials will discuss plans to manage the growing number of mountain goats in Olympic National Park at a meeting in Olympia next week.” Meetings also are planned “for next week in Everett, Port Angeles and Seattle.” 

## Volunteers Help To Restore Shoreline At De Soto National Memorial. 

The Bradenton (FL) Herald (8/12, De Leon) reports that “dozens of volunteers joined the National Park Service and the University of Central Florida on Saturday in a project to help restore the living shoreline along De Soto National Memorial that has been eroded by tropical storms and boat wakes.” They “spent several hours placing bags of oyster shells, previously filled by volunteers, along the shore at different areas in the park. Later, young red and black mangroves, grown by volunteers, were planted behind them.” 

## America’s National Parks Offer Valuable Learning Experiences For Children. 

In an op-ed for U.S. News & World Report (8/11, Mead), Sara Mead, a partner with Bellwether Education Partners, writes that national parks “provide abundant learning opportunities for both children and adults.” According to Mead, “by illustrating both the great moments and heroic figures and the less admirable parts of our nation’s history, these parks and historic sites can help both adults and children to know and value our history and to understand that the America we have today is not a foregone conclusion to be taken for granted, but a hard-fought patrimony that we as citizens have the opportunity and obligation to continue working to maintain and improve.” She adds that “at a time when many question the value of government, National Parks also illustrate what is possible when Americans, both in government and outside of it, work together to achieve a goal that is bigger than individual interest.” Mead calls for improving access to these “types of learning experiences” for “disadvantaged children.” 

## We’re Suffocating Yosemite; It’s Time To Consider A Reservation System For All Visitors. 

In an op-ed for the Modesto (CA) Bee (8/12, Buckley), John Buckley, executive director Central Sierra Environmental Resource Center, argues that Yosemite National Park must confront its overcrowding issue. He argues that “allowing excessive vehicle congestion conflicts with park service mandates to ensure visitors can have a positive experience.” According to Buckley, “the challenge is to identify the best steps to take – not just to improve the deteriorating visitor experience, but more important, to truly protect the ecological health of Yosemite Valley, its Wild and Scenic River corridor, and other stressed resources.” He concludes that “visitors can support seasonal limits on vehicles if they recognize that with a reservation they can avoid traffic jams and actually stop, park and savor the precious natural cathedral of Yosemite Valley.” 

# Office Of Insular Affairs 

## Trump: North Korea Will “Truly Regret” Attack On Guam, Warns US Military “Locked And Loaded.” 

President Trump met on Friday with Secretary of State Tillerson, Ambassador Haley, and National Security Adviser McMaster and in a news conference, the President warned North Korean leader Kim Jong-un that he would “truly regret” any attack on US territories and allies, hours after Trump tweeted, “Military solutions are now fully in place, locked and loaded, should North Korea act unwisely. Hopefully Kim Jong Un will find another path!” The President’s remarks received saturation coverage on the cable and network newscasts, which all led with the story and devoted more than 13 and a half minutes combined, while print and online reporting was also extensive. Analyses and commentary were primarily negative of Trump’s continued aggressive rhetoric toward North Korea and portrayed his latest comments as an troubling escalation of the crisis. In the lead NBC Nightly News (8/11, lead story, 3:15, Holt) segment, White House correspondent Kristen Welker reported that “flanked by his secretary of state, UN ambassador, and national security advisor,” Trump “turn[ed] up the heat on North Korea for a third time this week.” Bret Baier of Fox News’ Special Report (8/11, 6:09 p.m. EDT, Baier) similarly said at the joint news conference, Trump took “a number of questions” on several issues, including “the biggest issue at hand this moment,” the threat from North Korea. In its lead segment, Fox News’ Special Report (8/11, 6:00 p.m. EDT, Baier) broadcast the President, who said his meeting with Tillerson, McMaster, and Haley was “very good,” and that they “talked about North Korea as you can imagine. We are very much in agreement, we have been right from the beginning. This is something we have to stop. We all feel that very strongly.” The Wall Street Journal (8/11, A1, Kesling, Radnofsky) reports on its front page that the President said the US is looking “very carefully” at military options and asserted, “I hope that [Kim is] going to fully understand the gravity of what I said. And what I said is what I mean.” CNN’s Situation Room (8/11, 6:07 p.m. EDT, Blitzer) broadcast Trump saying that the US is considering further, “very strong” economic sanctions against North Korea. When asked about North Korean state media outlets’ assertions that the US is easily defeated, Fox News’ Special Report (8/11, 6:06 p.m. EDT, Baier) broadcast Trump asserting, “Let me hear Kim Jong-un say it.” Asked whether his Administration is open to regime change in North Korea or Venezuela, Trump declined to comment because “they are very different places,” but he stressed his support for peace and safety, as well as “having to get very tough if we have to protect the American people and also to protect our allies.” To the AP (8/11, Lemire, Talmadge), Trump “all but drew a red line that would trigger swift U.S. action” when the President warned if Kim “utters one threat in the form of an overt threat – which by the way he has been uttering for years and his family has been uttering for years – or he does anything with respect to Guam or anyplace else that’s an American territory or an American ally, he will truly regret it and he will regret it fast.” Reuters (8/11, Oliphant, Kim) reports that when asked about his tweet, Trump said, “Those words are very, very easy to understand.” According to Reuters, “The term ‘locked and loaded,’ popularized in the 1949 war film “Sands of Iwo Jima” starring American actor John Wayne, refers to preparations for shooting a gun.” Meanwhile, CNN’s Situation Room (8/11, 5:56 p.m. EDT, Blitzer) broadcast the President saying that the US has “been working very closely with China and with other countries” on the matter, and that he planned to discuss the issue with Chinese President Xi Jinping later Friday night. Trump added that “as far as reassurance,” the South Korean peoples “probably feel as reassured as they can feel. Certainly they feel more reassured with me than with other presidents from the past because nobody’s really done the job they’re supposed to be doing, and that’s why we’re at this horrible situation right now.” Trump added that he also “think[s] Japan is very happy with the job we’re doing.” Although the President said he has not yet spoken with the governor of Guam, he added, “I feel they will be very safe. Believe me, they will be very safe. And if anything happens to Guam, there’s going to be big, big trouble in North Korea.” The Washington Times (8/11, Boyer) reports Trump also “dismissed criticism that his rhetoric is raising the danger level of a potential confrontation.” He said, “My critics are only saying that because it’s me.” He added, “We have tens of millions of people in this country that are so happy with what I am saying, because they say finally we have a president that’s sticking up for our nation and frankly, sticking up for our friends and our allies. And this man [Mr. Kim] will not get away with what he is doing, believe me.” According to a front-page New York Times (8/11, A1, Baker) article, Trump “continued to beat war drums on Friday against North Korea,” but despite his latest comments, “there were no indications of imminent action in either part of the world.” The Times reports that “for all the bellicose language emerging from the president’s golf club in Bedminster, N.J., the United States military was taking no visible steps to prepare for a strike.” The Times states that “the juxtaposition between the heated words and the lack of apparent preparations suggested that Mr. Trump may still be counting on a resolution to the standoff with North Korea as it works to develop a nuclear arsenal capable of reaching the United States.” In a front-page article, the Washington Post (8/11, A1, Lamothe) similarly reports “the U.S. military does not appear to be moving toward a wartime footing with North Korea despite President Trump’s repeated threats this week of military action against Pyongyang, with few if any additional military forces moving into the region and the Pentagon chief emphasizing diplomacy over bloodshed.” According to the Post, “Among the signals that a major U.S. operation is not imminent is a trip just underway by Marine Gen. Joseph F. Dunford Jr., the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and a small cadre of his staff. He arrived Friday in Hawaii with plans to visit Japan, South Korea and China, all of which would be in peril if a war between North Korea and the United States explodes.” The Post adds that “The aircraft carrier USS Ronald Reagan and its accompanying flotilla of destroyers and guided-missile cruisers also returned to port Wednesday in Yokosuka, Japan, the Navy announced.” USA Today (8/11, Wolf) reports that “as he has done all week, the president appeared more eager to herald U.S. military readiness,” but senior White House correspondent Jim Acosta led CNN’s Situation Room (8/11, 5:01 p.m. EDT, Blitzer) in reporting that although Trump “insists his team is on the same page,” Defense Secretary Mattis on Thursday sought to “tone down the Administration’s rhetoric emphasizing diplomacy.” In the lead CBS Evening News (8/11, lead story, 2:35, Mason) segment, chief White House correspondent Major Garrett said Tillerson and Haley sought “to reassure allies despite the President’s tough talk,” even as Mattis stated, “the American effort is diplomatically led, it has diplomatic traction, it is gaining diplomatic results. And I want to stay right there right now.” Mattis conceded his “responsibility is to have military options should they be needed,” but The Hill (8/11, Greenwood) reports Mattis recognized, “The tragedy of war is well enough known. It does not need another characterization beyond the fact that it would be catastrophic.” While CNN’s Situation Room (8/11, 5:33 p.m. EDT, Blitzer) chief national security correspondent Jim Sciutto said Mattis “declined to give details on what military options he’s given the president,” in broadcast footage, Mattis asserted, “I don’t tell the enemy in advance what I’m going to do. Our readiness – we are ready.” Bloomberg News (8/11, Biggs, Sink) reports “a White House national security official....said the Pentagon has contingency plans for any crisis that are updated constantly to provide the president with options and that there was nothing new about the U.S. readiness stance.” Former Deputy Assistant Secretary and retired US Marine fighter pilot Col. Stephen Ganyard told the lead ABC World News Tonight (8/11, lead story, 3:20, Vega) segment “the US military has been planning for North Korean aggression for 60 years. They’re ready and they’re not going to get caught off guard.” The Washington Post (8/11, Wagner, DeYoung, Johnson) reports that “as Trump continued his bellicose rhetoric Friday – a tactic criticized by some U.S. leaders and allies – North Korea kept up its verbal salvos as well.” North Korea’s state-run newspaper ran a commentary claiming that the “U.S. military warmongers are running amok” and warned “the U.S. and its vassal forces will dearly pay for the harshest sanctions and pressure and reckless military provocations.” According to CNN’s Situation Room ’s (8/11, 6:18 p.m. EDT, Blitzer) Will Ripley, Trump’s demand for an answer from Kim has thus far gone unanswered, and a recent North Korean statement omitted any mention of its “recent rhetoric” on Guam or any “direct response to President Trump like earlier this week. We haven’t seen that kind of response from North Korea today. Also there are no indications, no imminent indications of a North Korean missile launch according to US intelligence. So at this point, North Korea is quiet. And what does that mean? We have to, of course, watch their words, but we also have to watch very closely what their actions are going to be.” Correspondent Will Ripley said as of Friday evening, CNN’s Situation Room (8/11, 5:06 p.m. EDT, Blitzer) “did see statements from North Korea threatening to make the United States – the mainland – a stage for nuclear war, saying that President Trump is pushing the Korean Peninsula to the brink of nuclear war.” Noticeably, Ripley said “what we did not hear today was any further detail about [North Korea’s] supposed plan to simultaneously launch four intermediate range ballistic missiles to Japan, within 20 miles of Guam,” which is “home to key US military assets and more than 160,000 American citizens. And this could be because North Korea has given this plan to Kim Jong-un, as they said he would, for his review – or it could be they’re dialing back the rhetoric a bit.” CNN’s Situation Room (8/11, 5:49 p.m. EDT, Blitzer) correspondent Brian Todd reported “there certainly is” evidence from US intelligence officials and outside analysts suggesting Kim Jong-un’s family has a history of aggression, and they are suggesting Trump should not “push this dangerous man into a corner.” Furthermore, Todd said, “analysts say it is possible North Korea’s elites may get nervous and move against Kim if he keeps taking his country from one crisis to another. But one expert points out Kim keeps his elites and generals under such close surveillance, it’s tough for them to gather forces against him.” Todd added that Kim “has two sisters,” and many “observers believe those are possibly the only people around him who he can really trust.” 

Trump Retweets USPACOM Pledging USAF Bombers On Guam “Stand Ready” To Support USFK. Politico (8/11, Nelson) reports that Trump on Friday “retweeted a post from U.S. Pacific Command that featured images of U.S. military aircraft and a message that ‘#USAF B-1B Lancer #bombers on Guam stand ready to fulfill USFK’s #FightTonight mission if called upon to do so.’” Politico notes “USAF is an abbreviation for the U.S. Air Force and USFK stands for U.S. Forces Korea.” The Washington Post (8/11, Lamothe) reports the President’s “message, including the dramatic hashtag, may sound ominous to the uninitiated. But combined with comments Thursday from Defense Secretary Jim Mattis and decades of history between North Korea and the United States, it suggests that while the present situation between Pyongyang and Washington is quite serious, Pacific Command is more signaling its readiness to fight if need be than spoiling for a battle within days.” The CBS Evening News (8/11, story 3, 1:20, Mason) noted “American B-1 bombers flew from Guam to the Korean Peninsula last month in a show of force after the North’s last ICBM launch.” Meanwhile, the CBS Evening News (8/11, story 2, 2:05, Mason) national security correspondent David Martin also reported, “When it comes to North Korea, the US military has been ‘locked and loaded’ for years. The motto of the 28,000 American troops in South Korea, as well as long-range bombers based 2,000 miles away on Guam, is ‘fight tonight,’ meaning be ready for an attack that could come with little or no warning.” Martin added US officials say that if North Korea “fired a missile at the American homeland or a US military base overseas, the Pentagon would first try to shoot it down, and second, retaliate with an attack of its own, perhaps with a cyber weapon. In the unlikely event the North used a nuclear weapon, the US would mount a much more devastating attack.” A New York Times (8/11, Doyle) analysis also considers how the US could intercept a ballistic missile bound for Guam or the continental US. 

Administration “Quietly” Conducting Back Channel Negotiation With North Korea. 

According to the AP (8/11, Pennington), “the Trump administration has been quietly engaged in back channel diplomacy with North Korea for several months, addressing Americans imprisoned in the communist country and deteriorating relations between the long-time foes.” The AP reports “people familiar with the contacts say the interactions have done nothing thus far to quell tensions over North Korea’s nuclear weapons and missile advances, which are now fueling fears of military confrontation. But they say the behind-the-scenes discussions could still be a foundation for more serious negotiation.” The AP adds that US officials say “the diplomatic contacts are occurring regularly between Joseph Yun, the U.S. envoy for North Korea policy, and Pak Song Il, a senior North Korean diplomat at the country’s U.N. mission.” However, Trump told reporters on Friday, “We don’t want to talk about progress, we don’t want to talk about back channels” and the State Department and White House both “declined to comment on Yun’s diplomacy.” Correspondent Rich Edson of Fox News’ Special Report (8/11, 6:11 p.m. EDT, Baier) noted Tillerson just returned from a diplomatic trip to Asia, and is “focused on North Korea while the president was conducting his own diplomacy from home.” Steve Hayes of the Weekly Standard told Fox News’ Special Report (8/11, 6:34 p.m. EDT, Baier) that Trump “brings a couple advantages to the debate, a global debate of North Korea. He is not going to settle for the failed diplomacy on North Korea that we’ve seen from three successive Administrations” in “the past 25 plus years.” Hayes added that “there is a believably to the threats.” Byron York of the Washington Examiner said Trump and Tillerson have seemingly adopted a “good cop, bad cop thing” over “the last several days,” which is “consistent with stressing diplomatic solutions.” Chief foreign affairs correspondent Andrea Mitchell of NBC Nightly News (8/11, story 3, 2:20, Holt) similarly stated, “The secretary of state has been playing good cop to the President’s bad cop when it comes to talks.” In video footage, Tillerson confirmed, “We have other means of communication open to them, to certainly hear from them if they have a desire to want to talk.” However, while The Hill (8/11, Fabian) acknowledges that “Tillerson has expressed openness to negotiations with Pyongyang if the authoritarian regime ceases ballistic missile tests,” he “made enemies within the administration over his approach.” The Hill highlights that Sebastian Gorka, a deputy assistant to the President, on Thursday “knocked Tillerson for offering a softer message than Trump on North Korea” as “nonsensical.” 

Pentagon: US-South Korea To Stage Annual Military Exercise Later This Month. 

Reuters (8/11, Ali) reports a Pentagon spokesman announced Friday that the annual joint US-South Korean military exercise, called Ulchi-Freedom Guardian, “is expected to go ahead as originally scheduled and will start on Aug. 21.” 

Guam Prepares Ahead Of Possible North Korean Attack. NBC Nightly News (8/11, story 2, 2:45, Holt) reported the “ramped-up rhetoric is being closely followed in Guam, the US territory that sits in striking distance of North Korea. Tonight, the 160,000 US citizens on the island have been given some grim warnings on what to do should the worst-case scenario occur, after North Korea threatened to land missiles just off Guam’s coast.” Correspondent Miguel Almaguer said that as tourists enjoy “the sun-drenched beaches,” Homeland Security officials are issuing “stark warnings – what to do if North Korea carries out its threat to lob four ballistic missiles in this direction. In the event of a missile attack, ‘do not look at the flash or fireball – it can blind you,’ ‘take cover under a concrete structure or below ground,’ ‘lie flat on the ground and cover your head – it could take 30 seconds or more for blast wave to hit,’ and if caught outside, ‘shower with lots of soap and shampoo to help remove radioactive contamination.’” The AP (8/11, Kelleher) and Reuters (8/11, Chiacu) report Guam’s Office of Civil Defense on Friday began distributing the fact sheets titled “Preparing for an Imminent Missile Threat.” ABC World News Tonight ’s (8/11, story 2, 1:15, Vega) Jim Avela explained, “North Korea is four hours away by plane from here, but just 14 minutes by ballistic missile. Today on the island known as the ‘tip of the spear,’ families fully aware they are in the middle of two nuclear nations.” He added that “Guam is always a target because of the military bases here, but this time, it’s different because it’s a very specific threat with a specific date in mid-August. And you can see from the local paper, Guam is taking this threat seriously.” Guam Gov. Eddie Baza Calvo said, “We’re staying calm, living our lives, but yeah, at the same time, making preparations.” The Wall Street Journal (8/11, Craymer) reports Calvo also said Guam is in “typhoon alley,” so the island’s residents are used to preparing for threats. He added, “Our buildings standards are the best in the U.S. – they’re built out of concrete and reinforced steel.” Calvo acknowledged, “The worst-case scenario for my community is obviously a missile attack, particularly if they had a nuclear payload,” but he asserted, “I think that would be catastrophic not only for Guam but for East Asia.” “Amid fears over potential warfare,” the AP (8/11, Bordallo, Vejpongsa) “asked several Guam residents what they want to know about the situation and what they want the people of North Korea and the United States to know about Guam,” and although the New York Times (8/11, Ives) reports “some Guam residents told reporters that they worried what might happen if North Korea’s leader, Kim Jong-un, were actually to follow through” on his threat, scientists in Guam “have at least one other major threat in mind: climate change.” The Times adds that “like other Pacific islands, Guam may be affected in the coming decades as climate change prompts shifts in weather, temperature and oceanic acidity, according to the Environmental Protection Agency.” In interviews with the Times, the “experts said...that the primary consequences may include people suffering heat stress because of an increase in heat waves, a rise in the intensity of tropical storms, and the damage or destruction of Guam’s exceptionally biodiverse coral reefs.” Meanwhile, Washington Post (8/11, Park) social media editor Gene Park, a Guamanian, laments that “lots of people are asking ‘What is Guam?,’” but “nobody is asking ‘Who is Guam?’” Park contends “the media has been sketching a caricature of sorts describing the people of Guam” this week because “they are powerless. Their voices are heard only whenever North Korea rattles its sword.” Park argues Guam is “America’s afterthought.” 

Moran Calls For Classified Briefing On North Korea, As Cicilline Urges Ryan To End Recess Early Over Threat. The Hill (8/11, Carney) “Floor Action” blog reports Sen. Jerry Moran, chairman of the Senate Appropriations Subcommittee on Military Construction, Veterans Affairs, and Related Agencies, told KMAN-AM on Friday that he has asked the Administration to give him a classified briefing on North Korea in the coming weeks for “details on both the ‘economic situation’ in North Korea as well as potential military options and ‘capabilities.’” He said, “What are our capabilities of taking out ... the silos, the locations of where these devices are, are they spread across the country, what do we know?” Moran added, “What are our capabilities for missile defense? ... Do we have the ability to bring that [North Korean] missile down before it does damage to the United States or our allies?” Meanwhile, The Hill (8/11, Bowden) reports Rep. David Cicilline, a member of the House Foreign Affairs Committee, sent a letter Friday to House Speaker Ryan asking him to “‘immediately’ reconvene the House in the face of escalating tension between the U.S. and North Korea.” Cicilline said, “In light of the ongoing standoff between the United States and North Korea, as well as President Trump’s reckless words, I ask that you immediately call the House of Representatives back into session to debate legislation prohibiting the U.S. from conducting a preemptive nuclear strike without prior congressional authorization.” The Hill adds Cicilline also “accused the president of making ‘a dangerous situation even worse’ in the Korean Peninsula with his promise that North Korea would face ‘fire and fury’ if it continued to threaten the U.S. and its allies.” Rep. Gregory Meeks, a member of the House Foreign Affairs Committee, told CNN’s Situation Room (8/11, 5:08 p.m. EDT, Blitzer) that while Trump is “drawing red lines,” he is “also acting like a child, When you look at Kim Jong-un, we don’t go down to his level. That’s what they’ve been doing forever.” Meeks added Trump is “supposed to be the leader of the free world.” Meeks also said Trump’s “credibility is shot with reference to the North Koreans and the rest of the world in this sense. Listen, everybody knows how strong the United States of America is and the military fire power we have. Everybody knows.” Meeks added that he hoped Tillerson, McMaster, and Haley would explain to Trump “in terms he will understand that he’s being unpresidential, and he’s not helping the scenario and in fact, endangering.” The Hill (8/11, Greenwood) reports Rep. Ted Lieu, a colonel in the Air Force Reserves, on Friday also “slammed President Trump’s rhetoric toward North Korea as ‘reckless’ and urged him to pursue a diplomatic solution to Washington’s escalating tensions with Pyongyang.” In a video posted on Twitter by progressive advocacy group VoteVets, Lieu said, “We need to engage in diplomacy. That’s the one thing that Donald Trump has not yet done.” He added, “before the president takes us down the dark and bloody path of a catastrophic war, he needs to first engage in diplomacy. ... He owes that to the American people and I call on the president to do that first before issuing provocative and senseless and reckless statements.” 

US Allies, China, Russia Urge Trump To Proceed Carefully With North Korea Threats. In a front-page article, the Washington Post (8/11, A1, Deyoung, Wagner, Johnson) reports “calls for more intense diplomacy on North Korea vied Friday with threats of force, with little sense of what strategy would prevail in Washington or Pyongyang or which leader would blink first.” The New York Times (8/11, Chan) reports German Chancellor Angela Merkel and other world leaders “expressed alarm on Friday at the bellicose language emanating from North Korea and the United States, but also [signaled] support for President Trump, as they sought to allay their citizens’ fears of a nuclear war on the Korean Peninsula.” The Times adds that “among America’s allies, Australia was perhaps the most decisive in denouncing North Korea’s weapons program.” While Merkel “said diplomacy offered the only way out of the crisis,” Australian Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull asserted his country stands “shoulder-to-shoulder with the United States.” However, the New York Times (8/11, Sang-Hun) reports South Korea on Friday said that “the White House had agreed not to do anything on the Korean Peninsula that would catch the South off guard.” Chung Eui-yong, the top national security adviser for South Korean President Moon Jae-in, spoke with McMaster by phone for 40 minutes on Friday morning. A spokesman for Moon said, “Both South Korea and the United States reaffirmed their promise that as they take step-by-step measures to ensure their security and the safety of their peoples, they will coordinate with each other closely and transparently.” The New York Times (8/11, Soble) reports Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe has been put in “a tough spot,” as Trump has become “an American president who seems overtly eager to confront their mutual adversary, North Korea.” Although “the latest escalation of tensions might seem to play into Mr. Abe’s hands,” the Times says that “Trump’s combative language on North Korea makes matters trickier for Mr. Abe.” The Times adds that because “North Korea’s neighbors would probably bear the brunt of its attacks,” in both Japan and South Korea, “support for military action against the North is low,” which Trump’s rhetoric “is hardly helping to change.” Meanwhile, Reuters (8/11, Solovyov) reports Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov “said on Friday the risks of a military conflict over North Korea’s nuclear program are very high, and Moscow is deeply worried by the mutual threats being traded by Washington and Pyongyang.” Lavrov stated, “Unfortunately, the rhetoric in Washington and Pyongyang is now starting to go over the top. We still hope and believe that common sense will prevail.” He added, “Direct threats of using force are heard. ... The talk (in Washington) is that there must be a preventive strike made on North Korea, while Pyongyang is threatening to carry out a missile strike on the U.S. base in Guam. These (threats) continue non-stop, and they worry us a lot.” However, the Washington Post (8/11, Denyer) reports the Global Times, a Chinese state-owned newspaper, warned in a Friday editorial that “China won’t come to North Korea’s help if it launches missiles threatening U.S. soil and there is retaliation,” but Beijing “would intervene if Washington strikes first.” The Post adds “the Global Times newspaper is not an official mouthpiece of the Communist Party, but in this case its editorial probably does reflect government policy, experts said.” Nonetheless, Reuters (8/11, Wen) reports Chinese tourists appear to be “undeterred by escalating tensions between Pyongyang and Washington rattling nerves” and continue to travel to North Korea. Reuters adds “tour operators said their industry remains robust.” 

Kissinger, Panetta, Mudd, Bolton, Gore Discuss Trump’s Options On North Korea. In a Wall Street Journal (8/11, Kissinger) op-ed, former Secretary of State Henry Kissinger lauds the UN Security Council for passing new sanctions on North Korea earlier this month, but warns the time for waiting is over and action is necessary to stop Kim from developing a full-scale nuclear capacity. While he urges the Administration to embrace restraint, Kissinger argues the US should not rule out the use of military force against Pyongyang. He also calls for China, South Korea, and Japan to step up and participate in the peace process. Former Defense Secretary Leon Panetta told CNN’s Situation Room (8/11, 6:22 p.m. EDT, Blitzer) that Trump’s rhetoric “raises a lot of concern,” and that the North Korean threat poses “possibly the most serious crisis involving a potential nuclear war since the Cuban missile crisis.” He said Trump must “speak in a steady and calm and stable and responsible way, because the rhetoric that’s going on is simply fueling this situation and creating something that concerns me, which is that at some point there is a miscalculation, a mistake.” Panetta continued that “one of the things we’ve learned over 60 years in dealing with various North Korean dictators is that you can’t outbully a bully. And the reality is that rather than engaging in this kind of loose talk, which i think, very frankly, undermines the power and prestige of the United States of America,” that “the rest of the world” is simultaneously “listening and trying to figure out what is going on.” Panetta added he finds “it hard to believe that countries throughout the world are not deeply concerned about what is happening here,” because they “see the prospect of two countries, because of miscalculation, because of words, because of a misstep, that may wind up in a nuclear war, potential for a nuclear war. Nobody in the world wants that to happen. Nobody. And for that reason, I think there are a lot of nervous world leaders in countries around the world that are trying to figure out just exactly what’s going to happen here. And I would certainly include Japan and South Korea and the countries in the South Pacific being worried about just exactly what’s going to happen.” On CNN’s Situation Room (8/11, 5:37 p.m. EDT, Blitzer), Philip Mudd, a former deputy director of the CIA’s Counterterrorist Center and the FBI’s National Security Branch as well as a former Director for Gulf Affairs on the National Security Council, said he does not believe Trump “is losing traction” on the matter, and “we have an end game.” Senior political analyst Mark Preston said Jong-un’s unpredictability constitutes the “big wildcard” right now. Mudd also acknowledged that intelligence on the North Korean threat “is difficult intelligence to acquire,” because it entails “technical information” about a missile launch, which is “an intelligence bonanza” and “not golden intelligence.” Second, “North Koreans don’t get out of North Korea much,” and finally, “I think people in this country don’t understand well the power of propaganda.” Mudd added 

that Trump is endangering national security because in his social media actions, he “threatening a fourth-rate national power and ensuring Kim Jong-un realizes the President is going to elevate his profile internationally by engaging in this game every day.” Meanwhile, The Hill (8/11, Delk) reports former Vice President Al Gore told Newsweek on Friday that Trump “can’t be blamed” for the tensions with North Korea. Gore asserted, “I think it’s only fair to point out he inherited this crisis.” He added, “The previous three presidents were not able to find an adequate solution, so he can’t be blamed for all of this.” However, Gore warned Trump’s “intemperate comments on North Korea were really unwise.” Former UN Ambassador John Bolton in a Breitbart (8/11, Hayward) interview “proposed reunification as the solution to the North Korean nuclear missile crisis.” He said Trump “made it clear that this is a different president than the one that North Korea and China have faced for the last eight years,” though Bolton cautioned “there’s a limit to” the President’s rhetoric, as Trump should understand that the more he “makes these kinds of remarks, it gets harder and harder to back away from a very tough stance without risking grave damage to his credibility.” According to Bolton, “No amount of negotiation is going to talk North Korea out of it. We’ve tried that, mistakenly in my view, for 25 years. It’s failed.” He added, “Either we do something dramatically different diplomatically – my proposal is to convince China to reunite the Korean Peninsula – then you’re down to military action. Nobody wants it, but nobody wants to be in the position Trump finds himself in after 25 years of failure.” WPost, Columnists, Analysts Consider Trump’s Response To North Korea. The Washington Post (8/11) editorializes that President Trump ultimately has two options for dealing with North Korea and its leader, Kim Jong Un: “to live with a nuclear North Korea, as we have long lived with a nuclear China, hoping to deter its use of nuclear weapons by assuring Mr. Kim that his regime’s destruction would immediately ensue. The other is to assemble a coalition of nations to impose economic sanctions sufficiently punitive and targeted at the regime that Mr. Kim decides he would be better off making a deal.” The Post contends “it is worth trying the latter before accepting the former,” but for this “to be successful, such a strategy also would require patience, diplomacy, coherence and quiet strength. Just to list those qualities is to acknowledge how unlikely success seems at this moment.” New York Times columnist Thomas Friedman said on CNN’s Situation Room 

(8/11, 5:20 p.m. EDT, Blitzer), “I don’t object to the President doing a little madman game here with the North Koreans. It’s clearly got their attention,” and appears aimed at compelling “the Chinese to act, because they really have the greatest leverage.” Ultimately, however, “it’s got to be connected to a diplomatic pathway, to a solution. The question is, is it?” Friedman explained Pyongyang will not likely offer a unilateral surrender, so “what’s not clear to me here” is what Trump will offer in exchange. Friedman added (8/11, 5:27 p.m. EDT, Blitzer) that Tillerson, McMaster, and Haley are “serious people,” but “what worries me” is whether they constitute a team with “a coherent strategy” because “you see them often out in multiple directions.” Bloomberg View (8/11, Lake) columnist Eli Lake contends that “the most depressing aspect of the current North Korean crisis is that even if Donald Trump wins, he loses.” Lake suggests “The president’s recent bellicosity aims for deterrence and leverage,” as “in substance, if not style, this is very similar to how past administrations have approached the Hermit Kingdom: threaten, cajole and bargain.” While he acknowledges “the critics of war are correct. A pre-emptive strike is not worth the risk,” Lake asserts “neither is another deal” for several reasons, namely that “the North Koreans don’t keep their promises.” Lake argues that “traditional ‘regime change’ should be off the table. But this should not stop the U.S. and its allies from helping to create conditions for the day when Koreans can take their country back. This requires some patience and imagination.” In her New York Times (8/11, Collins) column, Gail Collins states that “I believe I speak for a great many Americans when I say I am scared as hell of a confrontation between the head of the strongest nation in the world, who once wanted to play the president in ‘Sharknado 3,’ and a nuclear power dictator whose favorite house guest is Dennis Rodman.” Collins contends “Let’s just pray his current bellicosity is all hot air and no balloon” before concluding “our best hope [is] that the guy with the nuclear football is not necessarily the same person as the one sending out loopy messages on his smartphone. People who’ve dealt with the private Trump often say they found him less crazy than the public version.” In his New York Times (8/11, Egan) column, Timothy Egan urges Trump on behalf of the residents of California, Oregon, Washington state, Alaska, Hawaii, and Guam to embrace restraint because “We West Coasters can’t go our separate way on nukes, as we’re doing on climate change, vowing to adhere to the Paris accord even as you turn your back on the rest of the world. We don’t have a shield. We don’t control the nuclear code.” He adds “sanctions, like those just approved by the United Nations, are a good deterrence” and although “diplomacy is hard. ... it beats the alternative.” 

## Trump To Launch Investigation Of China Trade Policies Amid Growing Frustration With Beijing Over North Korea. 

White House officials announced Saturday that President Trump this week will direct USTR Lighthizer to probe China’s trade policies for intellectual property violations. Media coverage, which includes more than seven and a half minutes on the network newscasts, was also extensive in print and online. Reporting suggested that the investigation is an attempt by Trump to pressure China into taking a more forceful stance toward North Korea while appealing to the President’s base at the same time. In a front-page article on Trump’s “diplomatic gamble,” the New York Times (8/12, A1, Perlez, Baker) says that the President is “seeking to enlist China as a peacemaker in the bristling nuclear-edged dispute with North Korea at the very moment he plans to ratchet up conflict with Beijing over trade issues that have animated his political rise.” In a separate article, the New York Times (8/12, Thrush, Rappeport) reports “Trump is planning to jab, not punch, China for allegedly stealing intellectual property from American businesses, part of an effort to fulfill his hard-edge campaign promises on trade without alienating Beijing during the crisis over North Korea’s nuclear weapons program.” The Wall Street Journal (8/12, Schlesinger) reports White House officials announced the President will sign a directive on Monday ordering Lighthizer to begin the formal probe, which will investigate if the Chinese government and state-owned companies stole or otherwise coerced US companies into giving up patents and other IP. The Washington Post (8/12, Swanson) reports on its front page that the probe “could result in severe trade penalties, a threat the United States could wield to pressure Beijing into improving its economic behavior and doing more to contain North Korea’s nuclear threat.” According to the Post, the investigation “would seek to address what the U.S. business community has described as flagrant trade violations by China” and “may also prove to be a source of leverage to push China to do more to help contain a rising security threat from North Korea, which counts Beijing as its only powerful ally.” However, analysts warned the Post that “the measure could also backfire, resulting in more hostility and tension between the world’s two largest economies at a time when their cooperation is critical to a diplomatic resolution on North Korea.” While Reuters (8/12, Wroughton) reports an Administration official “insisted diplomacy over North Korea and the potential trade probe were ‘totally unrelated,’ saying the trade action was not a pressure tactic,” Politico (8/12, Restuccia) states that the investigation “will mark the escalation of Trump’s increasingly aggressive posture toward China.” Politico adds that in response to North Korea’s belligerence in recent weeks, “Trump has raged behind the scenes and in public, urged on by China hawks in his administration like trade adviser Peter Navarro and chief strategist Steve Bannon.” 

Media Analyses: Trump Unnerves Allies With Comments On North Korea. In an analysis, the AP (8/12, Lemire) says Trump thus far has “responded to perhaps the sternest international test of his presidency in precisely the way that some supporters had hoped and critics feared.” The AP adds “the mix of plain-spoken bluster, spontaneity and norm-breaking risk defined his political rise, and it’s guided his approach on North Korea. When the isolated communist nation punched, Trump tried to punch back harder, as he did in campaign debates. But this was not a Florida debate stage or a low-stakes celebrity Twitter spat of the sort Trump perfected before entering politics.” In a front-page analysis, the New York Times (8/12, A1, Thrush, Baker) says the President’s “four-day fusillade of apocalyptic threats against North Korea [has] left many in Washington and capitals throughout the Pacific wondering whether it was more method or madness.” According to the Times, “It was not the first time in his unconventional presidency that Mr. Trump had unnerved friend and foe alike, but never before had it seemed so consequential.” The Times adds that some of the President’s advisers “quietly asked each other in recent days if Mr. Trump’s bellicosity toward North Korea is part of some thought-out strategy that they have not been told about or what they suspect is just more on-the-fly instinct. But some aides have found themselves surprised at other moments when Mr. Trump has done something unexpected and seemingly random, only to explain his thinking afterward in a way that indicated more calculation than they had thought.” USA Today (8/12, Maresca) reports that as the President “ramps up his bellicose rhetoric toward North Korean leader Kim Jong Un, leaders and ordinary citizens across Asia are watching with various states of alarm, unsure which man poses a greater danger to their safety.” USA Today states that in Seoul, South Korea, “many say they aren’t particularly concerned about the escalating threats coming from the North Korean government, which has long menaced its next-door neighbor,” but in the Philippines, “many residents are watching the situation with concern.” USA Today adds that “other reaction around the Asian region was a mixture of wariness and confusion.” In her New York Times (8/12, Dowd) column, Maureen Dowd calls the “precipice of blustery, threatening exchanges between” President Trump and North Korean leader Kim Jong-un “particularly disturbing because they mirror each other in so many unhinged ways.” She says much “of what Trump does may be loudmouth blather,” but the North Korean threat “is real” and poses “the most severe test since the Cuban missile crisis.” New York Times (8/12, Douthat) columnist Ross Douthat outlines “the sequence of events that gave us the Cuban crisis,” and posits President Trump’s “showdown” with North Korea’s Kim Jong-un “isn’t the first time a reckless, lecherous U.S. president obsessed with his own vigor and out of his depth on foreign policy faced off against a thirtysomething dictator armed with nukes.” The US ultimately “survived the Cuban missile crisis,” Douthat says, so “there’s probably a way to get through this one, too.” He acknowledges “manifold” differences in the two scenarios, and suggests if the President averts “war, it will be because Trump is fundamentally a bluffer, who will issue threats on Twitter but won’t overrule his advisers if they tell him not to give an order that will leave hundreds of thousands dead.” 

Xi Urges Trump To Embrace Restraint Against North Korea. Reuters (8/8, Oliphant, Blanchard) reports Trump and Chinese President Xi Jinping spoke in a phone call Friday. According to Reuters, Xi “said there needs to be a peaceful resolution to the North Korean nuclear issue,” telling Trump that “he urged all sides to avoid words or action that raise tensions.” In a statement, the Chinese Foreign Ministry quoted Xi as saying, “Concerned parties must exercise restraint and avoid remarks and actions that escalate tensions on the Korean peninsula.” Reuters (8/12, O'Brien) reports the White House in a statement said Trump and Xi “reiterated their mutual commitment to denuclearize the Korean peninsula” and they “agreed that the recent adoption of a United Nations Security Council resolution on North Korea was an important step toward achieving peace and stability on the peninsula.” The White House said Trump and Xi “agreed North Korea must stop its provocative and escalatory behavior,” adding, the “relationship between the two presidents is an extremely close one, and will hopefully lead to a peaceful resolution of the North Korea problem.” NBC Nightly News (8/12, story 4, 2:25, Diaz-Balart) said many believe “China, with its strong ties in North Korea, may be key to reining in the regime.” Reporting from Dandong, China, correspondent Janis Mackey Frayer explained, “North Korea’s economic lifeline – the bridge connecting it to China. More than three-quarters of trade with the regime passes here.” Mackey Frayer said as “severe United Nations sanctions could slash a third of North Korea’s export revenue, at the choke point, this single-lane bridge, is business as usual. ‘It’s normal to trade with North Korea,’ says this business owner. ‘There’s nothing to fear.’ But these days, tension is running high. Deep suspicion of foreign journalists forced us to keep a low profile. As North Korea’s biggest ally and trading partner, China’s pressure is crucial. Those sanctions alone have never worked.” Washington Post (8/12, Von Drehle) columnist David Von Drehle says the North Korean crisis “is very much China’s moment,” and how it “handles the brinkmanship of Kim Jong Un is the most important test the Chinese have yet faced in their decades-long effort to take a place in the first rank of world powers.” He explains the challenge will measure Beijing’s reliability, economic strength, and “readiness to lead.” Von Drehle says President “Trump’s bellicose tone in recent days has been regrettable, but the underlying content of his words is entirely true: The United States possesses the power to destroy North Korea many times over,” but in this crisis, “it is China that stands at the crossroads.” Beijing’s failure, Von Drehle cautions, will “set back China’s rise for decades to come.” 

Trump, France’s Macron Discuss Additional UN Sanctions Against North Korea. Errol Barnett of the CBS Weekend News (8/12, story 2, 2:00, Ninan) reported President Trump is “considering an additional sanctions package” against North Korea “that, in his words, would be as strong as they get.” On Saturday, Trump spoke “with French President Emmanuel Macron about enforcing existing UN sanctions, as well as working together to achieve North Korean de-nuclearization.” Reuters (8/12, Rucker) reports the White House said in a statement that Trump and Macron “discussed the need to confront the increasingly dangerous situation associated with North Korea’s destabilizing and escalatory behavior.” North Korea Issues Another Threat Toward US. ABC World News Tonight ’s (8/12, story 5, 3:10, Vega) chief global affairs correspondent Martha Raddatz reported that on Saturday, after almost “a week of threats on both sides,” North Korean leader Kim Jong-un issued “a new warning” that was “clearly a response to President Trump’s string of warnings.” North Korean state-run media cautioned, “If the Trump administration does not want the American empire to meet its tragic doom...they had better talk and act properly.” The Washington Times (8/12, Taylor) reports Pyongyang’s official KCNA news agency released the report “a day after – and appeared to be a response to – international headlines that Mr. Trump had made Friday by asserting that the U.S. is ‘locked and loaded’ and will take action against the regime of North Korean leader Kim Jong-un ‘if he utters one threat.’” In a front-page article, the Washington Post (8/12, A1, Fifield) reports “the Kim regime has a history of making bellicose threats that it cannot or does not make good on. This may well be one of those cases. Or it might not.” According to the Post, “The problem with trying to figure out what Kim might do in a situation like this is severely complicated by the fact that the outside world knows almost nothing about him.” 

Trump Says US Stands With Guam “1,000 Percent,” Predicts North Korea Threats Will Increase Tourism “Tenfold.” The New York Times (8/12, Cagurangan) reports President Trump on Friday called Guam Gov. Eddie Calvo and told him he predicts the threats from North Korea will help the island territory increase tourism “tenfold.” In a recording posted “on the Republican governor’s Facebook page and other social media accounts,” Trump said, “I have to tell you, you have become extremely famous all over the world. They are talking about Guam; and they’re talking about you.” The President added when that it comes to tourism, “I can say this: You’re going to go up, like, tenfold with the expenditure of no money.” Trump also asserted, “You are safe. We’re with you 1,000 percent.” The Washington Post (8/12, Wagner) reports Calvo told Trump that “as the governor of Guam, representing the people of Guam, and as an American citizen, I have never felt more safe or so confident, with you at the helm.” Breitbart (8/12, Spiering) reports he also “praised Trump for his leadership, lamenting the criticism coming from Washington, DC, bureaucrats and the media.” Calvo said that despite “all the criticism going on over there, from a guy that’s being targeted, we need a president like you, so I’m just so thankful, and I’m glad you’re holding the helm, sir.” However, the Washington Post (8/12, Phillips, Wagner) reports “in talking about the heightened international attention to the island, Margaret Metcalfe, director of Calvo’s Washington office, said: ‘None of this is good publicity.’” In an interview, Metcalfe told the Post on Saturday, “I’m just saying that is the result of what’s happening. Nobody asked for it. Nobody wanted it. It happened. We pray day and night. … And we hope that calmness prevail and balance prevail. We certainly don’t what to do anything that would put our families at risk.” Metcalfe added, “I don’t think anyone can really predict what our president may offer, because he is one of those thinkers outside the box. But right now, I can tell you, in Guam, our flights are arriving from South Korea and Japan. ... Tourists are coming as normal even with all these fights from the media.” 

USAF Commander: Guam Air Base Prepared To Respond To North Korean Attack. 

Vladimir Dunthiers, in a segment for the CBS Weekend News ’ (8/12, story 3, 2:55, Ninan) “CBSN: On Assignment” special series, reported the Andersen Air Force Base in Guam, approximately 2,100 miles from North Korea, “has the largest stockpile of fuel and munitions in the Air Force” and “can respond to threats from the Middle East, Asia, and across the Pacific.” Col. Sam White of the US Air Force said troops at the base “stand ready to respond to a wide range of things at the President’s call. That’s the reason why we have the continuous bomber presence mission, is to give the President of the United States sovereign options against threats to the US. So we’re ready today.” Dunthiers continued, “Due to North Korea’s difficult mountainous terrain and deep bunkers, these types of munitions could be of vital importance in the event of a conflict.” Meanwhile, a Wall Street Journal (8/11, Cheng) analysis examines how South Korea would defend its 25 million citizens living in Seoul against an attack from North Korea. The AP (8/12, Riechmann) reports that although US intelligence officials “are pretty sure North Korea can put a nuclear warhead on an intercontinental missile that could reach the United States,” experts “aren’t convinced the bomb could make it all that way intact,” as “they cite lingering questions about North Korean leader Kim Jong Un’s nuclear know-how.” 

# US Geological Survey 

## With 8 Threatening Volcanoes, USGS Says California Deserves Close Monitoring. 

The Seattle Post-Intelligencer (8/11, Ellison) reports “the many famous, prominent and dangerous volcanoes of the West Coast will be the subject of field trips and much discussion” at this upcoming annual meeting of the International Association of Volcanology and Chemistry of the Earth’s Interior taking place in Portland, Oregon from August 14 to 18. According to the story, USGS says there are eight volcanoes in California worthy of close monitoring, and “among the 18 ‘very high threat volcanoes,’ 11 are along the Cascade Range in three states (Alaska and Hawaii have the others).” 

# Top National News 

## Trump, White House Under Bipartisan Criticism For Response To Charlottesville Violence. 

Second-day coverage of President Trump’s response to Saturday’s violence in Charlottesville, Virginia was harshly negative, with near-universal criticism of the President’s initial statement and many questions about why Sunday’s White House follow-up was not made in the President’s name. The two networks that ran Sunday evening newscasts opened with reports on the violence itself, but then ran stories on the bipartisan criticism of the President’s remarks. Republican Twitter criticism dissipated somewhat on Sunday, but pundits and Democrats remained vocal. Brian Stelter of CNN’s Reliable Sources (8/13) summed up the general mood: “You could make the case that Saturday was the worst day of the Trump presidency, with so many commentators – including major Republican commentators and GOP senators and congressmen – criticizing the President for his half-hearted response.” ABC World News Tonight (8/13, story 3, 2:55, Llamas) reported that the President is “facing intense backlash for his response to all the violence, refusing to specifically condemn the hatred unleashed by the white supremacists.” ABC’s David Wright: “Today, the White House struggled to shore up the President Trump’s equivocal response to Charlottesville. ... ‘Of course that includes white supremacists, KKK, neo-Nazi and all extremist groups,’ an unnamed White House official explained today. But Trump has yet to call out those groups for inciting the violence in Virginia.” NBC Nightly News (8/13, story 2, 2:40, Snow) reported, “President Trump called for unity after yesterday’s violence, but for some including members of his own party, the message fell flat, and today many called for a more forceful denouncement of white nationalism.” NBC’s Kelly O’Donnell: “For a presidency forged by blunt talk, what Donald Trump did not say is politically deafening. ... The President seemed alone in spreading blame for the violence. His omission, choosing not to call out white supremacist groups, some known to support him. A failure, according to critics and many Republicans.” The Washington Post (8/13, Johnson, Demirjian) reports that though the White House said that Trump “condemned ‘all forms of violence, bigotry and hatred’ that were on display in Charlottesville this weekend ‘of course that includes white supremacists, KKK, Neo-Nazi and all extremist groups,’” that “clarification stopped far short of what a growing number of Republicans have urged the president to do: directly call out and condemn white supremacy.” The Wall Street Journal (8/13, Radnofsky, Michaels) reports that the White House statement was not attributed to any specific official. The Washington Examiner (8/13, Feldscher) reports that “the spokesperson refused to go on the record with his or her name and would not give reporters in New Jersey a reason why the statement could not be attributed.” Politico (8/13, Cook) reports that the “clarification came less than 24 hours after Trump seemingly blamed both white supremacists and counterprotesters for the vitriol and clashes.” Kaitlan Collins said on CNN’s Reliable Sources (8/13, Stelter), “Why not attribute that to a White House official like Sarah Huckabee Sanders or another spokesman or the President himself, if he really does condemn hatred in all forms including neo-Nazism, and the KKK, why not put your name on that statement?” The AP (8/13, Lemire) reports that the White House “scrambled Sunday to elaborate on” the President’s response “as he came under bipartisan scolding for not clearly condemning white supremacists and other hate groups immediately after the altercations.” The President “remained out of sight and silent, save for a few retweets.” Bloomberg News (8/13, House, Talev, Epstein) reports the President “faced a second day of criticism after failing to personally denounce” the white supremacists. The New York Times (8/13, Thrush) reports that “criticism” of the President “intensified on Sunday, with lawmakers from both parties calling on him to explicitly condemn the role of white racists and agitators affiliated with the so-called alt-right, some of whom brandished pro-Trump banners and campaign placards during [the] violent protests.” Dan Merica said on CNN’s New Day Sunday (8/13), “What the President didn’t say yesterday is what is getting the most attention. Yes, President Trump did condemn the violence, the hatred that we saw on the streets of Charlottesville yesterday, but he didn’t condemn the alt-right and white nationalists that really started a lot of that violence.” The Los Angeles Times (8/13, King) writes, “Sometimes what President Trump doesn’t say causes his aides more headaches than things he does.” The White House “defended the president’s failure to explicitly condemn white supremacists” as “criticism of the president poured in for a second day, including from some GOP allies who added their voices to the chorus of opprobrium from Democrats.” Breitbart (8/13, Spiering) reports, “Media and political figures were furious after the president failed to specifically condemn the white nationalist forces that triggered the violent uproar.” Julie Pace of the AP (8/13) writes, “Why doesn’t President Donald Trump just unequivocally condemn white supremacists? It’s a jarring question to ask about an American president. But it’s also one made unavoidable by Trump’s delayed, blame-both-sides response. ... At times, his approach has seemingly inflamed racial tensions in a deeply divided country while emboldening groups long in the shadows.” The Hill (8/13, Manchester) reports that the White House “was forced to clarify” the President’s response. Reuters (8/13, Simpson) and the Daily Caller (8/13, Bennett) also report on the White House statement. E.J. Dionne writes in his Washington Post (8/13) column, “There are not, as Trump insisted Saturday, ‘many sides’ to questions that were settled long ago: Racism, anti-Semitism, discrimination and white supremacy are unequivocally wrong. A president who cannot bring himself to say this immediately and unequivocally squanders any claim to moral leadership.” Petula Dvorak writes in her Washington Post (8/13) column, “President Trump lit every one of those torches in Charlottesville. ... When the mob of white men marched in Charlottesville carrying flaming torches Friday night shouting ‘Heil Trump’ as the curtain-raiser for a day of violent clashes with counterprotesters that left three people dead, they showed the world that America is once again playing with fire. And Trump was the one with the match.” Kelly Jane Torrance of the Weekly Standard said on CNN’s New Day Sunday 

(8/13), “We have been waiting for months for Donald Trump really, if not more than a year, to condemn white nationalism and to say these people say that they are doing if my name and they say they are supporters of me. We’ve been waiting for him to strongly disavow them and he hasn’t done it. And I think it’s really about time for him to do so.” Anne Applebaum tweeted, “No post-hoc White House statement makes up for Trump’s cowardice. We now know exactly who and what he fears to criticize.” Perry Bacon Jr. of FiveThirtyEight tweeted, “If Bannon is telling Trump to go with this weekend’s approach, that matters. But I think we are over-covering staff. Trump is the decider.” Fox News’ Jedediah Bila tweeted, “Trump shouldn’t only publicly condemn white supremacists, but outright reject their support. They should find no safe space in his realm.” Conservative writer Erick Erickson tweeted, “Never forget how Trump’s media propagandists tried to excuse and give cover to the alt-right.” Matt Fuller of the Huffington Post tweeted, “People Trump has criticized more harshly than neo-Nazis: -Mitch McConnell -POWs -A Gold Star family -The Pope.” Bill Kristol tweeted, “WH staff told Trump they had to put out a statement, but couldn’t prevail on him to say it himself, in the first person. A revealing moment.” Jeremy Peters of the New York Times tweeted, “The right said Obama was soft on terror for not calling it out, blaming Islamists. By extension, Trump is being soft on white nationalism.” Amanda Terkel of the Huffington Post tweeted, “Trump White House, basically: All violence matters.” 

Pence Denounces White Supremacists While Defending Trump. The Wall Street Journal (8/13, Radnofsky) reports under the headline “Pence Goes Beyond Trump In Condemning White Supremacists” that Vice President Pence, who is in Colombia, made a more forceful and explicit statement on Sunday evening. The Washington Times (8/13, Boyer) reports that Pence said, “We have no tolerance for hate and violence from white supremacists, neo-Nazis or the KKK. These dangerous fringe groups have no place in American public life and in the American debate, and we condemn them in the strongest possible terms.” However, Pence “also criticized those who have accused Mr. Trump of not speaking out strongly enough,” saying that “Trump on Saturday ‘clearly and unambiguously condemned the bigotry, violence and hatred which took place on the streets of Charlottesville.’” Politico (8/13, Cohen) reports that Pence “criticized the media for its coverage” of Trump’s remarks. He said, “I take issue with the fact that many in the national media spent more time criticizing the President’s words than they did criticizing those that perpetrated the violence to begin with.” Tim Alberta of Politico tweeted, “Typical needle-threading from @VP: Takes it further than Trump, while clarifying that Trump himself went plenty far enough.” 

McMaster, Pompeo, Bossert Defend Trump’s Statement. On ABC’s This Week 

(8/13), National Security Adviser McMaster said, “The President called out anyone...responsible for” encouraging “this kind of bigotry and hatred, racism and violence.” He added that he thought the President “was very clear on that.” On NBC’s Meet The Press (8/13, Todd), McMaster was asked why the President didn’t single out the neo-Nazi protesters. McMaster said, “When he condemned bigotry and hatred on all sides, that includes them.” He said what was “important to the president” was “to bring all Americans together.” On CBS’ Face The Nation (8/13, Dickerson), CIA Director Pompeo said that he believed the President had been specific in condemning bigotry, hatred, and violence. The Washington Times (8/13, Wolfgang) reports that White House Homeland Security Adviser Bossert, appearing on CNN’s State Of The Union, “said he was proud of the president’s comments on Saturday.” Bossert said, “I, for one, was with the President yesterday and proud of the fact he stood up and calmly looked into the camera and condemned this violence and bigotry in all its forms.” 

USA Today: Ivanka Trump Issued “More Pointed Assessment.” USA Today (8/13, Collins) reports, “The day after deadly protests that occurred in Charlottesville, Va. following a ‘Unite the Right’ white nationalist rally, Ivanka Trump issued a more pointed assessment of blame than her father.” She tweeted, “There should be no place in society for racism, white supremacy and neo-nazis.” The Washington Post (8/13, Phillips) says that she “tweeted a reaction with a level of specificity that was absent in her father’s statement.” 

Gardner, Graham Urge Stronger Statement From Trump. Sen. Cory Gardner said on CNN’s State Of The Union (8/13, Tapper) that he sent his own message that the white supremacy is evil and asserted that the same message “must be acknowledged as such by the White House.” He called the behavior at the protest for what it is: evil. He said, that Trump “should use this opportunity to say this is terrorism.” Sen. Lindsey Graham said on Fox News Sunday (8/13, Wallace) that President Trump “missed an opportunity to be very explicit here.” He said that the supremacist groups seem to think they have a friend in the White House and he urges “the President to dissuade these groups that he’s their friend.” The Washington Times (8/13, Wolfgang) reports that Sens. Ted Cruz, Orrin Hatch, Marco Rubio and other Republicans “condemned the deadly demonstration. But Mr. Trump’s handling of the situation fueled commentary that he is comfortable with the support of white nationalist groups, some of which praised his remarks.” Politico (8/13, Cook) reports, “Republicans joined civil rights leaders and Democrats who reacted angrily” to Trump’s initial statement, “just the latest example of members of his party starting to carefully take on a president whose words and actions many chose to overlook after his surprise 2016 victory.” However, Rep. Tom Garrett (R-VA), who represents Charlottesville, said on Fox News’ Sunday Morning Futures , “I think we ought to, on both sides of the aisle, take him at face value right now and not criticize whether the condemnation was condemning enough or what have you. Let’s find something to unite over.” 

House Democrats Continue Criticism Via Twitter. Several House Democrats posted critical tweets about Trump’s response, while Republicans were largely quiet on Sunday after some critical tweets on Saturday. Rep. Don Beyer (D-VA) tweeted, “Donald Trump’s staff asked him to personally deliver a statement denouncing white supremacists. He refused.” Rep. Susan Davis (D-CA) tweeted, “Many sides? This is about one side emboldened by Trump’s hateful rhetoric. Must keep standing against violence & bigotry.” Rep. Ted Lieu (D-CA) tweeted, “There are many sides to @realDonaldTrump, but why does he appear beholden to David Duke and Vladimir Putin?” Rep. Jacky Rosen (D-NV) tweeted, “The fact President Trump failed to explicitly condemn the white supremacist ideology behind this evil from day 1 is beyond shameful.” Rep. Jackie Speier (D-CA) tweeted, “Mr President, call it what it is: radical white supremacist terror.” The Washington Examiner (8/13, Lim) reports that Rep. Maxine Waters (D-CA) “excoriated President Trump on social media...saying the White House is now the ‘White Supremacists’ House.’” She tweeted, “Trump has made it clear – w/ Bannon & Gorka in the WH, & the Klan in the streets, it is now the White Supremacists’ House.” In an editorial, the Wall Street Journal (8/13) links the violence to the rise of identity politics, and writes that Democrats seemed more interested in tarring Trump this weekend than in addressing racial and ethnic divisions. 

Scaramucci: Trump “Needed To Be Much Harsher.” Anthony Scaramucci said on ABC’s This Week (8/13), “I think he needed to be much harsher as it related to the white supremacists. With the moral authority of the presidency, you have to call that stuff out.” The Washington Post (8/13, Phillips, Wagner) reports that Scaramucci said, “He likes doing the opposite of what the media thinks he’s going to do. I think he’s also of the impression that there’s hatred on all sides, but I disagree with it.” 

NYTimes: Trump Was “Placating White Supremacists” With His Statement. The New York Times (8/13) editorializes, “Let’s discard the fiction that President Trump wasn’t placating white supremacists by responding so weakly. ... The neo-Nazis heard his message loud and clear.” Trump “is alone in modern presidential history in his willingness to summon demons of bigotry and intolerance in service to himself.” His “fear of naming the source of Saturday’s violence sharply contrasts with his eagerness to call out Islamist terror.” 

WPost Analysis: White Supremacists “Loved Trump’s Remarks.” The Washington Post (8/13, Wang) reports under the headline “One Group Loved Trump’s Remarks About Charlottesville: White Supremacists” that the President’s “choice of words – and the silence that preceded them – are being cheered by at least a few groups of people: neo-Nazis and white nationalists.” The Daily Stormer, “a neo-Nazi website...declared the president’s words as a signal of tacit support for their side: ‘Trump comments were good. He didn’t attack us. He just said the nation should come together. Nothing specific against us.’” (The hacker collective Anonymous took control of the Daily Stormer early Monday, vowing to shut it down permanently.) 

Charlottesville Mayor Says Trump Courted White Supremacists During Campaign. The Washington Times (8/13, Wolfgang) reports that Charlottesville Mayor Michael Signer said Sunday that Trump “deserves at least some of the blame.” Signer said on CNN’s State Of The Union, “Look at the campaign he ran. Look at the intentional courting, on one hand, of all these white supremacists, white nationalists...and look on the other hand at the repeated failure to step up, condemn, denounce, silence, put to bed all of these different efforts, just like we saw yesterday. This isn’t hard.” 

DOJ Opens Civil Rights Investigation Into Car Attack. The Washington Times (8/12, Noble) reports that the Justice Department has opened a civil rights investigation “into the circumstances under which a vehicle plowed into a crowd of people” protesting on Saturday. Twenty-year-old James Alex Fields has been charged “with second-degree murder and other crimes” in the death of 32-year-old Heather Heyer. The Washington Post (8/13, Shapiro, Silverman, Vozzella, Cox) reports that Fields “long sympathized with Nazi views and had stood with a group of white supremacists hours before Saturday’s bloody crash.” His former history teacher said that Fields “had espoused extremist ideals at least since high school.” The New York Daily News Monday cover features a picture of Fields with the headline “The Nazi Trump Won’t Call Out.” ABC World News Tonight (8/13, lead story, 4:05, Llamas) and NBC Nightly News 

(8/13, lead story, 3:50, Snow) opened by summarizing Saturday’s events and Fields’ arrest. ABC World News Tonight (8/13, story 2, 3:00, Llamas), Reuters (8/13, Woodall), and the New York Times (8/13, Caron) profile Heyer. The Washington Post (8/13, Schneider, Soong) reports, “Activists throughout the country...held vigils Sunday in response to” both the white supremacist rally and the ensuing violence; NBC Nightly News (8/13, story 3, 2:40, Snow) ran a feature on how tensions rose in Charlottesville in recent months. 

McAuliffe Defends Police Response. The New York Times (8/13, Stolberg) reports, “Gov. Terry McAuliffe on Sunday strongly defended the police response to the violent demonstrations here on Saturday, saying that law enforcement authorities had done ‘great work’ in ‘a very delicate situation.’” McAuliffe said police “estimated that 80 percent of those at the white nationalists’ rally and counterprotests – including members of self-styled militias in camouflage gear – were armed, ‘yet not a shot was fired.’” He added, “You can’t stop some crazy guy who came here from Ohio and used his car as a weapon. He is a terrorist.” 

Rally Organizer: “Violence Rules Over Speech” In Charlottesville. USA Today (8/13, Bacon) reports that Jason Kessler, the organizer of the Unite The Right rally, “tried to hold a news conference Sunday in front of Charlottesville City Hall – and it quickly descended into chaos.” He later tweeted, “I tried my best but once again violence rules over speech and ideas in #Charlottesville. The first amendment is finished it seems.” The Wall Street Journal (8/13, Kesling, Belkin) reports that Kessler was booed off stage as he tried to address reporters. 

Virginia GOP Senate Candidate: “Let’s Condemn Both Sides.” The Washington Examiner (8/13, King) reports that Virginia Senate candidate Corey Stewart, a Republican, “said politicians and the media didn’t focus at all on violence perpetrated by left wing people counter-protesting a white supremacist rally.” He said, “You hear all this condemnation of neo-Nazis and all the people that came out there, and they should have been condemned. There are a whole lot of left-wing agitators that went down there. When we are condemning, let’s condemn both sides.” The Washington Post (8/13, Vozzella, Nirappil) reports that Stewart “criticized fellow Republicans who condemned the white nationalists,” telling the Post, “All the weak Republicans, they couldn’t apologize fast enough. They played right into the hands of the left wing. Those [Nazi] people have nothing to do with the Republican Party. There was no reason to apologize.” The Washington Post (8/13, Weigel) reports that “alt-right” and “far-right media” have been warning of left-wing activists “as a rising danger to law and order, a justification for alt-right organizations to organize armed rallies.” 

Twitter Account Working To Identify White Supremacist Demonstrators. The New York Post (8/13, Perez) reports, “White nationalists who appeared at the deadly demonstrations in Charlottesville are being outed on social media – with at least one being fired from their job after his name and picture was posted online.” The “Yes, You’re Racist” Twitter account, with more than 180,000 followers, has been working to identify participants in the demonstrations. 

Seattle “Pro-Trump” Rally Met With Counter-Demonstrators. The Seattle Times (8/13) reports, “The pro-Trump Patriot Prayer group and counter-protesters held opposing demonstrations in downtown Seattle” on Sunday afternoon. The two groups “converged at Westlake Park where police reported stopping people carrying shields and backpacks. Officers spritzed several protesters with pepper spray.” NBC Nightly News (8/13, story 4, 1:30, Snow) reported on the protests. 

## Trump Condemns “Hatred, Bigotry” After Charlottesville Violence, But Fails To Blame White Nationalists. 

After at least three people died and 19 others were wounded at a white nationalist rally in Charlottesville, Virginia on Saturday, President Trump condemned the “egregious display of hatred, bigotry and violence on many sides, on many sides” in a speech and series of tweets. Media coverage, which included more than 21 minutes on the network newscasts, was also heavy in print and online. While Trump was lauded for calling for unity, reporting was generally critical of the President for not denouncing the white nationalists, neo-Nazis, and Ku Klux Klan members responsible for organizing the rally. Typical of the coverage was the Washington Post (8/12, Wagner, Johnson), which says that Trump “condemned ‘in the strongest possible terms’ the spate of violence unfolding in Charlottesville and called for ‘a swift restoration of law and order’ – but avoided placing blame on any particular party for the hate-fueled upheaval.” Politico (8/12, Cook) similarly reports the President “never denounced by name the extremist group, or called their behavior unacceptable.” Politico adds that “the furthest Trump went in protesting the white nationalists’ ‘Unite the Right’ rally was to say that his administration wanted to ‘get the situation straightened out in Charlottesville and we want to study it and we want to see what we’re doing wrong as a country, where things like this can happen.’” The Hill (8/12, Manchester) reports Trump said, “It’s been going on for a long time in our country. Not Donald Trump, not Barack Obama. This has been going on for a long, long time.” Bloomberg News (8/12, House, Epstein) reports the President spoke at his golf club in Bedminster, New Jersey “after two days of violent protests capped by an incident, details of which are still emerging, where a car at the scene plowed into the crowd, leaving one person dead and the driver under arrest.” According to USA Today (8/12, Johnson), “Trump, interrupting a signing ceremony for legislation benefiting veterans...called the street clashes, ending with a car plowing through a group of counter-protesters, ‘very, very sad.’” The Washington Times (8/12, Dinan) reports the President also “called for unity,” asserting, “the division must stop, and must stop right now.” The Wall Street Journal (8/12, Radnofsky) reports he added, “No matter our color, creed, religion or political party we are all Americans first.” Meanwhile, the Washington Times (8/12, Blake) reports Trump “weighed in” earlier in the day on Twitter, saying, “We ALL must be united & condemn all that hate stands for. There is no place for this kind of violence in America. Lets come together as one!” The President continued, “Am in Bedminster for meetings & press conference on V.A. & all that we have done, and are doing, to make it better-but Charlottesville sad!” In another tweet, he said, “Deepest condolences to the families & fellow officers of the VA State Police who died today. You’re all among the best this nation produces.” Trump added, “Condolences to the family of the young woman killed today, and best regards to all of those injured, in Charlottesville, Virginia. So sad!” The Hill (8/12, Greenwood) reports First Lady Melania Trump “was the first member of the administration to respond, drawing a line between ‘freedom of speech’ and violence.” Breitbart (8/12, Starr) reports the First Lady tweeted, “Our country encourages freedom of speech, but let’s communicate w/o hate in our hearts. No good comes from violence. #Charlottesville.” Vice President Pence tweeted, “I stand with @POTUS against hate & violence. U.S is greatest when we join together & oppose those seeking to divide us. #Charlottesville.” Pence also retweeted the first lady and continued, “As @POTUS Trump said, “We have to come together as Americans with love for our nation... & true affection for each other.” #Charlottesville.” Pence added, “Karen & I saddened by the loss of lives in Charlottesville. Thoughts & prayers w/ families of officers & young woman. Also w/ injured victims.” The Hill (8/12, Manchester) reports Attorney General Sessions issued a statement denouncing the violence, saying, “We stand united behind the President in condemning the violence in Charlottesville and any message of hate and intolerance.” Sessions added, “This violence is totally contrary to American values and can never be tolerated.” He also pledged that the Justice Department “would support local and state officers on the scene ‘in any way possible.’” While NBC Nightly News (8/12, story 2, 2:40, Diaz-Balart) reported the President struck “a different tone than we’ve heard from him in recent days” with his “call for unity,” Kelly O’Donnell said that despite referring to “bigotry,” Trump “did not specifically rebuke or describe racially motivated protesters, some of whom brought weapons to a planned demonstration.” ABC World News Tonight ’s (8/12, story 4, 3:25, Vega) David Wright reported the President’s use of “on many sides” in his statement “troubled a lot of people because it [was] ambiguous. Many people heard it as him creating a moral equivalence between the white nationalists and the counterprotesters, blaming both.” Wright added the White House now “says the President was condemning hatred, bigotry, and violence from all sources and in all forms.” The AP (8/12, Lemire) reports Trump’s position was not how Charlottesville Mayor Michael Signer “assessed the chaos that led the governor to declare a state of emergency, contending that Trump’s campaign fed the flames of prejudice.” Instead, Signer “said he was disgusted that the white nationalists had come to his town and blamed Trump for inflaming racial prejudices with his campaign last year.” He asserted, “I’m not going to make any bones about it. I place the blame for a lot of what you’re seeing in American today right at the doorstep of the White House and the people around the president.” In its lead segment, the CBS Weekend News (8/12, lead story, 2:45, Ninan) broadcast Signer criticizing the “outsiders coming here who’ve traveled all across the country to try and make Charlottesville a target for their ideology.” Signer added, “I refuse to be intimidated.” The Hill (8/12, Manchester) reports a number of Republican lawmakers also “went after...Trump on Saturday over his statement on violent clashes in Charlottesville.” The Hill adds Sen. Cory Gardner went “as far as saying Trump needed to call it a ‘terror attack by white supremacists.’” In a separate article, The Hill (8/12, Manchester) reports Gardner tweeted, “Mr. President – we must call evil by its name. These were white supremacists and this was domestic terrorism.” According to The Hill, Sen. Jeff Flake joined Gardner in condemning the aims of the rally, tweeting, “The #WhiteSupremacy in #Charlottesville does not reflect the values of the America I know. Hate and bigotry have no place in this country.” The Hill (8/12, Seipel) reports Sen. Orrin Hatch also criticized Trump’s comments on the rally, tweeting, “We should call evil by its name. My brother didn’t give his life fighting Hitler for Nazi ideas to go unchallenged here at home. -OGH.” The Hill (8/12, Thomsen) “Briefing Room” blog reports Sen. Marco Rubio “tore into President Trump Saturday for refusing to single out white supremacists at a white nationalist rally in Virginia.” Rubio tweeted, “Very important for the nation to hear @potus describe events in #Charlottesville for what they are, a terror attack by #whitesupremacists.” The Hill (8/12, Carter) reports House Speaker Ryan condemned the rally, tweeting, “The views fueling the spectacle in Charlottesville are repugnant. Let it only serve to unite Americans against this kind of vile bigotry.” The Hill (8/12, Manchester) reports Sen. Ted Cruz in a statement said, “The Nazis, the KKK, and white supremacists are repulsive and evil, and all of us have a moral obligation to speak out against the lies, bigotry, anti-semitism, and hatred that they propagate. ... Having watched the horrifying video of the car deliberately crashing into a crowd of protesters, I urge the Department of Justice to immediately investigate and prosecute this grotesque act of domestic terrorism.” The Hill (8/12, Bowden) reports in its “Briefing Room” blog that Democratic lawmakers also “urged President Trump to condemn” the rally, with Senate Minority Leader Schumer tweeting, “March & rally in Charlottesville against everything the flag stands for. President Trump must condemn in strongest terms immediately.” Schumer followed up, “Of course we condemn ALL that hate stands for. Until @POTUS specifically condemns alt-right action in Charlottesville, he hasnt done his job.” Rep. Steve Cohen, a member of the House Judiciary Committee, tweeted, “Charlottesville alt.right gathering is reminiscent of 1930’s Germany and the President needs to condemn it. Make America great; Speak out!” The Hill (8/12, Thomsen) “Briefing Room” blog reports former Vice President Joe Biden similarly “took aim at President Trump’s comments that ‘many sides’ led to [the] violence.” Biden tweeted, “There is only one side. #charlottesville.” The Hill (8/12, Thomsen) “Briefing Room” blog reports former President Obama tweeted the Nelson Mandela quote “No one is born hating another person because of the color of his skin or his background or his religion...” The Hill (8/12, Thomsen) reports in its “Briefing Room” blog that Hillary Clinton “condemned the ‘incitement of hatred’ which she said led to [the] violence,” tweeting, “My heart is in Charlottesville today, and with everyone made to feel unsafe in their country.” She continued, “But the incitement of hatred that got us here is as real and condemnable as the white supremacists in our streets.” Clinton added, “Every minute we allow this to persist through tacit encouragement or inaction is a disgrace, & corrosive to our values.” She concluded, “Now is the time for leaders to be strong in their words & deliberate in their actions.” The Hill (8/12, Bowden) reports the NAACP and the Congressional Black Caucus also both “swiftly shot back” at Trump. The NAACP tweeted, “Guess it’s hard to disavow bigots and hate when they are amongst your key strategists. #Charlottesville.” The CBC tweeted, “.@realDonaldTrump: “Both sides, law & order...” Your false equivalency, dog whistles are sad. White supremacy is to blame. #Charlottesville.” According to The Hill, “the reference is to White House chief strategist Steve Bannon, who formerly ran Breitbart News. Bannon has been called a white nationalist before by Trump’s critics, most notably by House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi (D-Calif.) in November.” A Washington Post (8/12, Board) editorial also criticizes Trump and shares what “a presidential president would have said” following the violence in Charlottesville. The Washington Post (8/12, Nirappil) reports on how the various Virginia candidates responded to the rally and violence while USA Today (8/12, Miller) shares “a look at how social media reacted to the #Charlottesville violence.” 

Police: Three Deaths Linked To Rally, 19 People Injured When Car Strikes Counter-Protesters. In a front-page article, the Washington Post (8/12, A1, Heim, Silverman, Shapiro, Brown) reports “a chaotic and violent day turned to tragedy Saturday as hundreds of white nationalists, neo-Nazis, Ku Klux Klan members – planning to stage what they described as their largest rally in decades to ‘take America back’ – clashed with counterprotesters in the streets and a car plowed into crowds, killing one person and injuring 19 others.” Angela Taylor, a public information officer at the University of Virginia Medical Center, told USA Today (8/12, Stanglin, Cavallaro) “that 20 patients were taken there and one died. The conditions of the other 19 were not yet determined.” USA Today adds that “about three hours after the car crash, the Virginia State Police’s Bell 407 helicopter crashed about 7 miles from the scene” and according to police reports, “two people on board died.” While the AP (8/12, Rankin) reports “the chaos boiled over [when] what is believed to be the largest group of white nationalists to come together in a decade” gathered in order “to protest plans to remove a statue of the Confederate Gen. Robert E. Lee,” Breitbart (8/12, Spiering) says the violence erupted “after leftist Antifa protesters attacked a protest of white nationalists.” USA Today (8/12, Rossman) states that “Twitter dispatches showed a violent scene with protesters wielding shields, sticks and flags in massive scuffles that left people bloodied.” USA Today adds “there were also reports of urine being tossed at reporters and the air was said to be filled with pepper spray, mace and tear gas.” A front-page New York Times (8/12, A1, Stolberg, Rosenthal) article reports “by 11 a.m., after both sides had made their way to Emancipation Park, the scene had exploded into taunting, shoving and outright brawling.” According to the Times, after Charlottesville police cleared the area, “witnesses said a crowd of counterdemonstrators, jubilant because the white nationalists had left, was moving up Fourth Street, near the mall, when a gray sports car came down the road and accelerated, mowing down several people and hurling at least two in the air.” In the lead ABC World News Tonight (8/12, lead story, 3:00, Vega) segment, Eva Pilgrim reported a “silver Dodge Challenger with Ohio plates seen here in this video barreling down a hill. Witnesses say it only stopped after it hit a van and another car. Blocked in, the silver car went in reverse to get away.” Pilgrim added the driver “was picked up just a short distance from the scene, not very far at all. Witnesses telling us whoever the driver was, they did not hesitate. They put their foot on the gas and kept going.” Meanwhile, the Washington Times (8/12, Blake) reports Virginia Gov. Terry McAuliffe “declared a state of emergency late Saturday morning moments before the ‘Unite the Right’ rally and counterprotests were scheduled to begin” in order to “to aid state response to violence.” He subsequently tweeted, “The acts and rhetoric in #Charlottesville over past 24 hours are unacceptable & must stop. A right to speech is not a right to violence.” The Hill (8/12, Manchester) reports McAuliffe at a press conference later Saturday “ripped white supremacists who sparked violence in Charlottesville, Va. on Saturday, saying there is no place for them in the country.” He asserted, “I have a message to all of the white supremacists and the Nazis who came into Charlottesville today. Our message is plain and simple. Go home. You are not wanted in this great commonwealth. Shame on you. You pretend that you’re patriots, but you are anything but a patriot.” McAuliffe added, “My message is clear. We are stronger than you. You will not succeed. There is no place for you here, there is no place for you in America.” The Hill (8/12, Seipel) reports Attorney General Sessions announced Saturday that the Justice Department “has opened up a federal investigation into the deadly events in Charlottesville, Va. on Saturday after a car plowed into a crowd of protestors and left one dead.” In a statement, Sessions said, “I have talked with FBI Director Chris Wray, FBI agents on the scene, and law enforcement officials for the state of Virginia. The FBI has been supporting state and local authorities throughout the day. U.S. Attorney Rick Mountcastle has commenced a federal investigation and will have the full support of the Department of Justice. Justice will prevail.” The Hill adds that the US Attorney’s office for the Western District of Virginia and the Richmond Field Office of the FBI confirmed the probe. ABC World News Tonight (8/12, story 3, 0:20, Vega) also briefly reported an investigation into the helicopter crash is underway. In a front-page article, the Washington Post (8/12, A1, Hermann, Heim, Silverman) says Charlottesville police have also come “under criticism for failing to keep apart warring white nationalists and counterprotesters who battled it out in the city streets Saturday amid what at first seemed an anemic response from authorities.” The Post adds that “anger over how the police responded came from all directions and intensified after the death of a woman struck by a car that plowed into a group of counterprotesters. Experts said police appeared outnumbered, ill-prepared and inexperienced.” 

David Duke: Charlottesville Protests About “Fulfilling Promises Of Donald Trump.” The Hill (8/12, Manchester) “Briefing Room” blog reports former Ku Klux Klan Grand Wizard David Duke “appeared at the ‘Unite the Right’ rally...prior to [the] violent clashes, saying ENDANGERED SPECIES 

# What does wolf ruling mean for Yellowstone grizzlies? 

> Amanda Reilly, E&E News reporter
> Published: Friday, August 11, 2017

# Email this story, sponsored by Center for Western Priorities. 

AN E&E NEWS PUBLICATION   

> WY
> This Greenwire story was sent to you by: gj taylor@comcast.net

# Conversation Contents 

## FW: From Greenwire -- ENDANGERED SPECIES: What does wolf ruling mean for Yellowstone grizzlies? 

# Gary Taylor <gj_taylor@comcast.net> 

## From: Gary Taylor <gj_taylor@comcast.net> 

## Sent: Fri Aug 11 2017 12:52:15 GMT-0600 (MDT) 

## To: 

## "'Jen Mock Schaeffer'" <JenMock@fishwildlife.org>, "'Ron Regan'" <RRegan@fishwildlife.org>, "'Wiley, Nick'" <Nick.Wiley@myfwc.com>, "'Moore,Virgil'" <virgil.moore@idfg.idaho.gov>, <scott.talbott@wyo.gov>, "'Chris Segal'" <chris.segal@gmail.com>, "'Lowell E. Baier'" <LEBaier@baierproperties.com>, "'David Willms'" <david.willms@wyo.gov>, "'Carol Bambery'" <CBambery@fishwildlife.org>, "'Lane Kisonak'" <lkisonak@fishwildlife.org> 

## CC: "'Rebecca A Humphries'" <bhumphries@nwtf.net>, "'Joel Pedersen'" <jpedersen@nwtf.net> 

## Subject: FW: From Greenwire -- ENDANGERED SPECIES: What does wolf ruling mean for Yellowstone grizzlies? 

How long will Congress let this nonsense go on until they step in to comprehensively, as opposed to species by species, fix this? I think we can anticipate ESA rule revisions, hopefully comprehensively, out of DOI, but of course, they will be litigated. Let the state and federal wildlife professionals do their job and decide stuff like this, please.      

> From: gj_taylor [mailto:email_this@eenews.net]
> Sent: Friday, August 11, 2017 2:42 PM
> To: gj_taylor@comcast.net
> Subject: From Greenwire -- ENDANGERED SPECIES: What does wolf ruling mean for Yellowstone grizzlies? Last week’s appeals court decision on endangered species protections on wolves in the Great Lakes region could have implications for grizzlies around Yellowstone National Park. Neal Herbert/Yellowstone National Park/Flickr

A court's decision last week knocking down the federal government's efforts to delist Great Lakes wolves could give environmentalists ammunition in their bid to overturn a delisting rule for Yellowstone grizzlies. For both wolves and grizzlies, the Fish and Wildlife Service carved out a smaller population from a larger listed species and declared it recovered. Last week, a three-judge panel of the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit found that the service could approach delisting that way under the law — but that FWS failed to consider key factors in its wolf rule. Greens say the grizzly delisting decision suffers from similar flaws. "Just as in the Great Lakes wolves, the Service failed to follow this proper process in the Greater Yellowstone grizzly bear delisting final rule," said Kelly Nokes, carnivore advocate at WildEarth Guardians. At issue in last week's Great Lakes wolf case was a 2011 FWS rule establishing the boundary of a new distinct population segment of wolves that covered all of Michigan, Minnesota and Wisconsin and parts of Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, North Dakota, South Dakota and Ohio. Along with defining the boundary, the rule removed protections from the population. The D.C. Circuit found that, under the Endangered Species Act, FWS does have the authority to define a new distinct population segment and delist it in the same action. But the court faulted FWS for not adequately considering what would happen to wolves around the country that are still listed when it removes federal protections from the Great Lakes population. The court also found that the service did not consider where wolves roamed historically. Wolves currently use less than 10 percent of their historic range. "Holding that the Service has the legal authority to identify a distinct population segment from within an already-listed species does not mean it did so properly here. In fact, it did not," Judge Patricia Millett, an Obama appointee, wrote for the court ( Greenwire , Aug. 1). As with wolves, environmentalists say, the Fish and Wildlife Service failed to consider grizzlies outside of the Greater Yellowstone Ecosystem in its recent delisting rule. In June, FWS announced it was ending protections for the about 700 grizzlies that live within the ecosystem. The population is above the federal threshold of about 600 for removing grizzlies from the list of threatened species protected under the Endangered Species Act. The service's Greater Yellowstone Ecosystem Distinct Population Segment covers portions of northwest Wyoming, southwest Montana and eastern Idaho ( E&E News PM , June 22). Several environmental groups have pledged litigation, filing notices of intent to sue with the Interior Department. To bring claims under the Endangered Species Act, plaintiffs must give 60 days' notice before filing lawsuits. The clock for the grizzly delisting decision runs out at the end of this month. Nokes of WildEarth Guardians, which is one of the groups that are planning to sue, said that of particular concern for the grizzly is what the delisting decision will mean for connectivity between different populations of bears. FWS failed to consider connectivity in its delisting decision, she said. "Grizzlies still need to connect to neighboring populations (e.g., the population near Glacier National Park) and reestablish themselves in key habitats where they no longer exist," Nokes wrote in an email to E&E News. "Connectivity will necessarily be hampered by the impending state-sanctioned trophy hunts permitted by the final rule." Environmentalists have also argued that the Fish and Wildlife Service ignored the fact that grizzly bears have yet to return to up to 98 percent of their historic range. Other groups threatening to bring Endangered Species Act claims include the Northern Cheyenne Tribe, Center for Biological Diversity, Sierra Club, National Parks Conservation Association, Alliance for the Wild Rockies, Western Watersheds Project and Native Ecosystems Council ( Greenwire , July 3). The groups will likely file in district court in Montana, where tribes have already challenged the Yellowstone grizzly delisting decision on religious grounds ( Greenwire , July 7). Matthew Bishop, an attorney with the Western Environmental Law Center who is representing WildEarth Guardians, noted that the D.C. Circuit's finding that FWS has to consider the implications for the remnant population of a species is a "relevant key finding that applies equally to the grizzly decision." He said, though, that conservation groups are still hammering out their legal arguments and that it's unclear how exactly the similarities with the Great Lakes wolves case will shape up in litigation over the grizzly delisting. He noted that the D.C. Circuit didn't go as far as the D.C. District Court in rejecting the Fish and Wildlife Service's approach. When it heard the Great Lakes wolf case, the U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia ruled that FWS had no authority to draw a circle around a population and declare it recovered. Ralph Henry, director of litigation at the Humane Society of the United States, which was the lead plaintiff in the Great Lakes wolf case, said the D.C. Circuit appeared to want to provide FWS with some flexibility in how the Endangered Species Act is applied. But the court was clear that FWS couldn't just focus its analysis on the population segment it was proposing to delist. "The service put blinders on to the impacts of the action," he said. "That's where Fish and Wildlife Service may well run into trouble in the grizzly context." Daniel Rohlf, a professor at Lewis & Clark Law School who focuses on wildlife and endangered species law, said the Yellowstone delisting decision "really makes it unclear" about the status of the remaining bears that are outside the Yellowstone area. "Fish and Wildlife Service does have a real potential problem by not clearly explaining the status of grizzly bears outside of Yellowstone," he said. For its part, the service says the Yellowstone ecosystem has reached its carrying capacity for grizzlies and that the delisting rule has several safeguards to ensure that the population remains stable. 

## A long history 

FWS's efforts to delist both wolves and grizzlies have long been mired in litigation. In general, the D.C. Circuit's decision last week set out significant legal markers on the issue of carving out populations of already listed species for purposes of delisting. "It sharpened what the Fish and Wildlife Service can and can't do," said Noah Greenwald, endangered species director at the Center for Biological Diversity. "It says that they can carve out a distinct population from a species and delist it. But in doing so, they can't undermine the recovery of the species itself." The decision, he said, validates concerns that environmentalists have had about FWS's failure to broadly consider the recovery of wolves — and grizzlies — throughout the United States. For both species, the service has long approached recovery by focusing on smaller distinct population segments rather than the species as a whole across the United States, and then pointed to those smaller populations to demonstrate recovery. "Grizzlies and wolves aren't really politically popular species, so the agency has been focused on interpreting the Endangered Species Act as narrow as possible," Rohlf said. Rohlf said the court recognized that FWS's delisting rule left wolves outside of the Great Lakes region with a "very unclear population status" that could preclude them from gaining protection under the Endangered Species Act. FWS's rule, he said, left open the option for the service to delist wolves in other areas because they're no longer part of a distinct population segment. "The D.C. Circuit is sort of calling the Fish and Wildlife Service on its shenanigans that it sometimes employs using the DPS definition under the Endangered Species Act," he said. "The court is logically saying you can't use the DPS policy ... in creative ways to deal with species you want to delist." But while last week's D.C. Circuit decision provided some clarity about the treatment of distinct population segments under the law, it still left plenty of questions. For example, while it's clear that the court was troubled that FWS looked only at the current range of wolves, it didn't answer just how relevant the historic range is to the agency's delisting decision. Conversation Contents 

## U.S. Department of the Interior News Briefing for Tuesday, December 5, 2017 

# Bulletin Intelligence <Interior@bulletinintelligence.com> 

## From: Bulletin Intelligence <Interior@bulletinintelligence.com> 

## Sent: Tue Dec 05 2017 04:01:03 GMT-0700 (MST) 

## To: <Interior@bulletinintelligence.com> 

## Subject: U.S. Department of the Interior News Briefing for Tuesday, December 5, 2017  

> Mobile version and searchable archives available here. Please click here to subscribe.
> DATE: TUESDAY, DECEMBER 5, 2017 6:00 AM EST

# Today's Table Of Contents 

DOI In The News 

• NBC: Trump Reduces Size Of Grand Staircase, Bears Ears Monuments. • KBSC-FM Boise (ID): Interior Department Nomination Hearing Begins Tuesday For Hill Staffer With Idaho Ties. • Eureka (CA) Times Standard: Feds’ Move To End Trinity River Watchdog Group Scrutinized. 

Bureau Of Indian Affairs 

• Tribal Membership, Federal Dollars And A Casino On The Line With Nooksack Election. 

Bureau Of Land Management 

• Washington Examiner: Congress Fights Over Whether To Allow Interior To Kill Wild Horses. • Associated Press: Agency Targets Trash, Lawlessness At Shooting Range. • Cody (WY) Enterprise: Fence Improvement Project Benefits Pronghorn Migration. • Las Vegas Review-Journal: Judge Releases 4 More Bunkerville Standoff Defendants. 

Bureau Of Ocean Energy Management 

• Bill Could Make Drilling Off N.C. Coast More Likely. • Company Pulls Plug On Massachusetts’ Cape Wind Offshore Wind Farm. 

Bureau Of Reclamation 

• Navajo-Gallup Water Project Gains Pipeline Contract. 

Fish And Wildlife Service 

• New York Times: Hunt Elephants To Save Them? Some Countries See No Other Choice. • Santa Fe New Mexican: Fish And Wildlife Service Plan Calls For Release Of 12 Newborn Wolf Pups. National Park Service 

• Duluth (MN) News Tribune: Park Service Nearing Decision On Isle Royale Wolves. • Alaska Public Radio Network: Research Continues On Elevated Mercury Levels In Some Non-migratory Fish In Southwest Alaska. • Billings (MT) Gazette: Little Bighorn Plan Would Create New Visitor Center, Make Room For Artifacts Currently In Arizona. • MLive (MI): Keeler Building Added To National Register, Paves Way For Redevelopment. 

US Geological Survey 

• Newsweek: Underwater Volcano Eruptions Sound Like Gunshots And Can Travel 10,000 Miles Through The Ocean. • Rio Blanco (CO) Herald Times: USGS Proposes $260,400 Plan To Study White River Algae Problem. • Big Island (HI) Video News: USGS Posts New Annotated Map Of Pu’u O’o Crater. 

Opinion Pieces 

• President Trump, Don’t Decimate The Bears Ears National Monument. • National Park Lovers Should Applaud Trump’s Monument Decision. • Trump Eviscerates Two National Monuments In The Name Of Political Back-scratching. • Additional Reading. 

Top National News 

• ABC: Trump Says He Feels “Badly” For Flynn As Lawyer Says A President Cannot Obstruct Justice. • NBC: Supreme Court Allows Third Version Of Travel Ban To Take Effect While Challenges Proceed. • Washington Post: Trump, Congressional Leaders To Hold Budget Talks Thursday. • Associated Press: GOP Leaders “Confident” Differences In Tax Bills Can Be Overcome. • ABC: North Korea: US-South Korea Air Drills Put Peninsula At “Brink Of Nuclear War.” • USA Today: US Mayors Set To Sign Climate Agreement In Chicago. 

Editorial Wrap-Up 

• New York Times. - “Yes, The President Can Obstruct Justice.” - “With Death Of Ali Abdullah Saleh, Need for Yemen Peace Grows.” • Washington Post. - “Is A Senate Seat Really Worth This?” - “How To Move The Tax Bill From Worse To Bad.” - “The District Has A Chance To Address Homelessness With Reason, Not Emotion.” • Wall Street Journal. - “Mueller’s Credibility Problem.” - “Supreme Rebuke For The Judiciary.” - “The Trial Bar’s Tax Break.” 

Big Picture 

• Headlines From Today’s Front Pages. 

Washington Schedule 

• Today’s Events In Washington. 

Last Laughs 

• Late Night Political Humor. 

# DOI In The News Trump Reduces Size Of Grand Staircase, Bears Ears Monuments. 

During a visit To Utah Monday, President Trump announced that he has reduced the size of Bears Ears National Monument by 85% and Grand Staircase-Escalante National Monument by about half. Media coverage is somewhat mixed, highlighting both the positive response from officials and Utahans who see the move as an economic win for the state as well as the negative reaction from protesters and tribal and environmental groups who have vowed to mount a legal challenge. NBC Nightly News (12/4, story 4, 0:25, Holt) reported that Trump is “dramatically scaling back” the sites, and Breitbart (12/4, Spiering) says he took “the unusual step...despite an outcry from leftist environmental groups.” Trump said, “With the action I’m taking today, we will not only give back your voice over the use of this land, we will also restore your access and your enjoyment. ... Public lands will once again be for public use.” The Washington Post (12/4, Dawsey, Eilperin) reports that Trump said he came to Utah to “reverse federal overreach” and took action “because some people think that the natural resources of Utah should be controlled by a small handful of very distant bureaucrats located in Washington. And guess what? They’re wrong.” The Washington Times (12/4, Wolfgang) says Trump “said previous presidents have greatly abused their power under the century-old Antiquities Act, and stretched the law past its limits in cordoning off millions of acres of land and placing them under government control.” A brief report on ABC World News Tonight (12/4, story 14, 0:20, Muir) said the sites cover “several million acres that contain large amounts of oil, gas and coal.” Axios (12/4, Pandey) says Trump’s move “received mixed reviews, with Utah Sens. Orrin Hatch and Mike Lee cheering alongside the audience at Trump’s Salt Lake City rally and protesters opposing the decision in Utah and outside the White House.” Similarly, the Salt Lake (UT) Tribune (12/4) says Trump was met by “thousands” of protesters outside the state Capitol, “most decrying the anticipated announcement,” while the inside of the Capitol was “packed with Trump supporters who celebrated Trump’s declaration as an economic victory for rural Utahans who depend on mineral development and ranching, activities they say were stifled by the sprawling monuments.” The Washington Examiner (12/4, Quinn) reports that protesters shouted, “F--- you, Trump” as his motorcade passed. The New York Times (12/4, Turkewitz) reports that the reduction of the Bears Ears Monument “is expected to trigger a legal battle that could alter the course of American land conservation, putting dozens of other monuments at risk and possibly opening millions of preserved public acres to oil and gas extraction, mining, logging and other commercial activities.” The AP (12/5, Lucey, Superville) says tribal and environmental groups opposed to the decision “began filing lawsuits Monday in a bid to stop Trump and Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke.” They argue the designations “are needed to protect important archaeological and cultural resources.” Reuters (12/4, Volcovici, Rampton) reports leaders representing the Navajo, Hopi, Pueblo of Zuni, Ute Mountain and Ute Indian tribes, which “pushed for the creation of the Bears Ears monument and who now manage it, said they will take the Trump administration to court.” Natalie Landreth, attorney for the Native American Rights Fund, said, “We will be fighting back immediately. All five tribes will be standing together united to defend Bears Ears.” The Salt Lake (UT) Tribune (12/4) says the Tribes argue that Trump “does not have the legal authority to shrink the designation.” Courts have not addressed the issue since the passage of the Antiquities Act 111 years ago. While Presidents are authorized under the law “to unilaterally set aside public lands to protect ‘objects of historic and scientific interest,’” a court ruling “would determine the Antiquities Act’s future use – whether it allows a president to revoke or modify a monument or just to designate one.” The Washington Examiner (12/4, Siegel) reports that the Administration and congressional Republicans “say previous presidents abused their authority” under the Act, “setting aside larger and larger swaths of public land, limiting development opportunities and stifling local control.” Ad Age (12/4, Pasquarelli) reports that California-based outdoor retailer Patagonia also plans to sue the Administration. CEO Rose Marcario said in a statement, “Americans have overwhelmingly spoken out against the Trump Administration’s unprecedented attempt to shut down our national monuments. ... We’ve fought to protect these places since we were founded and now we’ll continue that fight in the courts.” Jamie Yuccas reported on the CBS Evening News (12/4, story 11, 2:30, Glor) that “native tribes and environmental groups say it could be years of a legal fight before it is resolved.” Local television reports were largely positive for Trump. For example, on its website, KSL-TV Salt Lake City (12/4) said Trump’s announcement drew “cheers that reverberated throughout the Capitol rotunda Monday.” Trump told those gathered that his decision means “public lands will once again be for public use.” KTVX-TV Salt Lake City (12/4, 5:00 p.m. MST) said Trump “made an unprecedented move,” announcing “major reductions” to the national monuments. KUTV-TV Salt Lake City (12/4, 5:02 p.m. MST) reported that Trump “ma[de] good on his promise” to shrink the monuments. KUTV added that Trump announced the decision to “rousing applause.” Also reporting are the AP (12/5, PRICE, MCCOMBS), the New York Times (12/4), the Washington Post (12/5, Andrews), the Washington Post (12/4, Dawsey, Eilperin), the Washington Post (12/4), the Washington Post (12/4), the Washington Post (12/4), the Washington Examiner (12/4, Siciliano), The Hill (12/4, Thomsen), Politico (12/4, Lefebvre), Roll Call (12/4, Bennett), the Los Angeles Times (12/4, Finnegan), the Los Angeles Times (12/4, Schneider), the Salt Lake (UT) Tribune (12/4, Maffly), the San Francisco Chronicle (12/4, Turkewitz), the New York Post (12/4, Fredericks), the Orange County (CA) Register (12/4, Scauzillo), the Oregonian (12/4, Theen), the Denver Post (12/4, Lucey), the Grand Junction (CO) Daily Sentinel (12/5, Webb), the Arizona Republic (12/4, Korte), the Boston Herald (12/4), the Missoula Current (MT) (12/4, Kidston), BBC News (UK) (12/4), The Guardian (UK) (12/4, Smardon), The Guardian (UK) (12/4, Smith, Milman), the Daily Mail (12/4, Martosko), RT (12/4), and Sputnik News (12/4). Also reporting are USA Today (12/4), USA Today (12/4, Demille), TIME (12/5), Bloomberg News (12/4, Blumberg), Bloomberg News (12/4, Dlouhy, Sink), CNN (12/4, Merica), CNN (12/4, Weir), ABC News (12/4, Ebbs, Stracqualursi), ABC News (12/4, Ebbs, Mallin), NBC News (12/4, Vitali), Fox News (12/4, Chakraborty), CBS News (12/4), CBS News (12/4, Guild), CBS News (12/4, Guild), NPR (12/4), NPR (12/4, GONZALES, Siegler, DWYER), NPR (12/4), PBS NewsHour (12/4, Holmes), USA Today (12/4, Korte), USA Today (12/4, Cummings), TIME (12/4, Lucey, Superville), TIME (12/4), TIME (12/5, Steinmetz), Newsweek (12/4, Pereira), Fortune (12/4, Detrick), MarketWatch (12/4, Murphy), the Huffington Post (12/4, Madani), the Huffington Post (12/4, D'Angelo), Slate (12/4, Cummins), Montana Public Radio (12/4, Kreimer), Montana Public Radio (12/4, Hegyi), Moyers & Company (12/4, Miller), Outside (12/4), KSTU-TV Salt Lake City (12/4), KUER-FM Salt Lake City Salt Lake City (12/5, Fabrizio), and KTLA-TV Los Angeles Los Angeles (12/4). 

Bears Ears, Grand Staircase Escalante Decision By Trump Prompts Strong Reaction From Colorado Democrats. The decision also drew criticism from “Colorado’s top Democrats,” the Denver Post (12/4, Paul) reports. Gov, John Hickenlooper said in a statement, “Preserving and expanding our national monuments is keeping in the best traditions of our country. ... In Colorado, we value our lands because they are part of our fabric and they strengthen local economies. We hope our leaders can find a way to let monuments remain and return their focus to more pressing issues facing our country.” Rep. Diana DeGette (D-CO), called Trump’s decision a raid of “public lands for private gain,” Rep. Ed Perlmutter (D-CO) called it an “unprecedented attack.” Sen. Michael Bennet said the decision was “in lock-step with a small number of Washington special interests.” 

New Mexicans Asking President To Leave State’s Monuments Alone. The Alamogordo (NM) Daily News (12/4) reports that following President Trump’s decision to shrink Bears Ears and Grand Staircase-Escalante National Monuments, “New Mexicans are reasserting their support for Organ Mountains-Desert Peaks and Río Grande del Norte National Monuments, and imploring President Trump to leave the Land of Enchantment’s national monuments alone, according to a New Mexico Wildlife and Las Cruces Green Chamber press release.” Alamogordo public lands sportsman Rod Sims stated in the release, “Sportsmen have been on the front lines of conserving wildlife habitat like Bears Ears, Grand Staircase-Escalante, Organ Mountains-Desert Peaks and Río Grande del Norte. Hunting and fishing is a time-tested tradition in the United States, and we need vast backcountry to support healthy wildlife populations. Shrinking, breaking apart, or changing the management of national monuments can fragment habitat and harm wildlife migrations and populations.” 

Oregon Leaders Vow To Fight For Cascade-Siskiyou After Utah Monument Reductions. 

KGW-TV Portland, OR (12/4, Roth) reports that after President Trump announced two national monuments in Utah will “shrink significantly, top Oregon Democrats decried the action amid questions of whether Oregon’s Cascade-Siskiyou National Monument would be next.” Bears Ears and Grand Staircase-Esalante National Monuments were “among four national monuments Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke previously advised Trump to shrink.” The article notes that “also on list was Oregon’s Cascade-Siskiyou, which covers 112,000 acres in southern Oregon.” According to the article, “while Trump has yet to announce whether he will heed Zinke’s recommendation to shrink the Cascade-Siskiyou, Democratic Oregon lawmakers spoke out Monday in support of preserving the biologically diverse land.” 

Rockefeller And The Secret Land Deals That Created Grand Teton National Park. The Washington Post (12/4, Lednicer) reports on “the audacious plan” hatched in the 1920s, whereby John D. Rockefeller Jr. “agreed to surreptitiously acquire thousands of acres of breathtaking scenery around Jackson Hole, Wyo., and donate them to the federal government for a national park.” According to the article, “by 1930, a year after Congress had established Grand Teton National Park, word had gotten out about the purchases, and Wyoming residents were furious.” The paper says that the “controversy surrounding” President Trump’s decision to shrink Bears Ears and Grand Staircase-Escalante “shows that the fight over the size of national parks and monuments, which reached its apex in the fight over Jackson Hole, continues to this day.” 

## Interior Department Nomination Hearing Begins Tuesday For Hill Staffer With Idaho Ties. 

KBSC-FM Boise, ID (12/4, Barnhill) reports that Tuesday morning, a Senate committee will hear the nomination of Tim Petty to be the assistant Interior secretary for water and science. Petty has “worked for the Interior Department before – under then-Secretary and former Idaho governor Dirk Kempthorne.” 

## Feds’ Move To End Trinity River Watchdog Group Scrutinized. 

The Eureka (CA) Times Standard (12/4, Houston) reports that the Interior Department’s Press Secretary Heather Swift told the Times-Standard last week that it disbanded the Trinity River Adaptive Management Working Group “because the group did not submit a short justification memo on why the department should continue funding its $100,000 annual budget.” However, “the group’s chairman said to the Times-Standard on Monday that he was told on multiple times this year by U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service officials that the paperwork had been filed.” Stokely said, “There is some kind of bureaucratic mixup here. I suggest they give us another chance.” 

# Bureau Of Indian Affairs 

## Tribal Membership, Federal Dollars And A Casino On The Line With Nooksack Election. 

KUOW-FM Seattle (12/4, Fox) reports that early results from Saturday’s Nooksack election “show all incumbents won their seats.” Hinging on the results are “tribal membership, tens of millions of federal dollars and a casino.” According to the article, “when the tribe agreed to hold an election a few months ago, interim federal money started flowing back to the tribe and so did operation of its casino,” but “hat could all go away again if the Bureau of Indian Affairs does not certify this election by December 23.” 

# Bureau Of Land Management 

## Congress Fights Over Whether To Allow Interior To Kill Wild Horses. 

The Washington Examiner (12/5, Siegel) reports that to manage the overpopulation of wild horses, John Ruhs, the Bureau of Land Management’s director in Nevada, “wants Congress to lift restrictions on his agency to give it more flexibility to euthanize horses — not just when they’re old and sick — and sell more of them for private use, without dictating what the buyer can or cannot do with the animals.” The Senate “introduced a fiscal 2018 Interior-Environmental Protection Agency spending bill last month that includes language prohibiting BLM from selling without restriction tens of thousands of excess horses on federal rangelands and banning the agency from euthanizing animals that have been unsuccessfully offered for adoption more than three times.” However, the House’s fiscal 2018 Interior appropriations legislation “contains a section that would lift restrictions on BLM to sell or, in specific circumstances, euthanize excess wild horses.” 

## Agency Targets Trash, Lawlessness At Shooting Range. 

The AP (12/4) reports that an area 7 miles outside the Las Vegas Valley “that has been used for target practice for at least the past 20 years” is “littered with broken glass and tens of thousands of spent shotgun shells and bullet casings.” The Bureau of Land Management has “launched a new effort to address the growing trash and safety problem at Southern Nevada’s most popular spot for target shooters.” The BLM has “hosted a pair of volunteer cleanups at the site, one in May with the National Rifle Association and another in early November.” The bureau “also has teamed with the Metropolitan Police Department and the Nevada Highway Patrol to step up patrols in the area.” Additional coverage was provided by KNPR-FM Las Vegas (12/4). 

## Fence Improvement Project Benefits Pronghorn Migration. 

The Cody (WY) Enterprise (12/4) reports that the Bureau of Land Management Cody Field Office “recently collaborated with the Wyoming Department of Transportation, Wyoming Game and Fish Department and Friends of a Legacy to modify a stretch of fence east of Cody for the benefit of migrating pronghorn.” They “came together to replace the bottom strand of barbed wire with smooth, wildlife-friendly wire on about three miles of fence along WYO 32 on the eastern edge of the McCullough Peaks Wild Horse Herd Management Area.” According to the article, “the bottom wire was also raised to 16 inches off the ground to allow pronghorn to pass easily under it.” BLM wildlife biologist Destin Harrell, who organized the project, said, “Last year, thousands of pronghorn were stacked up along this fence, unable to cross. Thanks to the commitment of groups like FOAL, WYDOT and G&F to making BLM fences more wildlife-friendly, the migrating Carter Mountain pronghorn herd now has better access to its crucial winter range and an improved chance of surviving harsh winters.” 

## Judge Releases 4 More Bunkerville Standoff Defendants. 

The Las Vegas Review-Journal (12/4, Ferrara) reports that “a judge ordered four more Bunkerville standoff defendants freed from federal detention on Monday, less than a week after rancher Cliven Bundy rejected the conditions of his own release.” U.S. Magistrate Judge Peggy Leen ordered the pretrial release of four men, “whom prosecutors have described as ‘midtier’ defendants in the April 2014 armed standoff.” They include Bundy’s sons Melvin and David. 

# Bureau Of Ocean Energy Management 

## Bill Could Make Drilling Off N.C. Coast More Likely. 

The Jacksonville (NC) Daily News (12/4, Wagner) reports that the SECURE American Energy Act would make drilling off North Carolina more likely. The measure was passed by the House Committee on Natural Resources, but it has not yet received a vote from the full chamber. The bill would grant Congress the sole power to establish moratoriums on offshore drilling and create National Marine Monuments. Gov. Roy Cooper has opposed offshore exploration, saying it risks the state’s coastal economies. 

## Company Pulls Plug On Massachusetts’ Cape Wind Offshore Wind Farm. 

In continuing coverage the Washington Examiner (12/4, Siciliano) reports the company the Cape Wind wind farm proposed off the coast of “Massachusetts has officially given up on the nearly two-decade fight to bring it to life, saying it is better off developing other forms of energy elsewhere.” Cape Wind and Energy Management CEO Jim Gordon said in a statement, “During Cape Wind’s development period we successfully developed over a billion dollars of renewable solar and biomass energy projects and, although we were unable to bring Cape Wind to fruition, we are proud of the catalyzing and pioneering effort we devoted to bringing offshore wind to the United States.” The wind project “faced sustained opposition and court challenges orchestrated by wealthy land owners on Nantucket Sound and the fossil energy industry, Gordon said.” 

# Bureau Of Reclamation 

## Navajo-Gallup Water Project Gains Pipeline Contract. 

The Southwest Colorado Journal (12/4, Mimiaga) reports that “Navajo and Jicarilla-Apache Nation communities in New Mexico are one step closer to receiving domestic and commercial water supplies as part of a $1.13 billion federal construction project.” Construction began on the Navajo-Gallup Water Supply project “in 2013 with completion estimated for 2024.” The article notes that “it is being built by the Bureau of Reclamation, city of Gallup, Navajo Nation and Indian Health Service.” 

# Fish And Wildlife Service 

## Hunt Elephants To Save Them? Some Countries See No Other Choice. 

In continuing coverage of the controversy over the decision by the United States Fish and Wildlife Service last month “to allow hunters to bring home trophies from elephants killed in Zimbabwe and Zambia,” the New York Times (12/4, Nuwer) reports that “whether the proceeds from big-game hunting should be used to protect threatened and endangered species is a difficult question to answer.” The article notes that “in some areas, including in Namibia and Zimbabwe, the strategy has helped revive wildlife populations.” However, “in others, including Tanzania, hunting has fed corruption and decimated species.” Vern Buchanan Urges Donald Trump To Ban African Lion Trophies. The Sunshine State (FL) News (12/4, Derby) reports that Rep. Vern Buchanan, co-chairman of the Animal Protection Caucus in Congress, is urging President Trump “to restore the ban on allowing African lion trophies to be brought into the United States.” Buchanan said, “Allowing lion heads to be brought into the U.S. as trophies will only encourage the slaughter of these magnificent animals. President Trump should reverse his Interior secretary’s decision and keep the ban on African lion trophies.” 

## Fish And Wildlife Service Plan Calls For Release Of 12 Newborn Wolf Pups. 

The Santa Fe New Mexican (12/4, Moss) reports that the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service is “proposing to release 12 newborn Mexican wolf pups in New Mexico and Arizona over the coming year as part of its strategy to recover an endangered species that suffers from severe inbreeding and weak genetics.” In 2018, “a dozen captive pups will be matched with wild litters that have been born at roughly the same time as the domestic-bred pups, according to a plan released by the service Monday.” The plan also “outlines temporarily removing an adult female wolf from the Panther Creek Pack in Arizona, to avoid direct inter-sibling breeding, and allowing her to instead mate with an adult male from captivity.” 

# National Park Service 

## Park Service Nearing Decision On Isle Royale Wolves. 

The Duluth (MN) News Tribune (12/4, Myers) reports that the National Park Service is “getting closer to announcing its final decision on reintroducing wolves to Isle Royale National Park.” According to the article, “wolf researchers for Michigan Technological University say the island may be down to its very last wolf based on analysis of trail camera data gathered over the summer and through September.” Additional coverage was provided by USA Today (12/4, Matheny) and the Detroit Free Press (12/4, Matheny). 

## Research Continues On Elevated Mercury Levels In Some Non-migratory Fish In Southwest Alaska. 

The Alaska Public Radio Network (12/4, Lill) reports that the National Park Service and the United States Geological Survey are “among the agencies that study mercury levels in southwest Alaska’s lakes in order to better understand mercury’s effect on ecosystems and how it gets there.” In 2005, the National Park Service started “monitoring mercury levels in non-migratory lake fish in Katmai National Park and Preserve and the Lake Clark National Park Preserve.” Krista Bartz, an aquatic ecologist with the NPS’ Southwest Alaska Network inventory and monitoring program, said, “Since then we’ve collected around 400 fish samples, representing nine species from 20 lakes. We’ve found that filets from long-lived predator species, like lake trout and northern pike, can have elevated concentrations of mercury and they tend to increase with fish age.” Bartz “anticipates that the NPS will publish results from the past three years of study on resident lake fish in Katmai and Lake Clark in 2018.” Additional coverage was provided by KTOO-FM Juneau, AK (12/4, Lill). 

## Little Bighorn Plan Would Create New Visitor Center, Make Room For Artifacts Currently In Arizona. 

The Billings (MT) Gazette (12/4, Ferguson) reports that “a plan for the future of the Little Bighorn Battlefield National Monument includes the National Park Service’s preference for building a new 10,600-square-foot visitor center on the footprint of the current center and bringing back some if not all of the tens of thousands of battlefield artifacts now being stored for safekeeping in Tucson, Arizona.” Park officials are accepting input on the Little Bighorn Battlefield National Monument General Management Plan Amendment and Environmental Assessment through Jan. 4, 2018. Wayne Challoner, superintendent at the Little Bighorn Battlefield monument, said, “Right now we are in the information-gathering stage. We want to hear anything we may or may not be aware of. We are trying to see if we can go in and rebuild in the same footprint with a new and better-designed facility. Getting those artifacts back has always been the goal.” 

## Keeler Building Added To National Register, Paves Way For Redevelopment. 

MLive (MI) (12/4, Harger) reports that “the 106-year-old Keeler Building has been added to the National Register of Historic Places, a key step towards redevelopment of a downtown landmark that has been mostly vacant for more than 20 years.” The article notes that “the designation by the National Parks Service last month means the West Michigan Housing Alliance qualifies for about $20 million in state tax credits needed to get a $42.5 million affordable housing project underway, according to Jeff Dombrowski, the alliance’s founder.” 

# US Geological Survey 

## Underwater Volcano Eruptions Sound Like Gunshots And Can Travel 10,000 Miles Through The Ocean. 

Newsweek (12/4, Hignett) reports that “using hydrophones – special microphones designed for use underwater—scientists from the Alaska Volcano Observatory (AVO) and the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) recorded the sounds of two volcanos erupting.” According to the article, “presenting their findings at the 174th Meeting of the Acoustical Society of America in New Orleans, the team, led by Gabrielle Tepp, from the AVO, show how different eruptions sound drastically different – while some explosions lasted hours, others ripped through the sea like gunshots.” Researchers “recorded vastly different sounds from the Ayhi eruption and from the 2015 and 2016 eruptions of Bogoslof, a volcano near Alaska.” 

## USGS Proposes $260,400 Plan To Study White River Algae Problem. 

The Rio Blanco (CO) Herald Times (12/4, Turner) reports that “the White River Algae Task Force heard a proposal to study and identify the recurring algal bloom in the White River from United States Geological Survey (USGS) hydrologist Mike Stevens and western Colorado office chief Ken Leib on Wednesday, Nov. 22.” The purposes of the study are “to determine what conditions on the river are contributing to the algae bloom that has caused problems with aesthetics and recreational use of the river.” The USGS “plans to compile historical data on the river’s streamflow, nutrient levels, sediment and more.” 

## USGS Posts New Annotated Map Of Pu’u O’o Crater. 

The Big Island (HI) Video News (12/4) reports that the USGS Hawaiian Volcano Observatory posted a new map of the Pu’u ‘Ō’ō Crater on November 22, “with labels of the crater’s main features.” According to scientists, “no significant changes are evident at Pu ʻu ʻŌʻō.” However, the article adds, “there have been enough changes over the last few years at the vent to warrant a new annotated map of the active crater on Kilauea Volcano’s East Rift Zone.” 

# Opinion Pieces 

## President Trump, Don’t Decimate The Bears Ears National Monument. 

In an op-ed for The Guardian (UK) (12/4, Jewell), former Interior Secretary Sally Jewell writes that the action to establish the Bears Ears national monument “built upon decades of local efforts.” But President Trump’s move will “ignore the 2.8 million Americans who have spoken out in defense of these public lands, and will undercut the jobs and revenues they bring to local economies from outdoor recreation and tourism.” More fundamentally, Jewell writes, “it will break the promise to these tribes – and to the American people – that, once established, national monuments are protected in perpetuity.” 

## National Park Lovers Should Applaud Trump’s Monument Decision. 

In an op-ed on the Fox News (12/4) website, ex-Rep. Jason Chaffetz praises President Trump’s decision to reduce the size of the Bears Ears and Staircase-Escalante National Monuments as “an example of his policies that will benefit every American who enjoys national parks and monuments.” Chaffetz argues that national monument designations “have strained land management budgets and limited public access to beautiful places.” 

## Trump Eviscerates Two National Monuments In The Name Of Political Back-scratching. 

In an editorial, the Los Angeles Times (12/4) says President Trump “eviscerated” the Bears Ears and Staircase-Escalante National Monuments, “proving once again that, to this president, the federal government’s promises to its own people mean nothing.” His decision, the Times adds, “senselessly imperils stunningly beautiful natural areas and geological masterworks, as well as tens of thousands of Native American sacred sites and key wildlife habitats.” 

## Additional Reading. 

Trump Shrinks National Monuments — And With It, Obama’s Legacy. Washington Times (12/4, Chumley). 

President Trump’s National Monument Rollback Is Illegal And Likely To Be Reversed In Court. The Conversation (US) (12/4, Hecht). 

Trump’s Proclamation Shrinking Bears Ears Will Hurt All Of Us. NBC News (12/4, Ward-Lev, Gaffney, Swanson). 

Trump’s Rollback Of Monuments Ignores Public, Economic Interests. Huffington Post (12/4, Arce). 

President Trump’s Bears Ears Order Is An Illegal Attack On Tribal Sovereignty. 

Huffington Post (12/4, Echohawk). 

Don’t Count On A Utah Shale Boom. Huffington Post (12/4, Cunningham). 

Veterans Decry Trump’s Reduction Of National Monuments. Missoula Current (MT) (12/4). 

Elephants In Africa Need To Be Protected, And Believe It Or Not, Hunting Does This Better Than A Ban. Fox News (12/4, Cox). 

Listen To The 99 Percent: Keep Public Lands Public. Charleston (SC) Post and Courier (12/4, White). 

Americans Shouldn’t Be Priced Out Of Visiting. Durango (CO) Herald. 

National Parks Should Remain Open For All. Ottawa (KS) Herald (12/4, Doll). 

Our View: Right The Wrong Done To Twin Metals. Duluth (MN) News Tribune (12/4). 

Ryan Zinke Is Trump’s Attack Dog On The Environment. Outside (12/4, Woods). 

# Top National News 

## Trump Says He Feels “Badly” For Flynn As Lawyer Says A President Cannot Obstruct Justice. 

President Trump’s remarks Monday that he feels “badly” for former National Security Adviser Michael Flynn and stating that Hillary Clinton “lied many times to the FBI” without consequences led two broadcast network newscasts. In addition to ongoing coverage of whether the President’s weekend tweets might indicate obstruction of justice, several sources also point out that the FBI never suggested that Clinton was not truthful when she was interviewed during the investigation of her email server. Reports also look at a Trump attorney’s claim that a president cannot obstruct justice, expressing skepticism. On ABC World News Tonight (12/4, lead story, 3:20, Muir), Jonathan Karl reported, “At the White House today, the President offered words of sympathy” for Flynn. Trump: “Well, I feel badly for Gen. Flynn. I feel very badly. He’s led a very strong life.” Karl: “Flynn’s plea bargain is a big red flag for the White House.” Sen. Dianne Feinstein: “I think what we’re beginning to see is the putting together of a case of obstruction of justice.” Karl: “The President seems determined to undermine that case, by slamming the FBI, tweeting that its reputation is ‘in tatters, worst in history.’” Trump: “I will say this, Hillary Clinton lied many times to the FBI. Nothing happened to her. Flynn lied and they destroyed his life. I think it’s a shame.” The AP (12/4, Thomas) reports that the President “tried to contrast Flynn’s treatment with that of...Clinton, who he said ‘lied many times to the FBI and nothing happened.’” But the FBI “didn’t conclude that Clinton lied to agents.” USA Today (12/4, Jackson) reports that the DOJ “did not bring charges against Clinton over her use of a private email server while she was secretary of State, and law enforcement officials have said they do not believe Clinton misled investigators.” Reuters (12/4) also writes that “there was never any indication from the FBI that Clinton did not tell the truth.” The New York Times (12/4, Sullivan) reports that the President “did not cite specifically what Mrs. Clinton said that he considered a lie.” The Washington Post (12/4, Rucker) reports that Trump “told reporters Monday morning that Flynn’s undoing was ‘a shame’ and ‘very unfair.’” Bloomberg News (12/4, Sink) and the Washington Times (12/4, Persons) also cover the President’s remarks. Meanwhile, the AP (12/5, Lemire, Tucker) reports that Trump’s weekend tweets “revived questions about whether the president may have obstructed [the] ongoing investigation.” NBC Nightly News (12/4, lead story, 2:50, Holt) asked, “Has President Trump tweeted himself into legal trouble? That question had Washington abuzz today. ... In a tweet over the weekend, the President for the first time publicly said he fired Flynn in part because he lied to the feds. If that’s true, it frames an intriguing new timeline that some tonight argue puts Mr. Trump in some legal jeopardy of his own.” NBC’s Hallie Jackson: “Setting aside that James Comey testified [that] Hillary Clinton didn’t lie to the FBI, the focus now, did President Trump obstruct justice? And could this tweet be used against him? ‘I had to fire General Flynn because he lied to the Vice President and the FBI.’ The problem: If the President knew Flynn lied to the FBI and if he did later ask Comey to lay off Flynn – like Comey says but which the President denies – he could open himself up to accusations of obstruction of justice.” On the CBS Evening News (12/4, story 5, 1:45, Glor), Major Garrett similarly reported that “the tweet sparked new questions about whether the President has obstructed justice.” The Washington Post (12/4, Horwitz, Rucker) reports that Trump lawyer John Dowd offered a “brazen assertion” on Monday: “that a president cannot be found guilty of obstruction of justice.” Dowd “sought to excuse the president’s tweet in part by telling Axios and NBC News Monday that the ‘president cannot obstruct justice because he is the chief law enforcement officer under [the Constitution’s Article II] and has every right to express his view of any case.’” Axios (12/4, Allen) calls it “a new and highly controversial defense/theory,” and Politico (12/4, Cheney) reminds readers that “more than 40 current GOP members of Congress voted for the impeachment or removal” of President Clinton “from office for obstruction of justice. ... In all, 17 sitting senators supported the obstruction of justice charge against Clinton in 1998 and 1999.” The Los Angeles Times (12/4, Megerian, Tanfani) also reports on Dowd’s argument. Sen. Joe Manchin was asked on CNN’s The Lead (12/4) about Dowd’s claim that the President cannot obstruct justice. Manchin said, “I don’t agree. I just think the rule of law means the rule of law. It means we’re all held accountable and there are not two systems for two different types of people.” Rep. Adam Schiff (D-CA), ranking member on the House Intelligence Committee, said on CNN’s Anderson Cooper 360 (12/4), “Yes, I believe the President is no more above the law than any other American. It would be an absurd result to say that the President could interfere with investigations involving himself or others potentially and that he is immune from any repercussion.” The New York Times (12/4) says in an editorial, “You know you have a problem when you’ve been president for less than 11 months and you’re already relying on Richard Nixon’s definition of what’s legal. ... Trump’s tireless spinners and sophists are working to convince the American public that it’s all no big deal. This is an embarrassing and unpersuasive argument, but it’s not surprising. At this point, they have nothing else to work with.” Eugene Robinson writes in his Washington Post (12/4) column, “We know that Trump has apparently obstructed justice to try to halt investigation into what happened. What we don’t know is whether Congress, in the end, will do its sworn duty to protect the Constitution. ... But let’s not lose sight of the big picture. ... If nothing wrong happened with Russia during the campaign, why is Trump so desperate to cover it up?” Dana Milbank writes in the Washington Post (12/4), “As details of campaign contacts with Russia piled up, Trump and his officials instead said there had been ‘no collusion,’” then “retreated to another line of defense: Trump himself didn’t collude. ... Now, with four Trump campaign officials indicted and two of them, including Trump’s former national security adviser, pleading guilty, even that distinction no longer seems safe.” John Yoo of the American Enterprise Institute and Saikrishna Prakash of the University of Virginia write in the New York Times (12/4), “Even if the facts rose to the level of obstruction, most legal scholars agree that prosecutors cannot bring charges against a sitting president.” But “the House and Senate can make their own judgments – political as well as legal. ... Congress should not wait on a special counsel to perform its most fundamental constitutional duty of investigating and, if necessary, removing a corrupt president.” Daniel Hemel and Eric Posner of the University of Chicago Law School write in the New York Times (12/4) that Flynn’s admissions “leave little doubt that he also violated a federal criminal statute known as the Logan Act,” which prohibits individuals from attempting to influence foreign policy “in a dispute with the United States or ‘to defeat the measures of the United States.’” And “if Mr. Flynn violated the Logan Act, then so did the ‘very senior’ official who directed his actions.” However, James Robbins writes in his USA Today (12/4) column, “Flynn was fully in his rights making the call to Kislyak. Despite the best efforts of the anti-Trumpers, it is still not illegal to talk to Russians.” 

Those In Pence’s Circle Say He Was Out Of The Loop. Politico (12/4, Nussbaum) reports that “people close to” Vice President Pence “are trying to make clear” that Pence “knew nothing at all.” Pence’s aides “have maintained for months that their man was out of the loop, blissfully ignorant to contacts between the Trump campaign and various foreign actors.” But while “their story has been consistent,” it has “left outside observers wondering how Trump’s running mate and transition head could have known so little.” 

McFarland Email Appears To Contradict Testimony. The New York Times (12/4, Schmidt, Lafraniere) reports that an email sent during the transition period by K.T. McFarland, who would briefly become Trump’s deputy national security adviser, “appears to contradict testimony she gave to Congress over the summer about contacts between the Russian ambassador” and Flynn. In a December 29 email, McFarland “told another transition official that Mr. Flynn would be talking to the Russian ambassador that evening.” 

Russians Say Flynn Did Not Influence Kremlin Policy. The New York Times (12/4, Nechepurenko) reports that Kremlin spokesman Dmitri Peskov “said on Monday that it was ‘absurd’ to suggest that President Vladimir V. Putin was influenced in any way by a request from the Trump transition last December to refrain from retaliating against sanctions” imposed by President Obama. Peskov said, “The President makes his own decisions, guided solely by Russia’s national interests.” The Washington Post (12/4, Roth) reports that Peskov also said that “the Kremlin does not know anything about the talks with Flynn because they were conducted by the Foreign Ministry.” Russian Ambassador to the US Anatoly Antonov told the CBS Evening News 

(12/4, story 6, 2:05, Glor), “It’s very difficult to try to find a black cat in a dark room where there is not any cat at all.” CBS’ Margaret Brennan: “You’re saying there is no story there?” Antonov: “There is not any proof regarding Russian interference into your election.” 

Wray Defends FBI In Message To Agents And Staff. The New York Times (12/4, Goldman, Savage) reports that FBI Director Wray “defended his work force in an email on Monday, a day after President Trump said on Twitter that the agency’s standing was the ‘worst in History’ and its reputation was in ‘Tatters.’” In a message to 35,000 agents and support staff, Wray “said that he was ‘inspired by example after example of professionalism and dedication to justice demonstrated around the bureau. It is truly an honor to represent you.’” He did not mention the President by name. 

Trump Jr., Ex-Trump Business Associate To Appear Before House Intelligence Committee. Reuters (12/4) reports that Donald Trump Jr. and Felix Sater, a “former business associate of the president,” will appear before the House Intelligence Committee later this week. Both sessions will be closed to the public. 

Mueller’s Office Says Manafort Drafted Op-Ed With Colleague With Russian Ties. The AP (12/4, Day, Tucker) reports, “While facing several felony charges, Donald Trump’s former campaign chairman Paul Manafort has been working on an op-ed essay with a longtime colleague ‘assessed to have ties’ to a Russian intelligence service,” according to court papers filed by prosecutors working for Special Counsel Robert Mueller. The Los Angeles Times (12/4, Megerian) reports that Mueller’s office “said Manafort helped draft the editorial in recent days, working with a Russian who has ties to that country’s intelligence services. That writing violated a Nov. 8 court order ‘prohibiting such out-of-court statements in order to protect the fairness of the upcoming trial,’ the court filing said.” Reuters (12/4, Lynch) has a similar report. Sen. Chris Coons said on CNN’s Situation Room (12/4), “Clearly he’s not listening to his lawyers, or he’s more afraid of the Russians than he is of federal prosecution in the United States. ... That’s an enormous risk for him to take and will almost certainly lead to the re-imposition of a different arrangement for his freedom in advance of his facing trial.” 

FBI Agent Pulled From Probe Had Role In Drafting Comey’s Clinton Announcement. 

ABC World News Tonight (12/4, story 3, 0:40, Muir) reported on the “veteran FBI agent who was removed from the Russia investigation. ... Mueller removed Peter Strzok back in August after learning he had sent potentially anti-Trump text messages.” Strzok “played a key role in how then FBI Director James Comey announced the results of the Hillary Clinton email investigation, recommending that Comey describe Clinton’s actions as ‘extremely careless’ rather than ‘grossly negligent.’ The significance is that it’s a felony to mishandle classified information in a grossly negligent way.” CNN (12/4, Jarrett, Perez) reports on its website that “the drafting process was a team effort, CNN is told, with a handful of people reviewing the language as edits were made, according to another US official familiar with the matter.” The New York Post (12/4, Fredericks) reports that Senate Judiciary Chairman Charles Grassley “questioned the change last month, but the name of the agent who made the change was not known until now.” Kellyanne Conway said on Fox News’ Fox & Friends (12/4), “It’s so disturbing and troubling because...he was at the heart of the investigation into Hillary Clinton. We know that she lied numerous times. We know that she...deleted 33,000 e-mails. ... This is what frustrates people, and now this revelation that a decidedly, definitively anti-Trump FBI investigator was involved in the Hillary Clinton interviews, as the President says is now starting to make a lot of sense.” Rep. Trey Gowdy (R-SC) said on Fox News Special Report (12/4), “I think from a perception standpoint, it’s incredibly serious. He was one of the agents [on] Secretary Clinton’s investigation. ... He is anti-Trump, perhaps pro-Clinton texts. People have the right to assume the people that are investigating them are objective and have not already made up their mind.” The Wall Street Journal (12/4) says in an editorial that while no Trump/Russia collusion has been proven, the Strzok case suggests a political motive behind the investigation. Hugh Hewitt writes in the Washington Post (12/4), “This is a blockbuster revelation, carrying the possibility of shattering public confidence.” 

Mueller’s Office To Soon Release Expenditure Report. The Washington Times (12/4, Noble) reports that Mueller’s office “is preparing to release a statement of expenditures in the coming days providing a first look at what the probe is costing taxpayers – and depending on how funds have been spent, the disclosures could open up the controversial probe to additional criticism.” 

Papadopoulos’ July Arrest Recounted. Politico (12/4, Gerstein) recounts ex-Trump campaign foreign policy adviser George Papadopoulos’ arrest and long interview with the FBI last July. 

## Supreme Court Allows Third Version Of Travel Ban To Take Effect While Challenges Proceed. 

Coverage of the Supreme Court’s order permitting the third iteration of the Trump Administration’s travel ban to be in force while challenges to it move forward is primarily straightforward, though most sources agree that the decision is a rare victory for the White House, even if it is not a total one. The version of the ban in questions deals with Chad, Iran, Libya, North Korea, Syria, Somalia, Venezuela, and Yemen. NBC Nightly News (12/4, story 3, 0:50, Holt) called it “a victory at the Supreme Court for the Trump White House.” NBC’s Pete Williams: “This means that overseas family members of people in the US who were exempt from the travel ban are now subject to it. ... Lower courts said it could not be applied against people who have family members here, but tonight the Court has lifted that exemption.” Only Justices Ruth Bader Ginsburg and Sonia Sotomayor dissented, “so this could be a sign that the latest version of the travel ban will survive a Supreme Court challenge when it gets here early next year.” ABC World News Tonight (12/4, story 6, 0:25, Muir) said the decision “clear[s] the way for President Trump’s travel ban, even as it is being challenged in federal courts.” The AP (12/4, Sherman) similarly writes that though “this is not a final ruling on the travel ban...the action indicates that the high court might eventually approve the latest version of the ban.” Critics “of this and previous versions of the ban say they show a bias against Muslims.” Omar Jadwat of the American Civil Liberties Union said, “President Trump’s anti-Muslim prejudice is no secret. He has repeatedly confirmed it, including just last week on Twitter. It’s unfortunate that the full ban can move forward for now, but this order does not address the merits of our claims.” The New York Times (12/4, Liptak) calls the decision “a victory for the administration after its mixed success before the court over the summer, when justices considered and eventually dismissed disputes over the second version.” USA Today (12/4, Wolf) reports that the “unsigned orders issued Monday urge two federal appeals courts with oral arguments scheduled later this week to render decisions ‘with appropriate dispatch.’” The Washington Post (12/4, Barnes) reports that “judges in two judicial circuits – the US Court of Appeals for the 4th Circuit in Richmond and the US Court of Appeals for the 9th Circuit in San Francisco – had cast doubt on Trump’s third executive order banning almost all travel from certain countries. Oral arguments are scheduled for soon” in both courts. The Los Angeles Times (12/4, Savage) calls it “a significant victory” for the President. Attorney General Sessions “called the court’s decision a ‘substantial victory for the safety and security of the American people.’” (Breitbart (12/4, Mason) quotes Sessions at greater length.) In its front-page report, the Wall Street Journal (12/4, Kendall) quotes White House spokesman Hogan Gidley saying, “We are not surprised by today’s Supreme Court decision permitting immediate enforcement of the President’s proclamation limiting travel from countries presenting heightened risks of terrorism. The proclamation is lawful and essential to protecting our homeland. We look forward to presenting a fuller defense.” The Washington Times (12/4, Noble) says the court “doled out a victory for the Trump administration.” Eamon Javers similarly said on CNBC’s Closing Bell (12/4) that the ruling “will be viewed as a win for the Trump Administration and some welcome news at the White House.” The Wall Street Journal (12/4) editorializes in favor of the ruling, calling the court’s action an important moment for the rule of law, arguing that although it disagrees with the ban as policy, opposition to policy is no justification for courts to ignore the law. Reuters (12/4, Hurley), Bloomberg News (12/4, Stohr), and Politico (12/4, Gerstein) also report the court’s ruling. 

## Trump, Congressional Leaders To Hold Budget Talks Thursday. 

The Washington Post (12/4, O'Keefe, Debonis, Werner) report that with a Dec. 8 deadline looming, President Trump and congressional leaders will meet Thursday “to discuss enacting a year-end spending agreement in hopes of averting a government shutdown.” The Post says the meeting the night before government funding is set run out “puts significant pressure on GOP leaders to shore up support in their own ranks ahead of a vote on a plan to keep the government operating two more weeks as talks continue.” Bloomberg News (12/4, Wasson) says Trump and congressional leaders are “set to discuss a potential deal to raise defense and non-defense budget caps” as well as “other year-end matters, including protection” for so-called “Dreamers.” Politico (12/4, Ferris, Scholtes, Kim) reports that while funding is set to run out Friday at midnight, “Republican leaders believe they have the votes to push back that deadline until just before Christmas.” Reuters (12/4, Cornwell) reports that Democratic leaders have accepted an invitation to meet with the President and GOP leaders for “talks to avert a government shutdown this week.” Senate Minority Leader Schumer and House Minority Leader Pelosi “said Monday they hoped the president would remain open-minded about reaching a deal with Democrats.” The Washington Times (12/4, Howell) says that while the Democrats “refused to show up to a White House meeting on Nov. 28, after Mr. Trump said that given Democrats’ demands, there wasn’t a path to agreement,” on Monday they “said they would give it another try, though they will bring a list of demands” including funding for “rural infrastructure, provid[ing] more hurricane relief to Texas, Florida and Puerto Rico and renew[ing] the Children’s Health Insurance Program, among other things.” 

## GOP Leaders “Confident” Differences In Tax Bills Can Be Overcome. 

While there are “significant differences” between the house and Senate tax bills, the AP (12/4, Ohlemacher, Gordon) reports that “Republican leaders are confident none is insurmountable.” The AP goes on to explain “the differences and how each issue is likely to play out.” David Muir said on ABC World News Tonight (12/4, story 5, 3:05, Muir) that while there is “no pressing deadline,” Republicans “are furiously working to get this done before Christmas, as the President has asked.” House Majority Leader McCarthy was asked on Fox News’ Fox & Friends (12/4) about the House bill’s 39% top rate versus the Senate’s top rate of 38%. McCarthy said, “I would actually like to go lower on a personal basis. I don’t think you should punish people for being successful. But they have seven rates. We have four. We’ll work that out. I would always go to a lower rate.” Asked about the alternative minimum tax, McCarthy said, “In the House, you eliminate it. ... If you’re in California or if you’re in New York, that’s a real punishment as you go forward. ... I think that has to be repealed out of it. But the Senate also put it in when it came to corporations. That would also eliminate if you kept it in there the research and development benefit that you’re getting on the tax credit going forward. So I think the AMT has to be eliminated all together.” Bloomberg News (12/4)says President Trump on Saturday “introduced uncertainty over a provision that could mean a difference of about $200 billion over 10 years,” telling reporters that the corporate tax rate, which both the House and Senate bills reduce to 20%, “could be 22” in the final bill. Bloomberg News says those comments “imposed an air of unpredictability over congressional negotiations.” The Wall Street Journal (12/4, Davidson, Jamerson) examines last-minute changes inserted by Senate Republicans that benefit oil and gas companies, cruise-ship operators, auto dealers, universities and mortgage bankers. The Journal says the question is whether the changes will survive the House-Senate conference. Nancy Cordes said in the lead story for the CBS Evening News (12/4, lead story, 2:30, Glor) that Republican leaders “predict it will take them about a week to iron out key differences between the two bills.” Kasie Hunt reported on NBC Nightly News (12/4, story 6, 2:15, Holt) that “most American families will see their individual tax rate go down” under the bill, but “whether your family wins or loses depends on your circumstances.” Among those who could so better are “families with children, wealthy Americans who will avoid the estate tax if the House has its way.” On the other hand, “those who could lose out,” are “Americans in high tax states who will likely lose their state and local income tax deduction, graduate students who could owe the IRS thousands more, and Americans who could see their health insurance premiums go up if the Senate’s repeal of the individual mandate stays in the final bill.” CBS News business analyst Jill Schlesinger said on the CBS Evening News (12/4, story 2, 1:35, Glor) that “88% of people would see a tax reduction, 10% would see an increase, and the rest would actually stay the same.” The Washington Post (12/4) argues in an editorial that while the neither the House nor the Senate bill “is an improvement over the status quo,” there are ways to craft “a less-bad agreement.” The Post says lawmakers should remove “extraneous provisions tacked onto one bill or the other in order to pay off a particular lawmaker or to satisfy narrow ideological preoccupations.” In addition, they “should reduce the impact on the debt by scaling back the most unjustifiable giveaways to the wealthy,” and “take up President Trump on his willingness to drop the 35 percent corporate tax rate to 22 percent,” rather than 20%. Also, “instead of chopping away at the deduction for state and local taxes,” they “should reduce tax breaks in a fairer way, perhaps by further limiting the home mortgage deduction.” 

Pelosi Says Tax Bill Is Worst On Congressional History. The Hill (12/4, Marcos) reports that House Minority Leader Pelosi argued on the House floor Monday that the Republican tax bill is “the worst bill in the history of the United States Congress.” Pelosi said, “Now, how can I make that claim? Well, because it involves more money, hurts more people, increases the deficit by so much more, and just because everything is bigger in our country, the consequences of this bill, a multi-trillion dollar economy being addressed by a bill that had no hearings, no expert testimony.” 

Republicans Sought To Discredit JCT Ahead Of Senate Vote. The New York Times (12/4, Tankersley) reports that a change to congressional budget rules implemented by Republicans in 2015 which requires that “Congress consider the full cost of major legislation threatened to derail the party’s $1.5 trillion tax rewrite last week,” so “lawmakers went on the offensive to discredit” the Joint Committee on Taxation, which performed the analysis. Hours before last week’s Senate vote, Senate Republicans “opened an assault” on the JCT and its analysis, “which showed the Senate plan would not, as lawmakers contended, pay for itself but would add $1 trillion to the federal budget deficit.” The Times cites “public statements and messaging documents” which “show a concerted push by Republican lawmakers to discredit a nonpartisan agency they had long praised.” The Times says the “swift backlash helped defuse concerns about the deficit impact long enough for the bill to pass by a vote of 51 to 49.” 

Companies Lobby To Eliminate Corporate AMT. The Wall Street Journal (12/4, Francis, Rubin) reports in a front-page story that the Senate’s last-minute decision to keep a corporate alternative minimum tax took CEOs and business groups by surprise and on Monday, they launched a lobbying effort to eliminate or alter the provision. Citing the provision, the Daily Intelligencer (NY) (12/4, Levitz) says Republicans “accidentally nullified all of their corporate donors’ favorite deductions.” With their “blunder” Republicans accomplished “the unthinkable: They’ve written a giant corporate tax cut that many of their corporate donors do not like.” 

CEO Says Senate Bill Will Raise Murray Energy’s Taxes $60 Million. Murray Energy CEO Robert Murray said on CNBC’s Closing Bell (12/4), “The Senate’s legislation, in fact, is a huge tax increase on capital intensive, highly leveraged businesses. The result comes from leaving the alternative minimum tax in their plan, and then deleting the deduction for net interest expense as a cost of business.” Murray added that “for Murray energy, alone, this will raise our taxes $60 million a year notwithstanding the other so-called benefits that the Senate has proposed.” 

Democratic Governors Vow To Fight Tax Bill. Politico (12/4, Vielkind) reports that three Democratic governors – California Gov. Jerry Brown, New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo, and New Jersey Gov.-elect Phil Murphy – vowed Monday “to do everything they can to stop the emerging federal tax overhaul – even sue.” During a conference call with reporters, the Governors “denounced the bill” as “dangerous,” “fraudulent,” “nefarious,” “a scam” and “trickle down on steroids.” They take issue in particular with “the bill’s curtailment of the federal deduction for state and local taxes.” A front-page analysis in the New York Times (12/4, Casselman, McGeehan) calls the bill “an economic dagger aimed at high-tax, high-cost and generally Democratic-leaning areas – most notably New York City and its neighbors.” According to the Times, the bill “could send home prices tumbling 10 percent or more in parts of the New York area, according to one economic analysis.” In addition, it could “increase the regional tax burden, complicating companies’ efforts to attract skilled workers,” and “make it harder for state and local governments to pay for upgrades to the transit system and other infrastructure.” Moreover, “it could force cuts in federal programs that help immigrants, the elderly and other low-income residents afford the region’s high cost of living.” 

WSJournal: Conference Should Adopt House Bill Provision On Attorney Contingency Fees. In an editorial, the Wall Street Journal (12/4) says Sen. Lindsey Graham removed a provision from the Senate tax bill to eliminate a contingency-fee carve-out for California plaintiff attorneys. The Journal adds that a provision in the House bill would create equality across the country and urges the conference committee to adopt it. 

## North Korea: US-South Korea Air Drills Put Peninsula At “Brink Of Nuclear War.” 

All three networks reported on the size and scope of joint US-South Korean war drills currently taking place in the Korean Peninsula. Outlets said the drills, which follow North Korea’s recent ICBM test, have escalated tensions. ABC World News Tonight (12/4, story 10, 0:20, Muir) reported the US and South Korea are conducting simulated war drills involving hundreds of aircraft in a “massive show of force” days after North Korea launched its “most powerful missile yet.” Pyongyang argues the air drills are bringing the peninsula “to the brink of nuclear war.” The New York Times (12/4, Mullany) reports that “such drills have drawn vigorous criticism from North Korea, whose state news media said Sunday” that Pyongyang would “seriously consider” countermeasures against the drill and warned the US and Seoul would “pay dearly for their provocations.” North Korea, the Washington Post (12/4, Fifield) reports, denounced the exercises as dangerous “when insane President Trump is running wild,” while “analysts warned that they sharply increase the chances of miscalculation and accidental conflict.” NBC Nightly News (12/4, story 8, 2:50, Holt) said the US “is making a major show of force to North Korea with hundreds of planes, including two dozen radar-evading stealth jets, taking part in war games with South Korea.” The CBS Evening News 

(12/4, story 3, 2:20, Glor), which called the drills “one of the largest combined Air Force exercises in history,” showed Air Force Col. Scott Jobe, commander at the Misawa Air Base in Japan, saying “We want diplomacy to take its course. We want that to be the primary mechanism, but if needed and if called on, we’re ready to go, and we’re ready to go right now, 100%.” 

New US Weapon Could Stop North Korean Missiles. US government officials tell NBC Nightly News (12/4, story 8, 2:50, Holt) “that White House officials have been informed about a sophisticated weapon advocates believe could stop North Korean missiles.” Sen. Martin Heinrich described the technology: “Think about like when you put something in your microwave that actually has some metal on it. You know how badly that can go. Imagine directing those microwaves at someone’s electronics.” Mary Lou Robinson, the chief of high-powered electromagnetics at the Air Force research laboratory in New Mexico who supervised a series of tests, said “this technology absolutely works.” Proponents of the technology point out that it doesn’t harm humans. They “say while it is not currently operational, it could be quickly. Tonight, no official comment from the White House.” 

Senior UN Official To Visit North Korea This Week. Reuters (12/4, Nichols) reports UN political affairs chief will visit North Korea this week, “making the highest-level visit by a UN official in more than six years.” Jeffrey Feltman, a former senior State Department official, will visit from Tuesday to Friday and meet with officials to discuss “issues of mutual interest and concern,” the UN said. Spokesman Stephane Dujarric said Feltman will meet with North Korea Foreign Minister Ri Yong Ho and Vice Minister Pak Myong Guk during the visit. The Washington Post (12/4, Taylor) reports Feltman’s trip was arranged “after the United Nations received an invitation from North Korea.” 

Civilian Airline Saw Latest North Korean Missile Re-Entry. Brian Todd reported on CNN’s Situation Room (12/4) that officials at a Hong Kong-based airline say the crew of one of their passenger planes “spotted the attempted re-entry of that North Korean long-range missile last week.” The flight was “far away” from the missile, “but if that missile broke up on re-entry and there was debris flying around, that flight could have conceivably been in danger.” The Washington Post (12/4, Selk) reports Cathay Pacific said in a statement that the San Francisco-to-Hong Kong flight was “far from the event location” and that the airline “does not plan to change its flight routes, even as North Korea seems intent on testing ever more technologically advanced missiles.” 

## US Mayors Set To Sign Climate Agreement In Chicago. 

USA Today (12/4, Madhani) reports that “dozens of U.S. mayors are set to sign their own climate accord vowing to do their part in cutting the nation’s greenhouse emissions.” The agreement is called the “Chicago Charter” and is expected to be signed by representatives of at least 36 US cities on “Tuesday at the North American Climate Summit in Chicago.” The charter “lays out the framework for how some of the country’s municipalities plan to reach goals to reduce greenhouse emission and monitor each others progress — objectives similar to what the Paris international climate pact strives to achieve.” The Chicago Tribune (12/4, Byrne, Ruthhart) reports former President Barack Obama will address the summit. Chicago Mayor Rahm Emanuel said, “President Obama helped lead the fight against climate change with bold and decisive action, and we are honored he will be joining the North American Climate Summit where local leaders from around the world will make meaningful commitments to climate solutions.” The Tampa Bay (FL) Times (12/4, Frago) reports St. Petersburg, Florida Mayor Rick Kriseman will be at the summit “to trade ideas with more than 40 other mayors from around the world, including Buenos Aires, Dar Es Salaam, Copenhagen and Paris.” The Times adds “the three days of panels and break-out discussions should give mayors plenty of time to compare and contrast their cities’ challenges, the mayor said.” The AP (12/4) also provides brief coverage. 

# Editorial Wrap-Up 

## New York Times. 

“Yes, The President Can Obstruct Justice.” The New York Times (12/4) says in an editorial, “You know you have a problem when you’ve been president for less than 11 months and you’re already relying on Richard Nixon’s definition of what’s legal. ... Trump’s tireless spinners and sophists are working to convince the American public that it’s all no big deal. This is an embarrassing and unpersuasive argument, but it’s not surprising. At this point, they have nothing else to work with.” 

“With Death Of Ali Abdullah Saleh, Need for Yemen Peace Grows.” A New York Times (12/4) editorial says the “best hope for Yemen lies in a cease-fire, an end to the Saudi blockade, a negotiated withdrawal of the Houthis from the capital and another attempt at national dialogue, this time on a more realistic basis.” The absence of former Yemeni president Ali Abdullah Saleh, who was killed Monday, “could make that easier as well.” 

## Washington Post. 

“Is A Senate Seat Really Worth This?” In an editorial, the Washington Post (12/4) says that while Alabama Republican Senate candidate Roy Moore has denied the allegations of sexual misconduct, “he does not outright deny dating teenage girls as an older man. Many other women allege that he preyed on them as teenagers. None of them have reason now to lie. This is the man Mr. Trump has decided he needs in the Senate. Alabama voters must decide if they agree. Is it so important to have a senator who will vote the president’s way on tax cuts or judicial appointments that they are willing to be represented by a person who would do such abhorrent things to young girls?” 

“How To Move The Tax Bill From Worse To Bad.” The Washington Post (12/4) argues in an editorial that while the neither the House nor the Senate tax bill “is an improvement over the status quo,” there are ways to craft “a less-bad agreement.” The Post says lawmakers should remove “extraneous provisions tacked onto one bill or the other in order to pay off a particular lawmaker or to satisfy narrow ideological preoccupations.” In addition, they “should reduce the impact on the debt by scaling back the most unjustifiable giveaways to the wealthy,” and “take up President Trump on his willingness to drop the 35 percent corporate tax rate to 22 percent,” rather than 20%. Also, “instead of chopping away at the deduction for state and local taxes,” they “should reduce tax breaks in a fairer way, perhaps by further limiting the home mortgage deduction.” 

“The District Has A Chance To Address Homelessness With Reason, Not Emotion.” The Washington Post (12/4) editorializes that the District of Columbia Council should give its final approval to an overhaul of the District’s “law governing homeless services in the city.” The Post opines that money that used to be spent on housing families in motels on cold nights “would be better spent on increasing affordable housing or helping families become more stable.” The Post also indicates that the changes already appear to have resulted in “a decrease in the number of families requiring shelter.” 

## Wall Street Journal. 

“Mueller’s Credibility Problem.” The Wall Street Journal (12/4) says in an editorial that while no Trump/Russia collusion has been proven, the Peter Strzok case suggests a political motive behind the investigation. 

“Supreme Rebuke For The Judiciary.” The Wall Street Journal (12/4) editorializes in favor of the ruling by the Supreme Court on Monday allowing the Trump Administration’s travel ban to take effect. The 7-2 order (with Justices Ruth Bader Ginsburg and Sonia Sotomayor dissenting) granted the Administration’s request to block the stay of the ban issued by federal judges in Hawaii and Maryland. The Journal calls the court’s action an important moment for the rule of law, arguing that although it disagrees with the ban as policy, opposition to policy is no justification for courts to ignore the law. 

“The Trial Bar’s Tax Break.” In an editorial, the Wall Street Journal (12/4) says Sen. Lindsey Graham removed a provision from the Senate tax bill to eliminate a contingency-fee carve-out for California plaintiff attorneys. The Journal adds that a provision in the House bill would create equality across the country and urges the conference committee to adopt it. 

# Big Picture 

## Headlines From Today’s Front Pages. 

Wall Street Journal: 

Supreme Court Lets Trump Travel Ban Take Effect For Now Businesses Push To Repeal Corporate AMT Rebels Kill Yemen’s Ex-Leader, Opening New Phase In War How Dollar General Became Rural America’s Store Of Choice 

New York Times: 

Trump Slashes Size Of Bears Ears And Grand Staircase Monuments How New Yorkers Would Lose Under The Republican Tax Bill Trump Travel Ban To Take Effect After Supreme Court Ruling Roy Moore Gets Trump Endorsement And RNC Funding For Senate Race In Sex Abuse Cases, An Expiration Date Is Often Attached New Facebook App For Children Ignites Debate Among Families Yemen’s Ex-President Killed As Mayhem Convulses Capital 

Washington Post: 

Trump Shrinks National Monuments Woman Shares New Evidence Of Dating Roy Moore At Age 17 Travel Ban Can Be Fully Enforced, Justices Say Lawyer For Trump Posits Legal Immunity I-66 Rush-Hour Crowd Sees Tolls Hit $34.50 On First Day 

Financial Times: 

Brexit Deal Falls Through Over Irish Border Dispute China Hit By Gas Shortages As It Moves Away From Coal Wall Street Sets New Records On Tax Breakthrough 

Washington Times: 

Supreme Court Allows Full Enforcement Of Trump Travel Ban Supreme Court Questions Federal Law Banning State-Sponsored Sports Betting NFL’s Hail Mary: Deal Would Dole Out Millions To Soros-Linked Social-Justice Groups Mueller To Invite Criticism By Revealing Taxpayers’ Tab For Russia Investigation Amazon Effect: Aetna-CVS Deal A Symptom Of Retail Giant’s Penchant For Disrupting Entire Industries Trump’s ‘America First’ Policy Hits Argentine Biodiesel Producers, ‘Good Friend’ Macri 

Story Lineup From Last Night’s Network News: 

ABC: Russia Meddling Investigation; Russia Meddling Investigation-Expert Comment; Russia Meddling Investigation-FBI Agent Removed; Roy Moore Campaign; Tax Reform Plan; SCOTUS-Travel Restriction; Florida Teen Runaway Found; CVS-Aetna Merger; Weather Forecast; North Korea Threats; Minnesota-Dental Surgery Accident; Toddler Murder; Shark Attack Video; Trump-Utah National Monuments; Silver Dome Demolition; Christmas Lights. 

CBS: Tax Reform Plan; Tax Reform Plan-Expert Comment; North Korea Threats; Florida-Mass Shooting Foiled; Russia Meddling Investigation-Trump; Russia Meddling Investigation-Russian Ambassador; Trump-Access Hollywood Video; Roy Moore Campaign; John Anderson Dies; Super Moon; Trump-Utah National Monuments; TIME-Person Of The Year List; Text Message History; Space Pizza Delivery; Animal Dentist. 

NBC: Russia Meddling Investigation; Roy Moore Campaign; SCOTUS-Travel Restriction; Trump-Utah National Monuments; CVS-Aetna Merger; Tax Reform Plan; Weather Forecast; North Korea Threats; Uterus Transplant Birth; Weight Loss Program; Silver Dome Demolition; Las Vegas Charity. 

Network TV At A Glance: 

Russia Meddling Investigation – 12 minutes, 10 seconds Tax Reform Plan – 9 minutes, 25 seconds North Korea Threats – 5 minutes, 30 seconds Roy Moore Campaign – 4 minutes, 30 seconds Trump-Utah National Monuments – 3 minutes, 15 seconds 

Story Lineup From This Morning’s Radio News Broadcasts: 

ABC: Oklahoma Earthquake; California Wildfire; SCOTUS-Travel Restriction; Tax Reform Plan; Wall Street News. 

CBS: SCOTUS-Travel Restriction; Federal Budget; Trump-Utah National Monuments; Russia Meddling Investigation; San Francisco Shooting Trial. 

FOX: SCOTUS-Travel Restriction; Russia Meddling Investigation; Trump-Utah National Monuments; Florida-Mass Shooting Foiled; Opioid Epidemic. 

NPR: Federal Budget; Trump-Utah National Monuments; Russia Meddling Investigation; Opioid Epidemic. 

# Washington Schedule 

## Today’s Events In Washington. 

White House: 

PRESIDENT TRUMP — Has lunch with Republican Members of the Senate; leads a discussion with American business owners and their families; hosts the Congressional Ball. VICE PRESIDENT PENCE — Participates in the Senate Republican Policy Lunch; attends the Congressional Ball. 

US Senate: 10:00 AM Senate HELP Committee nominations hearing – Nominations hearing considers Kenneth Marcus to be Assistant Secretary of Education for Civil Rights; Johnny Collett to be Assistant Secretary of Education for Special Education and Rehabilitative Services; Scott Mugno to be Assistant Secretary of Labor for the Occupational Safety and Health Administration; and Dr William Beach to be Commissioner of Labor Statistics Location: Dirksen Senate Office Building, Rm 430, Washington, DC http://help.senate.gov/ 10:00 AM Senate Energy and Natural Resources Committee nominations hearing – Nominations hearing considers Dr Timothy Petty to be Assistant Secretary of the Interior for Water and Science; and Dr Linda Capuano to be Energy Information Administration Administrator Location: Rm 366, Dirksen Senate Office Bldg, Washington, DC www.energy.senate.gov 10:00 AM Senate Appropriations subcommittee hearing on addressing the opioid crisis – Labor, Health and Human Services, Education, and Related Agencies Subcommittee hearing on ‘Addressing the Opioid Crisis in America: Prevention, Treatment, and Recovery’, with testimony from President’s Commission on Combating Drug Addiction and the Opioid Crisis member (and former Rep.) Patrick Kennedy; Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration Assistant Secretary for Mental Health and Substance Use Dr Elinore McCance-Katz; National Institutes of Health Director Dr Francis Collins; and CDC National Center for Injury Prevention and Control Director Dr Debra Houry Location: Rm 124, Dirksen Senate Office Bldg, Washington, DC http://appropriations.senate.gov/ https://twitter.com/SenateApprops 10:00 AM Senate Banking Committee votes on Fed governor nominee – Executive Session, with agenda including the nomination of Jerome Powell to be Federal Reserve System Chairman of the Board of Governors, as well as ‘S. 2155, the Economic Growth, Regulatory Relief and Consumer Protection Act’ * President Donald Trump announced Powell’s nomination at the beginning of last month, and, if confirmed, he will replace Janet Yellen in February after she has served just one term Location: Dirksen Senate Office Building, Rm 538, Washington, DC http://banking.senate.gov/ 2:30 PM Senate Foreign Relations Committee Business Meeting, hearing on international accords – Business Meeting, with agenda including legislation including ‘S.1118, North Korean Human Rights Reauthorization Act of 2017’, ‘S.447, Justice for Uncompensated Survivors Today Act of 2017’, ‘S. Res. 150, A resolution recognizing threats to freedom of the press and expression around the world and reaffirming freedom of the press as a priority in efforts of the United States Government to promote democracy and good governance’, ‘S. Res 139, A resolution condemning the Government of Iran’s state-sponsored persecution of its Baha’i minority and its continued violation of the International Covenants on Human Rights’, and the nominations of Eric Ueland to be Under Secretary of State for Management, and James Randolph Evans to be U.S. Ambassador to Luxembourg * Immediately followed by hearing on ‘The President, Congress, and Shared Authority Over International Accords’, with testimony from Duke University School of Law Professor Curtis Bradley; and former Principal Deputy National Security Advisor Avril Haines Location: U.S. Capitol, S-116, Washington, DC http://foreign.senate.gov/ 2:30 PM Senate Energy and Natural Resources subcommittee legislative hearing – Energy Subcommittee legislative hearing on ‘S. 1336, Reliable Investment in Vital Energy Reauthorization Act’, ‘S. 1455, Energy Storage Goals and Demonstration Projects Act’, ‘S. 1563, Rare Earth Element Advanced Coal Technologies Act’, ‘S. 1851, Advancing Grid Storage Act’, ‘S. 1876, Reducing the Cost of Energy Storage Act’, ‘S. 1981, Small Scale LNG Access Act’, and ‘S. 2030, Ceiling Fan Energy Conservation Harmonization Act’, with testimony from Republican Sen. Thom Tillis; and Under Secretary of Energy Mark Menezes Location: Rm 366, Dirksen Senate Office Bldg, Washington, DC www.energy.senate.gov 3:00 PM Closed Briefing: Intelligence Matters Location: Rm 219, Hart Senate Office Bldg, Washington, DC http://intelligence.senate.gov 

US House: 11:00 AM GOP Reps. Rob Bishop, Chris Stewart, and John Curtis host Pen & Pad on President Trump’s Utah visit – House Committee on Natural Resources Chairman Rob Bishop and Republican members Chris Stewart and John Curtis host Pen & Pad to discuss President Donald Trump’s visit to Utah yesterday and the introduction of related legislation Location: U.S. Capitol, Washington, DC http://naturalresources.house.gov https://twitter.com/NatResources 11:00 AM House Minority Whip Steny Hoyer regular pen-and-pad briefing Location: H-144, U.S. Capitol, Washington, DC www.democraticwhip.gov/ https://twitter.com/WhipHoyer 12:00 PM House meets for legislative business – House of Representatives meets for legislative business, with agenda including consideration of ‘H.R. 3731 – Secret Service Recruitment and Retention Act of 2017’, as amended, ‘H.R. 3317 – SAFE Act’, ‘H.Res. 259 – Expressing concern and condemnation over the political, economic, social, and humanitarian crisis in Venezuela’, as amended, ‘H.R. 2658 – Venezuela Humanitarian Assistance and Defense of Democratic Governance Act of 2017’, as amended, ‘H.Con.Res. 90 – Condemning ethnic cleansing of the Rohingya and calling for an end to the attacks in and an immediate restoration of humanitarian access to the state of Rakhine in Burma’, as amended, and ‘S. 1266 – Enhancing Veteran Care Act’ under suspension of the rules Location: Washington, DC http://www.house.gov/ 2:00 PM House Rules Committee hearing – Hearing on ‘H.R. 38 – Concealed Carry Reciprocity Act of 2017’ and, as an emergency measure, ‘H.J. Res. XXXX – Further Continuing Appropriations Act, 2018’ Location: U.S. Capitol, H-313, Washington, DC http://www.rules.house.gov/ https://twitter.com/RulesReps 

Other: 8:00 AM International Religious Freedom conference – Order of St. Andrew, Archons of the Ecumenical Patriarchate International Religious Freedom conference, with U.S. officials, Greek Orthodox Archdiocese of America, and other Christian groups addressing the persecution of Christians in the Middle East and North Africa. Day two agenda includes Capitol Hill Lunch with Democratic Sen. Ben Cardin, session on ‘Persecution of Christians and Possible Solutions’ with Republican Sen. James Lankford and Rep. Gus Bilirakis, and banquet with former White House of Chief of Staff Reince Priebus Location: Trump International Hotel Washington, D.C., 1100 Pennsylvania Ave NW, Washington, DC conference.archons.org https://twitter.com/OrderStAndrew 8:00 AM POLITICO Women Rule Summit – POLITICO Women Rule Summit, to discuss how women can continue to make strides in achieving leadership positions across all sectors, with speakers include Secretary of Transportation Elaine Chao, Democrats Sen. Kirsten Gillibrand and Rep. Cheri Bustos, Republican Sen. Marco Rubio, Rolls-Royce North America Chairman, President, and CEO Marion Bovino, ‘Me Too’ movement founder Tarana Burke, Massachusetts Attorney General Maura Healey, International Refugee Assistance Program Director Becca Heller, Invariant founder and CEO Heather Podesta, Wethos CEO and Creative Director Rachel Renock, former Customs and Immigration Enforcement Director Sarah Saldana, Women in Federal Law Enforcement Foundation President Catherine Sanz, The Cook Political Report National Editor Amy Walter, and SoulCycle CEO Melanie Whelan Location: Four Seasons Hotel Washington, DC, 2800 Pennsylvania Ave NW, Washington, DC www.politico.com https://twitter.com/POLITICOEvents 9:00 AM Pakistan Ambassador to the U.S. speaks at Carnegie Endowment – Pakistan Ambassador to the U.S. Amb. Aizaz Ahmad Chaudhry speaks at Carnegie Endowment for International Peace on ‘Peace and Stability in South Asia’, discussing the changes taking place in the region Location: Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, 1779 Massachusetts Ave NW, Washington, DC http://www.carnegieendowment.org https://twitter.com/CarnegieEndow 

# Last Laughs 

## Late Night Political Humor. 

Stephen Colbert: “Well, it feels like Christmas is here, courtesy of Robert Mueller coming down the White House chimney with a sack full of subpoenas.” 

Stephen Colbert: “So they’re saying Trump’s lawyer wrote a tweet in the voice of his client, without the client’s permission or knowledge, a tweet in which the client indicts himself for obstruction of justice. That is malpractice. I certainly hope John Dowd has a lawyer that’s way better than John Dowd.” 

James Corden: “Donald Trump spent the entire weekend furiously lashing out at the FBI on Twitter over the Russia investigation. Don’t worry, I’m sure he still got to play golf, too, but that was mostly what he was doing.” 

James Corden: “When reporters questioned the story, Trump took his usual approach, blaming Hillary. He said, quote, ‘Hillary Clinton lied many times to the FBI, and nothing happened to her.’ Nothing happened to her? She lost a presidential election to Donald Trump. ... She wrote an entire book called ‘What Happened.’” 

James Corden: “According to Donald Trump’s former campaign manager, Trump’s usual McDonald’s order, and this is just for one meal, is two Big Macs, two Filet-O-Fish and a chocolate milkshake. Yeah, that’s not a meal order – that is an assassination attempt.” 

Trevor Noah: “First on Friday at 2 a.m. while you were on the dance floor, Republicans were on the Senate floor really burning down the house. And we’re going to get into that later in the show. But before that, it turns out we may all be saying ‘Merry Christmas’ again because Robert Mueller bought America a gift.” 

Trevor Noah: “Normally, you don’t think of Congress getting a lot done on Friday night, or Friday afternoon, or any time on Friday, or really any other day of the week. But this past Friday was different because Republicans finally had a chance to pass a sweeping tax bill that would make all those clenched smiles next to Trump totally worth it.” 

Jimmy Fallon: “What a crazy weekend in Washington. First, former National Security Adviser Michael Flynn cut a plea deal with Robert Mueller and then the Senate passed the GOP tax bill. I tried to follow it on the news, but all the anchors have been fired for sexual harassment, so I didn’t see anything.” 

Jimmy Fallon: “Michael Flynn agreed to a plea deal with Robert Mueller, and it came out that the FBI is investigating everyone in the White House, all the way to the top. Trump was like, ‘Oh my God, they’re investigating Putin?’” 

Jimmy Fallon: “The [Senate tax] bill’s drawn lots of criticism. Experts say it will ruin healthcare, cause problems for the elderly, and add over $1 trillion to the deficit. Trump’s cabinet was like, ‘Phew, thank God we’re going to jail. I mean, could you imagine if we had to live in this world?’” 

Seth Meyers: “The Senate passed a Republican tax bill just before 2:00 a.m. on Saturday, and if you’re wondering if that’s a good thing, try to remember the last time anything good happened to you at 2:00 a.m. on a Saturday.” 

Seth Meyers: “A new poll has found that 48 percent of Roy Moore’s supporters plan to vote for him because he’s the best person for the job. What’s the job? Male stripper for nursing homes?” 

Seth Meyers: “Former National Security Adviser Michael Flynn on Friday pleaded guilty to lying to the FBI about contacts with the Russian ambassador. And if that’s what he pleaded to, you know whatever he did was worse. It’s like if OJ had pleaded guilty to changing lanes without signaling.” 

Conan O’Brien: “This morning, President Trump endorsed Republican Senate candidate Roy Moore, despite the fact that Moore has been accused of molesting minors. When asked why he endorsed Moore, Trump said, ‘Us gross guys got to stick together.’” Conan O’Brien: “Time magazine has published short list of nominees for person of the year, and it includes Colin Kaepernick, Donald Trump and Robert Mueller. And if it’s a three-way tie, that’s going to be one awkward photo shoot.” 

Jordan Klepper: “Obstruction of justice because of a tweet? If anything on Twitter mattered, we’d have already started a hashtag war with North Korea.” 

Jordan Klepper: “So why would we cover the President’s potential crimes when we haven’t even investigated a failed candidate’s potential crimes yet? We need to focus on the real criminal: a private citizen who isn’t in power! Trump gets it!” 

Jordan Klepper: “As the deadline drew near, [GOP senators] filled the margins [of the tax bill] with handwritten notes, a personal touch the ungrateful Democrats failed to appreciate.” 

Jordan Klepper: “Republicans love this bill. Even Santa loves this bill, and why wouldn’t he? He lives in a red state and runs a global corporation fueled by cheap labor.” 

Copyright 2017 by Bulletin Intelligence LLC Reproduction or redistribution without permission prohibited. Content is drawn from thousands of newspapers, national magazines, national and local television programs, radio broadcasts, social-media platforms and additional forms of open-source data. Sources for Bulletin Intelligence audience-size estimates include Scarborough, GfK MRI, comScore, Nielsen, and the Audit Bureau of Circulation. Data from and access to third party social media platforms, including but not limited to Facebook, Twitter, Instagram and others, is subject to the respective platform’s terms of use. Services that include Factiva content are governed by Factiva’s terms of use. Services including embedded Tweets are also subject to Twitter for Website's information and privacy policies. The Department of the Interior News Briefing is published five days a week by Bulletin Intelligence, which creates custom briefings for government and corporate leaders. We can be found on the Web at BulletinIntelligence.com, or called at (703) 483-6100. Conversation Contents 

## U.S. Department of the Interior News Briefing for Wednesday, November 29, 2017 

# Bulletin Intelligence <Interior@bulletinintelligence.com> 

## From: Bulletin Intelligence <Interior@bulletinintelligence.com> 

## Sent: Wed Nov 29 2017 04:00:59 GMT-0700 (MST) 

## To: <Interior@bulletinintelligence.com> 

## Subject: U.S. Department of the Interior News Briefing for Wednesday, November 29, 2017  

> Mobile version and searchable archives available here. Please click here to subscribe.
> DATE: WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 29, 2017 6:00 AM EST

# Today's Table Of Contents 

DOI In The News 

• Reuters: Trump To Visit Utah Next Week, Expected To Announce Monument Decision. • Associated Press: Eni Receives Federal Permit For US Arctic Offshore Drilling. • Wall Street Journal: GOP Closes In On Opening Arctic Wildlife Refuge To Drilling. • E&E Publishing: Legal Challenges Mount As Clock Ticks On Elephant Decision. • Great Falls (MT) Tribune: Greater Sage Grouse Management Comment Period Extended. • Ashland (OR) Jefferson Public Radio: Utah Congressman Seeks To Re-Open Area In SW Oregon To Mining. • FedTech: Interior, VA And DOJ Chart The Way Forward On IT Reform. 

Bureau Of Indian Affairs 

• House OKs Calif. Tribe Land Deal With Feds. • DC Circ. Backs Toss Of Calif. County’s Tribal Casino Fight. 

Bureau Of Indian Education 

• Alleged Haskell Rape Victim Settles With Federal Government In Civil Lawsuit. 

Bureau Of Land Management 

• Denver Post: Senate Committee Votes To Block Killing Healthy Wild Horses. • Associated Press: Lawsuit Seeks To Block California Desert Water Project. • Associated Press: Self-Taught Rocket Scientist Eyes Monday For New Launch Date. • Ruidoso (NM) News: County Could Lose $32,020 In Federal Swap For State Trust Land. • Billings (MT) Gazette: Agencies Cooperate To Improve Fence For Wyoming Pronghorns. • Coos Bay (OR) World: Coos Bay Bureau Of Land Management Sells 3 Million Board Feet Of Timber. Bureau Of Ocean Energy Management 

• Cape Wind Fight Spins On. 

Fish And Wildlife Service 

• Associated Press: Threatened Snake Long Gone From Colorado River Re-Appears. • Joplin (MO) Globe: Neosho Fish Hatchery Awaits Ponds Completion. • Lawrence (KS) Journal World: Prairie Park Nature Center Aids In National Efforts To Save Endangered Black-footed Ferret. • New Richmond (WI) News: Erin Baillargeon Earns USFWS Volunteer Of The Year. 

National Park Service 

• Salt Lake (UT) Tribune: Have An Opinion About The Proposed Fee Hikes For Popular National Parks? The Comment Period Has Been Extended. • E&E Publishing: Experiment Puts Mall Rats On Birth Control. • Associated Press: Lawmakers Push For Historic Trail Status For Route 66. • Anniston (AL) Star: Park Service Concerned About Courthouse Sites. • Associated Press: Remains Of Ancient Sea Cow Unearthed On California Island. • Associated Press: Rocky Mountain Park To Expand Native American Representation. • Salt Lake (UT) Tribune: Utah’s Famed Bighorn Sheep Thriving In Zion National Park, So State Plans To Move Some To Bears Ears. • Ocala (FL) Star-Banner: Fort King: Reconstructed. • Santa Rosa (CA) Press Democrat: Future Of Point Reyes Cattle Ranches At Stake In National Park Service Planning Process. • Firehouse: Brian Johnson Named Structural Fire Branch Chief At National Park Service. • Oneida (TN) Independent Herald: Black Creek Fire Tower Added To National Register Of Historic Places. • St. Joseph (MO) News-Press: Benton Club On National Registry Of Historic Places. 

Office Of Insular Affairs 

• St. Thomas Source: WAPA Restores Power To 40 Percent Of Territory More Than Two Months After Hurricanes. • Radio New Zealand: Palau Under Pressure From China Over Taiwan Link. • Saipan (MNP) Tribune: CHCC Is Ready To Apply Green Cards For Its Longtime Nurses. • New Zealand Herald: Marshall Islands: Concrete Dome Holding Nuclear Waste Could Leak. • CNBC: Hawaii To Resume Cold War-era Nuclear Attack Warning Siren Tests Due To The North Korea Threat. • Marianas Variety: Governor: CW Issue Needs US Congressional Action. • Guam Daily Post: Calvo Uses Hearse To Call For Legislature To Hear $125M Borrowing, Tax Increase Proposal For GMH. • Virgin Islands Consortium (VIR): Thousands Of Jobs May Be Headed To St. Croix And Texas Following Trump Deals With Chinese Oil And Gas Giant. • Marianas Variety: More Independents Join GOP. • Virgin Islands Consortium (VIR): VI Republicans Urging Trump And GOP Not To Give Blank Check To VI Government. 

US Geological Survey 

• Washington Post: Bali Volcano Has A History Of Explosive Eruptions And Global Climate Impacts. • Daily Mail: Methane Ecosystem Found In Caves Of The Yucatan Peninsula. 

Opinion Pieces 

• The Trump Judiciary Threatens Federal Public Lands. • Additional Reading. Top National News 

> • NBC: Media Analysis: Most Powerful ICBM Yet Is North Korea’s Response To Trump. • ABC: Media Analyses: Judge’s Ruling On CFPB Head A Victory For Trump. • ABC: Trump Suggests Government Shutdown Possible After Democrats Skip Meeting. • NBC: Tax Bill Closing In On 50 Votes After Trump Meets With Senate Republicans.

Editorial Wrap-Up 

> • New York Times. - “Senate Considers Making A Terrible Tax Bill Even Worse.” • Washington Post. - “What’s One More Bad Thing In The GOP Tax Bill? Ask The Polar Bears.” - “Egypt Answers Terrorism With Familiar Incompetence.” - “Congress, Surprise Us.” • Wall Street Journal. - “A Trigger Warning On Taxes.” - “A Drama Queen Loses Her Head.” - “Fourth Amendment Showdown.”

Big Picture 

> • Headlines From Today’s Front Pages.

Washington Schedule 

> • Today’s Events In Washington.

Last Laughs 

> • Late Night Political Humor.

# DOI In The News 

## Trump To Visit Utah Next Week, Expected To Announce Monument Decision. 

Reuters (11/28, Holland, Rampton, Volcovici) reports that President Trump “is expected to announce his decision on whether to reduce the size of two national monuments” where drilling and mining are currently banned during a visit to Utah on Monday. Environmental groups and Native American tribal organizations are planning to protest Trump’s visit, and legal challenges are expected over the decision. Meanwhile, industry groups like the American Petroleum Institute “have said in the past that both Bears Ears and Grand Staircase-Escalante were unfairly designated as monuments and needed to be reviewed.” The AP (11/28) reports that Sen. Orrin Hatch’s spokesman Matt Whitlock “said Tuesday that the president accepted Hatch’s invitation to visit Utah to discuss Bears Ears and Grand Staircase-Escalante national monuments.” Hatch and Utah Gov. Gary Herbert “say Trump called them in October to announce he would approve Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke’s recommendation to downsize the two monuments protecting more than 3.6 million acres (14,600 square kilometers).” Also reporting are the Washington Post (11/28, Eilperin), the Washington Examiner (11/28, Siegel), the Salt Lake (UT) Tribune (11/29, Burr), the San Juan (UT) Record (11/28), the Deseret (UT) News (11/28, Roche), the Aspen (CO) Times (11/28, Condon), the Colorado Springs (CO) Gazette (11/28, Burr), the Westerner (11/28, DuBois), KSL-TV Salt Lake City Salt Lake City (11/28, Roch), and KNRS-FM Salt Lake City Salt Lake City (11/28). 

## Eni Receives Federal Permit For US Arctic Offshore Drilling. 

The AP (11/28, Joling) reports the Bureau of Safety and Environmental Enforcement has approved an application from Eni to drill exploratory wells in the Beaufort Sea. Drilling could begin next month from Spy Island as Eni plans to use extended-reach drilling methods to hit submerged land. BSEE’s Alaska region director Mark Fesmire said the agency conducted a thorough review of Eni’s well design, testing procedures and safety protocol before approving the plans. Reuters (11/28, Gardner) reports BSEE director Scott Angelle said developing Arctic resources is a “critical component to achieving American energy dominance.” Environmentalists criticized the move, with the legal director for oceans at the Center for Biological Diversity Kristen Monsell saying, “The Trump administration is risking a major oil spill by letting this foreign corporation drill in the unforgiving waters off Alaska.” The Hill (11/28, Henry) reports Eni already owns the leases that it is looking to explore. Angelle also said, “BSEE is committed to working with our Alaskan Native and industry partners by taking a thoughtful and balanced approach to oil and gas exploration, development and production in the Arctic.” The Washington Examiner (11/28, Siegel) reports that this is the first time in two years that the BSEE has approved drilling exploration in the Arctic Ocean. Also reporting are E&E Publishing (11/28), Offshore Engineer (11/28, Boman), E&P Magazine (11/28, Addison), the Alaska Public Radio Network (11/28, Harball), Alaska Dispatch News (11/28, DeMarban), the Spokane (WA) Spokesman-Review (11/28, Joling), CBS News, the Huffington Post (11/28, D'Angelo), and Alaska Dispatch News (11/28, DeMarban). 

## GOP Closes In On Opening Arctic Wildlife Refuge To Drilling. 

The Wall Street Journal (11/28, Puko) reports the GOP is closer to opening the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge as the tax reform bill moves to the Senate floor. Sen. Lisa Murkowski’s Committee on Energy and Natural Resources passed a bill to open ANWR drilling earlier this month and the Budget Committee approved the measure. However, the House has not passed a similar provision, but leaders from both chambers will likely negotiate over whether to include it in the final tax bill. The Seattle Times (11/28, Mapes, Bernton) reports Sen. Maria Cantwell has promised to make every effort to stop the measure. She said, “We are going to have to fight on the floor to try to stop this. ... It’s a backdoor process that only needs 51 votes. They would never get it in the normal process.” The Hill (11/28, Cama) and Vox (11/28, Irfan) also provided coverage. 

## Legal Challenges Mount As Clock Ticks On Elephant Decision. 

E&E Publishing (11/28, Doyle) reports that the Interior Department is “still struggling amid growing legal challenges to work out what to do about elephant trophy imports from Zimbabwe and Zambia.” The decision by President Trump is likely to attract legal challenges. In a suit filed this week, Friends of Animals and the Zimbabwe Conservation Task Force “challenged the Fish and Wildlife Service’s original decision earlier this month to lift the 3-year-old ban on the elephant trophy imports.” And “a reversal of the Fish and Wildlife Service’s extensively studied decision to lift the ban could invite a legal challenge from critics claiming the U-turn was ‘arbitrary and capricious’ and violated the Administrative Procedure Act.” 

## Greater Sage Grouse Management Comment Period Extended. 

The Great Falls (MT) Tribune (11/28, Dettmer) reports that “the public comment period for Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke’s Secretarial Order 3353, an order drafted to look at revisions to land management amendments for the greater sage grouse has been extended by the Bureau of Land Management to Dec. 1, 2017 —giving constituents four more days to provide feedback.” The revisions, Zinke said, are intended to “protect sage-grouse and their habitat while also ensuring conservation efforts do not impede local economic opportunities.” But “groups coming out against Zinke’s proposed amendments say the amendments brings greater sage grouse protections back to square one and undermines the work already put in by stakeholders.” 

## Utah Congressman Seeks To Re-Open Area In SW Oregon To Mining. Ashland (OR) Jefferson Public Radio (11/28, Moriarty) reports that Rep. Rob Bishop “recently sent a letter to Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke and Agriculture Secretary Sonny Perdue, urging them to review the validity of all Obama-era mineral withdrawals, and the Southwestern Oregon Mineral Withdrawal, in particular.” Under Obama, Bishop’s letter says, “millions of acres of Federal land were inappropriately withdrawn from mineral access due to false premises of environmental protectionism and the intentional misuse of statutory authority.” In response, Sens. Jeff Merkley and Ron Wyden, and Rep. Peter DeFazio “wrote a three-page letter to Zinke and Perdue, urging them to disregard what they called Bishop’s ‘flawed’ request for a review.” 

## Interior, VA And DOJ Chart The Way Forward On IT Reform. 

FedTech (11/28, Goldstein) reports that “agencies are still trying to figure out how they will respond” to the Modernizing Government Technology Act “and its promise of working capital funds to modernize IT.” To assist them “chart a course forward, the nonprofit Partnership for Public Service partnered with Accenture and released a blueprint earlier this month to spur improvements in federal technology management.” At an event in Washington earlier this month to discuss the blueprint, “several agency IT leaders discussed how they have put the ideas behind the report into practice in digital transformation initiatives.” At the Interior Department, CIO Sylvia Burns “said the agency got its senior leadership involved in discussions on how to comply with the Federal Information Technology Acquisition Reform Act.” 

# Bureau Of Indian Affairs 

## House OKs Calif. Tribe Land Deal With Feds. 

Law360 (11/28, Macagnone) reports that “the House of Representatives approved a bill Tuesday that would greenlight a land deal between the federal government and the Santa Ynez Band of Chumash Indians that has been the subject of litigation in California.” The bill from Rep. Doug LaMalfa “retroactively recognizes the U.S. Department of the Interior’s decision earlier this year to take more than 1,400 acres of land into trust for the tribe, and passed on a voice vote Tuesday.” 

## DC Circ. Backs Toss Of Calif. County’s Tribal Casino Fight. 

Law360 (11/28, Lidgett) reports that “the D.C. Circuit on Monday backed a lower court’s decision to toss a California county’s suit challenging a U.S. Department of the Interior decision supporting a proposed tribal casino, saying the tribe and the county agreed in a 1987 deal that the tribe would be treated as a federally recognized reservation.” 

# Bureau Of Indian Education 

## Alleged Haskell Rape Victim Settles With Federal Government In Civil Lawsuit. 

The Lawrence (KS) Journal World (11/28, Shepherd) reports that “the U.S. government has paid to settle a lawsuit by a former Haskell Indian Nations University student who said she was raped by two fellow students in a dorm in 2014, her attorney says.” According to court documents, “the remaining portion of Jane Doe H versus Haskell et al was closed Tuesday, after the plaintiff and the federal government agreed to dismiss it with prejudice.” Additional coverage was provided by KCUR-FM Kansas City, MO (11/28, Margolies). 

# Bureau Of Land Management 

## Senate Committee Votes To Block Killing Healthy Wild Horses. 

The Denver Post (11/28, McGhee) reports that the Senate Appropriations Committee’s “vote to block killing healthy wild horses has heartened advocates for the free-roaming mustang herds who fear the Bureau of Land Management wants to eliminate thousands to manage exploding herd populations.” The action on Nov. 20, “followed a July vote by the House Appropriations Committee that would make it possible for the Interior Department’s BLM to euthanize healthy wild horses.” According to the article, “the final decision on the animals’ future will be made during negotiations between the House and the Senate to reach a consensus on the two versions of the spending bill for the Interior Department.” 

## Lawsuit Seeks To Block California Desert Water Project. 

The AP (11/28, Jablon) reports that “environmental activists sued Tuesday to halt a plan to pump water from beneath the Mojave Desert and sell it to Southern California cities and counties.” The lawsuit takes aim at the decision by the Bureau of Land Management “allowing Cadiz Inc. to build a 43-mile pipeline to transfer the water from its desert wells into the Colorado River Aqueduct so it can be sold to water districts.” The BLM “released guidelines during the Obama administration to block construction of the pipeline along an existing federal railroad right of way, but the Trump administration reversed them this year and the project is on a priority infrastructure list.” The lawsuit claims “the new guidelines would illegally permit construction of the pipeline on public land, including the newly created Mojave Trails National Monument, ‘while circumventing laws enacted to protect human health and the environment.’” Also reporting are the Palm Springs (CA) Desert Sun (11/28, Roth), Courthouse News (11/28, Renda), and Law360 (11/28, Crosby). 

## Self-Taught Rocket Scientist Eyes Monday For New Launch Date. 

The AP (11/28, Graham) reports that a man who plans to launch himself in a rocket to prove that the earth is flat has rescheduled his experiment for Monday. Mike Hughes was “scheduled to blast off last weekend, but he didn’t have the proper permits from the Bureau of Land Management.” Hughes has “relocated his launch pad about 4 miles from its original spot so he takes off and lands on private property.” The BLM “said he still needs to fill out the permits.” However, “Hughes contends that shouldn’t be required since he’s flying on private land and has permission.” 

## County Could Lose $32,020 In Federal Swap For State Trust Land. 

The Ruidoso (NM) News (11/28, Stallings) reports that “a proposed land swap between the federal Bureau of Land Management and the New Mexico State Land Office could result in 17,215 acres in Lincoln County switching ownership and the county losing $32,030 in annual compensation dollars for nontaxable federal land.” In exchange, Deputy Land Commissioner Laura Riley “told commissioners last week the state will earn more revenue from the acreage than it did from the land that would be swapped to federal ownership in the Rio Grande Del Norte/Sabinoso Wilderness.” 

## Agencies Cooperate To Improve Fence For Wyoming Pronghorns. 

The Billings (MT) Gazette (11/28, Beckwith) reports that “the Bureau of Land Management Cody Field Office recently collaborated with the Wyoming Department of Transportation, Wyoming Game and Fish Department and Friends of a Legacy to replace the bottom strand of barbed wire with smooth wire on a fence east of Cody along State Highway 32.” The fence is on the eastern edge of the McCullough Peaks Wild Horse Herd Management Area. According to the article, “the bottom wire was also raised to 16 inches off the ground to allow pronghorn, which need space to crawl under fences, to easily pass underneath.” 

## Coos Bay Bureau Of Land Management Sells 3 Million Board Feet Of Timber. 

The Coos Bay (OR) World (11/28) reports that “the Coos Bay District of the Bureau of Land Management sold 3.2 million board feet of timber, worth $450,242.70, at an oral auction on Nov. 17.” Bureau Of Ocean Energy Management 

## Cape Wind Fight Spins On. 

The Cape Cod (MA) Times (11/28, Stening) reports that “opponents of the stalled Cape Wind project have appealed a federal agency’s decision to allow the offshore wind energy developer to maintain its long-term federal lease in Nantucket Sound, where the company had planned to build 130 wind turbines.” The notice of the appeal was filed on Nov. 21 with the Interior Board of Land Appeals. 

# Fish And Wildlife Service 

## Threatened Snake Long Gone From Colorado River Re-Appears. 

The AP (11/29) reports that “a threatened snake that hasn’t been seen along the lower Colorado River in a century has apparently repopulated an area south of Lake Havasu City.” U.S. Fish and Wildlife service spokesman Jeff Humphrey “said Tuesday that biologists first spotted the northern Mexican gartersnake along the Bill Williams River in west-central Arizona.” They later found it on the Colorado River at the Havasu National Wildlife Refuge. 

## Neosho Fish Hatchery Awaits Ponds Completion. 

The Joplin (MO) Globe (11/28, Kagubare) reports that “the Neosho Fish Hatchery is within days of completing its six-month construction project to update three of its six fishing ponds.” Bruce Hallman, environmental education specialist, noted that “the last time the ponds were improved was in the 1930s.” He said, “It will just make everything look better here and more efficient.” 

## Prairie Park Nature Center Aids In National Efforts To Save Endangered Black-footed Ferret. 

The Lawrence (KS) Journal World (11/28, Hlavacek) reports that black-footed ferrets are “making a modest comeback on the prairie they once freely roamed — thanks, in part, to the work of Prairie Park staff and U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service biologists.” Marty Birrell, nature interpretive supervisor at Prairie Park, “feels optimistic after this month’s trip to the 1,100-acre tract in western Kansas, where she and her colleagues helped capture, tag and vaccinate wild-born ferrets.” The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service has “yet to release data from this month’s survey, but Birrell said her team located at least 20 ferrets during her time on the site.” 

## Erin Baillargeon Earns USFWS Volunteer Of The Year. 

The New Richmond (WI) News (11/28, Lindfors) reports that “New Richmond Middle School seventh grade science teacher Erin Baillargeon was presented with the prestigious Volunteer of the Year Award by U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service Wildlife Biologist and Volunteer Coordinator Chris Trosen during a brief ceremony Thursday afternoon, Nov. 16.” Baillargeon, “along with her students, took on the responsibility for care and upkeep of several hundred wild lupine plugs in the middle school’s greenhouse during the school year.” At the end of the school year, Baillargeon, “minus her students’ help, became the sole caretaker for the army of plants.” 

# National Park Service 

## Have An Opinion About The Proposed Fee Hikes For Popular National Parks? The Comment Period Has Been Extended. 

The Salt Lake (UT) Tribune (11/29, Maffly) reports that “in the face of intense public interest, much of it critical,” the National Park Service is has extended the public comment period to “on its controversial proposal to boost entrance fees to $70 per vehicle at its most popular parks.” The NPS is “now accepting comments for a second month, until Dec. 22, as it weighs whether to implement the proposal, amend it or abandon it in favor of solutions that don’t rely so heavily on visitors.” Meanwhile, Arizona Public Media (11/28, Sieg) reports that Arizona Attorney General Mark Brnovich has “joined 10 of his counterparts in other states across the country in opposition to the price hike.” According to the article, “in a letter addressed to the acting director of the National Park Service, the attorneys general quote naturalist John Muir, who once wrote that people need ‘beauty as well as bread.’” 

## Experiment Puts Mall Rats On Birth Control. 

E&E Publishing (11/28, Hotakainen) reports that “under a pilot project set to begin in the coming weeks, a contraceptive bait called ContraPest will be fed to rats around the food kiosk at the Thomas Jefferson Memorial.” The project is “the brainchild of Arizona-based SenesTech Inc., which says it makes more sense to target the reproductive capabilities of rats to try to eliminate them in the long run instead of relying on toxic poisons to kill them immediately.” Mike Litterst, chief of communications for the National Parks Service’s National Mall and Memorial Parks, said, “This has been approved by the EPA and has been used in other metropolitan areas, including Chicago and New York City.” 

## Lawmakers Push For Historic Trail Status For Route 66. 

The AP (11/28) reports that “lawmakers are pushing Congress to give historic trail status to Route 66 to help preserve the iconic roadway, which passes through Missouri and seven other states.” The U.S. House Natural Resources subcommittee considered legislation on Nov. 15. Rep. Darin LaHood, who introduced the bill, said, “The federal government already recognizes the importance of Route 66. If signed into law, it (the bill) will designate Route 66 as a National Historic Trail ensuring that the National Park Service will have the authority to assist and support states and local communities in preserving, promoting and economically developing Route 66 for generations to come.” Additional coverage was provided by the Williams (AZ) Grand Canyon News (11/28, Windes). 

## Park Service Concerned About Courthouse Sites. 

The Anniston (AL) Star (11/28, Cunningham) reports that “the city of Anniston and the National Park Service differ on the best site for a new federal courthouse, but officials with the two bodies say they may yet find common ground.” The NPS, “in a letter commenting on assessments of three proposed downtown sites for the courthouse, said it supports one just west of Zinn Park.” The agency “wrote that it has concerns about two other sites, both near its new Freedom Riders National Monument.” 

## Remains Of Ancient Sea Cow Unearthed On California Island. 

The AP (11/28) reports that “scientists say they’ve unearthed fossil remains of a sea cow that lived in the shallow waters off Southern California’s Channel Islands some 25 million years ago.” The National Park Service announced Tuesday that “the fossil skull and rib cage were discovered this summer on Santa Rosa Island, about 50 miles northwest of Los Angeles.” According to Yvonne Menard of the NPS, “two researchers from the U.S. Geological Survey found the skull and rib cage in a steep ravine while mapping earthquake faults.” Additional coverage was provided by USA Today (11/28, Carlson), Southern California Public Radio (11/28), KTLA-TV Los Angeles Los Angeles (11/28, Bloom), and KNBC-TV Los Angeles Los Angeles (11/28). 

## Rocky Mountain Park To Expand Native American Representation. 

The AP (11/28) reports that Rocky Mountain National Park is “expanding its representation of Native Americans with the help of indigenous-focused University of Colorado groups and tribal representatives.” According to the article, “meetings began in the fall to devise a plan to expand representation of indigenous people’s lives.” The article says that “tribal members from Wyoming and Oklahoma were able to attend, while members from Utah, Colorado and Montana tribes have upcoming meetings with park officials.” 

## Utah’s Famed Bighorn Sheep Thriving In Zion National Park, So State Plans To Move Some To Bears Ears. 

The Salt Lake (UT) Tribune (11/28, Maffly) reports that “a multi-year relocation program” of bighorn sheep in Zion National Park is “set to begin next month after more than three years of study.” In the coming weeks, “state wildlife workers will capture 50 Zion sheep, mostly females, fit them with radio collars and release them in San Juan County, according to Rusty Robinson, Utah Division of Wildlife Resources big game coordinator.” The aim is “to augment Utah’s most imperiled bighorn herd, which inhabits a unit called San Juan North located west of the Abajo Mountains in Bears Ears National Monument and the Needles district of Canyonlands National Park. “ 

## Fort King: Reconstructed. 

The Ocala (FL) Star-Banner (11/28, Cundiff) reports that the grand opening of the newly reconstructed Fort King at the Fort King National Historic Landmark will be held this weekend. Events will “feature a reenactment of the December 1835 attack by Seminole chief Osceola and his men that triggered the Second Seminole War.” 

## Future Of Point Reyes Cattle Ranches At Stake In National Park Service Planning Process. 

The Santa Rosa (CA) Press Democrat (11/28, Kovner) reports that “the future of cattle ranching and herds of tule elk in the Point Reyes National Seashore is at stake in a policy-setting process that will culminate in four years and is already attracting thousands of public comments.” The National Park Service has “received about 2,800 comments on a list of six tentative management alternatives, including one that maintains the status quo for 24 families engaged in beef and dairy cattle ranching and three others that would eliminate or reduce ranching.” 

## Brian Johnson Named Structural Fire Branch Chief At National Park Service. 

The Firehouse (11/28) reports that “Brian Johnson has been named Structural Fire Branch Chief for the National Park Service Division of Fire and Aviation Management. He succeeds Hal Spencer, who retired earlier this year.” 

## Black Creek Fire Tower Added To National Register Of Historic Places. 

The Oneida (TN) Independent Herald (11/28) reports eight properties across Tennessee have added to the National Register of Historic Places. They include the Black Creek Fire Lookout Tower, “a fire lookout tower in Carroll County, the Tennessee War Memorial Building in Nashville, the Mt. Zion Negro School in Gibson County, the Blue Springs Lutheran Church and Cemetery in Greene County, the Farmers and Merchants Bank in Lawrence County, the Harrison Mill Farm in Maury County and Pottsville General Store in Maury County.” 

## Benton Club On National Registry Of Historic Places. 

The St. Joseph (MO) News-Press (11/28, Welch) reports that “the Benton Club of St. Joseph has been added to the National Register of Historic Places by the National Park Service.” 

# Office Of Insular Affairs 

## WAPA Restores Power To 40 Percent Of Territory More Than Two Months After Hurricanes. 

The St. Thomas Source (11/28) reports that “about 40 percent of the Water and Power Authority’s electrical customers, more than 49,000 of them, have been re-energized since Hurricanes Irma and Maria battered the territory in September, officials said Monday at a Government House news conference.” Gov. Kenneth Mapp has “set a target date of Christmas for 90 percent electricity, while Water and Power Authority Executive Officer Julio Rhymer’s estimate was year-end.” That promped Mapp to challenge, “I’m not giving him that extra week.” 

## Palau Under Pressure From China Over Taiwan Link. 

Radio New Zealand (11/28) reports that Taiwan observers are “warning the country’s allegiance with Palau could be disastrous for the Micronesian nation.” Last week, China reportedly “banned its travel agencies from arranging visits to Palau, where Chinese tourists were more than half of its visitors last year.” The Taiwan Strategy Research Association’s Fabrizio Bozzato “said China was partly responding to the visit of Taiwan’s president, Tsai Ing-wen, to several Pacific allies including Palau last month.” 

## CHCC Is Ready To Apply Green Cards For Its Longtime Nurses. 

The Saipan (MNP) Tribune (11/28, Cabrera) reports that “even before U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services made a 3,000 cut in the number of slots for foreign workers in fiscal year 2018, the Commonwealth Healthcare Corp. is already in the midst of plans to apply for permanent residency visas for its long-term nurses.” CHCC CEO Esther Muña “said the corporation is looking for appropriate visa categories for its nurses and staff, either H-1B or EB-2 visas.” Muña “said the Commonwealth Health Center, which CHCC operates, already has a nurse that CHCC had applied for an EB-2 visa. Many of CHC’s nurses are Filipino nationals.” 

## Marshall Islands: Concrete Dome Holding Nuclear Waste Could Leak. 

The New Zealand Herald (11/27, Killalea) reports that “rising sea levels and climate change threaten to unleash highly radioactive plutonium into the Pacific Ocean in a nightmare scenario for those who live in the Marshall Islands where dozens of nuclear blasts took place in the 1940s.” Water has begun to penetrate a massive concrete dome “containing the toxic waste with radioactive material leaking out.” 

## Hawaii To Resume Cold War-era Nuclear Attack Warning Siren Tests Due To The North Korea Threat. 

CNBC (11/28) reports that “Hawaii this week will resume monthly statewide testing of its Cold War-era nuclear attack warning sirens for the first time in about 30 years, in preparation for a potential missile launch from North Korea, emergency management officials said on Monday.” According to officials, “wailing air-raid sirens will be sounded for about 60 seconds from more than 400 locations across the central Pacific islands starting at 11:45 a.m. on Friday, in a test that will be repeated on the first business day of each month thereafter.” 

## Governor: CW Issue Needs US Congressional Action. 

Marianas Variety (11/27, Todiño) reports that Gov. Ralph D.L.G. Torres on Thursday “reiterated the need for U.S. congressional action to address the CNMI’s lack of workers.” Last week, “despite the pleas of the CNMI government and business community to reduce it by only one, the U.S. Department of Homeland Security reduced the number of CW-1 permits for fiscal year 2018 by 3,000 — to 9,998 from 12,998.” Torres “said he will continue to communicate with U.S. Congressman Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan ‘make every effort to introduce’ legislation in the U.S. Congress” 

## Calvo Uses Hearse To Call For Legislature To Hear $125M Borrowing, Tax Increase Proposal For GMH. 

The Guam Daily Post (11/16) reports that Gov. Eddie Calvo’s staff “this morning parked a hearse right at the entrance to the Guam Congress building and posted messages on the vehicle to call for legislature to hear a $125M borrowing and tax increase proposal for Guam Memorial Hospital.” Calvo’s press release said the hearse “symbolizes the consequence of the legislature’s inaction to hold a public hearing on two life-saving GMH bills.” It stated, “The bills, if passed, would fully fund the Guam Memorial Hospital every year. They would modernize medical equipment and facilities so that all the people of Guam, rich and poor, have access to quality healthcare right here at home.” 

## Thousands Of Jobs May Be Headed To St. Croix And Texas Following Trump Deals With Chinese Oil And Gas Giant. 

The Virgin Islands Consortium (VIR) (11/17) reports that “the talk of additional jobs at Limetree Bay Terminals through Sinopec is more promising” following President Trump’s trip to China, “where he worked to broker billions of dollars in energy deals.” According to the article, St. Croix’s economy “could benefit greatly from the hundreds — if not over a thousand — additional job opportunities to be made available at Limetree Bay.” 

## More Independents Join GOP. 

Marianas Variety (11/17, Erediano) reports that “more politicians who previously ran as independents are joining the NMI Republican Party, according to the local GOP chairman, Department of Public Works Secretary James Ada.” Ada noted that “besides House minority bloc member Lorenzo I. Deleon Guerrero, former independent Rep. Roman C. Benavente of Precinct 1 has submitted his letter of intent to run on the GOP slate next year.” Ada added “Sen. Justo S. Quitugua, a former Democrat who ran as an independent in 2014, also wants to seek reelection as a Republican.” 

## VI Republicans Urging Trump And GOP Not To Give Blank Check To VI Government. 

The Virgin Islands Consortium (VIR) (11/15) reported that Republican leaders from the U.S. Virgin Islands were in Washington earlier this month “telling the White House and Congress not to write a blank check to the Government of the Virgin Islands.” According to the article, “in a series of meetings, GOP leadership from the hurricane-devastated islands of St. Croix, St. Thomas and St. John are pushing for greater federal scrutiny of the territorial government, which the GOP says was in shambles before hurricanes Irma and Maria struck.” 

# US Geological Survey 

## Bali Volcano Has A History Of Explosive Eruptions And Global Climate Impacts. 

The Washington Post (11/28, Fritz) reports that “a giant, suffocating ash cloud hovers over the island of Bali in Indonesia, and neither geologists nor local officials know what the simmering volcano will do next.” According to the article, “if Agung’s eruptions become more intense,” it could “alter global temperature for months — maybe years.” The U.S. Geological Survey said, “A pyroclastic flow will destroy nearly everything in its path. With rock fragments ranging in size from ash to boulders traveling across the ground at speeds typically greater than [50 mph], pyroclastic flows knock down, shatter, bury or carry away nearly all objects and structures in their way.” 

## Methane Ecosystem Found In Caves Of The Yucatan Peninsula. 

The Daily Mail (11/28, Borkhataria) reports that “researchers have discovered a methane-fueled ecosystem that feeds bacteria in the underground rivers and flooded caves of Mexico’s Yucatan Peninsula.” The study, “conducted by researchers at Texas A&M University at Galveston, the US Geological Survey and a team of collaborators from Mexico, The Netherlands, Switzerland and other US institutions, claims to be the most detailed ecological study ever for a coastal cave ecosystem that is always underwater.” 

# Opinion Pieces The Trump Judiciary Threatens Federal Public Lands. 

In an op-ed for The Hill (11/28, Leshy, Echeverria), John D. Leshy, a distinguished professor of law emeritus at the University of California, Hastings College of the Law, and John D. Echeverria, a professor of law at Vermont Law School, writes that judges that President Trump appoints to federal courts pose a threat to public land. They point to a Nov. 3 decision handed down by Susan Braden of the U.S. Court of Federal Claims, which said “that cattle ranchers using public lands with the permission of the U.S. Forest Service are entitled to financial compensation from U.S. taxpayers because the government’s efforts to protect endangered species on those lands allegedly took their water rights in violation of the U.S. Constitution.” The professors of law take issue with Braden’s statement of the facts, as well as her legal reasoning, and conclude that “it represents a klaxon alarm about what may be in store for the public lands, the courts and the rule of law under the current president.” 

## Additional Reading. 

Hunting Can Be Good For Lions And Elephants. Wall Street Journal (11/28, Anderson, Downey). 

Zinke Remains Trump Cabinet’s Most Deplorable Member. Newsmax (11/28, Carlson). 

The West Grapples With History Through Its Place Names. High Country (CO) News (11/28, Lydon). 

Are Minnesota’s Public Lands Up For Sale?. St. Cloud (MN) Times (11/28, Zabokrtsky) .

American Horror Show: Trophies From Canned Lion Hunts Continue To Flow Into The U.S. Despite ESA Protection. Wisconsin Gazette (11/27, Pacelle). 

Congress Needs To Treat Wildfires Like The Disasters They Are. Poughkeepsie (NY) Journal (11/28, Mahar). 

Proposed National Park Fees Need Modification. Westminster (CO) Window (11/28, Christopher). 

OUR OPINION: Sign Online Petition In Support Of Historic Tax Incentives. Sioux City (IA) Journal (11/29). 

# Top National News 

## Media Analysis: Most Powerful ICBM Yet Is North Korea’s Response To Trump. 

North Korea’s launch of another Intercontinental ballistic missile garnered extensive media, including the lead stories on all three networks last night. Outlets highlighted that the missile launched Tuesday was the most advanced yet for Pyongyang, and cast the launch as a response to recent comments by President Trump and actions by the Administration. For example, Richard Engel, noting that this was the first launch by the North “in months,” said on NBC Nightly News (11/28, story 3, 2:35, Holt), “Why now? Political payback. President Trump threatened the regime while in South Korea earlier this month. The President followed up with a tweet saying he would never call Kim Jong-Un short or fat.” Likewise, in its lead story, Fox News’ Special Report (11/28) reported that “the latest provocation comes more than a week after President Trump put North Korea back on the state sponsor of terrorism list,” and “after Trump warned North Korea, ‘do not try us,’ in a speech in South Korea earlier this month.” AFP (11/28) calls Tuesday’s launch “a major challenge to...Trump after he slapped fresh sanctions on Pyongyang and declared it a state sponsor of terrorism,” and Bloomberg News (11/28, Kong, Tweed, Wadhams) similarly calls it North Korea’s “first provocation since...Trump labeled the country a state sponsor of terrorism earlier this month.” In its lead story, ABC World News Tonight (11/28, lead story, 2:25, Muir) called the launch a “direct provocation to the US President.” The ICBM tested Tuesday that flew “higher and longer than any [North Korea] has launched before.” The missile flew 2,800 miles, remaining in the air for 50 minutes before falling into the Sea of Japan. Experts “say if angled for distance instead of altitude, the same missile could reach deep into the US mainland, including Washington, DC.” USA Today (11/28, Bacon, Michaels) reports the missile “appeared to have a range of 8,100 miles, the longest tested, and capable of reaching Washington, DC.” The Washington Free Beacon (11/28, Heretik) reports Defense Secretary Mattis told reporters the missile “went higher, frankly, than any previous shot they’ve taken. It’s a research and development effort on their part to continue building ballistic missiles that can threaten everywhere in the world basically.” The AP (11/28, Pennington, Kim) says the “big unknown, however, is the missile’s payload. If, as expected, it carried a light mock warhead, then its effective range would have been shorter, analysts said.” Politico (11/28, Klimas, Morgan) reports that “some experts viewed the latest test as noteworthy because it was conducted in the middle of the night in North Korea,” which made it “harder for the US to track.” The Wall Street Journal (11/28, Cheng) reports Abraham Denmark, a former senior Asia policy official at the Pentagon during the Obama Administration and now a director at the Wilson Center, said, “Firing at night, from a potential mobile missile, demonstrates that North Korea is closer than ever to a credible nuclear deterrent against the United States.” The Los Angeles Times (11/28, Stiles) reports the President, addressing reporters at the White House, “seemed to brush off the significance of the launch,” and the CBS Evening News (11/28, lead story, 2:20, Mason) said that after the North “defied” the US, Trump told reporters, “We will take care of it,” and while “he did not say how,” Secretary of State Tillerson responded to the launch by “call[ing] for stricter enforcement of UN sanctions...including the right to stop, board, and search vessels transporting goods to and from the North.” Politico (11/28, Tamborrino) reports Tillerson condemned the launch in a statement saying, “All nations must continue strong economic and diplomatic measures.” USA Today (11/28, Bacon, Michaels) reports the State Department announced it is launching “an international effort to step up pressure on North Korea that could include interdicting ships carrying goods to and from that country.” Spokeswoman Heather Nauert said, “We have always been very clear that we would be open to talks with North Korea. But North Korea is not showing it is willing to sit down and talk.” Counselor to the President Kellyanne Conway said on Fox News’ Hannity (11/28), “North Korea is everybody’s problem. And anybody who doubted that saw that today. This President in bringing on board and talking to Japan and China and South Korea and...the UN Security Council voting twice unanimously in unprecedented fashion to sanction North Korea shows that the world is responding to Donald Trump’s leadership as President and commander-in-chief.” The Washington Post (11/28, Fifield) reports the “74-day break in missile testing, the longest pause in a year that has been marked by big advances and a steady salvo of launches, had generated some hope that diplomatic efforts could gain traction.” A Washington Post (11/28, Taylor) analysis says Tuesday’s launch “seems to dash the idea that Pyongyang’s lull in weapons testing over the past two months indicated a willingness to negotiate.” Instead, the Post says the “slowdown in testing in the last quarter of each year seems to be due to seasonal changes.” The New York Times (11/28, Choe) reports that “six minutes after the launch, South Korea conducted its own missile test off its east coast, demonstrating its ability to strike North Korean missile launching sites,” and Reuters (11/28, Kim, Stewart) reports the UN Security Council is scheduled to meet on Wednesday to discuss the latest missile launch. Sen. Lindsey Graham said on CNN’s Situation Room (11/28) that the North Koreans are “clearly...not listening to the Chinese.” He also said he does not agree with Trump that Russian President Vladimir Putin can help in dealing with the North. Graham added that he hopes North Korea understands that Trump “is not going to allow” it to have nuclear weapons that can reach the US, because “if we have to go to war to stop this, we will.” Sen. Dan Sullivan said on CNN’s Situation Room (11/28) that he’s “very concerned” about the possibility that North Korea could launch a missile that could hit “not just” Alaska, but the US mainland. Sullivan called for “more sanctions, credible military options” to back up diplomacy, and “more robust missile defense.” Tom Rogan of the Washington Examiner said on Fox News’ Special Report 

(11/28), “What you do see in specific terms here is the North Koreans showing a capability that far exceeds anything we’ve seen up until this point. I think there will be some shock in the White House and the Pentagon and the intelligence community about what has happened. For President Trump now, the critical decision is, do you exert pressure on China, specifically Chinese financial entities, or do you take military action because what we have seen here with this test is the failure of – or the unwillingness I think more likely – of the Chinese government to put the kind of pressure on Kim Jong-un’s regime that would be necessary to force him to the table.” Matt Schlapp of The Hill said on Fox News’ Special Report (11/28), “I don’t blame Donald Trump for this. You can say his diplomatic approach has not worked yet, but he inherited a 20 year problem which was to kick the can down the road. ... He is faced with terrible options and he’s got to do something that takes away this nuclear menace from reaching our allies and maybe even our own shores.” Adam B. Ellick and Jonah M. Kessel of the New York Times (11/28) write, “This is the story of two novice and reckless leaders — one 33 years old, the other 71 years old — taking their countries toward what we fear is a needless collision. The risk of war is greater than the public appreciates,” and “now, with war more likely than ever, talks are even more urgent.” 

Recent Meetings Raise Fresh Concern Over Possible Iran-North Korea Ties. The Washington Times (11/28, Taylor) reports that a “series of recent high-level meetings between Iranian and North Korean officials has prompted fresh concern in US national security circles about the depth of military and ballistic missile technology cooperation between the two American adversaries,” according to the Washington Institute for Near East Policy. The think tank, which is “known for its critical posture toward Iran’s government, says in an analysis that US intelligence has spotted Iranian defense officials in North Korea over the past year — raising the specter that Pyongyang and Tehran might be sharing certain military technological advances with each other.” 

## Media Analyses: Judge’s Ruling On CFPB Head A Victory For Trump. 

In a ruling that is universally cast as a victory for the Administration, a federal judge ruled Tuesday that President Trump can install his own director at the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau. On ABC World News Tonight (11/28, story 7, 0:30), the only network newscast to cover the ruling, David Muir said, “President Trump winning the battle over control of the nation’s top consumer financial watch dog,” while USA Today (11/28, McCoy, Johnson) says US District Judge Timothy Kelly “sid[ed] with the Trump Administration” and “refused to block the appointment of Mick Mulvaney as interim director.” Politico (11/28, Guida) describes “a big victory” for Trump, adding that Kelly “said there was not a substantial likelihood that the case would succeed on its merits.” Reuters (11/28) reports that Kelly “said the agency was part of the executive branch and he saw nothing in the law that prevented budget director Mick Mulvaney from holding the two positions.” The Washington Post (11/28, Hsu, Heath) also says Kelly “refused to block” Mulvaney’s appointment, adding that by denying CFPB deputy director Leandra English’s request for a temporary restraining order, Kelly “acknowledged that the case raised constitutional issues.” The Los Angeles Times (11/28, Puzzanghera) says Kelly, who President Trump nominated this year, “hand[ed] a victory to President Trump and opponents of the independent watchdog agency.” The New York Times (11/28, Rogers, Bernard) reports that Kelly “deliver[ed] a legal victory to the White House,” and gave “a boost” to Trump’s “deregulation push,” while Bloomberg News (11/28, Harris) says Kelly “rebuffed English, who sued to Nov. 26, contending she is entitled to the provisional post,” in an outcome that “cast a shadow over her contention the 2010 Dodd-Frank Wall Street reform legislation controls the line of temporary succession at the agency and not the broader federal statute relied upon by the president to designate Mulvaney.” While the Wall Street Journal (11/28, Clozel) reports that English’s attorney, Deepak Gupta, said she would appeal Kelly’s decision, the New York Post (11/28, Fredericks) reports that the ruling drew praise from the White House. Spokesman Raj Shah said, “The Administration applauds the court’s decision, which provides further support for the president’s rightful authority to designate Director Mulvaney as Acting Director of the CFPB. ... It’s time for the Democrats to stop enabling this brazen political stunt by a rogue employee and allow Acting Director Mulvaney to continue the bureau’s smooth transition into an agency that truly serves to help consumers.” The Washington Times (11/28, Boyer) reports Competitive Enterprise Institute General Counsel Sam Kazman said CEI was “glad to see this attempt at bureaucratic self-perpetuation fail,” and Consumer Bankers Association President and CEO Richard Hunt said his group looks forward “to working with acting CFPB Director Mick Mulvaney to bring transparent and balanced consumer protections to all customers and small businesses.” A USA Today (11/28) editorial casts the dispute as “proof of how desperately Republicans want to defang the aggressive agency,” and says Kelly’s ruling leaves Trump “in position to nominate a new director,” which means “efforts to undermine this strong consumer champion are well underway.” Dana Milbank argues in the Washington Post (11/28) that “under the statute that created the CFPB...it should now be rightfully run by Leandra English.” Nevertheless, “a Trump-appointed federal judge, to nobody’s surprise, ruled in Trump’s favor.” Milbank adds that “ultimately, the ‘coup’ will succeed” because Trump “will eventually be able to install a director who can defang the watchdog – and Wall Street bankers and corporate lobbyists will plant their flag of conquest at another agency.” However, the Wall Street Journal (11/28) takes a different view, editorializing that Kelly’s denial of English’s petition constituted a hilarious development in the ongoing struggle for leadership of the bureau. The Journal mocks English for staging photo-ops with Sen. Elizabeth Warren before the ruling from Kelly, and asserts that she must now decide whether to walk away in embarrassment or stay on as deputy under Mulvaney. 

“Anonymous Donors” Financing English’s Lawsuit. According to the Daily Caller (11/28, Pollock), English’s lawsuit is being financed by “secret donors.” In an interview with CNBC’s Power Lunch (11/27), Gupta “confirmed...that English is not paying for his hourly fees, but rather unknown anonymous donors are.” Gupta “appeared caught off guard when CNBC hosts asked who was financing his effort,” and “stumbled over his words in his first answer and said some form of unidentified ‘structure’ was being put in place to accept funds from anonymous donors.” He said, “Well, uh, it’s, it’s not, um, Miss, um English, um, ah. There are ethics lawyers that we’ve consulted, and we have a structure set up that is with ethics rules and, um, we’ll and we’ll be talking about that once we have that.” Asked “repeatedly...who is paying for the case,” Gupta replied, “It’s just not appropriate for me to be talking about that right now.” 

CBA President: CFPB Should Be Run By A Commission. In an op-ed for USA Today (11/28, Hunt), Richard Hunt, president and CEO of the Consumer Bankers Association, does not address Kelly’s ruling but argues that the CFPB’s mission “is far too vast and far too important for a single director to play both judge and jury for nearly every financial decision Americans make.” Hunt writes that “a sole director at the CFPB is unworkable” and calls on Congress “to fix it with legislation to create a bipartisan, Senate-confirmed commission.” 

WSJournal Sees Hilarity In Court Ruling Against Leandra English. The Wall Street Journal (11/28) editorializes that federal judge Timothy Kelly’s denial of Leandra English’s petition to block Mick Mulvaney from serving as acting director of the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau constituted a hilarious development in the ongoing struggle for leadership of the bureau. The Journal mocks English for staging pho-ops with Sen. Elizabeth Warren before the ruling from Kelly, and asserts that she must now decide whether to walk away in embarrassment or stay on as deputy under Mulvaney. The Journal opines that the controversy has been humiliating for English. 

## Trump Suggests Government Shutdown Possible After Democrats Skip Meeting. 

On ABC World News Tonight (11/28, story 4, 2:10, Muir), Jonathan Karl reported, “It was just a couple of months ago that President Trump was chumming around in the Oval Office with Democratic leaders Chuck Schumer and Nancy Pelosi, striking a temporary spending deal on their terms. ... But today, the President found himself flanked by empty chairs,” with Schumer and Pelosi “boycotting a planned bipartisan sit-down after Trump attacked them on Twitter.” Schumer: “The President said, ‘I don’t see a deal’ three hours before our meeting, before he heard anything we had to say.” Karl: “Schumer and Pelosi said, thanks, but no thanks.” Trump: “They’ve been all talk, and they’ve no action. And now it’s even worse. Now it’s not even talk.” Politico (11/28, McCaskill) reports that Trump “taunted them on Twitter.” At 9:17 a.m., Trump tweeted, “Meeting with ‘Chuck and Nancy’ today about keeping government open and working. Problem is they want illegal immigrants flooding into our Country unchecked, are weak on Crime and want to substantially RAISE Taxes. I don’t see a deal!” On the CBS Evening News (11/28, story 2, 1:10, Mason), Nancy Cordes reported, “They were supposed to discuss government funding, which is set to run out next week. ... You’re never going to stop the President from tweeting, so does this mean that going forward you’re not planning to sit down with him?” Schumer: “All he has to do is say he’s serious and wants to undergo a real negotiation, and we’ll sit down with him.” Breitbart (11/28, Key) reports that Schumer told reporters, “There are serious issues in front of us. We don’t have time to waste. We don’t have games to play. ... If the President reverses course and decides he wants to be a constructive force, working with both sides to forge a bipartisan deal, we’re happy to meet with him anytime, anywhere, any place.” The Hill (11/28, Fabian) reports that Trump “tore into” them for skipping the meeting. USA Today (11/28, Collins) reports that Trump told reporters that “he was ‘not that surprised’” that the Democrats canceled. The Washington Times (11/28, Miller) reports that Trump warned that a government shutdown after December “could be unavoidable, and he blamed Democratic leaders for forcing it.” Breitbart (11/28, Key) reports that Trump said of a shutdown, “I would absolutely blame the Democrats if it happens it’s going to be over illegals pouring into the country, crime pouring into the country, no border wall, which everybody wants. I got elected partially because of a border wall. ... They want high taxes. We want low taxes. So there are a lot of big differences. So we’ll see what happens as to shutdown.” Kellyanne Conway said on Fox News’ Hannity (11/28) that Schumer and Pelosi “are not there representing the opposition party. They are there as the minority leaders of the two chambers in Congress.” The Washington Post (11/28, O'Keefe, Sullivan) reports that the “breakdown in talks between Trump and Democrats will put more pressure” on Senate Majority Leader McConnell and House Speaker Ryan, “who both attended the White House meeting, to find a way forward on spending negotiations while they also race to wield their majorities to try to pass a sweeping tax bill this month.” The Wall Street Journal (11/28, Peterson) reports that a short-term spending measure keeping the government operational through the end of December is expected to pass soon. The Los Angeles Times (11/28, Bennett, Bierman) writes that Trump “runs the risk of alienating partners he needs to move his agenda forward. And he needs Democrats in coming weeks as much as at any time in his presidency.” Senate Majority Whip Cornyn “noted that it will take 60 votes in the Senate to pass the spending bill. ‘We have 52 Republicans. We can’t do it by ourselves,’ he said.” Reuters (11/28), the Washington Times (11/28, Dinan), and Roll Call (11/28, Bennett) also report. 

Trump Says Democrats Holding “Troop Funding Hostage.” Politico (11/28, Lima) reports that in a later tweet, the President accused the Democrats “of holding military funding ‘hostage’ in their end-of-year negotiations to avert a government shutdown.” Trump tweeted, “After North Korea missile launch, it’s more important than ever to fund our gov’t & military! Dems shouldn’t hold troop funding hostage for amnesty & illegal immigration. I ran on stopping illegal immigration and won big. They can’t now threaten a shutdown to get their demands.” 

WPost Analysis: Long Trump-Schumer Relationship Not Enough To Overcome Differences. On the front page of the Washington Post (11/28, A1, Fisher), Marc Fisher looks at the long relationship between Trump and Schumer, who “were never pals,” but “got along fine, two power players who had never quite been accepted in the inner circle of their chosen fields, two sharp-elbowed guys who led with their mouths and won power in part by mastering the art of being in the news.” While “people in both parties thought” that their relationship “might provide a path out of Washington’s political paralysis,” Tuesday’s events revealed “the limits of that relationship.” 

## Tax Bill Closing In On 50 Votes After Trump Meets With Senate Republicans. 

NBC Nightly News (11/28, lead story, 2:40, Holt) opened by reporting that “Senate Republicans made headway” on their tax plan on Tuesday, with the measure passing through committee. President Trump is “putting in face time to try to move the bill forward.” The CBS Evening News (11/28, story 3, 1:20, Cordes) reported that the President lunched with Senate Republicans, “where he sparred with senators who still have concerns about the party’s tax plan. Wisconsin’s Ron Johnson thinks the tax cuts favor corporations at the expense of small businesses.” Johnson: “I thought it was a fine-and-dandy exchange. I didn’t feel threatened at all.” The AP (11/28, Fram, Taylor) reports that the Senate Budget Committee advanced the measure on “a party-line 12-11 vote...as a pair of wavering Republicans – Wisconsin’s Ron Johnson and Tennessee’s Bob Corker – fell into line, at least for the moment. In more good news for the GOP, moderate Sen. Susan Collins of Maine said it was a ‘fair assumption’ that she was likelier to support the bill” after saying that the President had “agreed to make property taxes up to $10,000 deductible instead of eliminating that break entirely.” Reuters (11/28, Morgan, Cornwell) reports that Republicans “rammed forward” the measure. Bloomberg News (11/28, Kapur, Wasson) reports that the outlook for the bill “brightened” after the President “addressed GOP Senate holdouts in a closed-door, lunchtime session. The GOP meeting was ‘somewhat of a lovefest,’ Trump said later Tuesday.” USA Today (11/28, Shesgreen, Fair) reports that GOP leaders “remained optimistic” that the bill would pass “in the next few days, while at the same time acknowledging that the vote will likely be very close.” The Wall Street Journal (11/28, A1, Rubin, Peterson) reports that both Collins and Corker said they are closer to backing the final measure. Politico (11/28, Kim, Becker, Wilhelm) reports that “key GOP swing votes inched closer to backing the legislation” on Tuesday. The Washington Post (11/28, A1, Debonis, Werner, Paletta) reports that though Trump “clashed with Johnson,” he “appeared to make substantial progress toward winning” Collins’ vote. The President “signaled openness to Collins’s demands, which include paying federal subsidies to help lower-income Americans afford health coverage.” Johnson’s opposition “is based on his complaints that the bill would not sufficiently lower taxes for millions of businesses that are effectively taxed through the individual income tax code.” The Los Angeles Times (11/28, Mascaro) reports that Senate Majority Leader McConnell “acknowledged that changes were still being made to win over votes.” He said, “We do have a few members who have concerns and we’re trying to address them. We know we will not be able to go forward until we get 50 people satisfied, and that’s what were working on.” McClatchy (11/28, Clark) reports that third-ranking Senate Republican Sen. John Thune predicted a vote this week “and said leadership was negotiating ‘a path forward’ with Collins and the others.” Sen. Lindsey Graham said on CNN’s Situation Room 

(11/28), “I think they’re very close to a deal.” The New York Times (11/28, A1, Rappeport, Kaplan) writes that “passage of the tax overhaul, which seemed uncertain on Monday, strengthened considerably on Tuesday.” But “several hurdles remain,” including “resolving differences with the House version of the tax bill, which differs in significant ways from that of the Senate. Both bills cut taxes on businesses and individuals, but differ in the scope and timing of those cuts.” The New York Times (11/28) editorializes, “This is how Senate Republicans compromise these days: They could make their enormously unpopular tax bill, which lavishes benefits on corporations and wealthy families, more generous to real estate tycoons and hedge fund billionaires to win over” Johnson and Sen. Steve Daines, “who say the legislation doesn’t do enough for small businesses.” McConnell “is trying to rush the bill to a vote by the end of the week...to give lawmakers and the public as little time as possible to analyze and understand the bill.” The Washington Times (11/28, Sherfinski), The Hill (11/28, Bolton, Weixel), and Roll Call (11/28, McPherson) also have reports. 

Trump Tells Senators That He Backs Alexander-Murray ACA Bill. Bloomberg News (11/28, Kapur) reports that the President told the senators that he backs the Affordable Care Act market stabilization bill offered by Sens. Lamar Alexander and Patty Murray, “which may help bolster support for the tax-cut legislation headed for a vote this week.” However, the Washington Times (11/28, Miller) reports that Trump said that is contingent on passage of “a tax cut bill that eliminates the individual mandate.” 

Fate Of Bill Could Rest With McCain. The New York Times (11/28, Rappeport) reports that “once again, it could all come down to” Sen. John McCain, who was responsible for killing the GOP healthcare bill earlier this year. McCain “has been fairly tight-lipped about his views on the tax overhaul speeding through the Senate, saying he sees some problems with the existing bill but is waiting for a final plan before making a decision.” 

WSJournal Opposes Corker’s Proposed Trigger. In an editorial, the Wall Street Journal (11/28) opposes Corker’s proposal for a trigger to return some rates to current levels six years from now if revenues are lower than expected. The Journal warns that no one can predict when a recession might hit, and forcing such an increase could exacerbate one. 

Vulnerable Democrats Oppose Tax Bill. The Washington Post (11/28, Weigel) reports that though some moderate Democrats up for re-election next year in states won by Trump in 2016 were once viewed as possible yes votes, all 48 members of the Democratic caucus are expected to oppose the plan. Sen. Joe Manchin, “who has voted with the Trump administration more than any other Democrat in Congress, described a repetitive drama that had played out for months. He’d sit for productive conversations with the Trump administration, then watch as none of his ideas appeared in the Republican product.” Sens. Joe Donnelly and Heidi Heitkamp had also been seen as possible supporters. 

GOP, Democratic Senators Debate Bill On CNN. CNN on Tuesday evening hosted a debate on tax reform featuring two Republican senators and two Democratic senators. Sen. Ted Cruz said , “If you’re a taxpayer, this bill benefits you. ... We should be working to cut taxes for every single taxpayer in America.” Sen. Tim Scott said , “Our goal in this tax reform conversation is to deliver your money back in your paychecks. So that as my mother had to struggle paycheck to paycheck, those single mothers struggling paycheck to paycheck will be able to have more of their hard-earned money so that they can take care of their families and, at the same time, create an economy that creates the jobs of the future here in America, here at home. That’s what this tax reform does.” The Democrats took a much different view of the bill. Sen. Bernie Sanders said ,“Mark my words. The day after or soon after this legislation passes, if it does...these guys are going to come back and they are going to say, ‘Oh my goodness, the deficit is soaring. We have got to cut Social Security. We have got to cut Medicare and Medicaid and education and programs that the middle class and working families desperately need.’ This is a disastrous piece of legislation.” Sen. Maria Cantwell said , “Raising taxes on the middle class is wrong. And that’s what this bill does. It is also wrong to cut the cooperate tax rate without having a promise of how that is really going to raise wages and impact productivity.” ABC World News Tonight (11/28, story 3, 2:30, Muir) and NBC Nightly News 

(11/28, story 2, 2:15, Holt) both ran features on the possible impact of the bill on Americans of various income levels. The New York Times (11/28, Casselman) looks at “What The Tax Bill Would Look Like For 25,000 Middle-Class Families” via a chart representing “how big a tax cut (or tax increase)” each of 25,000 household “in the broadly defined middle class...would get under the bill in 2018.” 

Protesters Arrested Outside Senate Budget Committee Hearing. The Hill (11/28, Delk) reports that Capitol Police “arrested 36 people protesting outside a Senate Budget Committee hearing on the GOP tax bill” on Tuesday morning, arresting “all 36 on charges of disrupting Congress in their protest.” 

WPost Opposes ANWR Drilling Measure Added To Tax Bill On Tuesday. In an editorial, the Washington Post (11/28) notes that “on Tuesday, Republicans on the Senate Budget Committee added to their already malformed tax legislation a provision that would open the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge to oil and natural gas drilling. This is a poor idea that senators should resist sneaking into law while most of Washington is preoccupied with a major tax overhaul.” 

# Editorial Wrap-Up 

## New York Times. 

“Senate Considers Making A Terrible Tax Bill Even Worse.” The New York Times (11/28) editorializes, “This is how Senate Republicans compromise these days: They could make their enormously unpopular tax bill, which lavishes benefits on corporations and wealthy families, more generous to real estate tycoons and hedge fund billionaires to win over” Sens. Ron Johnson and Steve Daines, “who say the legislation doesn’t do enough for small businesses.” Majority Leader McConnell “is trying to rush the bill to a vote by the end of the week...to give lawmakers and the public as little time as possible to analyze and understand the bill.” 

## Washington Post. 

“What’s One More Bad Thing In The GOP Tax Bill? Ask The Polar Bears.” In an editorial, the Washington Post (11/28) notes that “on Tuesday, Republicans on the Senate Budget Committee added to their already malformed tax legislation a provision that would open the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge to oil and natural gas drilling. This is a poor idea that senators should resist sneaking into law while most of Washington is preoccupied with a major tax overhaul.” 

“Egypt Answers Terrorism With Familiar Incompetence.” A Washington Post (11/28) editorial says Egyptian President Abdel Fatah al-Sissi’s response to the “merciless attack” on a mosque last Friday was “familiar: an angry television speech promising ‘brute force,’ a showy bombing raid, and attacks on media reporting.” The Post argues Sissi’s government “has used terrorism as a pretext for the most severe political repression in Egypt’s modern history,” offering “a textbook example of how not to respond to Islamist extremism.” The Post notes President Trump nonetheless “remains a fan” of Sissi. Trump “called the strongman after the Sinai attack and tweeted, inexplicably, that it showed the need for ‘the WALL’ and ‘the BAN.’” The Post concludes in saying Trump and Sissi “are partners in obtuseness” in the fight against ISIS in Egypt. 

“Congress, Surprise Us.” .A Washington Post (11/28) editorial says Congress has failed to act on banning bump stocks, so “some states and cities are trying to fill the gap.” The Post notes that this week the Supreme Court “let stand a Maryland law banning the sale of these weapons,” and says, “Hopefully that will encourage more states to take similar action while they wait for Congress to do its job.” 

## Wall Street Journal. “A Trigger Warning On Taxes.” In an editorial, the Wall Street Journal (11/28) opposes Sen. Bob Corker’s proposal for a trigger to return some rates to current levels six years from now if revenues are lower than expected. The Journal warns that no one can predict when a recession might hit, and forcing such an increase could exacerbate one. 

“A Drama Queen Loses Her Head.” The Wall Street Journal (11/28) editorializes that federal judge Timothy Kelly’s denial of Leandra English’s petition to block Mick Mulvaney from serving as acting director of the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau constituted a hilarious development in the ongoing struggle for leadership of the bureau. The Journal mocks English for staging photo-ops with Sen. Elizabeth Warren before the ruling from Kelly, and asserts that she must now decide whether to walk away in embarrassment or stay on as deputy under Mulvaney. The Journal opines that the controversy has been humiliating for English. 

“Fourth Amendment Showdown.” The Wall Street Journal (11/28) editorializes about a case the Supreme Court will hear today, Carpenter v. US, which the Journal claims challenges decades of Fourth Amendment law. In an investigation of a string of armed robberies, investigators obtained location data from a suspect’s wireless carrier. The Journal argues that the collection of such data does not constitute an unreasonable search under the Fourth Amendment, since it does not reveal the content of any communication. The Journal also notes that Congress has created the legal framework for the collection and use of such data, and argues that lawmakers, not the courts, should make these decisions. 

# Big Picture 

## Headlines From Today’s Front Pages. 

Wall Street Journal: 

Senate Tax Revamp Gains Traction Strange Bedfellows: Democrats And Trump Blow Up 20-Year Consensus On Trade Korean Missile Test’s Trajectory Puts Washington In Range Oil Prices Chase $60 After A Year Of Surging Demand Uber Ex-Employee Alleges Covert Tactics To Steal Rivals’ Secrets 

New York Times: 

Republicans Clear Major Hurdle As Tax Bill Advances Trump Feuds With Democrats Ahead Of A Possible Government Shutdown North Korea Fires A Ballistic Missile, In A Further Challenge To Trump Trump Once Said The ‘Access Hollywood’ Tape Was Real. Now He’s Not Sure. Olympic Doping Diaries: Chemist’s Notes Bolster Case Against Russia Pushing New Yorkers Beyond The End Of The Line 

Washington Post: 

Tax Bill Advances In Senate As Skeptics Signal Their Support In Recession-Hit Venezuela, Even Sex Is In Crisis Schumer And Trump Share The Schmooze. Is It Enough? Libyan Found Guilty In 2012 Attacks In Benghazi Missile Launch Appears To Put DC In Range 

Financial Times: 

Pope Avoids Word ‘Rohingya’ As He Calls For Peace In Myanmar Uber Accused Of Running Secret Competitive Intelligence Unit Irish Deputy PM Resigns To Save Government UK Bows To EU Demands With Breakthrough Offer On Brexit Bill 

Washington Times: 

More North Korean Tests Likely To Come After Launch Of Most Sophisticated Missile So Far Iranian-North Korean Talks Raise Specter Of Cooperation On Military, Ballistic Missile Technology Judge Rules In Favor Of Trump In Battle Over CFPB Leadership Benghazi Suspect Convicted On 4 Of 18 Criminal Charges, Acquitted Of Murder Supreme Court Case On Same-Sex Wedding Cakes: Artistic Expression Vs. Civil Rights Democrats Move Toward Showdown By Refusing To Meet With Trump 

Story Lineup From Last Night’s Network News: 

ABC: North Korea Missile Test; Tampa-Serial Killer; Tax Reform Plan-Effects; Government Funding Meeting; Libya US Consulate Attack Trial; Washington Post-Failed Conservative Sting; CFPB Appointment; Prince Harry Engagement; Florida-Missing Teen; Marriage-Dementia; Pets-Bone Product Recall; Wingsuit Jumpers; Climate Change-Polar Bears. 

CBS: North Korea Missile Test; Government Funding Meeting; White House-Tax Reform Plan; John Conyers Sexual Allegations; Roy Moore Campaign; Washington Post-Failed Conservative Sting; Texas Church Shooting-Lawsuit; YouTube-Child Videos; Weinstein-Sexual Allegations; Russia-Celebrity Politician; Prince Harry Engagement. 

NBC: White House-Tax Reform Plan; Tax Reform Plan-Effects; North Korea Missile Test; Ivanka Trump-India Trip; State Dept Turmoil; Libya US Consulate Attack Trial; Prince Harry Engagement; Drones-Flight Danger; Jerusalem-Sacred Site; Indonesia-Volcano Eruption; Grammys Nominations; Climate-Personalities; Holiday Shopping; Young Adults Charity. 

Network TV At A Glance: 

Tax Reform Plan – 8 minutes, 45 seconds North Korea Missile Test – 7 minutes, 20 seconds Prince Harry Engagement – 5 minutes, 35 seconds Washington Post-Failed Conservative Sting – 4 minutes, 50 seconds Government Funding Meeting – 3 minutes, 20 seconds 

Story Lineup From This Morning’s Radio News Broadcasts: 

ABC: North Korea Missile Test; Tax Reform Plan; Government Funding Meeting; CFPB Appointment; Wall Street News. 

CBS: North Korea Missile Test; Tax Reform Plan; John Conyers Sexual Allegations; Tampa-Serial Killer; Pope-Myanmar Visit. 

FOX: North Korea Missile Test; John Conyers Sexual Allegations. 

NPR: North Korea Missile Test; Tax Reform Plan; Rep. Gutierrez Retirement; John Conyers Sexual Allegations. 

# Washington Schedule 

## Today’s Events In Washington. 

White House: 

PRESIDENT TRUMP — Gives remarks on tax reform. VICE PRESIDENT PENCE — No public schedule announced. 

US Senate: 9:30 AM Prosecutors Against Gun Violence hold emergency summit in Washington, DC – Prosecutors Against Gun Violence hold legislation-focused emergency summit in Washington, DC, with topics including the Gun Violence Prevention Order Act and the Concealed Carry Reciprocity Act. Participants include Democratic Sen. Dianne Feinstein, Manhattan District Attorney Cyrus Vance Jr., Los Angeles City Attorney Mike Feuer, district attorneys / county attorneys / prosecutors / city attorneys / state attorneys from New York, Nevada, Missouri, Minnesota, Massachusetts, Indiana, California, Colorado, Washington state, Georgia, Wisconsin, Florida, Michigan, and Pennsylvania, and members of law enforcement Location: Dirksen Senate Office Building, Rm G-11, Washington, DC http://www.prosecutorsagv.org/ 9:30 AM Senate HELP Committee considers HHS secretary nominee – Nominations hearing considers Alex Azar to be Secretary of Health and Human Services * President Donald Trump announced the nomination of the pharmaceutical company executive earlier this month, following the resignation of Tom Price over his use of chartered aircraft * Azar has been criticized over his career, having previously spoken out in defense of drug prices and in support of private companies that audit federal health care programs to locate overpayments to health care providers Location: Dirksen Senate Office Building, Rm 430, Washington, DC http://help.senate.gov/ 10:00 AM Senate Judiciary Committee nominations hearing – Nominations hearing considers Stuart Kyle Duncan to be U.S. Circuit Judge for the Fifth Circuit; David Ryan Stras to be U.S. Circuit Judge for the Eighth Circuit; Fernando Rodriguez Jr. to be U.S. District Judge for the Southern District of Texas; and Andrei Iancu to be Under Secretary of Commerce for Intellectual Property and U.S. Patent and Trademark Office Director * Consideration of the Duncan and Stras nominations has proved controversial, because Committee Chairman Chuck Grassley has gone against the tradition of requiring ‘blue slips’ of approval from the senators of judicial nominees’ states, instead arguing that the slips are a tradition rather than a rule and that most previous chairmen of the committee have not stuck to it strictly Location: Dirksen Senate Office Building, Rm 226, Washington, DC http://judiciary.senate.gov/ 10:00 AM Senate Environment and Public Works Committee Business Meeting – Business Meeting, with agenda including consideration of nominations of Kathleen Hartnett White to be a Council on Environmental Quality member; and Andrew Wheeler to be Environmental Protection Agency Deputy Administrator, as well as 19 General Services Administration resolutions Location: Dirksen Senate Office Building, Rm 406, Washington, DC http://epw.senate.gov/public/ 10:00 AM Congressional briefing on ‘Voices of Women and Girls on Menstruation, Dignity, and the Issue of Access’ – Congressional briefing on ‘Voices of Women and Girls on Menstruation, Dignity, and the Issue of Access’, presented by BRAWS: Bringing Resources to Aid Women’s Shelters in cooperation with Democratic Sens. Tim Kaine and Gerry Connolly and the University of the District of Columbia David A. Clarke School of Law Legislation Clinic. Girls in schools, women and girls in shelters, and women who were formerly incarcerated share their personal experiences with limited or restricted access to menstrual products, with the event highlighting ‘the need for thoughtful public policy solutions to this pervasive problem’ Location: U.S. Capitol Visitor Center, Rm 203-202, Washington, DC http://www.braws.org https://twitter.com/BRAWSorg #MenstruationMatters 10:15 AM Senate Dems on Tax bill and families – The Senate Democrats will call on the Republicans to come back to the negotiating table and work with Democrats on tax reform that will “bring tax relief to the middle class”. Speakers: Senator Bob Casey (D-PA); Senator Mazie Hirono (D-HI); Nina Borgia-Aberle from Tuscon, Arizona; Jamie Davis Smith from Washington, D.C. Cotnacts: Jacklin Rhoads (Casey), (202) 228-6367; Will Dempster (Hirono), (202) 224-9813. Location: LBJ Room U.S. Capitol Building, Room S-211 10:30 AM Nominations hearing considers Barry Lee Myers to be Under Secretary of Commerce for Oceans and Atmosphere Location: Russell Senate Office Building, Rm 253, Washington, DC http://commerce.senate.gov https://twitter.com/SenateCommerce 11:45 AM Domestic violence organizations and law enforcement speak in support of Fix NICS Act – Domestic violence organizations and law enforcement ‘show strong support for the Fix NICS Act – a bipartisan bill that would address the deadly connection between domestic violence fatalities and an abuser’s ability to access firearms’ via press conference. Participants include Fix NICS Act co-sponsors bipartisan Sens. John Cornyn (invited) and Chris Murphy, National Network to End Domestic Violence President and CEO Kim Gandy, domestic and gun violence survivors, and National Sheriffs’ Association Executive Director Jonathan Thompson Location: Senate Swamp, Washington, DC www.nnedv.org https://twitter.com/nnedv 2:00 PM Dem Sen. Ron Wyden and small business owners discuss the tax bill – Democratic Sen. Ron Wyden speaks on Main Street Alliance press call on the Senate tax bill, discussing the long and short-term impacts of the tax bill for small businesses and their communities with Main Street Alliance Legislative Policy Director Sapna Mehta, O’Neill Construction Group Owner Maurice Rahming (Portland, OR), The Coronado and Dark Hall Coffee Co-Owner Emily Spetrino (Phoenix), Good Karma Farms Owner Amy Grant (Belfast, ME), and Popcorn Heaven Owner ReShonda Young (Waterloo, IA Location: TBD mainstreetalliance.org https://twitter.com/mainstreettweets 2:30 PM Senate Veterans’ Affairs Committee Business Meeting – Business Meeting, with agenda including consideration of a committee print of ‘S.XXXXX, Caring for our Veterans Act of 2017’ Location: Russell Senate Office Building, Rm 418, Washington, DC http://veterans.senate.gov/ https://twitter.com/VAChair 3:00 PM Closed Briefing: Intelligence Matters Location: Rm 219, Hart Senate Office Bldg, Washington, DC http://intelligence.senate.gov 

US House: 10:00 AM House Judiciary Committee markup hearing – Markup hearing on ‘H.R. 38, Concealed Carry Reciprocity Act’, ‘H.R. X, Fix NICS Act’, and ‘H.R. 2666, AMBER Alert in Indian Country Act’ Location: Rayburn House Office Building, Rm 2141, Washington, DC http://judiciary.house.gov/ https://twitter.com/HouseJudiciary 10:00 AM House Government Reform subcommittees latest joint hearing on Regulatory Reform Task Forces – Interior, Energy, and Environment Subcommittee and Intergovernmental Affairs Subcommittee joint hearing on ‘Regulatory Reform Task Forces Check-In Part III’ Location: Rayburn House Office Building, Rm 2157, Washington, DC http://oversight.house.gov/ https://twitter.com/GOPoversight 10:00 AM House Financial Services subcommittee latest hearing on housing finance – Housing and Insurance Subcommittee hearing on ‘Sustainable Housing Finance: The Role of Ginnie Mae in the Housing Finance System’, with testimony from Government National Mortgage Association Acting President Michael Bright Location: Rayburn House Office Building, Rm 2128, Washington, DC http://financialservices.house.gov https://twitter.com/FinancialCmte 10:00 AM House Natural Resources Committee oversight hearing on modernizing NEPA – Oversight hearing on ‘Modernizing NEPA for the 21st Century’, with testimony from former Council on Environmental Quality General Counsel Dinah Bear; Longview/Kelso Building and Construction Trades Council President Mike Bridges; Common Good Chairman Philip Howard; and Converse County, WY, Commissioner Jim Willox Location: Longworth House Office Building, Rm 1324, Washington, DC http://naturalresources.house.gov https://twitter.com/NatResources 10:00 AM Oversight and Investigations Subcommittee hearing on ‘Examining VA’s Failure to Address Provider Quality and Safety Concerns’ Location: Cannon House Office Building, Rm 334, Washington, DC http://veterans.house.gov/ https://twitter.com/HouseVetAffairs 10:00 AM House Transportation subcommittee hearing on UAS – Aviation Subcommittee hearing on ‘Unmanned Aircraft Systems Integration: Emerging Uses in a Changing National Airspace’, with testimony from aeronautics and astronautics professor Dr Juan Alonso; Southern Company Executive Vice President and Chief Transmission Officer Billy Ball; AirMap General Counsel William Goodwin; The Association for Unmanned Vehicle Systems International President and CEO Brian Wynne; and Federal Aviation Administration Deputy Administrator Daniel Elwell, and Unmanned Aircraft Systems Integration Office Director Earl Lawrence Location: Rm 2167, Rayburn House Office Bldg, Washington, DC http://transportation.house.gov/ https://twitter.com/Transport 10:00 AM House Science subcommittee hearing on the WOTUS rule – Environment Subcommittee hearing on ‘The Future of WOTUS: Examining the Role of States’, with testimony from Arizona State Land Department Deputy Commissioner Wesley Mehl; Chilton Ranch rancher James Chilton Jr.; American University Washington College of Law Adjunct Associate Professor Ken Kopocis; and Pacific Legal Foundation Senior Attorney Reed Hopper Location: Rayburn House Office Building, Rm 2318, Washington, DC http://science.house.gov https://twitter.com/HouseScience 10:00 AM House Commerce subcommittee hearing on algorithms – Digital Commerce and Consumer Protection Subcommittee hearing on ‘Algorithms: How Companies’ Decisions About Data and Content Impact Consumers’, with testimony from University of Chicago Law School Professor Dr Omri Ben-Shahar; University of Pennsylvania Department of Computer and Information Science Professor Dr Michael Kearns; Yale Law School Information Society Project Resident Fellow Kate Klonick; Georgetown Law Center on Privacy and Technology Deputy Director Laura Moy; University of Maryland Francis King Carey School of Law Professor Frank Pasquale; and MIT Sloane School of Management Distinguished Professor of Management Science and Professor of Marketing Dr Catherine Tucker Location: Rayburn House Office Building, Rm 2123, Washington, DC http://energycommerce.house.gov/ https://twitter.com/HouseCommerce 10:00 AM House Appropriations subcommittee hearing on USDA’s role in disaster recovery – Agriculture, Rural Development, Food and Drug Administration, and Related Agencies Subcommittee hearing on ‘USDA’s Role in Disaster Recovery’, with testimony from Acting Deputy Under Secretary of Agriculture for Farm Production and Conservation Rob Johansson; USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service Acting Chief Leonard Jordan; and USDA Farm Service Agency Acting Administrator Steve Peterson Location: Rayburn House Office Building, Rm 2362-A, Washington, DC http://appropriations.house.gov/ https://twitter.com/HouseAppropsGOP 10:00 AM House Appropriations subcommittee hearing on U.S. Forest Service supplemental budget – Interior, Environment, and Related Agencies Subcommittee hearing on ‘Supplemental Oversight – US Forest Service’, with testimony from U.S. Forest Service Chief Tony Tooke Location: Rm 2007, Rayburn House Office Bldg, Washington, DC http://appropriations.house.gov/ https://twitter.com/HouseAppropsGOP 10:00 AM House Foreign Affairs subcommittee hearing on Saudi Arabia and Lebanon – Middle East and North Africa Subcommittee hearing on ‘The Latest Developments in Saudi Arabia and Lebanon’, with testimony from Council on Foreign Relations Senior Fellow for Middle Eastern Studies Elliott Abrams; Middle East Institute Vice President for Policy Analysis, Research, and Programs Dr Paul Salem; and Brookings Institution Center for Middle East Policy Senior Fellow Dr Tamara Cofman Wittes Location: Rayburn House Office Building, Rm 2172, Washington, DC http://www.hcfa.house.gov https://twitter.com/HouseForeign 10:00 AM House Workforce subcommittee hearing on the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation – Health, Employment, Labor, and Pensions Subcommittee hearing on ‘Financial Challenges Facing the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation: Implications for Pension Plans, Workers, and Retirees’ Location: Rayburn House Office Building, Rm 2175, Washington, DC http://edworkforce.house.gov/ https://twitter.com/EdWorkforce 10:15 AM House Energy subcommittee hearing on financial trading in the electricity markets – Energy Subcommittee hearing on ‘Powering America: Examining the Role of Financial Trading in the Electricity Markets’, with testimony from Red Wolf EnergyTrading CEO Wesley Allen (on behalf of Financial Marketers Coalition); PJM Interconnection Senior Vice President and General Counsel Vince Duane; California ISO Director of Market Monitoring Dr Eric Hildebrandt; Jenner & Block partner Max Minzner; NRG Energy Senior Vice President of Operations Chris Moser; and TPC Energy CEO Noha Sidhom (on behalf of Power Trading Institute) Location: Rayburn House Office Building, Rm 2322, Washington, DC http://energycommerce.house.gov/ https://twitter.com/HouseCommerce 10:30 AM House Democratic Leaders to Hold Post-Caucus Press Conference – Participants: Joe Crowley (D-NY), Chairman of the Democratic Caucus; Linda Sánchez (D-CA), Vice Chair of the Democratic Caucus Location: HVC Studio A — Capitol Visitor Center crowley.house.gov https://twitter.com/repjoecrowley 11:00 AM Congressional briefing on hurricane recovery in Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands – PICO National Network, National Latino Evangelical Coalition (NaLEC), and Democratic Rep. Darren Soto host Capitol Hill briefing on the ongoing humanitarian crisis in Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands following the September hurricanes. Speakers/participants include Ponce, Puerto Rico, Mayor Mayita Melendez, Caguas, Puerto Rico, Mayor William Miranda Torres, representatives from the U.S. Virgin Islands, PICO National Network chief of staff Denise Collazo, and NaLEC president Rev. Dr Gabriel Salguero Location: Cannon House Office Building, Rm 441, Washington, DC www.piconetwork.org https://twitter.com/PICOnetwork 11:00 AM House Small Business Committee hearing on federal regulations on the small trucking industry – Hearing on ‘Highway to Headache: Federal Regulations on the Small Trucking Industry’, with testimony from B.L. Reever Transport President Monte Wiederhold (on behalf of Owner-Operated Independent Drivers Association); True Blue Transportation owner Marty DiGiacomo (on behalf of National Association of Small Trucking Companies); Atlas PyroVision Entertainment Group CEO Stephen Pelkey (on behalf of American Pyrotechnics Association); and National Ready Mixed Concrete Association President Robert Garbini Location: Rayburn House Office Building, Rm 2360, Washington, DC http://smallbusiness.house.gov/ https://twitter.com/SmallBizGOP 12:00 PM House aims to pass bill on mandatory training in workplace rights for everybody in the chamber – House of Representatives meets for legislative business, with agenda including consideration of ‘H.Res. XXXX – Requiring each Member, officer, and employee of the House of Representatives to complete a program of training in workplace rights and responsibilities each session of each Congress, and for other purposes’ under suspension of the rules, as well as ‘H.R. 3905 – Minnesota’s Economic Rights in the Superior National Forest Act’ Location: Washington, DC http://www.house.gov/ 2:00 PM House Oversight subcommittees joint hearing on cybersecurity of voting machines – Information Technology Subcommittee and Intergovernmental Affairs Subcommittee joint hearing on ‘Cybersecurity of Voting Machines’, with testimony from Acting Under Secretary of Homeland Security for National Protection & Programs Christopher Krebs; Louisiana Secretary of State Tom Schedler; Virginia Department of Elections Commissioner Edgardo Cortes; University of Pennsylvania Associate Professor of Computer and Information Science Dr Matthew Blaze; and Brookings Institution Governance Studies Fellow in National Security Law Susan Klein Hennessey Location: Rayburn House Office Building, Rm 2154, Washington, DC http://oversight.house.gov/ https://twitter.com/GOPoversight 2:00 PM House Financial Services subcommittees joint hearing on legislation to counter terrorism and illicit finance – Financial Institutions and Consumer Credit Subcommittee and Terrorism and Illicit Finance Subcommittee joint hearing on ‘Legislative Proposals to Counter Terrorism and Illicit Finance’, with testimony from Webster Bank Executive Vice President and Chief Risk Officer Daniel Bley (on behalf of Mid-Size Bank Coalition of America); Condor Consulting President John Byrne; Bank of America Global Head of Financial Crimes Compliance William Fox (on behalf of The Clearing House); Global Witness US Office Deputy Head Stefanie Ostfeld; and Financial Integrity Network President and co-founder Chip Poncy Location: Rayburn House Office Building, Rm 2128, Washington, DC http://financialservices.house.gov https://twitter.com/FinancialCmte 2:00 PM House Foreign Affairs subcommittee hearing on Alzheimer’s – Africa, Global Health, Global Human Rights, and International Organizations Subcommittee hearing on ‘A Global Update on Alzheimer’s Disease’, with testimony from NIH National Institute on Aging Deputy Director Marie Bernard; NIH Fogarty International Center Director Roger Glass; New York University Alzheimer’s Disease and Related Dementias Family Support Program Research Professor Dr Mary Mittelman; Global Alzheimer’s Platform Foundation Chief Scientific Officer Dr Richard Mohs; and Splaine Consulting Principal Michael Splaine Location: Rayburn House Office Building, Rm 2172, Washington, DC http://www.hcfa.house.gov https://twitter.com/HouseForeign 2:00 PM House Appropriations subcommittee hearing on SBA and GSA supplemental budgets – Financial Services and General Government Subcommittee hearing on ‘Supplemental Oversight – Small Business Administration and General Services Administration’, with testimony from GSA Acting Administrator Timothy Horne; and SBA CFO and Associate Administrator for Performance Management Timothy Gribben Location: Rayburn House Office Building, Rm 2359, Washington, DC http://appropriations.house.gov/ https://twitter.com/HouseAppropsGOP 3:00 PM House Rules Committee hearing – Hearing on ‘H.R. 1699, the Preserving Access to Manufactured Housing Act of 2017’ and ‘H.R. 4182, the Ensuring a Qualified Civil Service Act of 2017’ Location: U.S. Capitol, H-313, Washington, DC http://www.rules.house.gov/ https://twitter.com/RulesReps 4:00 PM House Natural Resources Committee markup hearing begins – Markup hearing begins (Wednesday – Opening Statements Only) on ‘H.R. 1778, To provide that an order by the Secretary of the Interior imposing a moratorium on Federal coal leasing shall not take effect unless a joint resolution of approval is enacted, and for other purposes’, ‘H.R. 2630, La Paz County Land Conveyance Act’, ‘H.R. 3117, Transparency and Honesty in Energy Regulations Act of 2017’, ‘H.R. 3607, To authorize the Secretary of the Interior to establish fees for medical services provided in units of the National Park System, and for other purposes’, ‘H.R. 3979, Keep America’s Refuges Operational Act’, ‘H.R. 4299, To provide for the indefinite duration of certain military land withdrawals, to improve the management of lands currently subject to such withdrawals and to make the management of such lands more transparent, and for other purposes’, and ‘H.R. 4300, Admiral Lloyd R. ‘Joe’ Vasey Pacific War Commemorative Display Establishment Act’ * Concludes tomorrow Location: Longworth House Office Building, Rm 1324, Washington, DC http://naturalresources.house.gov https://twitter.com/NatResources 

Other: 8:45 AM POLITICO Playbook Interview with GOP Sen. Marco Rubio – POLITICO Playbook Interview with Republican Sen. Marco Rubio, hosted by POLITICO’s Anna Palmer and Jake Sherman, with welcome remarks from Financial Services Roundtable CEO Tim Pawlenty Location: The Liaison Capitol Hill, 415 New Jersey Ave, NW, Washington, DC www.politico.com https://twitter.com/POLITICOEvents 10:00 AM Media Equality Project on Congressional harassment and calls for resignations – The Media Equality Project is bringing “Bill Clinton’s victims, other luminaries, including Dr. Alveda King, niece of the late Martin Luther King, and others to Washington to confront Senator Franken,(D-MN) Congressman John Conyers, (D-MI) and Congressman Joe Barton (R) TX”. Media interview requests available. The group is also calling for the resignation of Franken, Conyers and Barton. Contact: aj.publius@gmail.com Location: National Press Club, First Amendment Room, 529 14th Street, NW Washington, D.C. 10:00 AM Cuba Trade magazine releases study on trade benefits with Cuba to U.S. farm states – Cuba Trade Magazine and U.S. Agriculture Coalition for Cuba release new white paper ‘Trade with Cuba: A White Paper on Trade Benefits to U.S. Farm States’, via conference call with participants including Republican Rep. Rick Crawford, U.S. Agriculture Coalition for Cuba Co-Chair Paul Johnson, and Cuba Trade magazine Publisher Richard Roffman and Editor-in-Chief JP Faber Location: TBD http://www.cubatrademagazine.com/ 11:00 AM House Appropriations subcommittee hearing on U.S. Army Corps of Engineers supplemental budget – Energy and Water Development, and Related Agencies Subcommittee hearing on ‘Supplemental Oversight – US Army Corps of Engineers’, with testimony from Acting Assistant Secretary of the Army for Civil Works Ryan Fisher; and U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Deputy Commanding General for Civil and Emergency Operations Maj. Gen. Ed Jackson Location: Rayburn House Office Building, Rm 2362-B, Washington, DC http://appropriations.house.gov/ https://twitter.com/HouseAppropsGOP 11:30 AM AG Sessions and Acting DEA Administrator Patterson announce new tools to combat the opioid crisis – Attorney General Jeff Sessions and Acting Drug Enforcement Administration Administrator Robert Patterson announce new tools to combat the opioid crisis, via press conference Location: Department of Justice, 950 Pennsylvania Ave, Washington, DC www.justice.gov https://twitter.com/TheJusticeDept 1:00 PM NASA discusses science investigations launching on the next SpaceX commercial resupply flight to the ISS – NASA discusses select science investigations launching on the next SpaceX commercial resupply flight to the International Space Station – targeted for launch next week at the earliest – via media teleconference featuring Made in Space president and CEO Andrew Rush, LaunchPad Medical CEO Brian Hess and CFO Grayson Allen, NASA Goddard Space Flight Center project scientist Dong Wu, University of Colorado-Boulder lead scientist Peter Pilewskie, NASA Johnson Space Center principal investigator Joseph Hamilton, and NASA Ames Research Center mission scientist Yasaman Shirazi Location: TBD http://www.nasa.gov https://twitter.com/NASA 6:00 PM Bipartisan Reps. Adriano Espaillat and Mia Love speak at The Hill event – The Hill host ‘Leadership in Action: The Hill’s Newsmaker Series’ event with Democratic Rep. Adriano Espaillat and Republican Rep. Mia Love discussing how to cut through bipartisan gridlock Location: Constitution Hall, 3501 Nebraska Ave NW, Washington, DC thehill.com https://twitter.com/TheHill #TheHillNewsmaker 6:00 PM World Affairs Council Embassy Series event with Singapore Ambassador to the U.S. Amb. Ashok Kumar Mirpuri Location: 3501 International Place, NW, Washington, DC http://www.worldaffairsdc.org https://twitter.com/wac_dc 6:00 PM Norwegian Christmas tree lighting ceremony at Union Station – Annual Norwegian Christmas tree lighting ceremony at Union Station in Washington, DC, featuring Norway Ambassador to the U.S. Amb. Kare Aas and special guests * Tree is a gift from the people of Norway to the people of the U.S. as thanks for assistance during and after World War II and for continued friendship since then Location: Union Station, 50 Massachusetts Ave NE, Washington, DC http://www.norway.org/ https://twitter.com/NorwayUS 7:30 PM Sarah Sanders keynotes APPF Annual Red, White and Blue Gala – American Principles Project Foundation Annual Red, White and Blue Gala, with keynote from Press Secretary Sarah Sanders Location: Mayflower Hotel, 1127 Connecticut Ave NW, Washington, DC www.americanprinciplesproject.org https://twitter.com/approject 

# Last Laughs 

## Late Night Political Humor. 

Trevor Noah: “Republicans have set a goal of passing their tax bill through the Senate this week. This plan would cut taxes for everyone as long as your last name is ‘Corporation.’” 

Jimmy Fallon: “I read that Trump lied about his own heritage for decades, claiming that his family was Swedish to help sell apartments. And he’s still claiming that he’s Swedish so IKEA will build his wall.” 

Jimmy Fallon: “It’s been rough for the President. In fact, his first wife Ivana says he really misses his old life. You remember Trump’s old life, where he played golf, watched ‘Fox & Friends,’ and sent crazy tweets all day.” 

Jimmy Fallon: “Get this, I read that the White House may ban staffers from using their smartphones while at work. In related news, President Trump just resigned from office. ‘That’s it, I quit. That is finally enough.’” 

Seth Meyers: “Newt Gingrich recently said that the best way to communicate with President Trump is through the Fox News shows ‘Fox & Friends’ and ‘Hannity,’ while the worst way to communicate with Trump is to marry him.” 

Seth Meyers: “President Trump commented on North Korea’s missile launch today, saying, quote, ‘We will take care of it.’ That’s it? I have to say, I don’t find it comforting that the President talked about enemy missiles the same way a dermatologist talks about a weird mole.” 

Seth Meyers: “Bernie Sanders was nominated for a Grammy today for the audio book of ‘Our Revolution: Future To Believe In.’ He was nominated in the ‘Shouted Word’ category.” 

Seth Meyers: “Vice President Mike Pence announced today that he will travel to Israel next month to address its legislative body. And this is scary: While he’s out of the country, Trump will be in charge.” Conan O’Brien: “Bernie Sanders has been nominated for a Grammy Award for best audio book. Of course, Bernie supporters are already complaining that the Grammys are rigged so that Hillary will win.” 

Conan O’Brien: “Prince Harry is getting married. That’s exciting news. Genealogy experts say that Prince Harry and his fiancee, Meghan Markle, are actually distant cousins. After hearing they were related, Queen Elizabeth finally gave the couple her blessing.” 

Jordan Klepper: “So Project Veritas floated a fake Roy Moore accuser in front of the Washington Post to see if they’d bite. And they didn’t. They did not. Fishing is not always about catching fish. It’s just about baiting hooks and hanging out with bros and trying to get an honest, God-fearing cowboy into the Senate, regardless of what nine women allege.” 

Copyright 2017 by Bulletin Intelligence LLC Reproduction or redistribution without permission prohibited. Content is drawn from thousands of newspapers, national magazines, national and local television programs, radio broadcasts, social-media platforms and additional forms of open-source data. Sources for Bulletin Intelligence audience-size estimates include Scarborough, GfK MRI, comScore, Nielsen, and the Audit Bureau of Circulation. Data from and access to third party social media platforms, including but not limited to Facebook, Twitter, Instagram and others, is subject to the respective platform’s terms of use. Services that include Factiva content are governed by Factiva’s terms of use. Services including embedded Tweets are also subject to Twitter for Website's information and privacy policies. The Department of the Interior News Briefing is published five days a week by Bulletin Intelligence, which creates custom briefings for government and corporate leaders. We can be found on the Web at BulletinIntelligence.com, or called at (703) 483-6100. • Nooksack Can’t Get Second Look At Toss Of Funding Suit. • Enviros Urge 9th Circ. To Revive Wind Farm Challenge. 

Bureau Of Indian Education 

• Oregon Lawmakers Demand Answers From Interior On Chemawa. 

Bureau Of Land Management 

• Washington Post: Three Years After Nevada Ranch Standoff, Bundy Federal Trial Begins In Las Vegas. • San Bernardino (CA) Sun: Here’s Why Cadiz Company Says It’s Taking ‘a Little Pause’ From Its Desert Water Project. • KSTU-TV Salt Lake City: BLM Seeking Public Feedback On Proposal To Expand Research Into Cosmic Rays. 

Bureau Of Reclamation 

• Walden Hydro Bill Would Lower Farmers’ Power Costs. • Timeline Moved Up On Irrigation Pipeline Project; Southwest Bend Piping Project To Begin Around The End Of The Year. 

Bureau Of Safety And Environmental Enforcement 

• BSEE Director Discusses Gulf Of Mexico E&P Opportunities At Deepwater Operations. • About 75,000 Barrels Per Day Of Gulf Oil Output Still Shut After Shell Fire. 

Fish And Wildlife Service 

• Bozeman (MT) Daily Chronicle: New Medicine Lake Blind Wheelchair Accessible. 

National Park Service 

• KPAX-TV Missoula (MT): Public Comment Period On Raising Fees At 17 National Parks Closing Soon. • WSB-TV Atlanta: Why You May Not Have That Lifetime National Parks Pass You Ordered Yet. • Cronkite News: Backers Hope Route 66 ‘Historic Trail’ Designation Can Drive Tourism. • Chicago Tribune: U.S. Steel Dumps More Toxic Chromium Near Lake Michigan, Faces Lawsuit. • Flathead (MT) Beacon: Glacier Park Visitation Up In October. • Las Vegas Review-Journal: Graffiti In Active Volcano At Death Valley Erased By Park Service. 

Office Of Insular Affairs 

• Houston Chronicle: Wildlife Agencies Meet On Guam To Discuss Brown Tree Snakes. 

Office Of Surface Mining 

• Omar’s Pine Creek 2 Mine Receives Award. 

US Geological Survey 

• Midland (TX) Reporter-Telegram: USGS: Uranium Has Been Found Near Big Spring. • Reuters: Aviat Networks Awarded $3.0 Million Project With USGS. • Associated Press: Former Oklahoma Seismologist Testifies In Earthquake Lawsuit. 

Opinion Pieces 

• Has Congress Already Forgotten Our Last Oil Spill Disaster? • We’re Not Paying Our Fair Share To Visit National Parks. • Additional Reading. 

Top National News 

• NBC: Trump Touts Success Of His Asia Trip, Says It Shows “America Is Back.” • CBS: As House Prepares To Vote On Tax Bill, Johnson Says He Opposes Senate Version. • Associated Press: Democrats Introduce Articles Of Impeachment Against Trump. • New York Times: Bonn Conference Trying To Make Headway Despite US Stance On Paris Deal. 

Editorial Wrap-Up • New York Times. - “Mr. Trump Casts A Shadow Over The AT&amp;T-Time Warner Deal.” - “The Senate Questions The President’s Power To Launch Nukes.” • Washington Post. - “Republicans Turn Their Irresponsible Tax Bill Into Monumentally Unwise Social Policy.” - “What Happens In Zimbabwe Without Mugabe In Power?” - “Don’t Be Relieved Only Five People Died In California. Be Enraged.” • Wall Street Journal. - “The Appeal Of Mandate Repeal.” - “Zimbabwe’s Coup By Any Other Name.” - “Adios, Richard Cordray.” 

Big Picture 

> • Headlines From Today’s Front Pages.

Washington Schedule 

> • Today’s Events In Washington.

Last Laughs 

> • Late Night Political Humor.

# DOI In The News 

## U.S. Senate Panel Advances Quest For Oil In Arctic Refuge. 

Reuters (11/15, Gardiner) reports that oil drilling in the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge “moved a step closer to reality on Wednesday after the US Senate energy and natural resources panel voted 13-10 to open part of the reserve coveted by conservationists.” Alaska Sen. Lisa Murkowski (R), a supporter of the measure and Chair of the Senate Energy and Natural Resources Committee, which has jurisdiction on the issue, “says drilling in the refuge is needed to provide jobs and boost the country’s resource base,” adding that drilling on the reserve will be done “the right way.” The AP (11/15, Daly) reports that “opening the remote refuge to oil and gas drilling is a longtime Republican priority.” It quotes Murkowski saying that allowing drilling on the refuge “will help keep energy affordable, saving families and businesses money every time they pay for fuel — essentially an energy tax cut.” Bloomberg News (11/15, Dlouhy) reports that “the estimated $1.1 billion in federal revenue it will generate over the next decade offsets proposed tax cuts, binding it to the Republicans’ high-priority overhaul effort and setting it up to pass the Senate on a simple majority vote.” The Houston Chronicle (11/15, Dlouhy) reports drilling could provide a new source of oil for the Trans Alaska Pipeline System, helping to sustain its economic viability as production on the North Slope declines. However, it is not clear if energy companies are eager to move into the Arctic. The high cost of operations in the remote region discourage drilling as cheap shale projects in Texas and North Dakota provide a surge of oil. The Alaska Dispatch News (11/15, Herz) reports Alaska would get half the proceeds from the federal leasing program, which the CBO esstimates could total $1.1 billion over the next decade. The Washington Examiner (11/15, Siegel) reports a number of Democratic amendments to the bill failed, as Sen. Maria Cantwell challenged the purpose and process of the legislation. Cantwell said, “It really does turn regular order on its head. ... We are being asked to consider legislation that is different than previous bills [that tried to allow drilling in ANWR], and has not been subject to single hearing. At its core, the [bill] would change current law and turn the refuge into a petroleum reserve.” However, Murkowski said, “When [the refuge] was created, it specifically said this area right here [the 1002 area] is recognized for its potential and if Congress authorizes it, the coastal plane can be developed for oil and gas. We don’t change the purpose for which ANWR itself was created.” The Huffington Post (11/15, D'Angelo) reports Sen. Bernie Sanders said future generations will look at the hearings and say “what world was the United States Senate living in” as it pushed for fossil fuel development “at a time of devastating damage done by climate change.” Sanders said, “You’re talking about raising a billion dollars here. ... I’m talking about the United States government spending hundreds of billions of dollars repairing damage, which, to a significant degree, not totally, had to do with climate change. And the scientists tell us the worst is yet to come.” E&E Publishing (11/15), E&E Publishing (11/15), E&E Publishing (11/15), Natural Gas Intelligence (11/15, Passut), Courthouse News (11/15, Buchman), and KTUU-TV Anchorage (AK) Anchorage, AK (11/15, Polk) also provided coverage. 

## Trophies From Elephant Hunts In Zimbabwe Were Banned In The U.S. Trump Just Reversed That. 

The Washington Post (11/15, Fears, Eilperin) reports the Trump Administration reversed an import ban on the remains of elephants legally hunted in Zimbabwe and Zambia. The Post adds that African elephants are listed as threatened under the Endangered Species Act. The US Fish and Wildlife Service previously determined that Zimbabwe “had failed to prove that its management of elephants enhanced the population.” In its new statement, the agency “did not specify what had changed in that country.” The move follows Interior Secretary Zinke’s establishment of an International Wildlife Conservation Council to advise him on how to increase Americans’ public awareness of conservation, wildlife enforcement and the “economic benefits that result from U.S. citizens traveling abroad to hunt.” The Hill (11/15, Cama) reports that the FWS “said it has determined that hunting African elephants in Zimbabwe and Zambia ‘will enhance the survival of the species in the wild,’ which is the standard by which officials judge whether to allow imports of parts – known as trophies – of the animals.” An FWS spokesman said in a statement late Wednesday, “Legal, well-regulated sport hunting as part of a sound management program can benefit the conservation of certain species by providing incentives to local communities to conserve the species and by putting much-needed revenue back into conservation.” Also reporting are the Washington Examiner (11/15, Siciliano), CNN International (11/15, Wallace), Newsweek (11/15, Meza), the Huffington Post (11/15, D'Angelo), ABC News (11/15, Ebbs), WIMS-AM South Shore (IN) South Shore, IN (11/15), UPI (11/16, Downs), and Gizmodo (11/15, McKay). 

## This Group Thinks Trump Hasn’t Done Enough To Unravel Environmental Rules. 

Here’s Its Wish List. The Washington Post (11/15, Eilperin, Dennis) reports that at a private meeting last week sponsored by the Heartland Institute, activists were “giddy” about “much of what the Trump administration had done to roll back Obama-era environmental regulations,” but also “grumpy” that “it wasn’t nearly enough.” The article notes that while Interior Deputy Secretary David Bernhardt could not “make the meeting in person,” Interior energy policy counselor Vincent DeVito did speak to the gathering. Asked this week why DeVito had chosen to address the group, Interior spokeswoman Heather Swift said in an email, “The summit was an opportunity to communicate the progress the department has made on energy and restoring multiple-use and access to federal lands, as well as share ideas and perspectives on how to achieve energy dominance.” The Post continues that “the institute’s scorecard on energy issues, Swift added, reflected that Interior ‘is making incredible progress on restoring traditional multiple uses and access to public lands and toward cutting costly and job-killing regulations on responsible energy development.’” 

## New Outdoor Advisory Panel Draws Mixed Reviews. 

The Twin Falls (ID) Times-News (11/15, Barker) reports that “representatives of outdoor recreation and conservation groups see both potential and peril” in Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke’s new “Made in America” recreation advisory committee. For instance, Sandra Mitchell of the Idaho Recreation Council “embraced the idea and said the committee could help ensure all user groups, both motorized and non-motorized, are treated equally.” On the other hand, “Paul Sanford, national director of recreation policy for the Wilderness Society at Washington, D.C., said he doesn’t object to the committee, but doesn’t want it to be overpopulated with people who represent recreational vehicles and motorized recreation.” 

## Secretary Zinke Questions His Department’s Loyalty (VIDEO). 

Newsy (11/15, Miller) reports that Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke is “at odds with his own department about loyalty to the Trump administration.” According to the article, “since taking over the department, Zinke has restructured many of the senior positions,” and “a handful of career officials have resigned over these changes.” 

# Bureau Of Indian Affairs 

## Gaming Panel Approves Tribe’s Plan For Casino Near Omaha. 

The AP (11/15, Funk, Press) reports that the National Indian Gaming Commission has “again approved the Ponca Tribe of Nebraska’s plan to build a casino near Omaha, but after a decade of court hearings, the project’s future remains uncertain.” The commission’s decision “this week came nearly 10 years after it first approved the proposed casino in Carter Lake, Iowa.” Ponca Tribal Chairman Larry Wright Jr. lauded “the latest decision because building the casino would give the tribe significant new resources to help its members.” Additional coverage was provided by the Omaha (NE) World-Herald (11/16, Duggan, Moring). 

## Blackfeet Tribal Members In Federal Court Over Water Rights. 

KRTV-TV Great Falls, MT (11/15, DeMarco) reports that “members of the Blackfeet tribe were in federal court in Great Falls on Tuesday requesting legal ownership of tribal natural resources.” In October 2015, “enrolled members of the Blackfeet Tribe filed a complaint against the Bureau of Indian Affairs and the Secretary of the Interior.” Judge John Johnston has “granted an extension in the case so the enrolled members of the Blackfeet Tribe can find a lawyer to help represent them on the complaint.” 

## Leech Lake Band Seeks To Recover 11,000 Acres Of “Allotted Lands” In The Chip. 

The Walker (MN) Pilot-Independent (11/15, DeBoer) reports that “an error by the Bureau of Indian Affairs back in the 1940s or 1950s resulted in about 11,000 acres of ‘allotted lands’ that rightly belonged to the Leech Lake Band of Ojibwe, being wrongly transferred to the Chippewa National Forest.” For the last “two to three years, the Leech Lake Band has been working to get the allotted acres transferred back to Band ownership through ‘secretarial transfers.’” 

## Nooksack Can’t Get Second Look At Toss Of Funding Suit. 

Law360 (11/15, Westney) reports that “a Washington federal judge rejected a bid Tuesday to reconsider his dismissal of a lawsuit by the Nooksack Indian Tribe’s purported council that claimed the Bureau of Indian Affairs wrongly refused funding to the tribe, saying the dismissal appropriately deferred to the agency’s finding that the council wasn’t allowed to bring the case.” 

## Enviros Urge 9th Circ. To Revive Wind Farm Challenge. 

Law360 (11/15, Westney) reports that “a conservation group has asked the Ninth Circuit to overturn a lower court decision tossing claims that the Bureau of Indian Affairs violated environmental law in approving a lease between a wind farm developer and a California tribe, saying the agency failed to do enough to protect golden eagles and other birds.” Bureau Of Indian Education 

## Oregon Lawmakers Demand Answers From Interior On Chemawa. 

KUOW-FM Seattle (11/15, Manning) reports that “the six Democrats in Oregon’s congressional delegation released a letter Wednesday pressing a top official in the Interior Department to answer questions about the Chemawa Indian School in Salem.” The letter “comes in response to a series of stories from OPB that found health, safety and academic problems at the school. Staff have also complained to OPB that administrators would retaliate against anyone who raised concerns about how the school was managed.” The letter specifies four “areas it wants Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary for Indian Affairs John Tahsuda to look into: student safety and health, academic failings and high enrollment fluctuations, whistleblower protections, and overall transparency in decision making.” 

# Bureau Of Land Management 

## Three Years After Nevada Ranch Standoff, Bundy Federal Trial Begins In Las Vegas. 

The Washington Post (11/15, Sottile) reports that “more than three years after Nevada rancher Cliven Bundy and hundreds of militiamen faced off with federal law enforcement officers who had repossessed Bundy’s cattle, the 71-year-old is finally seeing his battle reach a courtroom.” Bundy; “two of his sons, Ryan and Ammon; and militia leader Ryan Payne are facing federal trial here on charges of conspiracy to commit an offense against the United States, conspiracy to impede and injure a federal officer, and extortion, among other charges that, if they result in convictions, could lead to life sentences.” According to the article, “prosecutors argued in opening statements this week that the standoff was an attack on the government; attorneys representing the Bundys say the gathering was an exercise of the family’s right to protest.” The AP (11/15, Ritter) reports that Ryan Bundy “told a federal jury on Wednesday he believes protesters and self-styled militia members saved his life when they arrived in April 2014 after government agents used dogs and stun guns against his family members ahead of a gunpoint showdown that ended a cattle roundup.” Bundy, “who is serving as his own lawyer in the trial in Las Vegas, spent more than an hour speaking with a projected image of his wife and eight children on the courtroom screen.” Bundy”told his family history, declared his belief in states’ rights over limited federal government, and professed his love of family, the land, God, Americans, liberty and freedom.” Also reporting are the AP (11/15, Ritter), Reuters (11/15, Smith), and the Daily Mail (11/15, Miller)/ 

## Here’s Why Cadiz Company Says It’s Taking ‘a Little Pause’ From Its Desert Water Project. 

The San Bernardino (CA) Sun (11/15, Steinberg) reports that after recently receiving “the long-sought federal approval for its massive desert water project, Scott Slater, Cadiz president and CEO, said it’s time for the project to ‘slow down’ a bit.” Slater explained, “We are going to take a little pause…and double our effort to allow people to understand this project. We believe people should support an innovative project like ours.” However, “one environmentalist who has studied and followed the project for years, said pausing at this point strikes an odd note.” David Lamfrom, California Desert and National Wildlife Programs director with the National Parks Conservation Association, “said he believes the pause is really because the California Lands Commission has recently surfaced as a possible stumbling block to the project.” But “Cadiz downplays that notion.” 

## BLM Seeking Public Feedback On Proposal To Expand Research Into Cosmic Rays. 

KSTU-TV Salt Lake City (11/15, Steinbrecher) reports that the Bureau of Land Management seeks input “from the public on a proposal that would quadruple the size of an international scientific study happening near Delta.” According to the article, “using clusters of telescopes and surface detectors on the ground, researchers from the University of Utah and around the world are studying cosmic rays, particularly a phenomenon called the ‘Oh-My-God Particle.’” Researchers propose “to quadruple the size of the project to 750,000 acres, which would allow them to place more detectors on the ground.” The article says that “many of the detectors would go on BLM land, and the Millard County Commission is concerned that will mean less public land is available for other uses like grazing, recreation or economic development.” 

# Bureau Of Reclamation 

## Walden Hydro Bill Would Lower Farmers’ Power Costs. 

The Ripon Advance (11/15) reports that Rep. Greg Walden “on Friday introduced the Klamath Infrastructure Improvement Act, legislation that would serve Klamath County irrigators needing affordable water rates.” H.R. 4329 would “amend the Klamath Basin Water Supply Enhancement Act of 2000 and would bring Klamath Basin hydropower costs in line with those for Bureau of Reclamation projects in other Pacific Northwest areas.” Walden said, “We have 1,000 farms in Klamath County. We have 650,000 acres of farmland in the county. Combined crop and livestock sales annually reach approximately $200 million. Agriculture is essential not only to the lifeblood of Klamath County, and frankly to our entire district.” 

## Timeline Moved Up On Irrigation Pipeline Project; Southwest Bend Piping Project To Begin Around The End Of The Year. 

The Bend (OR) Bulletin (11/16, Hamway) reports that “after talk of major delays last week, a project that would replace a section of canal near the southern edge of Bend with a 3,000-foot irrigation pipeline is back on track to begin around the end of the year.” Craig Horrell, general manager of Central Oregon Irrigation District, “said a $5 million piping project is expected to break ground in December or January, pending the results of a federal environmental analysis.” Edna Rey-Vizgirdas, spokeswoman for the Bureau of Reclamation, said, “We’re trying to accommodate their timeline.” 

# Bureau Of Safety And Environmental Enforcement 

## BSEE Director Discusses Gulf Of Mexico E&P Opportunities At Deepwater Operations. 

Offshore Magazine (11/15) reports that at the Deepwater Operations Conference & Exhibition, BSEE director Scott Angelle emphasized the importance of deepwater Gulf of Mexico E&P. During his keynote presentation, Angelle said, “The offshore oil and gas industry has demonstrated that when faced with challenges in deepwater whether market-based or technology, it continues to innovate and accelerate. ... BSEE must work to ensure that the outer continental shelf is attractive for investment and that all operations are conducted safely and are environmentally sustainable.” World Oil (11/15) reports conference director David Paganie said, “Director Angelle’s remarks at Deepwater Operations were an encouraging reminder that offshore oil and gas has advocates in Washington that seek to galvanize the industry in this challenging market.” 

## About 75,000 Barrels Per Day Of Gulf Oil Output Still Shut After Shell Fire. 

Reuters (11/15, Sims) reports a combined 75,206 bpd of oil and 215,122 mcfd of natural gas production remain offline at four platforms in the Gulf of Mexico in the wake of a fire on Shell’s Enchilada platform. The BSEE said production has been shut in fro Shell’s Enchilada, Salsa and Augers platforms, along with Hess’ Baldpate platform and Conger field. Shell said a plan to repair the damage caused by the fire is underway, while Hess is helping the oil major determine when production can resume. Fish And Wildlife Service 

## New Medicine Lake Blind Wheelchair Accessible. 

The Bozeman (MT) Daily Chronicle (11/14) reports that a new accessible blind was dedicated in Ducks Unlimited volunteer Pat Nolan’s honor in Medicine Lake National Wildlife Refuge. According to the article, “construction of the blind was led by DU volunteer Steve Cunningham, and completed by two sons and five grandsons of Nolan’s, with assistance from refuge staff.” Sean Lofgren, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service project leader at Medicine Lake, “said the blind will be used for hunting, wildlife observation and wildlife photography.” 

# National Park Service 

## Public Comment Period On Raising Fees At 17 National Parks Closing Soon. 

KPAX-TV Missoula, MT (11/15, Miller) reports that the comment period for a proposal to raise fees at 17 popular national parks “will be closing in just about a week.” Due to concerns that the 30-day comment period is not enough time, Sen. Steve Daines on Wednesday “sent a letter to the acting director of the National Park Service asking for an extension of the public comment period.” A spokesman with the National Park Service “says the 30-day comment period isn’t unusual.” 

## Why You May Not Have That Lifetime National Parks Pass You Ordered Yet. 

WSB-TV Atlanta (11/15, Johnson) reports that senior citizens can expect their lifetime passes to national parks to be mailed out “sometime in the next 30 days, according to the AARP.” The National Park Service had “said that seniors rushing to beat a steep price increase on lifetime passes created a logjam so severe that it delayed the processing of the requests.” 

## Backers Hope Route 66 ‘Historic Trail’ Designation Can Drive Tourism. 

Cronkite News (11/15, Windes) reports that lawmakers are considering “a bill that would put Route 66 on the road to becoming a National Historic Trail.” The bill, “heard Wednesday by a House Natural Resources subcommittee, would put the more-than-2,400-mile road under the care of the National Park Service, returning signage to the road and letting it appear on maps as a historic road, among other changes.” 

## U.S. Steel Dumps More Toxic Chromium Near Lake Michigan, Faces Lawsuit. 

The Chicago Tribune (11/14, Hawthorne) reports that “six months after U.S. Steel dumped a plume of toxic metal into a Lake Michigan tributary, the company quietly reported another spill at the same northwest Indiana plant and asked state environmental regulators to keep it secret, according to newly released documents.” According to the article, “the 56.7 pounds of chromium released in late October by the company’s Midwest Plant was 89 percent higher than its water pollution permit allows over 24 hours, U.S. Steel revealed in a letter sent to the Indiana Department of Environmental Management.” The Northwest Indiana Post-Tribune (11/16, Lavalley) reports that officials with the Indiana Dunes National Lakeshore and Indiana American Water Company said they weren’t told about the October leak. Bruce Rowe, public information officer and supervisory ranger in charge at the national lakeshore, said, “Our chief of resource management contacted IDEM (Wednesday) morning to learn more about this, and is going to contact other agencies. We obviously want to protect our resources and our visitors just like that spill six months ago, so we’re taking this very seriously and looking into it.” 

## Glacier Park Visitation Up In October. The Flathead (MT) Beacon (11/15) reports that “monthly visitation in Glacier National Park grew once again in October after a dip due to wildfires.” According to the National Park Service, “an estimated 84,000 people visited the park last month, roughly 9,000 more people than a year ago.” 

## Graffiti In Active Volcano At Death Valley Erased By Park Service. 

The Las Vegas Review-Journal (11/15, Brean) reports that “National Park Service employees had to roll out about 600 feet of hose to erase the latest graffiti at Death Valley.” In late October, unidentified “vandals scratched large letters and symbols into the mud bottom of Ubehebe Crater, at the northern end of the national park about 180 miles northwest of Las Vegas.” After receiving “complaints from visitors about the graffiti, the park dispatched a water tanker and team of seven park employees to the crater Nov. 7.” 

# Office Of Insular Affairs 

## Wildlife Agencies Meet On Guam To Discuss Brown Tree Snakes. 

The AP (11/15) reports that “wildlife agencies are meeting this week on Guam to provide updates on numerous projects targeting the invasive brown tree snake, which has proved detrimental to Guam’s native bird population.” The meetings will focus on “increased inspections, awareness programs and effective baiting methods.” The article notes that “approximately $2.8 million from the Office of Insular Affairs is anticipated to carry out the brown tree snake eradication and control projects for the fiscal year.” 

# Office Of Surface Mining 

## Omar’s Pine Creek 2 Mine Receives Award. 

The Williamson (WV) Daily News (11/15) reports that “Arch Coal’s Coal-Mac LLC Pine Creek 2 Surface Mine, located in Omar, received the Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement 2017 Excellence in Surface Coal Mining Reclamation Award.” The award was presented at the National Mining Association’s awards ceremony in Washington, D.C. on Nov. 6. The mine was recognized for “the development and use of multiple techniques to control threats to water quality, such as selenium pollution, total dissolved solids and conductivity.” 

# US Geological Survey 

## USGS: Uranium Has Been Found Near Big Spring. 

The Midland (TX) Reporter-Telegram (11/16, Hawes) reports that the U.S. Geological Survey announced the discovery of uranium in West Texas this week. The USGS “released preliminary information about the discovery northwest of Big Spring.” According to the article, “the uranium itself is part of a new mineral called finchite, named after longtime USGS uranium scientist Warren Finch.” 

## Aviat Networks Awarded $3.0 Million Project With USGS. 

Reuters (11/15) reports that Aviat Networks Inc. has been awarded a $3.0 million project with the U.S. Geological Survey. The new system is “to be used by earthquake science center to transport geophysical, seismographic data, security video to/from various sites.” 

## Former Oklahoma Seismologist Testifies In Earthquake Lawsuit. 

The AP (11/15) reports that former Oklahoma seismologist Austin Holland, who said he was “pressured by an official at the University of Oklahoma to not link the state’s surge in earthquakes to oil and gas production” gave sworn testimony in a lawsuit filed by residents against oil companies for a 2011 earthquake. Accord to the lawsuit, the earthquake that affected Kansas, Arkansas, Tennessee allegedly caused the residents to sustain damages. Holland testified that he was reprimanded for assisting in publishing a journal article on how to handle man-made earthquakes. 

# Opinion Pieces 

## Has Congress Already Forgotten Our Last Oil Spill Disaster? 

In an op-ed for The Hill (11/15, Super), David A. Super, a professor of law at Georgetown Law, criticizes the proposed SECURE American Energy Act (H.R. 4239). The legislation “would transfer to states the authority to authorize oil and gas drilling on public lands,” but it would not “provide states with any resources to perform this work, which currently costs the Bureau of Land Management well over $100 million a year.” Super claims that “the legislation’s only real effect would be to tie the hands of future Congresses that might wish to reassert the balance between extractive, other economic, recreational, and environmental interests that historically has guided our natural resources policy.” 

## We’re Not Paying Our Fair Share To Visit National Parks. 

In an op-ed for The Hill (11/15, WatkinsOpinion Contributor —), Tate Watkins, a research fellow at the Property and Environment Research Center, defends the Interior Department’s proposal to raise fees at 17 popular national parks. Watkins argues that “if our parks, forests, and wilderness areas are truly national treasures, then outdoor recreationists should have no qualms paying to enjoy — and support — them.” But Watkins also suggests that “managers should have flexibility to set pricing structures that work best for each site—whether that includes peak-season fees, annual passes, day rates, or surcharges for visitors from abroad.” 

## Additional Reading. 

Park Fee Increase Prices Out Families. Jackson Hole (WY) News & Guide (11/15, Iobst). 

Fees Just Part Of Park Solution. Jackson Hole (WY) News & Guide (11/15). 

Accessing Our National Parks Should Not Be A Privilege Afforded Only To The Privileged. 

Bend (OR) Source (11/15). 

Wrong Path On National Park Fees. Concord (NH) Monitor (11/15). 

Veterans Service & Conservation Corps: Career Pathways Through Continued Service. 

Huffington Post (11/15). 

We Need Responsible Energy Development On Public Lands. Montana Standard (11/15, Nyman, Rogers). 

Guest Commentary: Trump Administration Shuns Voices Behind Local Groundwork. 

Aspen (CO) Times (11/15, Newman). 

Thomas Mitchell: Constitution Stretched To The Breaking Point. Elko (NV) Daily Free Press (11/15, Mitchell). 

A Ray Of Hope For American Shad. Narrowsburg (NY) River Reporter. 

Progress In The World’s Fight To Save Elephants, Rhinos, Pangolins And Sharks . . . Backsliding In The Fight To End Trophy Hunting By Americans. Huffington Post (11/15, Greene). 

# Top National News 

## Trump Touts Success Of His Asia Trip, Says It Shows “America Is Back.” 

To widespread media skepticism, the President yesterday celebrated his accomplishments in Asia, claiming credit for crafting a unified front against North Korea and for trade deals worth billions of dollars. Two major network newscasts reported Trump’s remarks. In its story about “what he sees as” the trip’s “accomplishments,” NBC Nightly News (11/15, story 3, 1:30, Welker) said Trump “took a victory lap,” and described him as “clearly frustrated by headlines that suggested he didn’t secure any concrete results.” The CBS Evening News (11/15, story 8, 0:45, Mason), meanwhile, quipped that it “appeared for a time” that Trump’s “account of his Asia trip...might run as long as the 12-day journey itself.” In his speech, USA Today (11/15, Jackson, Korte) reports, “Trump outlined his efforts in a country-by-country rundown,” and “some commentators on Twitter likened” his “methodical recitation to someone showing slides of their summer vacation.” More favorable toward Trump was the Washington Times (11/15, Miller) account, which quotes him as saying, “My fellow citizens, America is back and the future has never looked brighter. ... I swore that in every decision and with every action I would put the best interest of the American people first. ... That is exactly what I have done.” Politico (11/15, Lima), however, says Trump touted the success of his trip “despite a dearth of marquee victories for the White House,” which “seemingly did not draw any major diplomatic concessions from the nations it visited on major issues like North Korea’s nuclear efforts, new trade pacts or human rights.” Townhall (11/15, O'Brien) reported that “trade and commerce” were the issues Trump “spent the most time discussing, clearly enthused by his recent meetings.” But Bloomberg News (11/15, Wayne, Pettypiece) says the trade deals touted by Trump “aren’t contracts and might not be fulfilled. And while the president railed against what he regards as systemic flaws in US trade relationships, he neither publicly requested or received specific assurances by foreign leaders to reduce imbalances or address issues such as market access by US companies and intellectual property theft.” The Washington Post (11/15, Gearan) casts Trump as chafing “at criticism that he did not notch any major accomplishments,” and USA Today (11/15, Jackson, Korte) says he “gave the speech at the White House in the wake of criticism of the trip by some analysts and political foes.” The Los Angeles Times (11/15, Bennett) similarly indicates Trump’s “message was undermined by the lack of significant accomplishments he could point to from the trip,” and the New York Times (11/15, Qiu) runs a “Fact Check” analysis under the headline “Trump’s ‘Tremendous Success’ Abroad Is Overstated.” Another New York Times (11/15, Shear) story similarly describes the trip as having brought “few concrete achievements,” and adds “Trump made no significant announcements in a speech that he had hyped on Twitter as ‘a major statement’ to be delivered upon his return.” The Times goes on to report that “critics say Mr. Trump has abandoned the United States’ status as a global superpower by retreating from trade agreements and backing out of the Paris climate accord.” Trump’s “political rivals accuse him of straining relationships with allies in NATO and elsewhere while embracing despots.” The Wall Street Journal (11/15, Ballhaus) runs a similar story this morning. Jonah Goldberg of National Review said on Fox News’ Special Report 

(11/15),”This was no major announcement. He had teased this as a major announcement – tune in for major announcement. There was no major announcement. At the same time, I’m not sure it matters. The press was mad about it. I’m not sure that matters.” Goldberg added that “it sounded like a successful trip. It looked like a successful trip. He came back and talked about it like a successful trip and just because the reporters in the room didn’t like it, well, welcome to the era of Trump. Reporters in the room often don’t like what he does, but he was reaching out to his audience beyond that and I thought it was probably going to be effective for him.” 

Trump’s Search For Water Bottle Featured Across News Coverage. A significant topic across the coverage of the President’s remarks were the two occasions in which he paused to drink water. The Hill (11/15, Fabian), for example, said “the speech might be remembered for Trump’s two awkward-looking water breaks,” and the New York Times (11/15, Qiu) that the President was “deterred only by a struggle to quench his thirst.” While the subject is mentioned in virtually every story on Trump’s remarks, the CBS Evening News (11/15, story 8, 0:45, Mason) devoted all but one sentence of its 45-second report to explain that the President’s “mouth got so dry he had to stop and search for a bottle of water to quench his thirst. A few minutes later, it happened again.” Added CBS, “You’ll recall Mr. Trump, on the campaign trail, mocked then-rival Marco Rubio for taking a water break as he delivered the GOP response to a state of the union address.” Rubio weighed in on Twitter, writing, “Needs work on his form. Has to be done in one single motion, and eyes should never leave the camera, but not bad for his first time.” The AP (11/15, Thomas) also indicates that “during the 2016 campaign, Trump frequently skewered Rubio...for needing to quench his thirst during speeches,” and USA Today (11/15, Estepa) reports, “Sometimes, you really just need a drink of water. Sen. Marco Rubio knows this.” 

Trump: Xi Agrees “Freeze-For-Freeze” Is Unacceptable. The AP (11/15, Pennington) reports Trump said “the US and China agree that North Korea cannot just freeze its nuclear weapons program in exchange for concessions and that it must eliminate its arsenal.” Trump “was restating a long-standing US position but suggested that China now concurred with Washington that a ‘freeze-for-freeze’ agreement was unacceptable.” Said Trump, “President Xi recognizes that a nuclear North Korea is a grave threat to China, and we agreed that we would not accept a so-called freeze for freeze agreement, like those that have consistently failed in the past.” 

Following Trump Visit, China To Send High-Level Envoy To North Korea. The AP (11/14, Bodeen) reports that “following...Trump’s visit to Beijing, China said Wednesday that it would send a high-level special envoy to North Korea amid an extended chill in relations between the neighbors over Pyongyang’s nuclear weapons and missile programs.” Song Tao, “the head of China’s ruling Communist Party’s International Department, will travel to Pyongyang on Friday to report on outcomes of the party’s national congress held last month, the official Xinhua News Agency said.” The Washington Post (11/15, Denyer) says “it is not clear whether this trip has anything to do with” Trump’s visit, as “Beijing routinely undertakes such trips to fellow Communist states.” 

North Korean Editorial: Trump Should Be Sentenced To Death For Kim Insults. The Washington Post (11/15, Erickson) reports “the ever-escalating war of words between the United States and North Korea got dialed up to 11 on Wednesday, when an editorial in a state-run newspaper called...Trump a coward who deserved the death penalty.” The Post adds that “Rodong Sinmun, a mouthpiece for Kim’s ruling Workers’ Party of Korea, took aim at Trump,” writing, “The worst crime for which he can never be pardoned is that he dared [to] malignantly hurt the dignity of the supreme leadership. ... He should know that he is just a hideous criminal sentenced to death by the Korean people.” 

Murphy: Restraining Trump’s Nuclear Authority Won’t Signal Weakness To North Korea. 

Sen. Chris Murphy, a member of the Foreign Relations Committee, said on CNN’s Situation Room (11/15) that he’s not “alone” in being concerned about President Trump’s ability to pre-emptively launch nuclear weapons at North Korea, arguing that “it’s not a coincidence that the first major hearing that we’ve had on the decision-making process regarding the launch of a nuclear weapon happens at the exact same moment that President Trump is suggesting through his Twitter feed that he might use a nuclear weapon against North Korea without consulting with Congress.” When asked if restraining the President’s nuclear authority signals a “weakness to regimes like North Korea,” Murphy said that’s “nonsense,” adding that no president can engage in a pre-emptive military strike without authorization from Congress. Murphy said he’s “introduced legislation that would clarify that.” In an editorial headlined “The President’s Power To Launch Nukes,” the New York Times (11/15) says “Trump and North Korea have prompted Congress to do something it hasn’t done in more than four decades: formally consider changes to the law that gives American presidents the sole authority to launch nuclear weapons.” The US President “is engaged in a dangerous game of chicken with Kim Jong-un,” and while “the Republican-led Congress, which has shown few signs of pushing back against presidential powers, may end up taking no action...there are hard questions to be addressed, especially now that the American people have been alerted to the scope and potential peril of Mr. Trump’s powers.” Sen. Jeanne Shaheen said on CNN’s The Lead (11/15), “I thought this was a great opportunity to try and further engage Russia in what’s going on with North Korea. One of the things we need to do with North Korea, which is a rogue nation, is to get the international community in support of further sanctions, of keeping pressure on the North Korean regime and Russia is a key player there and he missed that opportunity to engage Putin on that issue.” Shaheen added, “We need to build an international coalition as President Obama did on Iran to get people united in working and keeping the pressure on North Korea. What we don’t need is inconsistent messages on Twitter that...are open to interpretation by Kim Jong-un, who is a very irrational and radical leader. So I think that’s the kind of consistent, stable diplomacy that we need to continue and I think, unfortunately, this administration has fallen short in that score.” 

UCLA Basketball Players Thank Trump For Intervening With China To Win Their Release. 

NBC Nightly News (11/15, story 5, 1:50, Holt) reported three UCLA men’s basketball players are back in the US “after being caught up in a legal drama in China which led...Trump to intervene when they were caught shoplifting and faced up to a decade in prison.” Trump was shown saying, “What they did was unfortunate, and you know you’re talking about very long prison sentences. They do not play games.” The White House says Trump’s words with Chinese President Xi Jinping, “along with diplomatic efforts by the State Department, led to a reduction in charges.” On Wednesday morning, Trump tweeted, “Do you think the three UCLA basketball players will say, ‘thank you, President Trump’ they were headed for ten years in jail.” The CBS Evening News (11/15, story 7, 0:35, Mason) reported the three players apologized on Wednesday for shoplifting, and ABC World News Tonight (11/15, story 8, 1:15, Muir) that the three thanked Trump for his efforts. Fox News’ Special Report (11/15) showed footage of the players thanking the President and the US government. USA Today (11/15, Peter), Reuters (11/15, Carroll), the Washington Post (11/15, Bontemps), Politico (11/15, Lima, Nelson) and the Los Angeles Times (11/15, Bolch), among other news outlets, also report the story. 

In Japan, Bannon Warns Against China’s Plans To “Dominate” World Economy. The Washington Times (11/15, Taylor) reports that Steve Bannon “railed against China’s ‘hegemonic’ ambitions Wednesday, telling a crowd in Tokyo that the West and its Asian allies must wake up to communist Beijing’s plan to ‘dominate’ the world economy.” Bannon said “American ‘elites’ have long believed a ‘false premise’ that China would become more of a liberal democracy and a free market economy as its economy grew,” yet “the exact opposite has happened. ... The Chinese leadership had no intention ever of joining the rules-based international order. They had their own plan, and they executed that plan very rigorously.” 

Trump Takes To Twitter To Blast “Naïve (Or Dumb)” NYTimes, CNN. The Washington Times (11/15, Miller) reports that earlier Wednesday, Trump “took to Twitter with a vengeance...to blast his critics in the news media.” Trump “labeled CNN as ‘Loser!’ and skewered the ‘failing’ New York Times for being ‘naive (or dumb)’ on foreign policy.” Trump said of the Times, “The failing @nytimes hates the fact that I have developed a great relationship with World leaders like Xi Jinping, President of China. ... They should realize that these relationships are a good thing, not a bad thing. The U.S. is being respected again. Watch Trade!” Politico (11/15, Lima) says “it was unclear what specific Times article the president was responding to,” though “earlier Wednesday Times foreign affairs columnist Thomas Friedman penned a piece criticizing” him “for allowing himself to be manipulated by Xi on trade, an issue the president has made a priority in his overseas diplomatic talks.” Under the headline “China Could Sell Trump the Brooklyn Bridge,” Friedman writes in the New York Times (11/14, Friedman) that “Xi has been brilliant at playing Trump, plying him with flattery and short-term trade concessions and deflecting him from the real structural trade imbalances with China.” 

## As House Prepares To Vote On Tax Bill, Johnson Says He Opposes Senate Version. 

With the House set to vote on its tax cut plan Thursday, President Trump tweeted Wednesday evening, “Big vote tomorrow in the House. Tax cuts are getting close!” However, coverage on the network news broadcasts and in print this morning focuses on the Senate bill, suggesting the measure could be in trouble after Sen. Ron Johnson said he will not support it and Sen. Susan Collins said the decision to include a repeal of the ACA’s individual mandate was a mistake. Anthony Mason reported on The CBS Evening News (11/15, story 2, 2:40, Mason) that House Republicans “are set to pass a massive package of corporate and individual tax cuts” Thursday. Chief congressional correspondent Nancy Cordes added that the House plan would “eliminate the deduction for state and local taxes,” which “has angered a handful of GOP House members from high-tax states, but there probably aren’t enough of them to prevent passage in the House.” However, much of the media coverage highlights Johnson’s opposition to the Senate bill as well as the inclusion of the individual mandate repeal and Collins’ criticism of that decision. Johnson told the Wall Street Journal (11/15, Hughes) Wednesday that he opposes the Senate Republican tax bill, arguing that the measure benefits corporations more than other businesses. Johnson told the Journal, “If they can pass it without me, let them. ... I’m not going to vote for this tax package.” The Washington Times (11/15, Sherfinski) reports that in a statement Johnson “said...that it’s important to strike a proper competitive balance between larger corporations and smaller ‘pass-through’ companies that file their taxes as individuals and are often taxed at levels higher than the 35 percent corporate rate.” Said Johnson, “These businesses truly are the engines of innovation and job creation throughout our economy, and they should not be left behind. ... Unfortunately, neither the House nor Senate bill provide fair treatment, so I do not support either in their current versions.” The Washington Examiner (11/15, Lawler) says Johnson is “the first Republican senator to express opposition to the GOP tax bill,” and the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (11/15, Glauber) says his opposition “could prove important since Republicans have only 52 seats in the Senate.” 

Rove: Differences Between House, Senate Bills Can Be Used To Craft A Better Final Version. Karl Rove writes in the Wall Street Journal (11/15) that while much has been made of the differences between the House and Senate bills, their goals are similar, and the areas where they differ can be used to craft a better final bill. Rove adds that Republicans, and President Trump in particular, need to persuade Americans that the corporate tax changes will create jobs and raise incomes, which will help the economy grow. 

## Democrats Introduce Articles Of Impeachment Against Trump. 

In what the AP (11/15, Freking) describes as “a long-shot effort that stands little chance in the Republican-led House,” six House Democrats have introduced articles of impeachment against President Trump, “accusing him of obstruction of justice and other offenses.” The AP adds that “the large majority of Democrats seem intent on having nothing to do with the effort either as lawmakers await the results of special counsel Robert Mueller’s investigation,” and “Democratic leaders have argued that the impeachment campaign riles up Trump’s GOP base, a critical bloc in next year’s midterm elections.” The Washington Times (11/15, Dinan) reports that the Democrats, led by Rep. Steve Cohen, say Trump “has obstructed justice in his dealings with then-FBI Director James Comey, and his businesses are taking money that is illegal under two separate parts of the Constitution.” In addition they say Trump “has undermined the judiciary by using his pardon powers on former Sheriff Joe Arpaio, and that he’s undermined the press corps covering him by berating news outlets or calling them ‘fake.’” 

Podesta: Trump Wants To Run The Justice System “Like A Banana Republic.” In an op-ed for the Washington Post (11/15), John Podesta, who served as chair of Hillary Clinton’s 2016 presidential campaign, writes that reports that “Sessions — in an apparent effort to appease Trump — is considering appointing a special counsel to investigate Clinton’s role in approving the purchase of Uranium One” is proof that Trump “wants to upend 230 years of constitutional history and principle to run the U.S. justice system like a banana republic, or perhaps more aptly like what now passes for the rule of law in the country he aspires to emulate, the Russian Federation.” Podesta argues that “authoritarians and tyrants” use “the instruments of state power, particularly the wrath of the prosecutor, to rain opprobrium down upon citizens with whom they disagree.” 

Sessions To Be Interviewed By House Intelligence Committee. Reuters (11/15) reports a DOJ spokesman said Wednesday that Attorney General Sessions will be interviewed in a closed door session with the House intelligence committee on Nov. 30. The committee is one of several, “along with the Department of Justice’s special counsel Robert Mueller, investigating alleged Russian interference in the 2016 presidential campaign and potential collusion by President Donald Trump’s campaign.” 

Firm Mentioned In Trump Dossier Linked To Internet Pirates. McClatchy (11/15, Hall) reports that the co-called Trump Dossier “got a lot right,” but “the accusation that a company called XBT and its US subsidiary Webzilla hacked the emails of Democratic Party leaders” is “still vexing investigators.” XBT and Webzilla “have long been the targets of lawyers who fight Internet piracy.” McClatchy adds that is review of “more than 1,000 pages of court documents” found that “Webzilla employees were linked through litigation and regulatory filings to two companies accused of large-scale copyright violations involving Hollywood movies and subscription pornography.” The Daily Caller (11/15, Ross) cites “a source familiar” with Glenn Simpson’s testimony to the House Intelligence Committee who said the Fusion GPS founder “acknowledged...that he did not verify information in the uncorroborated and salacious dossier before briefing reporters on its contents during the campaign.” Bloomberg News (11/15, House) reports that “people familiar with his testimony” say Simpson “defended [the dossier’s] credibility” during his testimony. 

Judge Calls For Greater Transparency In Legal Fight Over Fusion Bank Records. 

Politico (11/15, Gerstein) reports that following “a brief hearing in US District Court in Washington, Judge Richard Leon” told lawyers involved in the legal fight between the House Intelligence Committee and Fusion GPS that the dispute over the committee’s demands for Fusion’s bank records “is of major public significance and needs to be handled with greater transparency.” Leon said, “If there were ever a case where [public access] is in the best interest of all concerned, this is one. ... This is not the kind of case, in my judgment, where there should be much if any time behind the [closed] door, unless it’s necessary. … I think the arguments can be made in open court on the nonconfidential, discrete legal questions.” 

Schiff: Parts Of Trump Dossier Have Turned Out To Be True. In an interview with the Wall Street Journal (11/15, Tau) Wednesday, Rep. Adam Schiff, the ranking Democrat on the house intelligence Committee rejected attempts by Republicans to discredit the Dossier, arguing that its claims that Russia sought to help elect Trump proved to be true. 

## Bonn Conference Trying To Make Headway Despite US Stance On Paris Deal. 

The New York Times (11/15, Friedman, Plumer) reports that “few at United Nations climate talks” in Bonn, Germany “are openly showing” any anger they feel at the United States for rejecting the Paris climate change agreement. In private negotiating sessions, career State Department staffers are “making headway on technical issues to strengthen the Paris accord”; many of them “are familiar players in these negotiations and are continuing to pursue longstanding objectives, like greater transparency on emissions cuts from developing countries.” George David Banks, a senior energy adviser to President Trump, said that because the US has “the best negotiating team in the world,” the “other delegations are very supportive of making sure the US delegation is as involved as possible.” However, the State Department official originally leading the talks, Thomas A. Shannon Jr., canceled at the last minute, “leaving the negotiations largely in the hands of lower-ranking colleagues,” and Banks “refers most questions to the State Department.” In contrast, Fox News’ Special Report (11/15) reported that at the conference, “the US is taking heavy criticism over President Trump’s decision to withdraw from the Paris Climate Accord.” One American energy executive “infuriated participants when he said it’s naïve to suggest poor countries can escape poverty through wind and solar when fossil fuel remains a cheaper...alternative.” That remark came as scientists at the conference say they’re anticipating a 2 percent rise in global CO2 emissions for 2017, with Corinne Le Quere of the University of East Anglia shown saying that the CO2 increase is “driven primarily by what’s happening in China with the renewed use of coal.” Meanwhile, a separate American delegation expressed support for the Accord. Washington Gov. Jay Inslee was shown saying, “Donald Trump cannot stop us. This is the most important thing we wanted the world to know.” 

# Editorial Wrap-Up 

## New York Times. 

“Mr. Trump Casts A Shadow Over The AT&T-Time Warner Deal.” The New York Times (11/15) editorializes that “President Trump’s hostility toward the news media, and CNN in particular, has been so extreme that it is calling into doubt whether his appointees at the Department of Justice can fairly evaluate a merger involving the cable news channel’s parent company, Time Warner, and AT&T.” The Justice Department’s Antitrust Division “has reportedly asked AT&T to sell the Turner Broadcasting division of Time Warner, a unit that includes CNN, or sell its DirecTV unit to gain approval for the deal.” While the Times notes that “on its face, this is not an unreasonable request,” it argues that “given Mr. Trump’s repeated attacks on CNN, there’s ample cause to suspect that the Justice Department scheme is a ploy to force a sale of the news organization to owners that will strip away its editorial independence and turn it into a house organ of the Trump administration.” 

“The Senate Questions The President’s Power To Launch Nukes.” In an editorial, the New York Times (11/15) says President Trump and North Korea “have prompted Congress to do something it hasn’t done in more than four decades: formally consider changes to the law that gives American presidents the sole authority to launch nuclear weapons.” The US President “us engaged in a dangerous game of chicken with Kim Jong-un,” and while “the Republican-led Congress, which has shown few signs of pushing back against presidential powers, may end up taking no action...there are hard questions to be addressed, especially now that the American people have been alerted to the scope and potential peril of Mr. Trump’s powers.” 

## Washington Post. 

“Republicans Turn Their Irresponsible Tax Bill Into Monumentally Unwise Social Policy.” A Washington Post (11/15) editorial says by including a provision to repeal the ACA’s individual mandate in their tax bill, Senate Republicans “remade their tax bill into an Obamacare repeal bill.” The provision, the Post argues, “turned a fiscally irresponsible tax plan into a monumentally unwise piece of social policy that would do much more than widen the deficit.” The Post argues that if Republicans believe repealing the mandate “is good health-care policy, they should seek to pass it on its own, with hearings, markups and debate.” 

“What Happens In Zimbabwe Without Mugabe In Power?” In an editorial, the Washington Post (11/15) writes that the “prospects don’t look good” for Zimbabwe. President Mugabe’s “horrific record” did not inspire the coup and Mnangagwa has “a history of brutal behavior” and could lose a fair vote to the opposition leader. However, the Post warns that “a genuine popular mandate” is needed for reforms to revive the economy. The Post calls on the US and other Western governments to “insist on a prompt restoration of constitutional order and a firm commitment by the military to holding internationally supervised elections next year.” The Post concludes this is “a fragile opportunity to rescue” Zimbabwe, should the situation “not lead to the installation of another strongman.” 

“Don’t Be Relieved Only Five People Died In California. Be Enraged.” The Washington Post (11/15) editorializes that observers should not be comforted by the fact that “only” five people died in Tuesday’s shooting at an elementary school. The Post asserts that “what ought to be foremost is rage at the refusal of lawmakers to take action that might prevent these needless tragedies — and a renewed demand for sensible gun-control regulations, including a ban on assault weapons and comprehensive background checks with better enforcement.” 

## Wall Street Journal. 

“The Appeal Of Mandate Repeal.” A Wall Street Journal (11/15) editorial praises Senate Republicans’ decision to include a repeal of the ACA’s individual mandate in their tax bill and argues that Democrats should explain, why, if ACA insurance provides quality coverage at affordable prices, do people have to be coerced into buying it. 

“Zimbabwe’s Coup By Any Other Name.” The Wall Street Journal (11/15) warns in an editorial that Zimbabwe’s coup is motivated by a political power struggle within the ruling Zanu-PF party and not the suffering of the country’s people. The Journal predicts the coup will not lead to improvements, which would require a total overhaul of its governance. 

“Adios, Richard Cordray.” In an editorial, the Wall Street Journal (11/15, Journal) expresses pleasure at Consumer Financial Protection Bureau director Richard Cordray’s exit, writing that he overstepped the mandate of CFPB and went after industries unpopular with progressives. 

# Big Picture 

## Headlines From Today’s Front Pages. 

Wall Street Journal: 

Activist Peltz Narrowly Wins P&G Board Seat, New Count Shows Republican Sen. Ron Johnson Opposes GOP Senate Tax Package Zimbabwe Army’s Power Grab Could Mark End Of Mugabe’s Reign A Specter Is Haunting Europe’s Recovery: Zombie Companies 

New York Times: 

Tax Bill Thrown Into Uncertainty As First GOP Senator Comes Out Against It Four More Women Describe Advances By Roy Moore As Campaign Pushes Back With Mugabe’s Era Ending In Zimbabwe, A Warning Echoes In Africa A Growing Call To Limit Lawyers’ Donations To Prosecutors Deception And Ruses Fill The Toolkit Of Investigators Used By Weinstein Leonardo Da Vinci Painting Sells For $450.3 Million, Shattering Auction Highs 

Washington Post: 

Two More Women Accuse Moore Of Pursuing Them Senate Tax Bill Hits New Snags Zimbabwe Awaits Fate Of Detained Mugabe Crack Of Gunfire Led To School’s Lockdown Museum Of The Bible Is Strictly By The Book 

Financial Times: 

Zimbabwe Army Seizes Power And Holds Mugabe Africa’s Richest Woman Removed As Head Of Angola State Oil Group Russia And Venezuela Agree $3bn Debt Restructuring 

Washington Times: 

Catch-And-Release Of Illegals Restarted In Texas, Border Patrol Agents Say Democrats Introduce Articles Of Impeachment Against Trump Newest Museum In Nation’s Capital Will ‘Tell The Biography Of The Bible’ Zimbabweans Stunned, Uncertain After Military’s ‘Soft Coup’ Of Mugabe Liberals Finally Hold Bill Clinton Accountable For Sexual Misconduct Kurds Seek More Help From Trump Administration To Keep Peace With Iraq 

Story Lineup From Last Night’s Network News: 

ABC: Roy Moore Sexual Misconduct Allegations; Tax Reform Plan-Obamacare Repeal; California Shooting; Tampa-Possible Serial Killer; Congress-Sexual Harassment Policy; Weather Forecast; Zimbabwe-Military Coup; US College Basketball Players Return; Loose Mental Patient Captured; Pilot-Carrying Gun On Board; St. Louis-Car Crash; New Planet Discovery; Adopted Sibling Discovery. 

CBS: Roy Moore Sexual Misconduct Allegations; Tax Reform Plan-Obamacare Repeal; California Shooting; Texas Church Shooting-Gunman; Loose Mental Patient Captured; Zimbabwe-Military Coup; US College Basketball Players Return; Trump-Asia Tour Wrap Up; Ford-SUV Carbon Monoxide Leak; Wilbert Jones Freed; NBA News; Pope-Lamborghini Donation; Da Vinci Painting Auction. 

NBC: Roy Moore Sexual Misconduct Allegations; California Shooting; Trump-Asia Tour Wrap Up; Tax Reform Plan-Obamacare Repeal; US College Basketball Players Return; Tampa-Possible Serial Killer; Schools-Cyber Security; St. Louis-Fire; Amazon-Grocery Business; Treasury Secretary-Dollar Bills Signature; Meteor Sighting; Pope-Lamborghini Donation; Charity Turned Hobby. 

Network TV At A Glance: 

Roy Moore Sexual Misconduct Allegations – 9 minutes, 30 seconds California Shooting – 7 minutes Tax Reform Plan-Obamacare Repeal – 6 minutes, 5 seconds US College Basketball Players Return – 3 minutes, 40 seconds 

Story Lineup From This Morning’s Radio News Broadcasts: 

ABC: Roy Moore Sexual Misconduct Allegations; Trump-Asia Tour Wrap Up; Baltimore Police Officer Shot; California Shooting. 

CBS: Roy Moore Sexual Misconduct Allegations; Tax Reform Plan-Obamacare Repeal; Trump-Asia Tour Wrap Up; Loose Mental Patient Captured; US College Basketball Players Return; Da Vinci Painting Auction. 

FOX: Roy Moore Sexual Misconduct Allegations; Trump-Asia Tour Wrap Up; Baltimore Police Officer Shot; Charles Manson Ill. 

NPR: Roy Moore Sexual Misconduct Allegations; Obamacare Enrollment Rate; Trump Administration-Immigration Policies; Zimbabwe-Military Coup. 

# Washington Schedule 

## Today’s Events In Washington. 

White House: 

PRESIDENT TRUMP — Gives remarks to the House Republican Conference. VICE PRESIDENT PENCE — No public schedule announced. 

US Senate: 10:00 AM Senate Foreign Relations Committee top secret briefing on new counterterrorism guidance – Closed / Top Secret / Sensitive Compartmented Information briefing on ‘New Counterterrorism Guidance’, given by State Department Coordinator for Counterterrorism Nathan Sales, and Assistant Legal Advisor Steven Fabry; and Joint Staff Deputy Director for Special Operations and Counterterrorism Maj. Gen. Albert Elton II Location: U.S. Capitol Visitor Center, SVC-217, Washington, DC http://foreign.senate.gov/ 10:00 AM Senate Judiciary Committee Executive Business Meeting – Executive Business Meeting, with agenda including the nominations of Leonard Steven Grasz to be U.S. Circuit Judge for the Eighth Circuit; Terry Doughty to be U.S. District Judge for the Western District of Louisiana; Terry Fitzgerald Moorer to be U.S. District Judge for the Southern District of Alabama; Mark Saalfield Norris Sr. to be U.S. District Judge for the Western District of Tennessee; Scott Brady to be U.S. Attorney for the Western District of Pennsylvania; and Andrew Lelling to be U.S. Attorney for the District of Massachusetts; as well as ‘S. 2070, Kevin and Avonte’s Law’ Location: Rm 226, Dirksen Senate Office Bldg, Washington, DC http://judiciary.senate.gov/ 10:00 AM Senate Transportation subcommittee hearing on USCG readiness – Oceans, Atmosphere, Fisheries, and Coast Guard Subcommittee hearing on ‘Coast Guard Readiness: How Far Can We Stretch Our Nation’s Only Multi-Mission, Military Force?’, with testimony from U.S. Coast Guard Commandant Adm. Paul Zukunft; Etta Kuzakin of King Cove, AK; Michigan Technological University’s Dr Guy Meadows; and Mississippi Emergency Management Agency’s Lee Smithson Location: Russell Senate Office Building, Rm 253, Washington, DC http://commerce.senate.gov https://twitter.com/ SenateCommerce 10:00 AM Senate Armed Services Committee nominations hearing – Nominations hearing considers John Rood to be Under Secretary of Defense for Policy; and Randall Schriver to be Assistant Secretary of Defense for Asian and Pacific Affairs Location: Dirksen Senate Office Building, Rm G50, Washington, DC http://armed-services.senate. gov/ 11:30 AM MomsRising and other groups visit Capitol Hill to talk about how they are ‘thankful for the immigrants in their lives’ – MomsRising, SEIU, Herd on the Hill, Mormon Women for Ethical Governance, UndocuBlack, and allies visit Capitol Hill to ‘tell Members of Congress why they’re thankful for the immigrants in their lives’ and ‘remind them that the diversity of our nation is what makes us strong, innovative and prosperous – and we’re thankful to live in the United States of America together’. MomsRising’s Donna Norton, SEIU’s Jaime Contreras, Mormon Women for Ethical Governance’s Sharlee Glenn, and DACA recipient and UndocuBlack member Cindy Kolade hold press conference with Democratic Sen. Chris Van Hollen, before advocates deliver Thanksgiving-themed cookies shaped like turkeys to dozens of senators and representatives along with petitions signed by 25,000 people in support of the DREAM Act and protecting Temporary Protected Status recipients Location: U.S. Capitol, S-115, Washington, DC momsrising.org https://twitter.com/MomsRising 2:00 PM Closed Briefing: Intelligence Matters Location: Rm 219, Hart Senate Office Bldg, Washington, DC http://intelligence.senate.gov 

US House: 9:00 AM House expected to vote on Tax Cuts and Jobs Act – House of Representatives meets for legislative business, with agenda expected to include completion of consideration of ‘H.R. 1, The Tax Cuts and Jobs Act’ * The Tax Cuts and Jobs Act would reduce the number of different tax bands, increase the standard deduction, eliminate the Alternative Minimum Tax, largely eliminate the State and Local Tax Deduction, convert corporate tax into a flat rate, and increase the estate tax exemption Location: Washington, DC http://www.house.gov/ 10:00 AM House Commerce subcommittee hearing on 5G – Communications and Technology Subcommittee hearing on ‘The Race to 5G and its Potential to Revolutionize American Competitiveness’, with testimony from Wireless Infrastructure Association President and CEO Jonathan Adelstein; The Brattle Group Principal Dr Coleman Bazelon; Indiana Biosciences Research Institute CEO David Broecker; 5G Americas President Chris Pearson; and City of San Jose Chief Innovation Officer Shireen Santosham Location: Rayburn House Office Building, Rm 2123, Washington, DC http://energycommerce.house.gov/ https://twitter.com/HouseCommerce 1:30 PM Dem Rep. Earl Blumenauer hosts forum on ‘A Call for Reform: Fix the Farm Bill’ – Democratic Rep. Earl Blumenauer hosts forum on ‘A Call for Reform: Fix the Farm Bill’, focusing on ‘the need to create a more visionary, equitable, and cost-effective Farm Bill’. ‘The Omnivore’s Dilemma’ and ‘In Defense of Food’ author Michael Pollan keynotes, followed by a panel discussion featuring ASPCA Farm Animal Campaign Content Director Suzanne McMillan, Environmental Working Group Vice President of Government Affairs Scott Faber, Food Policy Action Executive Director Monica Mills, Humane Society of the United States CEO and President Wayne Pacelle, Taxpayers for Common Sense President Ryan Alexander, and U.S. PIRG Food and Farming Program Director Bill Wenzel * Ahead of the forum, Rep. Blumenauer holds a press conference with Pollan, Mills, Pacelle, Alexander, Democratic Reps. Don Beyer, Rosa DeLauro, Chellie Pingree, and Peter Welch, and Union of Concerned Scientists Food & Environment Program Director Ricardo Salvador Location: U.S. Capitol, Washington, DC blumenauer.house.gov https://twitter.com/repblumenauer 

Other: 

# Last Laughs 

## Late Night Political Humor. 

Jimmy Kimmel: “The President hasn’t weighed in on the biggest story of the week, Roy Moore. Donald Trump’s in a real bind. On one hand, he doesn’t want to support an accused pedophile for Senate. His other hand is grabbing a woman by the...you know what I’m saying.” 

James Corden: “Trump said he accomplished a lot of things on his trip, but North Korea seems to have a different opinion, because yesterday, North Korea state media published a scathing review of President Trump’s trip to Asia. They said Trump displayed his ‘true colors as an old lunatic, mean trickster, and human reject.’ Now you listen here, North Korea, we may not like him either, but that is the President of the United States you’re accurately describing.” 

James Corden: “I can’t believe Trump and Kim Jong-Un are still going back and forth like this. Like the two of them have literally become the characters in every rom-com you have ever seen. They’ve written insulting each other so much you just know they’ll actually end up together. You know what I mean? They’re like, ‘You are an old trickster.’ ‘You a crazy rocket man.’ ‘Yeah, well you, you’re the love of my life.’” 

Trevor Noah: [Referring to the military coup in Zimbabwe] “I think the news is being dramatic here, all right. You don’t overthrow a 93-year-old man, okay? You just don’t wake him up. The generals are probably in the room like, ‘We’re now in power, we rule.’ ‘Shhhh!’ You know how it’s funny how back in the day, Americans would have seen this news and been like, ‘Man, I’m glad that doesn’t happen here.’ And now people are like, ‘Man, wish that happened here.’” 

Trevor Noah: “Oh, and speaking of African dictators, President Trump is back from Asia.” 

Trevor Noah: “Let’s move on to Congress, because people say that Congress never gets anything done. But yesterday, they got more nothing done than I have ever seen before. First, Attorney General Jeff Sessions flew in from the North Pole to explain to the House Judiciary Committee why his memory is perfect. Except when it comes to remembering Russians, he couldn’t remember them at all.” 

Trevor Noah: “Out of nowhere, it came out that the Senate Republican tax plan will now include repealing Obamacare’s individual mandate, which would mean 13 million fewer Americans having health insurance. You’ve got to admit, this is super sneaky. Like, they couldn’t repeal Obamacare outright, so now they’re just going to try to Bill Cosby it. You know, they just slip it into something else so America wakes up the next day like, ‘Wait, what the hell happened to our healthcare?’ ‘What healthcare? You don’t have a plan, and now you’re going to die.’” 

Jimmy Fallon: “I read that Congress is debating if President Trump should have the power to order a nuclear strike. I guess right now, it’s an even split between ‘no’ and ‘hell no.’ ... They have a good plan, though. They’re going to replace the red button on his desk with the one that orders office supplies from Staples.” 

Seth Meyers: “Former White House Communications Director Anthony Scaramucci is reportedly in talks with publishers about a book chronicling his tenure in the White House. A book? You were there for ten days. At best, you could release a fortune cookie.” 

Seth Meyers: “North Korean state media today called President Trump a coward for canceling his visit to the Demilitarized Zone during his trip to Asia. Listen, President Trump is a lot of things, but a coward is just one of those things.” 

Seth Meyers: “Republicans are reportedly hoping that President Trump will pressure Alabama senator candidate Roy Moore to drop out of the race. Roy Moore still might not drop out, but at least he’ll know what it’s like to be pressured by an older man.” 

Copyright 2017 by Bulletin Intelligence LLC Reproduction or redistribution without permission prohibited. Content is drawn from thousands of newspapers, national magazines, national and local television programs, radio broadcasts, social-media platforms and additional forms of open-source data. Sources for Bulletin Intelligence audience-size estimates include Scarborough, GfK MRI, comScore, Nielsen, and the Audit Bureau of Circulation. Data from and access to third party social media platforms, including but not limited to Facebook, Twitter, Instagram and others, is subject to the respective platform’s terms of use. Services that include Factiva content are governed by Factiva’s terms of use. Services including embedded Tweets are also subject to Twitter for Website's information and privacy policies. The Department of the Interior News Briefing is published five days a week by Bulletin Intelligence, which creates custom briefings for government and corporate leaders. We can be found on the Web at BulletinIntelligence.com, or called at (703) 483-6100. 

## --

Zack Gambill Advisor to FWS U.S. Department of the Interior 1849 C Street, NW -- MIB Room 3351 Washington, DC 20240 office: 202-208-4416 

NOTE: Every email I send or receive is subject to release under the Freedom of Information Act. Conversation Contents 

## November 28 -- Greenwire is ready 

# "E&E News" <ealerts@eenews.net> 

## From: "E&E News" <ealerts@eenews.net> 

## Sent: Tue Nov 28 2017 11:06:29 GMT-0700 (MST) 

## To: @fws.gov> 

## Subject: November 28 -- Greenwire is ready (b) (6) Conversation Contents 

## U.S. Department of the Interior News Briefing for Monday, November 27, 2017 

# Bulletin Intelligence <Interior@bulletinintelligence.com> 

## From: Bulletin Intelligence <Interior@bulletinintelligence.com> 

## Sent: Mon Nov 27 2017 04:04:35 GMT-0700 (MST) 

## To: <Interior@bulletinintelligence.com> 

## Subject: U.S. Department of the Interior News Briefing for Monday, November 27, 2017  

> Mobile version and searchable archives available here. Please click here to subscribe.
> DATE: MONDAY, NOVEMBER 27, 2017 6:00 AM EST

# Today's Table Of Contents 

DOI In The News 

• Associated Press: Candidate To Lead US Land Agency: No Advocate Of Transfers. • NPR: Montana Monument May Expand Under Trump Administration. • Mille Lacs (MN) Messenger: Secretary Of The Interior Ryan Zinke Visits Mille Lacs County. • The Atlantic: Trump Has Raised The Stakes Of The Public-Land Debate. • CNN: Documents Show Involvement Of Zinke’s Wife On Official Trip. • Washington Post: The Energy 202: Internal Watchdog Says Interior Should Focus On Climate Change. It Isn’t. • Huffington Post: Group Lobbying To End Trophy Hunting Ban Is Alarmingly Close With Ryan Zinke. 

Bureau Of Indian Affairs 

• Program Enhances Navajo Language In Tribal Courts. • Native Americans Rewrote The Playbook For Preserving Public Land. • Desecrated In Macabre Ways, The Ancestral Remains Of Catalina’s Native Americans Finally Come Home. • American Indians Strive To Restore Nearly Lost Tribal Food Traditions. • In Indian Country, Honoring Flag Might Mean Different Anthem. • Five Myths About American Indians. 

Bureau Of Indian Education 

• Putting The ‘Education’ Back In Bureau Of Indian Education. 

Bureau Of Land Management 

• Associated Press: Forest Service Weighs Changes To Protections For Sage Grouse. • Salem (OR) Capital Press: BLM Focuses On Productive Partnerships. • Riverside (CA) Press Enterprise: Will A Senate Bill Save Thousands Of Wild Horses, Burros From Being Euthanized? • Associated Press: Public Meetings Scheduled For Burning Man Permit Renewal. • E&E Publishing: New BLM Regime Shifts Energy Landscape In Colo. 

Bureau Of Ocean Energy Management 

• Jerry Brown Has Meeting In Norwary About California’s Offshore Wind Potential. 

Fish And Wildlife Service 

• Associated Press: NRA, Hunting Group Say Grizzly Bear Hunts Needed For Safety. • E&E Publishing: Right And Left Wings Battle Over Migratory Bird Treaty. • Associated Press: EPA Still Weighing Fine For Geese Deaths At Former Mine. • Associated Press: Trappers Ask Court To Throw Out Lawsuit Over US Fur Exports. • Payson (AZ) Roundup: Fish And Wildlife Retracts Opposition To Arizona Project. • San Francisco Chronicle: A World Apart On The Butte Sink Marsh. 

National Park Service 

• Associated Press: State Attorneys General Bash Plan To Hike National Park Fees. • Associated Press: Utah’s Grand Staircase Monument May Face Sharp Reduction In Size. • Associated Press: Carlsbad Caverns National Park Keeps Concessions Contractor. • Associated Press: Johnny Cash Boyhood Home Considered For Historic Nomination. • Associated Press: Smokies Look For Private Money To Replace Emergency Radios. • Associated Press: Renovations Set To Begin At Boulder Beach Campground. • Associated Press: 8 Tennessee Sites Added To Historic Places Register. • CNN: National Park Service Doesn’t Object To Sale Of Trump Wine At Park. 

Office Of Insular Affairs 

• Virgin Islands Consortium (VIR): National Parks Reopen In U.S. Virgin Islands Following Hurricanes. 

US Geological Survey 

• Washington Post: Oil And Gas Industry Is Causing Texas Earthquakes, A ‘Landmark’ Study Suggests. • Associated Press: Earthquake Recorded Off Oregon Coast. 

Opinion Pieces 

• Ryan Zinke’s Missteps On Ivory. • Editorial: Fee Hikes At National Parks Would Limit Access To Wealthy Americans. • Op-ed: The Facts About Multiple Land Use In Utah. • Additional Reading. 

Top National News 

• CBS: Media Analyses: Trump Blasts Jones Again In Implicit Moore Endorsement. • Washington Examiner: Trump To Push Tax Reform On Hill, In Purple State This Week. • Washington Times: As English Files Suit, DOJ Backs Trump’s Appointment Of Acting CFPB Director. • USA Today: Politico Analysis: Pruitt Seeking To Re-Engineer EPA’s Culture. • New York Times: Puerto Ricans Flee Island For US Mainland. • Washington Post: Balz Discusses Study On “Glaring Alarm” Over Trump’s Reliance On Executive Action. 

Editorial Wrap-Up 

• New York Times. - “Cops, Cellphones And Privacy At The Supreme Court.” - “New York City Has Been A Problem Landlord.” • Washington Post. - “Colleges Need To Take On Greek Life Before More People Die.” - “Two Of Trump’s Judicial Nominees Deserve A Much Closer Look.” - “The Fates Of 700,000 ‘Dreamers’ Hang In The Balance. This One Should Not Be Hard For Congress.” • Wall Street Journal. - “Tax Reform, Growth, And The Deficit.” - “Patents And Property At The Supremes.” - “Richard Cordray’s Political Stunt.” 

Big Picture 

> • Headlines From Today’s Front Pages.

Washington Schedule 

> • Today’s Events In Washington.

Last Laughs 

> • Late Night Political Humor.

# DOI In The News 

## Candidate To Lead US Land Agency: No Advocate Of Transfers. 

The AP (11/26, Gruver) reported Karen Budd-Falen, a candidate to lead the Bureau of Land Management, “says environmentalists mischaracterize her as an advocate of” signing over public lands “to state and local governments and private interests when in fact she’s got no opinion on the issue.” Interior spokeswoman Heather Swift “declined to say whether Budd-Falen was still a candidate or when somebody might be nominated for the director job, which has been vacant since January.” The AP noted Bunn-Falen “and her husband, Frank Falen, have a practice with four other attorneys” that focuses “largely on ranchers and property rights – anything from easements to oil and gas leases and how to comply with government regulations.” According to the AP, her past clients included Cliven Bundy. 

## Montana Monument May Expand Under Trump Administration. 

NPR (11/26, Hegyi) reported that this past summer, Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke recommended Montana’s Badger Two-Medicine “become a new national monument, and President Donald Trump is expected to announce decisions about monuments in December.” The designation “would protect more than 200 square miles of federal land from any future oil and gas development.” NPR discusses Zinke’s ties to Montana, saying that while he has “encouraged mining, drilling and reducing the size of national monuments elsewhere in the country, he’s left existing national monuments in Montana alone and he’s urged mining bans near Yellowstone National Park.” The Huffington Post (11/27, Papenfuss) also reports on this story. 

## Secretary Of The Interior Ryan Zinke Visits Mille Lacs County. 

The Mille Lacs (MN) Messenger (11/22, LaMoore) reported Secretary of the Interior Ryan Zinke “made an impromptu visit to the Mille Lacs County area on Thursday and Friday, Nov. 16 and 17, to discuss the current law enforcement crisis.” Zinke told the Messenger that he had never visited northern Minnesota and he wanted to start visiting tribal reservations in this part of the country. Zinke’s visit “comes on the heels of a Nov. 8 letter from the Department of the Interior to Mille Lacs County Attorney Joe Walsh” that “reaffirms the federal government’s position that the Mille Lacs Band of Ojibwe reservation exists.” Zinke said, “Tribal law enforcement within those boundaries needs to be honored. This is a capable law enforcement agency and should be treated as such.” Trump Has Raised The Stakes Of The Public-Land Debate. 

The Atlantic (11/20, Felton) reported on steps the Trump Administration has taken to roll back federal protection of US land. The Atlantic said that this summer, Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke “reviewed and suggested modifying 10 national monuments; Trump reportedly said that he planned to shrink at least two, Bears Ears and Grand Staircase-Escalante; a House bill was introduced that would limit the president’s power to protect land; and a Senate budget resolution could open a wildlife refuge to drilling.” The article details the federal government’s expanding role in land protection in the past 120 years, including President Theodore Roosevelt’s signing of the Antiquities Act in 1906. The Atlantic said that Democratic presidents starting with Jimmy Carter “exercised their land-protection power extensively,” despite Republican claims of federal overreach. 

## Documents Show Involvement Of Zinke’s Wife On Official Trip. 

CNN (11/21, Killough, Wallace) reported the advocacy group Western Values Project, through a Freedom of Information Act request, obtained a batch of government documents and emails that show Department of Interior staffers accommodating a “a last-minute change in Lolita Zinke’s travel itinerary during a May trip to Alaska, Norway and Greenland.” According to the documents, when a staffer learned that Lolita Zinke would be leaving Alaska to return to Washington, DC on a different date from that previously scheduled, the staffer emailed another staffer: “UGH! We have all kinds of planes, trains and automobiles manifests to now scramble with.” In an exchange of emails, aides “also discussed...that Lolita Zinke would need to pay her own way to attend an event hosted by the governor of Alaska, which included a meal.” Multiple emails indicate that Secretary Zinke “acknowledged that he would personally pay for his wife’s meal.” 

## The Energy 202: Internal Watchdog Says Interior Should Focus On Climate Change. It Isn’t. 

An analysis by the Washington Post (11/22, Grandoni) “PowerPost” blog reported the Interior’s Office of the Inspector General listed climate change among the “most significant management and performance challenges” facing the department in an a report released last week. The Trump Administration, however, “has taken few – if any – steps to address the emerging threat.” Rather, under the leadership of Secretary Ryan Zinke, the department “has reoriented its mission around boosting the extraction of fossil fuels and other resources on the more than 500 million acres under its management as part of the Trump administration’s sweeping ‘energy dominance’ agenda.” The Post analysis also said the Bureau of Indian Affairs “has scrubbed mentions of climate change from the website of its Tribal Climate Resilience Program (now just ‘Tribal Resilience Programs’), which helped tribes study climate change impacts.” 

## Group Lobbying To End Trophy Hunting Ban Is Alarmingly Close With Ryan Zinke. 

The Huffington Post (11/23, D'Angelo) reported on the relationship between Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke and Safari Club International (SCI), which donated thousands of dollars to Zinke’s congressional campaigns. The Huffington Post said the “appropriateness of the relationship has come into question after the Interior Department lifted Obama-era bans on importing elephant and lion trophies from Zimbabwe and Zambia.” Additionally, SCI said on its website that its Director of Litigation, Anna Seidman, “had a prime spot” at a recent signing ceremony for a pair of secretarial orders to overturn a pair of hunter-focused secretarial orders. 

# Bureau Of Indian Affairs 

## Program Enhances Navajo Language In Tribal Courts. 

The AP (11/23, Smith) reported on steps taken by the Navajo National Judicial Branch to “enhance the Navajo language in tribal courts.” The program, a collaboration between the branch and Navajo Technical University, “has students learning court transcription and interpretation in Navajo and English.” According to the AP, the “program was funded by a $150,000 grant from Tribal Justice Support under the U.S. Department of the Interior.” 

## Native Americans Rewrote The Playbook For Preserving Public Land. 

The Los Angeles Times (11/26, Schneider) reports that former President Obama’s Proclamation 9558, which conserves “over 100,000 Native American archaeological and cultural sites within the newly established 1.35-million-acre Bears Ears National Monument,” is now under attack by the Trump Administration. Utah’s Republican congressional delegation “immediately vowed to amend the Antiquities Act to strip its authority for presidents to act on their own to protect large expanses of federal land.” The passage of a bill sponsored by Rep. Rob Bishop (R-UT) “would mark a decided tilt in favor of industrial and political forces that have worked for decades in the West to dismantle safeguards for federal land and the environment.” However, President Trump’s “antipathy to the antiquities law and the new monument has galvanized Native American groups, who see the standoff as another test of their strength a year after the confrontation over the Dakota Access pipeline in North Dakota.” 

## Desecrated In Macabre Ways, The Ancestral Remains Of Catalina’s Native Americans Finally Come Home. 

The Los Angeles Times (11/22, Sahagun) reported on steps taken by the Gabrielino-Tongva Tribe to retrieve Native American remains that “sat in storage for decades” following the closure of a museum in 1950 and give them “a proper burial.” The Times said that a “in a private ceremony in July 2016, the remains of 200 ancestors...were reburied on a bluff in the heart of Catalina, surrounded by green hills essentially unchanged from when the Gabrielino-Tongva roamed the 76-square-mile island.” According to the Times, the reclaimed remains “tell a story that mirrors a broader trend as local tribes use their growing political influence and the legal authority of the Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act to take back remains and artifacts held by museums and universities for proper care and burial.” 

## American Indians Strive To Restore Nearly Lost Tribal Food Traditions. 

The San Francisco Chronicle (11/22, Duggan) reported that Thanksgiving is the annual time of the year when “American Indians are recognized by the wider American society, albeit usually in caricature. To present modern ideas of indigenous food that also recognize precolonial traditions, native chefs from across the continent are flying to New York City over Thanksgiving weekend to participate in a series of pop-up dinners.” Additionally, a young generation of American Indians “are working to reintroduce native food ways to their tribes” by organizing “intertribal events to share ideas and reconnect with their culture.” However, Northern California tribes continue to “struggle for the right to gather foods like acorns, mussels and surf fish that have sustained their tribes for thousands of years” as newer generations “have been cut off from ancestral hunting and gathering grounds, and those grounds have compacted as wild salmon and other vital foods dwindle.” 

## In Indian Country, Honoring Flag Might Mean Different Anthem. 

The AP (11/25, Fonseca) reported that Native Americans have a “unique take” on the debate on “taking a knee” during the national anthem “as the ethnic group with the highest military-service rate, and an enduring regard for warriors.” Many tribes “have their own national anthems known as flag songs that focus on veterans.” Reverence that some tribes display toward veterans “is almost sacred,” as warriors are “blessed through ceremonies before they encounter enemies, and welcomed back with parades, giveaways, eagle feathers, cleansing ceremonies and songs.” 

## Five Myths About American Indians. Kevin Gover, director of the Smithsonian’s National Museum of the American Indian, debunked five myths about American Indians in the Washington Post (11/21, Gover), which he attributes to centuries of “narratives, novels, short stories, textbooks, newspapers, art, photography, movies and television” perpetuating old stereotypes or creating new ones. He says that a singular Native American culture does not exist, explaining that “lumping all Native Americans into an indiscriminate, and threatening, mass continued during the era of western expansion, as settlers pushed into tribal territories in pursuit of new lands on the frontier.” Gover wrote that “vast differences – in culture, ethnicity and language – exist among the 567 federally recognized Indian nations across the United States.” 

# Bureau Of Indian Education 

## Putting The ‘Education’ Back In Bureau Of Indian Education. 

Sue Parton, president of the Federation of Indian Service Employees, writes in the Oklahoman (11/26, Parton) that for too long, the Bureau of Indian Education, the Department of the Interior, Congress, “and other agencies have neglected the very real problems that have done a disservice to Native students in their schools, including off-reservation Indian boarding schools.” Parton says that BIE schools “continue to wrestle with low student achievement; punitive, ineffective ways to address discipline and safety issues; a lack of social, emotional and health care services; staff turnover and poor morale; retaliation against whistleblowers; opaque rather than transparent decision making; and a lack of true accountability.” To overcome these obstacles, Parton proposes community schools, which “educate the whole child, working with community partners that provide programs and services to take on not just educational improvements but the complex problems that hinder good outcomes.” 

# Bureau Of Land Management 

## Forest Service Weighs Changes To Protections For Sage Grouse. 

The AP (11/22, Ridler) reported the US Forest Service said Tuesday that it is working with the US Bureau of Land Management regarding “protection plans for sage grouse in six Western states after a U.S. court agreed with mining companies and others that the agency illegally created some safeguards in Nevada.” Forest Service spokesman John Shivik “said the coordinated review makes sense two years after federal officials decided the chicken-sized bird shouldn’t receive endangered-species protections.” The agency is accepting public comments in Idaho, Montana, Nevada, Utah, Colorado, and Wyoming through Jan. 5. 

## BLM Focuses On Productive Partnerships. 

The Salem (OR) Capital Press (11/22, Dumas) reported that Kathy Benedetto, senior adviser to BLM, “told ranchers at the Idaho Cattle Association annual convention” last week that Interior Secretary has developed a plan for the department to be more a more productive partner with public-lands users. She said Zinke has been defining his priorities over the past nine months,”including restoring a regulatory balance, expanding access to public lands, restoring trust and being a good neighbor.” There is also a renewed focus at BLM “on shared conservation stewardship, including efforts to try outcome-based grazing, revisit sage grouse conservation plans and reconsider the land-use planning process.” 

## Will A Senate Bill Save Thousands Of Wild Horses, Burros From Being Euthanized? 

The Riverside (CA) Press Enterprise (11/24, Horseman) reported that advocates for wild horses applauded an “explanatory statement on the Senate Appropriations Committee’s $32.6 billion Interior spending bill for fiscal 2018” that calls for “humane and politically viable options” to deal with wild horse overpopulation on federal land. This contrasts with a “similar bill passed by the House Appropriations Committee in July” that “allows horses to be euthanized as a means of population control.” Bureau of Land Management officials have “said that the current wild horse population, estimated at 73,000, is more than the land can sustain and the population doubles every four years and that not enough horses are being adopted to keep pace with population growth.” Nevertheless, Suzanne Roy, executive director of the American Wild Horse Campaign, said in a news release, “The Senate has heard the voice of the Americans loud and clear and rejected the killing of our nation’s iconic wild horses and burros.” 

## Public Meetings Scheduled For Burning Man Permit Renewal. 

The AP (11/23) reported the Bureau of Land Management and the organizers of the annual Burning Man counterculture festival will host “a series of meetings next month to get the public’s input regarding the proposed renewal of the event’s permit.” The meetings are scheduled for Dec. 4 to 6 in Gerlach, Reno, and Lovelock. The formal permit renewal process is expected to starting March. 

## New BLM Regime Shifts Energy Landscape In Colo. 

E&E Publishing (11/22, King) reported that environmental advocates support the North Fork Alternative Plan, a proposal to close off 75 percent of the North Fork Valley’s federal lands to energy leasing. However, the North Fork Valley plan, “which BLM’s Uncompahgre Field Office in western Colorado is considering as part of its latest resource management plan (RMP), is hotly contested by fossil fuel developers.” 

# Bureau Of Ocean Energy Management 

## Jerry Brown Has Meeting In Norwary About California’s Offshore Wind Potential. 

The San Diego Union-Tribune (11/24, Nikolewski) reported Gov. Jerry Brown, during his trip to Europe earlier this month, met “with executives from one of the world’s biggest energy companies to discuss the possibilities of developing the first offshore wind project in California.” He met “with Bjørn Otto Sverdrup, senior vice president for corporate sustainability for Statoil in Norway, according to the news website Axios.” There are no offshore wind farms on the West Coast and there is just one that “has been completed in the U.S. – off the shores of Block Island in Rhode Island.” The Union-Tribune mentioned that in May 2016, Brown caleld on the US Department of the Interior “to establish a state task force in coordination with Bureau of Ocean Energy Management to identify promising areas for wind energy off California’s coastline.” Brown said to Axios, “It’s great, all that wind blowing, if we can get it, if the price is right, if the technology is there, if we can get through appropriate analysis. ... I think it may have real potential, but there’s lots of issues there.” 

# Fish And Wildlife Service 

## NRA, Hunting Group Say Grizzly Bear Hunts Needed For Safety. 

The AP (11/25, Brown) reported the National Rifle Association and Safari Club International have “want to ensure their members can hunt grizzly bears in the three-state region around Yellowstone National Park after the animals lost U.S. protections.” In response to conservation groups suing the US Fish and Wildlife Service for revoking the species’ threatened status in July, the NRA and SCI “asked U.S. District Judge Dana Christensen to let them intervene in the case.” The hunting groups argued in “affidavits submitted by their attorneys that hunting would help the region’s economy, allow states to better manage the animals and improve public safety.” 

## Right And Left Wings Battle Over Migratory Bird Treaty. 

E&E Publishing (11/22, Doyle) reported that federal officials may be banned from “pursuing companies whose operations incidentally kill migratory birds, under a two-pronged maneuver now advancing publicly on Capitol Hill and quietly inside the Interior Department.” The Migratory Bird Treaty Act “prohibits the unauthorized taking of more than 800 species of migratory birds.” The US Fish and Wildlife Service “currently contends this includes killing that is ‘incidental’ to industrial or commercial activities, regardless of the corporate actors’ intentions.” Rep. Liz Cheney (R-Wyo.) is “leading one effort to steer the law in industry’s direction” by adding an amendment into the “SECURE America Energy Act” that specifies accidental or incidental take was not covered by the MBTA. A “related effort” could also “be afoot in the office of Interior’s solicitor. There, attorneys appointed in the Trump administration are second-guessing a key legal opinion issued by their predecessors” regarding the MBTA. 

## EPA Still Weighing Fine For Geese Deaths At Former Mine. 

The AP (11/24) reported the Environmental Protection Agency said it has not yet decided whether to fine the companies responsible for polluting the waters of a former open pit copper mine, killing at least 3,000 snow geese last year. However, EPA project manager Nikia Greene “told the Montana Standard that the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, which has jurisdiction over migratory birds, won’t fine Montana Resources and BP-owned Atlantic Richfield Company over the bird deaths at the Berkeley Pit in Butte.” A FWS spokeswoman declined to comment. 

## Trappers Ask Court To Throw Out Lawsuit Over US Fur Exports. 

The AP (11/23, Brown) reported that attorneys for fur trappers are asking a federal judge to throw out a lawsuit against the US Fish and Wildlife Service to block the export of bobcat pelts from the United States. The AP said FWS “regulates trade in animal and plant parts according to the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species, or CITES, which the U.S. ratified in 1975.” The plaintiffs “allege the government’s export program doesn’t protect against the accidental trapping of imperiled species such as Canada lynx.” However, the fur trappers’ attorneys argued that the lawsuit would “do away with the CITES export program.” 

## Fish And Wildlife Retracts Opposition To Arizona Project. 

The Payson (AZ) Roundup (11/25, Shogren) reported the US Fish and Wildlife Service “last month lifted its longstanding objections to the construction of a city-sized development that threatens the last free-flowing major river in the arid Southwest.” The agency had twice in recent years “warned that a key federal permit to build 28,000 homes, golf courses and other amenities near the San Pedro River in southern Arizona would have ‘appreciable’ effects on” some 400 species of migratory birds that are sustained by the river. Yet last month, FWS, “under pressure from the developer and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers,” reversed itself and “agreed that the federal permit to allow a developer to fill in 51 acres of desert washes for roads and building pads would not adversely impact endangered or threatened species.” The Roundup said the “reversal comes as President Donald Trump has repeatedly ordered agencies to roll back environmental protections to facilitate business interests.” 

## A World Apart On The Butte Sink Marsh. 

The San Francisco Chronicle (11/26, Stienstra) reports on duck hunting “in the Butte Sink marsh, nestled at the foot of the Sutter Buttes about 60 miles north of Sacramento.” About a million ducks are located in the area, as just two weeks ago, 700,000 were counted at adjacent Gray Lodge Wildlife Area. The article mentions that “if 10 percent of bird watchers would buy the $25 Federal Duck Stamp, according to one report from the Department of the Interior, it would raise $125 million per year for wetlands purchases and protection.” 

# National Park Service State Attorneys General Bash Plan To Hike National Park Fees. 

The AP (11/22, Mulvihill) reported a group of attorneys general from 10 states and the District of Columbia sent a letter on Wednesday urging “the National Park Service to scrap its proposal to more than double the entrance fee at 17 popular national parks.” They said in a letter to NPS’ acting director, “We cannot let the most popular and awe-inspiring national parks become places for the wealthy.” According to the AP, the signers are all Democrats except for Arizona’s Mark Brnovich, a Republican. The NPS “estimates that higher fees will generate an additional $70 million a year,” but the AGs “say the increase actually could reduce the number of visitors and revenue.” The Sacramento (CA) Bee (11/22, Hart) reported that in the letter, California Attorney General Xavier Becerra “offered a glimpse at his legal theory, saying the National Park Service proposal does not adequately take into account the impact of the fee increase on park visitors. He argued the agency has not done the necessary outreach to those who could be affected, and slammed it for not undertaking an economic analysis, saying the fee increases are ‘unlikely’ to achieve the stated purpose of addressing deferred maintenance backlog.” San Francisco (CA) Chronicle (11/23, Alexander) reported that since NPS introduced the rate plan last month, over “65,000 people have logged comments about the hikes, most with concerns about people being priced out of such iconic spots as the Grand Canyon and Yellowstone.” According to the Chronicle, “If the concerns laid out in the letter are not addressed, Becerra’s office said litigation would follow.” Also reporting on this story are the Los Angeles (CA) Times (11/22, Ulloa), Porterville (CA) Recorder (11/24), Orange County (CA) Register (11/22, Fisher), and KTAR-FM Glendale (AZ) Glendale, AZ (11/22). 

## Utah’s Grand Staircase Monument May Face Sharp Reduction In Size. 

The AP (11/25) reported that Kane County officials “suggested to Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke that the 1.9 million acre Grand Staircase-Escalante National Monument in southern Utah could be shrunk to about one-tenth the size, according to maps obtained by a Salt Lake City newspaper.” The maps suggest the monument could be reduced to about 200,000 acres covering two separate areas. The Salt Lake Tribune “obtained a version from state public lands officials through a second request for public records.” According to the AP, the “announcement of reductions to Grand Staircase-Escalante National Monument and the new Bears Ears National Monument is expected to be made by President Donald Trump when he visits the state early next month.” 

## Carlsbad Caverns National Park Keeps Concessions Contractor. 

The AP (11/25) reported Carlsbad Caverns National Park has signed a new 10-year contract with Carlsbad Caverns Trading Co., LLC, “the company that has provided concessions at the southern New Mexico tourist destination for the last decade.” The National Park Service’s “commercial services program administers more than 500 concession contracts across the country with gross receipts totaling about $1 billion annually.” 

## Johnny Cash Boyhood Home Considered For Historic Nomination. 

The AP (11/23) reported the Arkansas Historic Preservation Program’s review board is considering the boyhood home of country music icon Johnny Cash and 13 other state properties for inclusion on the National Register of Historic Places. The Cash home “was built in 1934 in Dyess in northeastern Arkansas, about 30 miles (48 kilometers) northwest of Memphis, Tennessee.” 

## Smokies Look For Private Money To Replace Emergency Radios. 

The AP (11/26) reports Great Smoky Mountains National Park law enforcement officials are “turning to private fundraisers to try to find enough money to replace their outdated hand-held radios.” Officials said the park “needs $1.3 million to replace the radios and $1.2 million to fix repeaters and transmitters to make sure signals reach throughout the rugged national park and surrounding jurisdictions.” According to the AP, a nonprofit group “is trying to raise $1.5 million for the radios with the federal government paying the rest.” 

## Renovations Set To Begin At Boulder Beach Campground. 

The AP (11/24) reported the National Park Service said a five-month, $3.4 million renovation project at Boulder Beach Campground will begin Monday. Lake Mead National Recreation Area superintendent Lizette Richardson “says the campground has been recognized as one of the top 50 in the West.” 

## 8 Tennessee Sites Added To Historic Places Register. 

The AP (11/22) reported the Tennessee Historical Commission announced Tuesday the additions of eight state properties to the National Register of Historic Places. The AP said the “newly listed sites are the Leach Fire Lookout Tower in Cedar Grove; the Tennessee War Memorial in Nashville; Mt. Zion Negro School near Bradford; Blue Springs Lutheran Church and Cemetery in Mosheim; Farmers and Merchants Bank in Ethridge; Hardison Mill Farm and the Pottsville General Store, near Columbia; and the Black Creek Fire Lookout Tower in Robbins.” 

## National Park Service Doesn’t Object To Sale Of Trump Wine At Park. 

CNN (11/22, Wallace) reported the National Park Service does not object to selling bottles from Trump Winery at a gift shop in Shenandoah National Park. National Park Service spokesman Jeremy Barnum explained the gift store is managed by a private company. Barnum said, “The concessioner has been selling wine from the distributor of this particular winery in Virginia for years.” While NPS decides what types of products the shops may sell, the agency “does not specify what brands of these products should be sold.” 

# Office Of Insular Affairs 

## National Parks Reopen In U.S. Virgin Islands Following Hurricanes. 

The Virgin Islands Consortium (VIR) (11/22) reported the Department of the Interior announced Tuesday that the “Christiansted National Historic Site and Buck Island Reef National Monument on the island of St. Croix, and Trunk Bay Beach at Virgin Islands National Park on the island of St. John have reopened following lengthy closures because of damage wrought on the parks by Hurricanes Irma and Maria.” Interior Secretary Zinke said, “I couldn’t be more proud of the hard work of National Park Service staff, volunteers, and their partners in the Virgin Islands. Their commitment to the park and to the community is inspiring. I’ve heard many stories of staff tending to the needs of the park and their neighbors before even taking care of themselves.” Governor Kenneth Mapp said, “The reopening of Buck Island Reef National Monument, Trunk Bay Beach, and Christiansted National Historic Site represents another significant milestone in the recovery of the U.S. Virgin Islands.” 

# US Geological Survey 

## Oil And Gas Industry Is Causing Texas Earthquakes, A ‘Landmark’ Study Suggests. 

The Washington Post (11/24, Guarino) reported that a new study was published Friday in the Science Advances journal over the increased rate of earthquakes occurring in Texas and whether humans are in any way responsible. The study was performed by a team from the US Geological Survey and the study’s author, Southern Methodist University Associate Professor of Geophysics Maria Beatrice Magnani. Magnani commented on the pattern of earthquakes that led to the study and said “it’s been a head-scratching period for scientists.” The reasearchers were attempting to understand “what has been causing the rash of Texas quakes.” USGS geophysicist and the study’s co-author Michael Blanpied said, “the main approach has been to correlate the location to where there has been human activity.” 

## Earthquake Recorded Off Oregon Coast. 

The AP (11/24) reported the US Geological Survey recorded a “a 4.7-magnitude earthquake in the Pacific Ocean off the coast of Oregon” Friday morning. The earthquake “occurred at a depth of 6.2 miles (10 kilometers).” 

# Opinion Pieces 

## Ryan Zinke’s Missteps On Ivory. 

In an editorial, the Boston Globe (11/24) wrote that Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke has, in a span of just eight months, “made so many missteps that Donald Trump himself tweeted out a policy reversal late last week.” The Globe criticized several aspects of Zinke’s leadership, including his “part of an embarrassing travel scandal” and his links to the now-scuttled Whitefish Energy Holdings deal to rebuild Puerto Rico’s power grid after Hurricane Maria. However, even President Trump “distanced himself from Zinke, last week, after the US Fish and Wildlife Service moved to overturn an Obama administration ban on importing elephant trophies.” 

## Editorial: Fee Hikes At National Parks Would Limit Access To Wealthy Americans. 

In an editorial, the San Francisco Chronicle (11/24) criticized the plan to “charge a whopping $70 to enter some of America’s most beloved national parks.” The proposed fee increases “have come under fire by nature enthusiasts, outdoors groups and, now, California Attorney General Xavier Becerra and 10 of his counterparts from other states.” The attorneys general challenged the “backdoor math” of how the “punitive math” will help the parks’ financial situation. According to the Chronicle, “the crux of their argument is a simple one. The national parks belong to all Americans, not only the wealthy ones.” Instead of raising fees, the Chronicle calls on Congress to appropriate much-needed funds to the park service. 

## Op-ed: The Facts About Multiple Land Use In Utah. 

Don Peay, founder of Sportsmen for Fish and Wildlife, wrote in the Deseret (UT) News (11/26, Paey) that “we are grateful that President Trump and Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke are coming to Utah, to hopefully restore multiple use status to our great public lands — lands and herds we want to pass on in abundance for future generations.” Peay claims hunting and fishing a $2.3 billion Utah industry, and with “careful management and hundreds of millions of investment, we have proven we can have it all, energy, mining, ranching, camping, hiking, hunting, fishing and tourism.” According to Peay, the “Grand Staircase and Bears Ears monuments have been damaging to habitat restoration projects, and fortunately these herds were established before monument status.” He also criticizes out-of-state “environmental groups” for not contributing “one dime to restore Utah’s herds or improve our great state and federal lands.” 

## Additional Reading. 

Bears Ears Perfects America’s Best Idea By Including Tribes. San Francisco (CA) Chronicle (11/22, Jarvis) 

There Is No Good Time To Lift The Ban On Elephant Trophy Hunting In Zimbabwe. 

Washington (DC) Post (11/24, Liss) 

Hiking National Parks Good; Hiking Entry Fees Bad. Tacoma (WA) News Tribune (11/25) 

A Curious Decision By The Interior Department. Greene County (PA) Observer-Reporter (11/23) 

# Top National News Media Analyses: Trump Blasts Jones Again In Implicit Moore Endorsement. 

In two tweets on Sunday, President Trump again weighed in on the Alabama Senate race, blasting ex-US Attorney Doug Jones ahead of the Dec. 12 special election. Trump said across the two tweets, “The last thing we need in Alabama and the U.S. Senate is a Schumer/Pelosi puppet who is WEAK on Crime, WEAK on the Border, Bad for our Military and our great Vets, Bad for our 2nd Amendment, AND WANTS TO RAISES TAXES TO THE SKY. Jones would be a disaster! I endorsed Luther Strange in the Alabama Primary. He shot way up in the polls but it wasn’t enough. Can’t let Schumer/Pelosi win this race. Liberal Jones would be BAD!” While Trump did not mention scandal-plagued ex-state Supreme Court Justice Roy Moore in either tweet, coverage casts the President’s comments – much as it did his remarks last week – as an implicit endorsement of the GOP candidate. On the CBS Weekend News (11/26, story 3, 1:50, Quijano), Errol Barnett reported that “Trump, who last week defended Roy Moore, repeated that stance on Twitter today. ‘Moore’s opponent Doug Jones would be disaster,’ he said, reminding that he initially backed Moore’s opponent.” On NBC Nightly News (11/26, story 3, 0:55, Snow), Kelly O’Donnell reported that “Trump pushed for Roy Moore’s victory without naming Moore. ‘Can’t let Schumer/Pelosi win this race. Liberal Jones would be bad.’ Some Republicans have urged President Trump to persuade Roy Moore to leave the race. But he has ignored that pressure. He cites Roy Moore’s denial of any wrongdoing. So President Trump is indirectly endorsing Roy Moore.” Alabama Live (11/26, Gore) reported that with the tweets, Trump “is doubling down on his criticism of” Jones, pressing “for Republican support while” not mentioning Moore. USA Today (11/26, Estepa) reports that Trump “doubled down on his insistence that a Democrat shouldn’t win Alabama’s Senate seat, once again appearing to back” Moore. The New York Times (11/26, Caron) also says that Trump “doubled down on his criticism of...Jones, and reiterated his support for...Moore.” The Washington Post (11/26, Kane, Nakamura) says that Trump “continued his lonely campaign to boost” Moore, criticizing Jones “as other GOP lawmakers continued to oppose their party’s nominee over sexual misconduct allegations.” The Post says that while Trump didn’t mention Moore in his tweets, the President criticized Jones “in a way that made clear that Trump supported the controversial Republican nominee.” Politico (11/26, Nussbaum) reported, “The tweets come as Trump has become increasingly vocal about the charged Alabama Senate race, which just weeks ago was seen as a lock for Republicans. But in the wake of a slew of accusations against Moore – including that he molested a 14-year-old girl when he was in his 30s – many Republican leaders called on Moore to drop out of the race, though Moore vehemently denied the accusations.” Under the headline “Trump Chooses Legislative Agenda Over GOP Repulsion Of Moore,” the AP (11/26, Colvin) reports that with his tweets, Trump made “clear the success of his legislative agenda outweighs widespread GOP repulsion at the prospect of seating...Moore, who is dogged by allegations of sexual misconduct.” The Hill (11/26, Savransky) reported that Trump “last week appeared to throw his support behind...Moore,” telling reporters, “We don’t need a liberal person in [the Senate seat], a Democrat.” Newsweek (11/26, Silverstein) reported on its website that Trump “has still not said if he believes Moore’s accusers are lying and he has not formally endorsed the former judge’s campaign. He said he would decide this week whether he’s going to campaign for Moore ahead of the Dec. 12 vote.” The Daily Caller (11/26, Crowe) headlined its report “‘Jones Would Be A Disaster’ – Trump Issues Backhanded Endorsement Of Moore.” On NBC Nightly News (11/26, story 4, 1:30, Snow), political analyst Mark Murray said of the Alabama Senate race, “This is really turning into a no-win situation for Republicans. If Roy Moore does end up winning, you will see Democrats trying to label the Republican Party as the party of Donald Trump and Roy Moore, as we head into the 2018 mid-term elections. If Roy Moore ends up losing, then Republicans will find a situation where Democrats are one seat closer to a potential Senate majority in 2018, if there is a wave.” Michael Bender of the Wall Street Journal said on CNN Inside Politics (11/26), “I think what we’ve seen from President Trump and his political calculations, it’s very short-term. He’s not worried about the long-term brand of the Republican Party, like Mitch McConnell would be, or the long-term implications for the legislative agenda over the next 18 months. He’s focused on the near term. He wants immediate wins. We’ve seen that repeatedly. He talked about these major legislative issues that can take years of singular focus. He expects them to be done right away. He wants Roy Moore in the Senate for a vote on a tax reform plan. It’s almost as simple as that.” Correspondent Ellison Barber said on Fox News MediaBuzz (11/26) that Trump gave Moore “a non-endorsement endorsement. Initially, you had the White House saying...that if these allegations are true, he should step down. And then they repeatedly said that President Trump wants the voters of Alabama to decide. He had noticeably not said anything about it until those comments [last week] on the South Lawn. ... Then you had him tweet again today that it is better than a Pelosi or a Schumer puppet. There is only so much they can push back at some point. The White House can say as much as they want that he wants the voters of Alabama to decide. ... It doesn’t really matter when President Trump comes out and then says what he has said, I think you have to take his words more than anything from the press secretary.” Fox News’ “The Five” co-host Juan Williams said on Fox News MediaBuzz (11/26), “I think you have to put this in political context and the political context is this. Remember, President Trump did not back Judge Moore in the Republican primary in the state of Alabama. He picked the incumbent, the appointee Luther Strange. So what you get is a situation where then once Roy Moore won the seat, there was pressure on him. I think he felt somewhat, ‘Maybe I made the wrong call earlier. My base is with Judge Moore.’” 

Report Examines Jones’ Positions On Issues Highlighted By Trump. Meanwhile, Alabama Live (11/26, Gore) offers “a look at Jones’ stances on the issues highlighted by” Trump, such as the President’s claims that “the former federal prosecutor is ‘weak on crime, weak on the border and bad for the military.’” For example, of Trump’s claim that Jones “is ‘weak on crime,’” Alabama Live says that the Democrat, “a former US Attorney for the Northern District of Alabama and assistant U.S. attorney in Birmingham, has touted his law enforcement background, including the prosecution of two Ku Klux Klan members for the decades old bombing at the 16th Street Baptist Church.” 

ABC News: President Was Unhappy With Ivanka Trump’s Criticism Of Moore. On ABC World News Tonight (11/26, story 3, 2:50, Llamas), Lana Zak reported on Trump’s Sunday tweets criticizing Jones, and highlighted the President saying last week of the allegations about Moore, “Well, he denies it. Look, he denies it. You’re talking about, he said 40 years ago this did not happen.” Zak added that Trump’s “comments [stand] in sharp contrast to those of his daughter and adviser, Ivanka Trump, who earlier told the AP, ‘There’s a special place in hell for people who prey on children. I’ve yet to see a valid explanation, and I have no reason to doubt the victims’ account.’ Now, ABC News has learned the President was not happy by Ivanka’s quick reaction.” 

On Sunday Shows, GOP Senators Press For Moore’s Exit From Race. Bloomberg News (11/26, Talev, Niquette) reports that Trump “didn’t join fresh suggestions to abandon Moore, made by” GOP Sens. Rob Portman (OH), Tim Scott (SC), and John Thune (SD) during “separate Sunday talk show appearances.” Portman, appearing on NBC’s “Meet the Press,” said “it would be ‘best’ if Moore stepped aside.” And Thune, appearing on “Fox News Sunday,” said, “If Roy Moore wins and he comes into the Senate in January, there’s going to immediately be an ethics investigation, which is going to be a cloud that he’ll be operating in. It’s going to be a distraction for us and for our agenda.” Scott, appearing on ABC’s This Week (11/26, Raddatz), said, “It is pretty clear to me that the best thing that Roy Moore can do for the country is to move on,” and added that “the reality of it is, the allegations are strong and credible.” The Wall Street Journal (11/26, Nunn) quotes Scott as saying, “In my opinion, and in the opinion of many Republicans and conservatives in the Senate, it is time for us to turn the page, because it is not about partisan politics.” The Huffington Post (11/26, Fang) reported that Scott, “as he repeated his call for Moore” to step aside, said, “I want to be on the side of right when history writes this story.” However, under the headline “Trump Continues To Implicitly Endorse Roy Moore,” the New York Post (11/26, Moore, Schultz) reports that Scott “declined to criticize Trump’s defense of Moore. Asked if the president had compromised his moral authority by defending Moore, Scott replied ‘I don’t think so.’” The Hill (11/26, Beavers) quoted Thune as saying, “I would like to see the president come out and do what we’ve done, saying Moore should step aside.” The Washington Times (11/26, Swoyer) reports that GOP Sen. Lindsey Graham (SC), appearing on CNN’s “State of the Union,” “said Sunday that...Trump is throwing a lifeline to...Moore and warned that a victory by Mr. Moore would be baggage for the” GOP. Said Graham, “The moral of the story is don’t nominate somebody like Roy Moore. From a party perspective, we got to look long term not short term.” The Hill (11/26, Shelbourne) quoted Graham as saying of Trump’s tweets, “Well, that’s a political decision by the president and he’s definitely trying to throw a lifeline to Roy Moore.” The Washington Examiner (11/26, Siegel) reported that GOP Sen. Jeff Flake (AZ), in a Sunday tweet, “warned fellow Republicans not to ‘succumb’ to ‘political tribalism’ by supporting...Moore.” Said Flake, “After what we know, for Republicans to support Roy Moore over Doug Jones is political tribalism at its worst. We shouldn’t succumb to it.” The Hill (11/26, Samuels) reported that Flake, “who has announced he will not seek reelection in 2018, has been an outspoken critic of Trump and of Moore.” In another report, The Hill (11/26, Shelbourne) said, “The remarks from the Republican senators contrast with Trump’s attitude toward Moore,” as the President argues that “the GOP cannot afford to lose the Alabama seat vacated by Attorney General Jeff Sessions.” 

RNC Chair Says Voters To Serve As Moore’s “Judge And Jury.” The Hill (11/26, Bowden) reported that RNC chief Ronna Romney McDaniel, in an interview over the weekend with John Catsimatidis on AM 970 in New York, said “that Alabama voters will have to be the ‘judge and jury’ on whether” Moore wins. Said McDaniel, “The allegations were obviously very concerning, concerning to the degree that we [the RNC] pulled our resources. [But] Roy Moore cannot be replaced on the ballot. He is the candidate. The Alabama [Republican] Party has stood by that. Now the Alabama voters are going to have to be the judge and jury on this.” 

WPost Analysis: Moore Allegations Present Suburban Women With “Awkward Choice.” 

The Washington Post (11/26, Weigel) reports that with the special election rapidly approaching, “a battle is emerging for...white suburban women who typically support GOP candidates but, unlike many of their male counterparts, have become uneasy about Moore. Each side, relying at times on the candidates’ wives to make their case, is presenting female voters with an awkward choice regarding their vote Dec. 12: stand by a man accused of making unwanted sexual advances toward teenage girls when he was in his 30s, or vote for a Democrat with liberal views on abortion and other issues and whose victory could imperil the Senate’s Republican majority.” 

## Trump To Push Tax Reform On Hill, In Purple State This Week. 

The Washington Examiner (11/26, Feldscher) reports President Trump “announced his arrival back in the nation’s capital” with a tweet “urging the Senate to pass tax reform, which he promised would benefit all Americans.” Trump tweeted, “Back in D.C., big week for Tax Cuts and many other things of great importance to our Country. Senate Republicans will hopefully come through for all of us. The Tax Cut Bill is getting better and better. The end result will be great for ALL!” CNN (11/26, Schatz) reported on its website that Trump will travel to Capitol Hill on Tuesday “to meet with Senate Republicans at their luncheon” in a bid to help the Republican tax bill across the finish line. Trump will also “speak with the so-called ‘Big Four’: House Speaker Paul Ryan, House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi, Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell and Senate Minority Leader Chuck Schumer.” In addition, Michael Bender of the Wall Street Journal told CNN Inside Politics that Trump is “using a familiar page from his playbook: persuasion in his own words.” Said Bender, “His team now is drafting a speech to be delivered this week in a purple state where, unsurprisingly, a Democratic senator is seeking re-election in 2018. ... But to find success with this, watch for two things: Can Trump avoid the kind of unforced errors that normally cause him needless distractions? And can he show the kind of discipline and follow through in the days and weeks to come that are necessary? The fate of this party’s last best chance to pass major legislation this year hangs in the balance. “ 

## As English Files Suit, DOJ Backs Trump’s Appointment Of Acting CFPB Director. 

The Washington Times (11/26, Dinan) reports that the Justice Department said in a ruling Saturday that President Trump “acted quickly enough to install his own acting director” of the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, which “appears to give the White House the upper hand in a developing battle with anti-Trump forces.” However, it is not clear “whether the ruling will be enough to head off a brewing constitutional crisis, with two different people now claiming to be the rightful acting director of the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau.” In a move the Times says was “tinted with anti-Trump politics,” former director Richard Cordray “announced a new deputy director Friday then sped up his own resignation, which would normally make the deputy director, Leandra English, the acting director.” However, Trump “countered...by quickly naming his own chief manager, Office of Management and Budget Director Mick Mulvaney, as acting head of the CFPB.” The Wall Street Journal (11/25, Hayashi) quotes an unnamed senior White House official who accused Cordray of “provoking” a fight with the appointment. Meanwhile, a front-page story in the Wall Street Journal (11/26, A1, Hayashi) reports that the night before CFPB was to reopen with two temporary leaders, English has sued the Administration to block Mulvaney from taking control. The Washington Post (11/26, Merle) says English filed suit in the US District Court of DC, calling “herself the ‘rightful acting director’ of the CFPB and asked for a temporary restraining order to prevent Trump from appointing” Mulvaney. The suit says, “The President’s purported or intended appointment of defendant Mulvaney as Acting Director of the CFPB is unlawful.” The Washington Times (11/26, Boyer, Dinan) says English’s suit argues that “the federal vacancy law doesn’t apply if another later statute sets out a different process for a board’s succession.” The New York Times (11/26, Cowley) quotes English as saying in her suit, “The President’s attempt to appoint a still-serving White House staffer to displace the acting head of an independent agency is contrary to the overall statutory design and independence of the bureau.” Reuters (11/26) reports that Senate Minority Whip Durbin told CNN’s “State of the Union” that Trump’s move would violate the Dodd-Frank law. Durbin told CNN “that he did not believe the Trump administration had the authority to appoint Mulvaney under the 2010 Dodd-Frank law, which created the agency.” Durbin said, “I read the provision. ... It says that when the director steps aside, the deputy director shall be in charge of the agency – not may – shall be in charge, and so now there’s an effort by Mick Mulvaney and the attorney general to really push him into this position so he can take away their power.” However, on the same program, Sen. Lindsey Graham “disputed the notion that the White House lacked authority,” saying, “I think the president’s on good ground here to appoint somebody under the vacancy statute.” A Wall Street Journal (11/26) editorial raises the possibility that Cordray sought to create chaos on Monday when CFPB opens. The Journal says that while the Administration will ultimately prevail under the law, if English refuses to vacate what she argues is her office, she will have to be escorted out which Cordray and Democrats will exploit for political gain. The AP (11/26, Condon) says the dispute may end in a court fight. Senate Republican Conference Chairman John Thune told Fox News Sunday that he expects that Mulvaney “will be on the job and he’ll be calling the shots over there” on Monday. But, he added that “ultimately, this may end up in court.” Thune also said that with Mulvaney running the agency, he hopes to see “reforms to that agency, which has essentially very little accountability to the Congress or anybody else.” The CBS Weekend News (11/26, story 4, 0:30, Quijano) reported Sen. Elizabeth Warren said Trump “is creating chaos and supports this dispute being settled in the courts.” 

CFPB Lawyer Backs DOJ’s Ruling. Politico (11/26, Woellert) reports that CFPB general counsel Mary McLeod has “sided with the Justice Department” over the appointment, “adding further confusion to the leadership battle over the controversial watchdog agency.” In a Nov. 25 memo obtained by Politico, “McLeod said Trump had the legal authority to name an acting director to the bureau under the Federal Vacancies Reform Act.” McLeod wrote, “As General Counsel for the Bureau, it is my legal opinion that the President possesses the authority to designate an Acting Director for the Bureau. ... I advise all Bureau personnel to act consistently with the understanding that Director Mulvaney is the Acting Director of the CFPB.” 

## Politico Analysis: Pruitt Seeking To Re-Engineer EPA’s Culture. 

USA Today (11/26, King) reports that EPA Administrator Pruitt is “on a mission to re-engineer the agency’s culture by returning power to states and away from the Washington bureaucrats and coastal elites he said have led it astray.” Pruitt has “adopted a ‘red team/blue team’ model designed to challenge climate change assumptions that global warming is occurring and humans are the primary cause.” This “has raised some of the loudest alarm bells among his many critics who consider it an attack on settled science.” USA Today adds that Pruitt arrived at EPA “under a mutual cloud of hostility,” having sued it “14 times on behalf of Oklahoma challenging a variety of regulations and billing himself as ‘a leading activist against EPA’s activist agenda.’” After nearly a year at the agency, “Pruitt still feels the resistance from employees.” 

## Puerto Ricans Flee Island For US Mainland. 

The New York Times (11/26, Rojas) reports that in the aftermath of Hurricane Maria’s devastation, and in the midst of a sluggish recovery on the island, tens of thousands of Puerto Ricans have left the island to settle on the US mainland, with some planning to stay only for a while but many making plans to stay permanently. Many University of Puerto Rico law students have accepted an offer from Touro Law Center to complete their semester at the school’s campus in New York. The decisions of these individuals to leave have been received with mixed reactions from the remaining residents in Puerto Rico, from support to envy or even feelings of betrayal. 

Chef Jose Andres Has Served More Than Three Million Meals To Hurricane Victims In Puerto Rico. On CBS’ 60 Minutes (11/26), Anderson Cooper reported on the efforts of chef Jose Andres, who, along with “an army of chefs and volunteers,” has “served more than three million meals to the hungry people of Puerto Rico” since Hurricane Maria. 

## Balz Discusses Study On “Glaring Alarm” Over Trump’s Reliance On Executive Action. 

In an analysis for the Washington Post (11/25, Balz), Dan Balz writes that in the “most recent issue of the Forum, a nonpartisan journal of ideas and political analysis,” Sidney M. Milkis and Nicholas Jacobs of the University of Virginia argue that President Trump’s “deployment of what they call ‘executive-centered partisanship’ is both in keeping with the modern presidency and a potentially damaging shift in our politics.” Balz says that “on the arena of executive action, he is pursuing a model established by his recent past predecessors, with worrisome consequences to constitutional governance.” To Milkis and Jacobs, “what began in other presidencies has become ‘a glaring alarm during Trump’s presidency,’” and refer to “the ‘false illusion’ that the executive ‘can truly function as a representative democratic institution.’” 

# Editorial Wrap-Up 

## New York Times. 

“Cops, Cellphones And Privacy At The Supreme Court.” The New York Times (11/26) editorializes that the Supreme Court should revise its so-called third-party doctrine, which “was developed in the 1970s and holds that people have no expectation of privacy when information has been voluntarily shared with a third party, like a cellphone service provider,” when it considers a case involving the issue this week. The Times opines that the doctrine is no longer compatible with the realities of the digital age, when people frequently share data automatically generated by third parties in the course of everyday activities 

“New York City Has Been A Problem Landlord.” The New York Times (11/26) editorializes that “the news that the New York City Housing Authority falsely certified for years that it had inspected apartments for lead paint is a stark sign of how powerless public housing tenants can be and how much the system has eroded.” The Times asserts that “the city needs to do more to show 400,000 residents of public housing that their conditions matter.” One public housing resident quoted in the editorial believes that the city only cares about whether money is paid on time, while mold has been in her apartment for years with no response. 

## Washington Post. 

“Colleges Need To Take On Greek Life Before More People Die.” The Washington Post (11/26) editorializes that, while banning Greek life at many US universities may not be realistic, universities must establish a “new normal” involving “students committing to changes in behavior and university officials not looking away until someone dies.” The Post cites the recent deaths of four young men because of initiation events or parties at fraternities, along with reports of other troubling behavior at both sororities and fraternities nationwide. The Post opines that the heavy promotion of partying and “the ability of these groups to discriminate and reward privilege is — or should be — antithetical to the mission of universities.” 

“Two Of Trump’s Judicial Nominees Deserve A Much Closer Look.” The Washington Post (11/26) editorializes that the Senate must reassert its duty “to ‘advise and consent’ on judicial nominees, rather than ramming through whomever the president selects.” The Post specifically criticizes the nominations of Brett Joseph Talley, who the American Bar Association unanimously found to be unqualified, and Thomas Farr, who was involved in a racially-based voter suppression campaign while working for a senator’s reelection campaign. The Post criticizes Judiciary Committee Chairman Charles Grassley’s decision to “no longer honor all requests by senators to block unpalatable nominees from their home state.” 

“The Fates Of 700,000 ‘Dreamers’ Hang In The Balance. This One Should Not Be Hard For Congress.” The Washington Post (11/26) editorializes that as about 700,000 young, undocumented immigrants in the US face the termination of legal protections that they have relied on since 2012, lawmakers in Washington have turned the problem into a partisan bargaining chip. Democrats threaten to shut down the government unless a spending bill is amended to fix the problem, while Republicans demand concessions on border enforcement in exchange for crafting a solution. The Post opines that “the haggling over dreamers is Washington at its dysfunctional worst.” 

## Wall Street Journal. 

“Tax Reform, Growth, And The Deficit.” A Wall Street Journal (11/26) editorial says Senators have to decide whether the tax reform bill will be an overall benefit to the nation. The Journal argues it will because it is a sign of confidence that better policies can rebuild the country’s economic strength. 

“Patents And Property At The Supremes.” The Wall Street Journal (11/26) editorializes that the policy of inter partes review that was established by Congress via the 2011 America Invents Act had good intentions, but is damaging to constitutional principles and should be changed. The Supreme Court will review the policy on Monday in Oil States Energy v. Greene’s Energy; Oil States claims that inter partes review violates Article III and the Seventh Amendment of the Constitution. 

“Richard Cordray’s Political Stunt.” A Wall Street Journal (11/26) editorial raises the possibility that by resigning unexpectedly and appointing his chief of staff Leandra English as deputy director, former CFPB Director Richard Cordray sought to create chaos on Monday when CFPB opens. The Journal says that while the Administration will ultimately prevail under the law, if English refuses to vacate what she argues is her office, she will have to be escorted out which Cordray and Democrats will exploit for political gain. 

# Big Picture 

## Headlines From Today’s Front Pages. 

Wall Street Journal: 

CFPB Deputy Chief Sues Trump Over Agency Leadership Inside The Wal-Mart Vs. Amazon Battle Over Black Friday The Economy Is Humming, But Businesses Aren’t Borrowing A Self-Made Star Shows One Way To Crack The Gen Z Code 

New York Times: 

Congress Returns To Intense Pressure To End Secrecy Over Sex Harassment In Tax Debate, Gift To Religious Right Could Be Bargaining Chip Long Divided, Iran Unites Against Trump And Saudis In A Nationalist Fervor Myanmar General’s Purge Of Rohingya Lifts His Popular Support Added To The Storm’s Toll, Guilt And Heartache For Puerto Ricans Who Fled Battle For Control Of Consumer Agency Heads To Court 

Washington Post: 

Urgent Agenda Awaits On Hill An Apex Predator Returns Some Women Leave Caliphate But Vow To Fight On For ISIS High Court Case Could Burst Dam On Sports Betting Pressure On Congress To Move On Harassment 

Financial Times: 

Dark Sky Over Bali Volcano Cancels Flights Saudi Crown Prince Pledges To Rid World Of Islamist Terror Agustín Carstens Urges US To Maintain Leadership In World Economy Corporate Japan Hit By Severe Labour Shortages 

Washington Times: 

Trump Vs. Cordray Fight Over CFPB Chief Goes To Court In Hiroshima, Japan’s Military Debate Over Pacifist Constitution Hits Home Democrats Use Testimony Of Former Bodyguard In Quest To Prove Trump Activities With Prostitutes Pope Francis To Visit Myanmar, Carefully Confront Rohingya Muslim Crisis Energy Advocates, Environmentalists Look For Murkowski’s Vote On ANWR Oil Drilling 

Story Lineup From Last Night’s Network News: 

ABC: Al Franken-Sexual Misconduct; John Conyers-Sexual Misconduct; Trump-Roy Moore Campaign; FBI-Russian Hacking Notification; High school Car Murder; Florida-Road Rage; Egypt-Mosque Attack; US Navy-Plane Crash; Holiday Travel; Weather Forecast; Indonesia-Volcano Eruption; Holiday Shopping; Newark Airport-Scary Landing; Nightclub Floor Collapse; Prince Harry Engagement; Homeless Veteran; Cancer Survivor Pianist. 

CBS: Al Franken-Sexual Misconduct; Massage Company-Sexual Allegations; Trump-Roy Moore Campaign; Consumer Financial Protection Bureau Appointment; Egypt-Mosque Attack; Holiday Travel; Holiday Shopping; CBS Evening News New Anchor; Black Friday Gun Sales; Longest Living US President; Indonesia-Volcano Eruption; Syria Civil War-Volunteer Doctor; NYC-Self Driving Cars; School Lunch Charity. NBC: Al Franken-Sexual Misconduct; John Conyers-Sexual Misconduct; Roy Moore Campaign; Roy Moore Campaign-Expert Comment; Holiday Shopping; Florida-Road Rage; Saudi Arabia-Crown Prince; Tobacco New Advertisements; Time Magazine Deal; Recycling Ideas; Indonesia-Volcano Eruption; Meteor Sighting; WW2 Veteran Marathon; Bike Business Charity. 

Network TV At A Glance: 

Trump-Roy Moore Campaign – 7 minutes, 5 seconds Al Franken-Sexual Misconduct – 5 minutes, 55 seconds Indonesia-Volcano Eruption – 1 minute 

Story Lineup From This Morning’s Radio News Broadcasts: 

ABC: Consumer Financial Protection Bureau Appointment; Congress Sexual Allegations; Holiday Travel; Tobacco New Advertisements; 

CBS: Congress Sexual Allegations; Trump-Roy Moore Campaign; Holiday Shopping; Indonesia-Volcano Eruption; Miss Universe Pageant. 

FOX: Consumer Financial Protection Bureau Appointment; Congress Sexual Allegations; Indonesia-Volcano Eruption. 

NPR: Consumer Financial Protection Bureau Appointment; Congress Sexual Allegations; Russian Meddling Investigation-Kushner; Trump-Roy Moore Campaign. 

# Washington Schedule 

## Today’s Events In Washington. 

White House: 

PRESIDENT TRUMP — Has lunch with Vice President Mike Pence and Members of the Senate Finance Committee; hosts an event honoring the Native American code talkers; meets with Secretary of Defense James Mattis. VICE PRESIDENT PENCE — No public schedule announced. 

US Senate: 11:00 AM GOP Sen. James Lankford release federal govt waste report – Republican Sen. James Lankford releases his annual report on federal govt waste and solutions, this year entitled ‘Federal Fumbles: 100 ways the government dropped the ball’, identifying new examples of waste, inefficiency, and duplication in govt, along with solutions to resolve each fumble Location: U.S. Capitol, S-325, Washington, DC http://www.lankford.senate.gov/ https://twitter.com/SenatorLankford 4:00 PM Senate resumes consideration of U.S. district judge nominee – Senate convenes and resumes consideration of the nomination of Dabney Langhorne Freidrich to be U.S. District Judge for the District of Columbia Location: Washington, DC http://www.senate.gov/ 

US House: No votes in the House of Representatives today 

Other: No relevant event scheduled. 

# Last Laughs 

## Late Night Political Humor. 

No late-night talk show aired on Sunday night.  

> Copyright 2017 by Bulletin Intelligence LLC Reproduction or redistribution without permission prohibited. Content is drawn from thousands of newspapers, national magazines, national and local television programs, radio broadcasts, social-media platforms and additional forms of open-source data. Sources for Bulletin Intelligence audience-size estimates include Scarborough, GfK MRI, comScore, Nielsen, and the Audit Bureau of Circulation. Data from and access to third party social media platforms, including but not limited to Facebook, Twitter, Instagram and others, is subject to the respective platform’s terms of use. Services that include Factiva content are governed by Factiva’s terms of use. Services including embedded Tweets are also subject to Twitter for Website's information and privacy policies. The Department of the Interior News Briefing is published five days

a week by Bulletin Intelligence, which creates custom briefings for government and corporate leaders. We can be found on the Web at BulletinIntelligence.com, or called at (703) 483-6100. Conversation Contents 

## Importation of Elephant Trophies from Zimbabwe and Zambia into the US. 

# Michael Ambrose <mvambrose@ambroseconsulting.net> 

## From: Michael Ambrose <mvambrose@ambroseconsulting.net> 

## Sent: Fri Nov 24 2017 05:34:04 GMT-0700 (MST) 

## To: @fws.gov" < @fws.gov> 

## Subject: Importation of Elephant Trophies from Zimbabwe and Zambia into the US. 

> Dear Secretary Sheehan, I would like to present you with the real facts about Elephant populations and the effect allowing Trophy Hunting and the importation of their trophies into the US has on Elephant herd populations of the world. I am an ex Navy Seal and an Avid Big Game hunter and know these to be true from first hand experience. Also the voice of the populations who live in these areas should be heard and considered with equal weight as outside experts. I think you will find overwhelming support for Trophy Hunting in these areas.

## ELEPHANT TROPHY IMPORTS HAVE NEVER BEEN “BANNED,” AND THE POSITIVE ENHANCEMENT FINDINGS ARE BASED ON THE BEST AVAILABLE INFORMATION RECEIVED IN 2014-2016 

## • There has been no “ban” on elephant trophy imports. In April 2014, the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS) “suspended” the import of elephant trophies from Zimbabwe due to a lack of information. Zimbabwe’s Parks and Wildlife Management Authority (ZPWMA) responded to two questionnaires from the FWS in April 2014 and December 2014. However, in March 2015, the FWS extended the suspension, finding information was still lacking. The negative enhancement finding dated March 2015 repeatedly affirmed, “The suspension … could be lifted if additional information on the status and management of elephants in Zimbabwe becomes available, including utilization of revenue generated through sport-hunting by U.S. hunters, which satisfies the conditions of the 4(d) special rule under the ESA.” In July 2015, May 2016, and November 2016, ZPWMA responded to additional FWS questions. The November 2017 positive enhancement finding is based on these later responses and thousands of pages of supporting documents, including Zimbabwe’s National Elephant Management Action Plan, 2014 countrywide elephant population surveys, 2014-2016 actual and projected budget data, 2014 and 2015 offtakes and 2016 quota data, 2014-2016 CAMPFIRE data, and much more. • Issuing import permits for elephant trophies from Zimbabwe was not a political decision by this Administration. In September 2016, before the election occurred, the FWS had already indicated to ZPWMA that the suspension would be lifted. ZPWMA was told by the Chief of Permits that the FWS needed “only one more piece of information,” a prioritization of the new Elephant Management Plan, before the negative enhancement finding could be reversed. That prioritization was provided on November 8, 2016, before the election results were in. At the end of 2016, the FWS should have made the positive enhancement finding, but was admittedly sidetracked by an influx of thousands of new permit applications due to the listing of rosewood (used extensively in musical instruments and furniture) on the CITES Appendixes effective January 2017. • Similarly, there has been no “ban” on the import of elephant trophies from Zambia. In October 2011, the FWS made a positive enhancement finding to authorize the import of regulated elephant hunting trophies from Zambia. However, 2013 and 2014, Zambia’s wildlife authority suspended hunting to obtain more current wildlife population information. In 2015, Zambia’s government lifted the hunting suspension, and set a conservative quota of 80 elephant. In August 2016, the Chief of Permits sent an email indicating that the FWS was trying to issue import permits for elephant trophies from Zambia before the CITES Conference of the Parties in September 2016, based on an April 2015 Non-Detriment and Enhancement Finding the FWS received from Zambia’s wildlife authority. However, the FWS ran out of time. At the Conference of the Parties, the Chief of Permits indicated that elephant permits from Zambia would likely issue before the end of the year. Again, because of the new (b) (6) (b) (6) rosewood permits, that enhancement finding was put on a back burner. 

## ZIMBABWE’S ELEPHANT POPULATION IS THE SECOND-LARGEST IN AFRICA 

## • In 1900, it was estimated that Zimbabwe had a national population of 4,000 elephant. Since then, the population has grown to over 82,000 (a twenty-fold increase). The current population is double the target national population established in the 1980s, almost 40% larger than in 1992, when the FWS determined to maintain the Endangered Species Act (ESA) “threatened” listing, and almost 20% larger than in 1997, when the last positive enhancement finding was made (before November 2017). Elephant sub-populations in Zimbabwe are generally considered stable or increasing. • North-West Matabeleland: This population is estimated at 54,000, and is most densely located in Hwange National Park (45,000 elephant). In 1928, the estimated elephant population in Hwange was 2,000. • Sebungwe: This population is estimated at 3,500 and has declined since 2001 due to human population expansion into a previously unsettled areas. The human population exploded from 45,000 in 1950 to over 700,000 in 2013, which explains the decline in the elephant population. Due to the expansion of human settlement and unlike other major elephant ranges in Zimbabwe, the habitat in this area is fragmented. • Mid-Zambezi Valley: This area has an estimated elephant population of about 12,000. That population declined since the 2001 countrywide survey, and it is believed the decline is due to cross-border poaching and perhaps, the cross-border movement of elephants during the survey. Anti-poaching is a major component of the Zambezi Valley/Mana Pools Regional Elephant Management Action Plan, and recently the area has been chosen as a CITES MIKES site with an ongoing project. • South-East Lowveld: Most of this population inhabits Gonarezhou National Park, whose population has been growing consistently at 5% per annum over 20 years. This region’s sub-population is estimated at 13,000 elephant between the Park, surrounding communal areas, and nearby private conservancies. 

## ZAMBIA’S ELEPHANT POPULATION IS STABLE 

## • Zambia’s elephant population inhabits seven sub-regions covering National Parks and Game Management Areas. According to the 2016 African Elephant Status Report, Zambia’s elephant population is estimated at over 21,000. This is generally considered stable over the past 25 years, and is stable compared to Zambia’s population in 1992, when the FWS determined to maintain elephant as “threatened” listed. However, several population surveys indicating an estimate closer to 30,000 were not included in the 2016 African Elephant Status Report, and Zambia’s wildlife authority estimates the country’s population at more than 30,000. 

## ELEPHANT HUNTING OFFTAKES IN ZIMBABWE ARE SUSTAINABLE 

## • Zimbabwe maintains a CITES export quota of 1,000 tusks from 500 bull elephants. A national quota of 500 elephants represents only 0.6% of a population of 82,630 elephant. Actual hunting offtakes are considerably lower, have a negligible impact on the overall population rate, and have declined in the past three years due to the import suspension. Average Hunting Offtakes 2010-2013 (% of Total Elephant Population): 228 (0.276%) 2013 Hunting Offtakes (% of Total Elephant Population): 258 (0.312%) 2014 Hunting Offtakes (% of Total Elephant Population): 162 (0.196%) 2015 Hunting Offtakes (% of Total Elephant Population): 075 (0.091%) 

## ELEPHANT HUNTING OFFTAKES IN ZAMBIA ARE NEGLIGIBLE 

## • In 2013 and 2014, Zambia suspended regulated tourist hunting to obtain a better sense of national wildlife population trends. In 2015, Zambia set a conservative export quota of 160 tusks from 80 bull elephants. Zambia maintained the quota of 80 elephants in 2016 and 2017. A national quota of 80 elephants represents less than 0.4% of a population of 21,967 elephant. Actual hunting offtakes are negligible and have no impact on the national population rate. 2015 Hunting Offtakes (% of Total Elephant Population): 03 (0.014%) 2016 Hunting Offtakes (% of Total Elephant Population): 12 (0.055%) 

## ELEPHANT MANAGEMENT IN ZIMBABWE IS GUIDED BY APPROPRIATE LEGISLATION AND A STATE-OF-THE-ART MANAGEMENT PLAN 

## • Governing Law: The Zimbabwe Parks and Wild Life Act provides the regulatory mechanism for ZPWMA and its programs. The Act created ZPWMA as a parastatal authority apart from the central government and established a separate fund, apart from the Central Treasury, to sustain ZPWMA’s operations. The Act sets harsh penalties for elephant-related offenses, and was amended in 2010 to impose a nine-year minimum sentence for the first offense of elephant poaching. Under the Parks and Wild Life Act, Rural District Councils and other land holders are granted “appropriate authority” to benefit directly from wildlife. Under this legislation, land holders are encouraged to maintain and increase wildlife populations because they retain the benefits of sustainable use of that wildlife. • Elephant Management Plan: Elephant are managed according to the Zimbabwe National Elephant Management Plan (2015-2020). The plan incorporates specific action items, deliverables, deadlines, and responsible parties. It is an adaptive management plan utilizing prioritization of targets measured by key components, strategic objectives, and outputs. The plan focuses on five major components: Protection and Law Enforcement; Biological Monitoring and Management; Social, Economic, and Cultural Framework; Building Conservation Capacity; and Program Management. The National management plan is supplemented by four regional plans that utilize the same framework to address the unique challenges for each major elephant range in Zimbabwe. Zimbabwe’s elephant management planning process was kicked off by the FWS’ elephant trophy import suspension. ZPWMA held a year of stakeholder planning workshops, including a preparatory meeting of representatives from CAMPFIRE in November 2014; a national elephant management planning workshop in December 2014; an elephant management planning and anti-poaching workshop in Mana Pools (Zambezi Valley range) in March-April 2015; an elephant management planning workshop in the Sebungwe range in May 2015; and an elephant management planning workshop in the South East Lowveld range in September 2015. 

## ELEPHANT HUNTING IN ZIMBABWE GENERATES CONSERVATION BENEFITS THAT SATISFY THE “ENHANCEMENT” STANDARD: Although hunting offtakes are negligible, elephant hunting fees create extensive conservation incentives in Zimbabwe. • Habitat: Hunting areas in Zimbabwe represent ~130,000 km² of protected habitat. This represents over four times the size of Zimbabwe’s National Parks (~28,000 km 2). Healthy elephant populations require large tracts of habitat; the areas set aside for regulated hunting are therefore essential to the elephant’s continued survival. • Management and Enforcement Revenues: Revenues generated from tourist hunting conducted on state lands comprised approximately 20% of ZPWMA’s revenue stream in 2014. Over $6.2 million in trophy fees came from elephant hunts, with $5 million accruing to ZPWMA to reinvest in elephant protection and species management. Over 50% of that revenue came from U.S. clients. Almost 80% of ZPWMA’s operating budget is allocated towards law enforcement in the form of staff costs and patrol provisions. ZPWMA employs 1,500 active field rangers. Put simply, hunting revenues support anti-poaching efforts across Zimbabwe’s elephant range—and this is largely paid for by American elephant hunters. • Operator Anti-Poaching: In addition to supporting ZPWMA’s enforcement capacity, hunting operators deploy their own anti-poaching units to police the Safari Areas and fund community game scouts in CAMPFIRE Areas. For example, a small sample of 14 individual operators surveyed by the Safari Operator Association of Zimbabwe spend $957,843 on anti-poaching in 2013 and deployed 245 anti-poaching scouts. One specific operator, Charlton McCullum Safaris (CMS) in the Dande Safari Area and Mbire Communal Area, spends on average $80,000-$90,000 in patrol and equipment costs and anti-poaching rewards. From 2010 to 2016, CMS’ efforts led to an 82% decline in elephant poaching in an import border region. As another example, the Save Valley and Bubye Valley Conservancies together spend over $1 million on anti-poaching each year. These anti-poaching efforts are funded predominately by hunting revenue, and protect stable populations of elephant and the third-largest black rhino population in the world. • Regional Anti-Poaching: According to the CITES “Monitoring the Illegal Killing of Elephants” (MIKE) program, poaching in the Southern African countries that allow regulated tourist hunting, including Zimbabwe, is lower than anywhere else on the continent and has never reached an unsustainable level. This stands in stark contrast to the West and Central African countries that do not rely upon tourist hunting as a conservation tool. • Community Benefits: Zimbabwe’s CAMPFIRE program is the pioneering community-based natural resource management program in Africa. The program allows rural communities to financially benefit from wildlife, thereby incentivizing the use of communal land as wildlife habitat, and the protection of wildlife in the form of increased tolerance of destructive wildlife. An estimated 777,000 households (200,000 direct participants and 600,000 secondary beneficiary families) rely on benefits from CAMPFIRE. 90% of CAMPFIRE revenue is generated from regulated hunting, and 70% of this comes from elephant hunting. Thus, prior to the import suspension, elephant hunting generated over $1.6 million per year for CAMPFIRE communities and was reinvested in the construction of classrooms and clinics, the installation of water infrastructure and solar powered facilities, the purchase of vehicles for anti-poaching support, compensation for destruction of crops or livestock by dangerous game, and other benefits that improve the livelihoods of the rural communities living in CAMPFIRE Areas. These benefits offset the damage caused by game species: from 2010 to 2015, elephant destroyed 7,495 hectares of crop fields in CAMPFIRE communities and claimed the lives of approximately 40 people. 

## ELEPHANT MANAGEMENT IN ZAMBIA IS UP-TO-DATE AND GENERATES SUBSTANTIAL BENEFITS TO ENCOURAGE RECOVERY OF THE SPECIES 

## • Governing Law: The Zambian Wildlife Act No. 14 of 2015 is the guiding legislation for elephant protection and management. This cutting-edge law consolidated the prior wildlife authority into a government Department of National Parks and Wildlife (DNPW), to address the funding concerns and shortfalls experienced by the prior authority. DNPW is made up of a Wildlife Law Enforcement Unit with over 1,250 rangers; a Conservation Unit; an Infrastructure Development Unit; and a Community-Based Natural Resource Management Unit to oversee the development of conservation planning in Game Management Areas. • Management and Enforcement Revenues: Between 2010 and 2012, regulated hunting revenues accounted for approximately 32% of the operating budget funding for Zambia’s wildlife authority. With a potential to generate nearly $1 million in elephant hunting fees, in 2015 and 2016, these fees totaled only $150,000, due mainly to import restrictions. This amount was divided between DNPW and the Community Resource Boards in Game Management Areas (GMA). DNPW uses this revenue for ranger salaries and resource protection, as well as management surveys, staff training, and other activities. Approximately 75% of DNPW’s expenditures are for anti-poaching, and Zambia’s Wildlife Law Enforcement Unit conducted over 10,500 anti-poaching patrols in 2015, involving an average of 5,878 staff per quarter and 237,028 patrol days. • Habitat: Hunting areas in Zambia (~180,000 km²) provide almost three times the amount of protected habitat compared to the country’s National Parks (~64,000 km²). • Community Benefits: In GMAs, elephant license fees are divided equally between the DNPW and the GMA’s Community Resource Board, and 20% of concession fees also accrue to the Board. In 2015 and 2016, approximately $1.36 million in hunting fees was distributed to the Boards, as well as $10,000 per concession paid by the hunting operator. Under the new Wildlife Law, Boards must invest those funds as follows: 45% towards wildlife protection and patrols, 35% towards community improvement projects such as construction of schools, clinics, and water infrastructure, and 20% towards administrative costs. Written concession agreements between the operators, DNPW, and the community Boards usually obligate the concessionaire to make further community investments, such as constructing a classroom and paying a teacher’s salary. Operators in 13 blocks were obligated to spend over $1.1 million in community infrastructure development and 3.4 million in community lease and other payments for the duration of their leases. • Game Meat Distributions: Moreover, under Zambian law, at least 50% of harvested game meat must be donated and distributed to local communities. A 2015 study found that operators in three GMAs contributed an average of 6,000 kilograms of harvested meat per season, and estimated that operators across all GMAs could provide ~130 tons of much-needed protein annually. This reduces the incentive for bush meat poaching in these areas bordering and buffering Zambia’s National Parks. • Operator Anti-Poaching: Hunting operators’ concession agreements with DNPW and the Community Resource Board identify mandatory anti-poaching obligations and expenditures. At present, 75 Boards employ over 750 wildlife scouts and 79 support personnel, at a monthly cost of over $38,800. Those scouts are paid for by revenues from tourist hunting. A small sample of four operators spent over $201,000 on anti-poaching in 2015, to fund community scouts and fund and equip their own operator anti-poaching teams. This anti-poaching support is largely paid for by U.S. hunters, as over half of all hunting clients in Zambia are from the U.S. 

## [Note: Supporting documents for each of these points is available by contacting Conservation Force, cf@conservationforce.org. These Talking Points largely rely on the responses of ZPWMA and DNPW to FWS information requests and supporting documents provided as part of those responses as well as individual hunting operator enhancement reports, reports of the CAMPFIRE Association, and publicly available IUCN documents.] 

## MINI-ARGUMENTS REFUTING FALSE FACTS 

## • There has never been a “ban” on elephant trophy imports from Zimbabwe. A negative enhancement finding was made in April 2014 that “suspended” the import of elephant trophies. The FWS’ negative 2015 enhancement finding stated repeatedly that once additional information was received, the negative finding would be reviewed and reversed (e.g., “The suspension … could be lifted if additional information on the status and management of elephants in Zimbabwe becomes available, including utilization of revenue generated through sport-hunting by U.S. hunters, which satisfies the conditions of the 4(d) special rule under the ESA.”) A “ban” suggests a permanent prohibition; a “suspension” is a “temporary abrogation or withholding.” Zimbabwe’s elephant trophy imports were suspended. • Lifting of the suspension was not a political decision. The decision should have been made in July 2015, when ZPWMA provided extensive additional documentation in response to a FWS questionnaire. The FWS requested “one more piece of information” at the CITES Conference of the Parties in September 2016. That information was provided in November 2016. No further information was needed, or requested. If the FWS had properly prioritized the issuance of elephant import permits—as they told ZPWMA they would at the CITES Conference of the Parties—the positive enhancement finding would have been made and these permits would have issued before the current Administration was in office. • The import of elephant trophies from Zimbabwe should not have been suspended in the first place. In April 2014, the FWS announced the suspension based on an asserted “lack of information.” In contradiction to CITES Res. Conf. 6.7’s recommendation of notifying and consulting with range states before imposing stricter domestic measures, and the Endangered Species Act’s requirement of “encouraging foreign conservation programs,” 16 U.S.C. § 1537(b), the FWS shut down imports under an April 2014 negative enhancement finding that the FWS later admitted was wrong with respect to Zimbabwe’s elephant population and level of poaching. In fact, the correct estimate for Zimbabwe's elephant population—almost 83,000—is 16,000 elephant higher than when the last, positive enhancement finding was made in 1997. That estimate is double the size of the elephant populations of Namibia and South Africa put together, yet the FWS maintains positive enhancement findings for the import of elephant trophies from Namibia and South Africa. The trophy import suspension was based on a mistaken concern that Zimbabwe’s elephant population had declined, and the FWS should have admitted the mistake and reversed the suspension immediately. The failure to do so suggests a political motivation, not a scientific one. • Zimbabwe’s elephant population is not “the worst managed,” but is among the best. That Zimbabwe maintains a stable elephant population of over 83,000, despite a despotic government, poor economy, and exploding human population growth rate, is a testament to the country’s strong management. That number is almost 40% higher than in 1992, when the FWS confirmed the “threatened” listing of elephant, and almost 20% higher than in 1997, when the FWS made a positive enhancement finding authorizing the import of elephant trophies. This is due in part to ZPWMA being a parastatal separate and separately funded from the central government. It is also due to the commitment of Zimbabwe’s citizens to maintaining their elephant, notwithstanding the costs—over 40 rural Zimbabweans were killed by elephant from 2010 to 2015. Zimbabwe’s strong wildlife management is also demonstrated by recent IUCN Red List assessments of lion and giraffe, which indicated increasing populations of these species in Zimbabwe. The evidence demonstrates that Zimbabwe’s wildlife management, not only its elephant management, is succeeding.] • Zimbabwe’s elephant management is not “poor”; it is state-of-the-art and written by one of the world’s foremost elephant experts. In response to the April 2014 suspension of elephant trophy imports, ZPWMA took to heart the FWS’ criticism that Zimbabwe’s then-current elephant management plan dated to 1997. Although that plan was adaptively implemented and monitored, it was admittedly dated. Zimbabwe immediately began the process of adopting a brand-new, state-of-the-art elephant management plan—basically, to satisfy the FWS. This included a year of stakeholder planning workshops: a preparatory meeting of representatives from Zimbabwe’s community-based natural resources management program, CAMPFIRE, in November 2014; a national elephant management planning workshop in December 2014; an elephant management planning and anti-poaching workshop in Mana Pools (Zambezi Valley) in early April 2015; an elephant management planning workshop in the Sebungwe range in May 2015; and an elephant management planning workshop in the South East Lowveld region in September 2015. Zimbabwe focused on regional planning because the four regions face different management challenges. Each planning workshop produced a regional elephant management plan that was incorporated into the final. The final document was drafted by a leading elephant scientist, and the process was monitored throughout by the IUCN’s African Elephant Specialist Group. • Regulated hunting is not poaching. By definition, “regulated” hunting is regulated and lawful. It is carefully monitored by ZPWMA, and offtakes are recorded in a national database. Lawfully hunted ivory tusks are marked to show that they are lawful and note the year of harvest. Moreover, regulated hunting revenues underwrite most anti-poaching expenses in Zimbabwe and the rest of Southern Africa, either by fees paid to government wildlife authorities that are used for law enforcement, or by operator-funded teams that patrol concessions and keep poachers out. Finally, revenue-sharing and contributions by hunting operators creates conservation incentives for rural communities most affected by wildlife, which disincentivizes poaching. For example, Zimbabwe’s CAMPFIRE communities were receiving over $1.6 million per year in revenues from elephant hunting prior to the import suspension. These funds allow for clinics and schools to be built, teachers’ salaries to be paid, boreholes to be drilled, and so on. Hunting operators in Zambia are required to share at least 50% of harvested meat with rural communities. Many tons of meat can come from elephant hunts, to reduce the need and tolerance for bushmeat poaching and protect species in addition to elephant. • Allowing imports of elephant trophies will not damage the government’s efforts to control ivory trafficking. Elephant trophy imports have been authorized for Namibia and South Africa for the past three years, which demonstrates that a country may maintain lawful hunting and low poaching at the same time. In fact, according to the CITES MIKE data, the Southern African countries that depend upon regulated hunting as a conservation tool have the lowest Proportion of Illegally Killed Elephant (PIKE) rates in the world. PIKE, which is used to assess whether poaching levels are unsustainable, has never risen above the sustainability threshold in Southern Africa. PIKE at Zimbabwe’s MIKE sites is well below that level. Moreover, national and international law requires the marking of ivory tusks taken as lawful hunting trophies, which clearly and visibly separates these lawful tusks from illegal ones. • Photographic tourism is not a substitute in most hunting areas. Opponents argue that photographic tourism would be a better option than hunting. It is true that photo-tourism is available in some places; for example, some conservancies in Namibia benefit from photographic tourism revenues alone or a mixture of photo- and hunting tourism. But photo-tourism requires decent infrastructure and scenery, and dense enough wildlife populations to draw tourists. These may not be available in remote areas of a country without access to airports or other activities, and where the wildlife populations are not yet dense enough to ensure a sighting on a two-hour game drive. This is the situation in many CAMPFIRE Areas, where photographic tourism was tried … and failed. In these areas, without the benefits of hunting, the habitat would be converted to agriculture and livestock. Benefits to the rural community stakeholders are less from photographic tourism than from tourist hunting. Conversation Contents 

## Elephant imports 

# "William L. Shores" <lshores@shorescpa.com> 

## From: "William L. Shores" <lshores@shorescpa.com> 

## Sent: Fri Nov 24 2017 04:20:10 GMT-0700 (MST) 

## To: " @fws.gov" < @fws.gov> 

## Subject: Elephant imports Good day sir. I am writing to express my support for allowing the the import of elephants parts from Zimbabwe and Zambia. I believe that any action to deny the import of these animals legally taken by sport hunters from these countries is showing an arrogance by the United States indicating that we, in the US, know more about management of elephants in those countries than the people in this countries know. How would we feel if Africans met to determine how species here in the US should be managed? What if they were telling us how to manage, for example, white-tailed deer? It would be absurd. It is equally absurd that we are attempting to do the same thing to them. I am a veteran of many safaris, 25 to be exact. I have witnessed first hand the benefits of sport hunting. Let me briefly summarize: 1- Locals are employed by the safari companies. 2- Money from the safaris companies are used to help build school, clinics, roads, water holes, etc. 3- Anti-poaching units are employed by the safari companies . These patrol on a daily basis. Where these are present, poaching of wildlife is GREATLY reduced. I have personally seen the piles of snares, gins traps, etc that these units have collected in their patrols. It is amazing. Actually shocking. 4- Meat taken from sport hunted animals is distributed amount the local villages thus reducing the incentive for them to poach. It is interesting that once one leaves a safari area and crosses into an area where no hunting is allowed, the Africans have killed virtually every living thing. I have seen this time and time again in the 29 years I have been going to Africa. Hunters and their dollars are the ONLY thing protecting the wildlife of Africa. Make no mistake, it is POACHING that has reduced Africa’s elephant populations not legal sport hunting. There is a substantial amount of rhetoric surrounding the current U.S. administration’s looming decision on the import ban applying to elephant and lion trophies. A lot of this rhetoric is based up emotions , not facts and is coming from those who do not understand Africa or African issues. As a result, I am taking this opportunity to summarize the guiding principles influencing sustainable and ethical hunters. (b) (6) (b) (6) First and foremost, I support and advocate for the sustainable and ethical use of wildlife – utilizing wildlife’s inherent value in the most pragmatic manner to promote wildlife conservation. I believe I am qualified to speak on this issue because I have spent a substantial portion of my life researching and supporting conservation issues around the world. I am heavily involved in conservation issues right now. In fact, I am an officer and board member of a conservation organization with projects in several African countries right now. Those projects are in Uganda, Congo, Zimbabwe, Mozambique and South Africa. These projects include many species including species that are not now and never will be sport hunted. For example, we are supporting the Lwiro Chimpanzee Reserve in the Congo. It is critically important (and reasonable) to understand that there is a vast difference between poaching and legal hunting performed in a sustainable and ethical manner. Like all conservationists, I abhor poaching and poachers and everything they represent. I likewise abhor non-sustainable and unethical hunting. I only support sustainable and ethical hunting and I sincerely believe that hunting that follows sustainable and ethical principles can be an incredible conservation tool. It has been estimated that sport hunting areas extend over 1.4 million square kms in Africa; that is approximately 22% more land than is covered by national parks in Africa. Much of the sport hunting areas rely on sport hunting as their sole “land use.” It is unclear how much of that land could be viable converted to solely photographic or non-consumptive tourism. Having been to many of these areas, I cannot imagine that many of them would appeal to the photographic types. They are too remote and too rough. However, if we arguably give up hunting in those areas, some other economic activity must replace the hunting activities in order to sustain the local countries and communities. It would indeed be ironic to lose 1.4 million square kilometers of wildlife land and eliminate wildlife to make room for crops and domestic livestock – cattle being the most common large animal on the planet by far. They roam in the millions across landscapes that were once wild and teeming with wild game. Perhaps as bad, if not worse, are crops. The Africans clear the land of EVERYTHING. They plant for a year, two at the most. After that, they move to another parcel and repeat the same thing. Africa is being decimated by these practices WHERE HUNTING IS NOT ALLOWED. Why not instead support sustainable and ethical hunting that in turn promotes animal conservation in areas where wildlife is abundant (and in some cases overpopulated – such as is the case with elephants in Zimbabwe & Botswana). Additionally, hunting activities can and do feed people in local communities as noted above. Therefore hunting activities provide for both feeding local populations and supporting and promoting the inherent value of wildlife populations. I can send you pictures and videos of the locals Africans taking ALL of the meat from elephants that have been harvested. They take EVERYTHING. In may cases, it is the only sources of protein that they have. I am more than happy to do this. One memorable experience that I have is of an African male swimming across the Zambezi river (a river loaded with crocodiles) to get a piece of elephant meat the size of a fist. He was that protein starved that he would risk his life for a small piece of meat. People here in the US do not realize that Africa is far different than here. In the bush, there are no grocery stores or restaurants. Wildlife is where the majority of their protein comes from. I therefore ask that each of you consider the following premises: 1. The Inherent Value in Wildlife Is a Conservation Tool – Where geographic sub-regional wildlife populations exist in healthy and sustainable numbers, sustainable and ethical hunting practices support and promote the inherent value that exists in wildlife. This result is due to the economic influx generated by the financial outlays expended by hunters that have a direct, significant and immediate impact on the local countries and communities in which wildlife exists. This inherent wildlife value promotes continued conservation initiatives and efforts at the grassroots, local governmental and international NGO levels. It is critical, however, that the hunting activities are supported by scientifically researched and competently-executed conservation practices that focus primarily on wildlife population health and sustainability. In Africa, they have a saying that is universal,”if it pays, it stays." 2. Elephant Populations Are Not Equally Distributed – The African continent (Africa) is composed of 54 different countries and many diverse habitats and ecosystems. There are, in fact, geographic areas in Africa whose elephant populations have been poached to the brink of local extinction (also known as extirpation). Comparatively, many other geographic sub-regions in Africa (especially in many southern African countries) contain successful and thriving elephant populations – in fact, in certain regions these Elephant populations are overpopulated/overcrowded to the point where the local ecosystem cannot adequately support the elephant populations. Consequently, any reasonable person must at least consider maximizing the conservation value of such populations by benefiting the communities and countries which they inhabit. By providing value to the local countries and communities in which elephant populations thrive, elephant populations become inherently valuable assets to those countries and communities and therefore encourage conservation efforts for the benefit of those elephant populations – this model is equally applicable to all wildlife populations. There are areas that I have personally been to in Botswana and Zimbabwe that are severely overpopulated with elephants . They are destroying everything. In fact, some ecosystems are being altered forever having a huge negative impact on the species that live there, not to mention the crop damage they do. 3. No Meaningful Reduction in Legal Hunting Practices – The ban on elephant imports into the United States does not meaningfully change how many elephants are hunted in legal hunts. It does however, reduce the revenue generated to the local countries and communities in which the elephant populations live, thereby reducing the population’s inherent value to those local countries and communities and thusly negatively impacting conservation efforts that support those elephant populations. Consequently, any reasonable person must at least consider maximizing the inherent value of elephant populations by supporting legal, sustainable, and ethical hunting as a viable conservation alternative that has yielded successful results in Europe, the United States, and many other regions in the globe. In addition, I would like you to consider the following facts: 1- Zimbabwe has the second largest population of elephants in Africa at approximately 82,000. in 1900, it is estimated that Zimbabwe had 4,000 elephants. The current population is DOUBLE the targeted population for the country. It is 40% larger than when the FWS (in 92) determined to maintain the “threatened” listing under the ESA and 20% larger than the last time the FWS made a positive enhancement finding (in 97) prior to the 11.17 determination. 2- The hunting of elephants results is miniscule off takes of elephants annually. The annual quota is 500 bulls. This is not even enough to stop the already drastically over populated species from continuing to increase the population. While the percentage of the population of elephants taken by sport hunters varies by year, it is always less than 1/2 of 1%. 3-Zimbabwe’s elephant management is governed by appropriate legislation and a state of the art management plan guided by some of the formost experts in the world. This has gotten a lot longer than I intended and I have more to say . Accordingly, I will not delve into Zambia. What does this mean to the people of Zimbabwe? Why don’t you see for yourself? The follow is a recent press release on this matter: "CAMPFIRE ASSOCIATION PRESS STATEMENT ON LIFTING OF THE SUSPENSION OF ELEPHANT TROPHY IMPORTS INTO AMERICA Zimbabwe’s Community Areas Management Programme for Indigenous Resources (CAMPFIRE) hails the recent decision by the United States Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS) to lift the suspension of elephant trophy imports into the United States of America. We encourage the USFWS and the President of the United States to stand by the decision to issue import permits for sport-hunted elephant trophies. Trophy fees and meat from elephant incentivize CAMPFIRE communities to dedicate land as habitat for elephant and other wildlife. U.S. citizens represent the largest share of CAMPFIRE hunting clients. CAMPFIRE communities have been negatively impacted by the suspension of trophy imports, and we look forward to increased benefits, and therefore additional conservation incentives, with the lifting of the suspension. CAMPFIRE enables local communities, especially those residing in areas where the level of human and elephant conflict is high, to benefit from wildlife through sport hunting. Since the suspension of elephant trophy imports in 2014, CAMPFIRE Association has cooperated fully and worked closely with the Zimbabwe Parks and Wildlife Management Authority to provide the necessary information required by USFWS, and also participated in the development of a national Elephant Management Plan. Hunting generates about 90% of CAMPFIRE income, with elephant hunting contributing up to 70% of annual income. American hunters make up 60% of the clients in CAMPFIRE areas. CAMPFIRE has a combined 2.4 million beneficiaries, made up of 200,000 households that are directly involved in the program. Another 600,000 households benefit indirectly from social services and infrastructure supported by wildlife related income. The size of wards that make up CAMPFIRE is approximately 50,000km2 or 12.7% of the country, which is roughly equivalent to the size of the National Parks estate. Under CAMPFIRE, based on voluntary interest in participation by local communities, wildlife is found on land outside national parks. By choice, these communities and their Rural District Councils (RDCs) maintain varying sizes of land free from subsistence and commercial agriculture, or other economic activities such as gold panning and mining that negatively impact on wildlife management and the conservation of natural resources. CAMPFIRE is therefore making significant contributions to the protection of between 2 and 3 million hectares of land in Zimbabwe. Reports by Safari Operators under CAMPFIRE show that the suspension of elephant trophy imports in 2014 resulted in the cancellation of 108 out of 189 (57%) elephant hunts booked by US citizens. This translated to a sharp decline in income to the CAMPFIRE programme from US$2.2m in 2013 to an average US$1.7m in 2014 through to 2016, putting the conservation of elephant in these areas at huge risk. As recognized in the recent USFWS enhancement finding, the sharing of CAMPFIRE income has been satisfactory. An audit of CAMPFIRE income at community level for the period 2010-2015 was submitted in 2016 to USFWS to support the positive finding. At district level, wildlife income is used for administration, field patrols, monitoring of hunts, problem animal control, water provision, and fire management. Communities have drilled boreholes, constructed seasonal roads, erecting of fencing to keep out wildlife, purchase of tractors, and direct purchase of drought relief food. Children benefit from reduced walking distances through the construction of schools, procurement of learning materials, and payment of school fees from CAMPFIRE proceeds. Communities also benefit from meat in excess of the requirements of safari hunting operations, and from problem animal control. Annual hunting quotas are granted based on the relative density of elephants in the neighbouring protected areas and those residing in the CAMPFIRE areas. The national trophy hunting quota is set at 0.3 – 0.5% of the overall population to maintain trophy quality at approximately 35kg (77lbs). The quality of hunting in CAMPFIRE areas remains good, and this is confirmed by repeated hunter arrivals each year, among other indicators. Zimbabwe’s population of the African elephant, Loxodonta africana, is healthy and remains on Appendix II under the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES). The IUCN Species Survival Commission’s African Elephant Specialist Group (AfESG)’s 2016 estimate of Zimbabwe’s elephant population is around 83,000. CAMPFIRE Association objects to the ill informed press reports and releases against the lifting of the suspension, including appeals to US authorities for its reinstatement. CAMPFIRE Association supports the lifting of the suspension, which will benefit our participating districts and wards. The sharing of hunting income creates a real incentive to protect elephant and other game species, even when these species negatively impact people living in CAMPFIRE areas. 139 people in CAMPFIRE areas have lost their lives from wildlife attacks, including elephant, since 2010. Over 7,000ha of crops were destroyed by elephant between 2010 and 2015 in 10 CAMPFIRE districts. With the minimum cash value of maize at US$180/ton, the approximate loss to communities is between US$500,000 – US$1.0 million. These losses are endured by communities living in areas highly prone to drought and low rainfall, making the impact even more acute. Despite these losses, the poaching of elephant in CAMPFIRE areas is relatively low, with only 38 elephants poached since 2016 to the present. Effective local level anti-poaching operations through CAMPFIRE have resulted in the decline in elephant poaching in Mbire district from a peak of 40 cases in 2010 to only 5 so far in 2017. The sustainability of hunting as a conservation tool, and its contribution to rural livelihoods is a reality in Zimbabwe. CAMPFIRE Association urges all conservationists, animal lovers and all institutions interested in the protection of wildlife to respect the livelihood choices of African communities, and to acknowledge that the protection of wildlife from poaching and illegal wildlife trafficking is more effective when rural people are allowed to exercise multiple options for the sustainable use of wildlife that they live with. For more information, please contact: Charles Jonga, Director of CAMPFIRE Association, Mukuvisi Woodlands, Harare, Zimbabwe. Email: campfire@ecoweb.co.zw, Website: www.campfirezimbabwe.org” Sir, this was not a political decision. All information necessary to make the decision to reinstate the imports was given the the FWS BEFORE the elections. The FWS asked for nothing else. The decision could have been made before the election. I know the people against the imports mean well. However, in reality, people like them are going to be the downfall of all African wildlife. I respectfully request that you allow the imports to continue . Thank you for your time. As noted earlier, I am happy to provide any information which may help you. William L. (Larry) Shores, CPA Shores, Tagman, Butler & Company, PA 17 South Magnolia Avenue Orlando, FL 32801 (407)872-0744 extension 214 Conversation Contents 

## Standing with CITES for Sustainable Use Attachments: /37. Standing with CITES for Sustainable Use /1.1 Letter on Sustainable Use of Wildlife (11.23.2017).pdf 

# <mmuns@mdccholdings.com> 

## From: <mmuns@mdccholdings.com> 

## Sent: Thu Nov 23 2017 10:20:56 GMT-0700 (MST) 

## To: <exsec@ios.doi.gov>, <officeofthesecretary@ios.doi.gov>, < @fws.gov> 

## Subject: Standing with CITES for Sustainable Use 

## Attachments: Letter on Sustainable Use of Wildlife (11.23.2017).pdf 

Dear Messrs. Zinke and Sheehan, Please find attached a brief letter on my and my group's support of the USFWS recent positive enhancement finding on elephants in Zimbabwe and Zambia. My letter is more focused on the larger picture of sustainable use and the U.S.'s participation in CITES. My letter is based on a decade of experience being directly involved with the Niassa Game Reserve in Mozambique. Thank you for your time, consideration and I hope you and your family's have a blessed Thanksgiving. Sincerely, Matthew Muns CEO, MDCC Holdings O: 972 331 6500 C: 214 500 2088 skype: matthewmuns mmuns@mdccholdings.com www.mdccholdings.com (b) (6) Conversation Contents 

## U.S. Department of the Interior News Briefing for Wednesday, November 22, 2017 

# Bulletin Intelligence <Interior@bulletinintelligence.com> 

## From: Bulletin Intelligence <Interior@bulletinintelligence.com> 

## Sent: Wed Nov 22 2017 04:01:29 GMT-0700 (MST) 

## To: <Interior@bulletinintelligence.com> 

## Subject: U.S. Department of the Interior News Briefing for Wednesday, November 22, 2017 

Mobile version and searchable archives available here. Please click here to subscribe. 

DATE: WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 22, 2017 6:00 AM EST 

# Holiday Message 

In observance of the U.S. Thanksgiving holiday, we will not publish on Thursday, November 23, 2017 and Friday, November 24, 2017. Service will resume on Monday, November 27, 2017. We wish our readers a safe and happy holiday. 

# Today's Table Of Contents 

DOI In The News 

• The Hill: Zinke: ‘The Only Thing I’ve Hunted In Africa Is Terrorists’. • Marine Corps Times: Marine Corps War Memorial Finally Commemorates Iraq, Afghanistan. • American Security News: Petty Tapped For Interior Department Post On Water And Science. • Politico: FEC Probes Discrepancies At Former Zinke PAC. • CNN: National Historic Site In Puerto Rico Reopens After Hurricane. • St. Thomas Source: V.I. National Parks Reopen. • WWBT-TV Richmond (VA): Richmond Congressman, Interior Secretary Tackle Sexual Harassmen. • Government Executive: Senate Seeks Much Smaller Spending Cuts Than Trump And The House, At Some Agencies. • CBS News: How Trump’s National Monuments Decision Could Affect Massive Deposit Of Fossils. • U.S. News & World Report: Yellowstone Mining Opponents Press Gianforte To Join Cause. • Casper (WY) Star-Tribune: Forest Service Will Consider Changes To Sage Grouse Protections. Bureau Of Indian Affairs 

• Tribal Leaders Take Aim At Oil And Gas Development. • Calif. County Asks 9th Circ. To Rehear Tribal Casino Row. 

Bureau Of Land Management 

• Natural Gas Intelligence: Trump Administration, Enviros Urge Court To Leave BLM Frack Ruling Intact. 

Bureau Of Reclamation 

• Las Vegas Children Study Birds On International Migratory Bird Day. 

Bureau Of Safety And Environmental Enforcement 

• Investment In Partnership Is Good For Energy Dominance. 

Fish And Wildlife Service 

• Brush (CO) News-Tribune: Colorado Parks & Wildlife To Receive $100K Grant. • Arizona Republic: How A Border Wall Could Drive The Jaguar Extinct In America. 

National Park Service 

• The Hill: Park Service Expands Comment Period For Proposed Entry Fee Price Hike. • The Hill: National Park Store Sold Trump Wine, Says Feds Weren’t Involved. • Washington Post: Silence Again Surrounds A Police Shooting In Fairfax County, This Time By U.S. Park Police. • U.S. News & World Report: JFK Birth Centennial Ending On Assassination Anniversary. • Salt Lake (UT) Tribune: Arches Road Construction Nears End, Will Take A Break For Thanksgiving Weekend. • Pensacola (FL) News Journal: Gulf Islands National Seashore Road Closures Cause Travel Headaches. 

Office Of Insular Affairs 

• Saipan (MNP) Tribune: Over 460 Coconut Rhino Beetles, Larvae Collected. 

Office Of Surface Mining 

• Conservation Groups Argue Peabody Leases Were Improperly Approved. 

US Geological Survey 

• U.S. News & World Report: NASA’s Discovery Of ‘Water’ On Mars Might Actually Be Sand, New Study Finds. • Additional Reading. 

Opinion Pieces 

• The Voice Missing From The Elephant Trophy Debate? Africans. • Realini: National Monuments Inspire Entrepreneurs. • Congress Must Fix Wildfire Funding Problem. • Additional Reading. 

Top National News 

• NBC: Media Analyses: Trump Tacitly Endorses Moore. • Reuters: Trump: AT&T Purchase Of Time Warner “Not A Good Deal For The Country.” • Politico: Murkowski Backs Individual Mandate Repeal’s Inclusion In Tax Bill. • Washington Times: Senate Security Spending Bill Includes Funds For Border Wall. • Los Angeles Times: FCC Chairman Proposes Repeal Of Net Neutrality Rules. • Washington Free Beacon: Gallup Poll Finds Worry About Economy At Lowest Level In 18 Years. • New York Times: Whitefish Suspends Puerto Rico Work Over Unpaid Bills. 

Editorial Wrap-Up 

• New York Times. - “Who To Blame For Your Subway Nightmare.” • Washington Post. - “The United States Torments Its Poorest Neighbor.” - “Jeff Sessions Keeps Waging His Failing War Against Sanctuary Cities.” - “Why Would Trump Choose This Academic To Lead The Census Bureau.” • Wall Street Journal. - “Trump’s Dubious Trust-Busting.” - “Keystone XL On The Cusp.” - “China’s Burma ‘Solution.’” 

Big Picture 

> • Headlines From Today’s Front Pages.

Washington Schedule 

> • Today’s Events In Washington.

Last Laughs 

> • Late Night Political Humor.

# DOI In The News 

## Zinke: ‘The Only Thing I’ve Hunted In Africa Is Terrorists’. 

The Hill (11/21, Samuels) reports that Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke on Tuesday “pushed back against a photo circulating on the internet that purported to show him with a hunted elephant amid backlash on a decision to lift a ban on importing elephant trophies.” Zinke tweeted, “The only thing I’ve hunted in Africa is terrorists.” The article notes that “Zinke is not the man in the image, and the photo was first posted in 2016.” The Washington Examiner (11/21, Yilek) reports that “Snopes, a fact-checking website, has rated the claim as false. The man in the photo is actually Ian Evans, a Scottish farmer.” Additional coverage was provided by the Independent Journal Review (11/21, Fink). 

## Marine Corps War Memorial Finally Commemorates Iraq, Afghanistan. 

The Marine Corps Times (11/21, Schogol) reports that a ceremony was held Tuesday at the U.S. Marine Corps War Memorial to unveil new engravings that recognize the Afghanistan and Iraq campaigns. The Washington Times (11/21, Harper) reports that Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke said, “As the Deputy Commander of Special Forces in Iraq and retired Navy SEAL, I saw the commitment, patriotism, and fortitude that American service members and their families display while serving our country. Our warriors who serve in Iraq and Afghanistan see more frequent deployments as our nation has been at sustained combat for longer than in any previous point in our nation’s history. The Iraq and Afghanistan veterans are warriors in the field and leaders in the community. I salute them and am grateful for their service.” Local TV coverage was provided by Raleigh-Durham (NC) Spectrum News ,

KNVN-TV Chico, CA (11/21), and WRLH-TV Richmond, VA (11/21). 

## Petty Tapped For Interior Department Post On Water And Science. 

American Security News (11/21) reports that Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke lauded the selection of Timothy Petty as the next assistant secretary for water and science at the Interior Department. Zinke said, “Dr. Tim Petty brings years of quality service and experience to the team at the department, and we could not be happier with the President’s choice for the position. Dr. Petty has served as the acting assistant secretary and deputy assistant secretary for Water and Science at the department before, and we are excited to put him back to work for the American people in the [President Donald] Trump Administration.” FEC Probes Discrepancies At Former Zinke PAC. 

Politico (11/21, Lefebvre) reported that the Federal Election Commission is requesting “a leadership PAC previously affiliated with Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke to provide more details about its direct mail spending and to account for a $200,000 discrepancy in its account, among other issues in its most recent campaign finance report. SEAL PAC, which Zinke launched after winning his first congressional race in 2014, has until Dec. 26 to address the issues identified by the FEC, according to a request sent Monday” that “also asks about incomplete information related to some donors, excess contributions and potentially misclassified spending, some of which occurred after Zinke’s affiliation with the leadership PAC ended when he joined President Donald Trump’s Cabinet in March.” Additional coverage was provided by the Washington (DC) Examiner (11/21, Siegel). 

## National Historic Site In Puerto Rico Reopens After Hurricane. 

CNN (11/21, Green) reports that “by next week, two important areas of a national historic site in San Juan, Puerto Rico, damaged by Hurricane Maria will be open to visitors and back to normal operations.” The National Park Service announced Tuesday that “public tours resumed Tuesday at the Castillo San Cristóbal area of San Juan National Historic Site, and officials expect Castillo San Felipe del Morro to reopen as early as next week.” Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke said, “For over 400 years, Castillo San Felipe del Morro has stood as guardian and symbol of Puerto Rico’s heritage, and it’s also a major tourism attraction for visitors from all over the world. I’m incredibly proud of the National Park Service and entire Interior family, who have been working nonstop to reopen this important cultural and tourism attraction. Part of rebuilding communities means rebuilding revenue streams so folks can get back to work, earn a living and care for their families. The National Park Service will continue to work closely with the people of Puerto Rico to restore life into this vibrant community.” 

## V.I. National Parks Reopen. 

The St. Thomas Source (11/21) reports that “Christiansted National Historic Site and Buck Island Reef National Monument on St. Croix and Trunk Bay Beach at V.I. National Park on St. John all reopened Monday, the U.S. Interior Department announced.” Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke said , “I couldn’t be more proud of the hard work of National Park Service staff, volunteers, and their partners in the Virgin Islands. Their commitment to the park and to the community is inspiring. I’ve heard many stories of staff tending to the needs of the park and their neighbors before even taking care of themselves.” He added, “We have a long way to go, but every day we make progress toward getting these parks fully functional to visitors and back to providing important economic support to these communities as they return to normal.” 

## Richmond Congressman, Interior Secretary Tackle Sexual Harassmen. 

WWBT-TV Richmond, VA (11/21, Sullivan) reports on the sexual harassment complaints among employees in the National Park Service. Congressman Don McEachin has “joined other lawmakers in demanding the National Park Service put a stop to it.” He has “called for another hearing on the issue,” saying to Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke during a budget hearing in June, “You have declared a zero-tolerance policy with the promise of updating policies, including new training requirements and new reporting procedures, but I would suggest to you that that is not enough.” 

## Senate Seeks Much Smaller Spending Cuts Than Trump And The House, At Some Agencies. 

Government Executive (11/21, Katz) reports that “Senate Republicans are poised to fund several key agencies at significantly higher levels than the Trump administration requested, though Democrats are still decrying what they see as overly harsh reductions.” Notably, “at the Interior Department, a Senate measure unveiled on Monday would cut spending from current levels by just 1 percent.” The cutback “would be $370 million less severe than the House proposal and $470 million less than the administration’s request.” The article notes that “while the House bill also included language supporting separation incentives at Interior, such provisions were not included in the Senate bill.” Also, “at components such as the National Park Service, the Senate actually proactively spoke out against any workforce cuts.” 

## How Trump’s National Monuments Decision Could Affect Massive Deposit Of Fossils. 

CBS News (11/21) reports that scientists are raising concerns that a decision to downsize the Grand Staircase-Escalante National Monument “could damage one of the richest deposits of dinosaur bones in the world.” The article notes that “in the two decades since the 1.9 million-acre patch of desert was designated a national monument, 25 new species of dinosaurs have been discovered in its sands.” Paleontologist Andy Farke said, “There’s a possibility that fossils may be lost or destroyed. Things like fossil theft and vandalism. Once that record of our planet’s history is gone, you know, we’ve lost something from the American story.” 

## Yellowstone Mining Opponents Press Gianforte To Join Cause. 

The AP (11/21, Brown) reports that “opponents of two gold mines proposed near Yellowstone National Park pressed Tuesday for Montana’s lone U.S. House member to seek federal legislation to withdraw public lands near the park from future mining.” According to the article, “after a measure stalled in the Senate, businesses and conservation groups said the support of U.S. Rep. Greg Gianforte is crucial to making permanent a temporary mining ban enacted last year on 47 square miles (121 square kilometers) of land north of Yellowstone.” Gianforte “said in a statement Tuesday that he intends to introduce legislation on the issue but did not specify when that would happen or offer details on its contents.” 

## Forest Service Will Consider Changes To Sage Grouse Protections. 

The Casper (WY) Star-Tribune (11/21, Richards) reports that the Forest Service is “considering changes to sage grouse management in the West, a charge led by the Interior Department since earlier this year due to what the Interior Secretary described as Western ‘anger’ about federal overreach.” In Wyoming, the Forest Service plans may focus on “grazing rights, a key complaint from ranchers.” A spokesman for the Forest Service “said opening up the plans in light of the BLM decision to do the same was ‘prudent’ so that practices are manageable for ranchers, industry and others.” Additional coverage of the sage grouse issue was provided by the Powell (WY) Tribune (11/21, Davis). 

# Bureau Of Indian Affairs 

## Tribal Leaders Take Aim At Oil And Gas Development. 

The AP (11/21, Bryan) reports that “Native American activists and tribal leaders from around New Mexico are joining the chorus of environmentalists who have been fighting for years to stop oil and gas development.” According to the article, “they are part of a groundswell as tribes across the U.S. organize around land issues, from a pipeline in North Dakota and the disputed boundaries of a national monument in Utah to concerns about the encroachment of energy development in an area of the Southwest dotted with archaeological sites tied to a civilization that gave rise to many of the region’s modern tribes.” 

## Calif. County Asks 9th Circ. To Rehear Tribal Casino Row. 

Law360 (11/21, Lidgett) reports that “a California county on Monday urged the Ninth Circuit to rethink a panel ruling backing a lower court’s support of the U.S. Department of the Interior’s decision to take land into trust for a proposed Ione Band of Miwok Indians casino.” Amador County “asked the panel to review en banc an October decision that upheld the DOI’s lower court win in a case in which the county argued the tribe’s casino project near Sacramento shouldn’t have been greenlit.” 

# Bureau Of Land Management 

## Trump Administration, Enviros Urge Court To Leave BLM Frack Ruling Intact. 

Natural Gas Intelligence (11/21, Passut) reports the Trump Administration and environmental groups are arguing on the same side, albeit for different reasons, over an Obama-era rule governing hydraulic fracturing on public and tribal lands. In separate filings, attorneys for the environmental coalition and the BLM ask the US Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit Court to reject calls from four western states, two industry groups, and an Indian tribe for a rehearing over the rule. The BLM is looking to keep the rule intact so it can rescind the regulation, perhaps as early as January. Environmental groups want the court to issue a mandate to officially vacate the district court ruling, which would temporarily revive the regulation. 

# Bureau Of Reclamation 

## Las Vegas Children Study Birds On International Migratory Bird Day. 

The Las Vegas Review-Journal (11/21, Erickson) reports that “about 30 other local children gathered at Tuesday’s International Migratory Bird Day event, a collaboration by Clark County Parks and Recreation and local environmental groups to teach children about bird migration.” According to the article, “experts showed children different bird eggs and nests, led games and passed out coloring books with pictures of birds.” Nathan Lenon, a biologist with the Bureau of Reclamation, “helped a little girl with pigtails and big, black sunglasses look for birds through binoculars.” 

# Bureau Of Safety And Environmental Enforcement 

## Investment In Partnership Is Good For Energy Dominance. 

The World Oil (11/21) reports that Bureau of Safety and Environmental Enforcement Director Scott A. Angelle “participated in meetings with BSEE staff, industry, Air Force leadership, and other stakeholders Tuesday and Wednesday in California.” Angelle said, “BSEE continues to develop partnerships with all stakeholders, all in an effort to enhance the Nation’s energy program while not backing away from the requirements for safe and environmentally-sustainable operations. We need robust energy production from the OCS and it must be safe and environmentally-sustainable.” 

# Fish And Wildlife Service 

## Colorado Parks & Wildlife To Receive $100K Grant. 

The Brush (CO) News-Tribune (11/21) reports that the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service announced that it plans “to award a $100,000 cooperative agreement to the Colorado Parks and Wildlife for the restoration of Gunnison Sagegrouse habitat.” The project “includes mechanically treating (mowing) areas of encroaching pinyon-juniper trees that currently have healthy established sagebrush understory within Gunnison sage-grouse habitat.” Also, “the treatment will remove remnant tree skeletons that remain from fire where current understory exhibits sagebrush reestablishment.” 

## How A Border Wall Could Drive The Jaguar Extinct In America. 

The Arizona Republic (11/21, Loomis) reports that “the jaguar’s fate could hinge on the fate of President Donald Trump’s border-wall proposal.” Biologists and wildlife advocates believe “jaguars could pair off north of the border someday, if Americans leave the trail open and if a female follows it.” However, building “an impenetrable wall” would mean “the species will go extinct in this country.” 

# National Park Service 

## Park Service Expands Comment Period For Proposed Entry Fee Price Hike. 

The Hill (11/21, Henry) reports that the National Park Service is “giving the public an extra month to comment on its proposal to hike entry fees at popular parks.” The public comment period for the proposal was extended “Tuesday to allow for another month of input, according to the Park Service website.” The NPS was “originally due to take comments through Thanksgiving, but its new deadline is Dec. 22.” The AP (11/21) reports that “the Park Service said it wanted to accommodate interest from Congress and the public. More than 65,000 comments already have been submitted.” Also reporting are the Washington Examiner (11/21, Siegel), the Seattle Times (11/21, Mapes), the Sacramento (CA) Bee (11/21, Harris), the Loveland (CO) Reporter-Herald (11/21), and KTVH-TV Helena, MT (11/21). 

## National Park Store Sold Trump Wine, Says Feds Weren’t Involved. 

The Hill (11/21, Cama) reports that “a store in Virginia’s Shenandoah National Park sold wine produced by the Trump Winery as recently as September.” According to the article, “the stores are operated by Delaware North Cos., which agrees to pay fees to the National Park Service (NPS) based on the annual revenues of its operations on park property.” Mark Leach, “who manages the Shenandoah stores for Delaware North, said NPS and park managers had no role in the wine purchase decisions.” NPS spokesman Jeremy Barnum “stressed that it was Delaware North that decided to sell the wine, not the park.” Barnum said, “The National Park Service authorizes concessioners to sell categories of retail goods and products like t-shirts, baseball hats, and in this case wine. However, the NPS does not specify what brands of these products should be sold.” 

## Silence Again Surrounds A Police Shooting In Fairfax County, This Time By U.S. Park Police. 

On Tuesday morning, the Washington Post (11/21, Jackman) reported that the U.S. Park Police “shot a man in Fairfax County, Va., on Friday night.” The Post add: “The man is in critical condition. And that’s about all we know.” According to the Post, “The Park Police refuse to identify the man they shot. Or the officer who shot him. Or why the officer shot him.” On Tuesday night, the Washington Post (11/21, Weil) reported that the FBI said it is investigating the shooting. According to the Post, “Two Park Police officers opened fire after pursuing a car that they said was connected with a hit-and-run crash in Alexandria. The chase ended in the the Mount Verrnon area of the county at Fort Hunt Road and Alexandria Avenue.” 

## JFK Birth Centennial Ending On Assassination Anniversary. 

The AP (11/22) reports that “a year of events marking the 100th anniversary of President John F. Kennedy’s birth is drawing to a close exactly 54 years after his assassination.” National park rangers at the John Fitzgerald Kennedy National Historic Site will “lay a wreath outside Kennedy’s childhood home in Brookline, Massachusetts, and a 21-gun salute by an honor guard will follow.” 

## Arches Road Construction Nears End, Will Take A Break For Thanksgiving Weekend. 

The Salt Lake (UT) Tribune (11/21, Wharton) reports that Arches National Park officials say a road construction project that “included resurfacing, restoring and rehabilitating 23 miles of roads and pullouts” is nearing competition. According to the article, “with favorable weather, the project could be completed by the end of November or early December.” 

## Gulf Islands National Seashore Road Closures Cause Travel Headaches. 

The Pensacola (FL) News Journal (11/21, Gabriel) reports that “ongoing roadwork in Gulf Islands National Seashore prompted 167 people to cancel campground reservations for the Thanksgiving holiday, the National Park Service said.” Brent Everitt, a spokesman for Gulf Islands National Seashore, “said the park service was working to reopen the two roads as soon as possible.” 

# Office Of Insular Affairs 

## Over 460 Coconut Rhino Beetles, Larvae Collected. 

The Saipan (MNP) Tribune (11/22) reports that “combined efforts to eradicate the coconut rhinoceros beetle infestation on Rota have successfully thwarted over 439 grubs and 39 adult beetles.” Ray Roberto, coordinator for the DLNR Invasive Species, “said that personnel have been tracking the CRB count since the beginning of October and that grubs have been collected and destroyed.” Roberto said, “We are very appreciative of the combined efforts of our agencies and extend our gratitude to the grant funding that was recently awarded by the Office of Insular Affairs to continue these efforts.” 

# Office Of Surface Mining 

## Conservation Groups Argue Peabody Leases Were Improperly Approved. 

Wyoming Public Radio (11/21, McKim) reports that “conservation groups WildEarth Guardians and the Sierra Club recently filed a complaint with the Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement, OSMRE, over two coal leases approved in 2012.” The groups claim “Peabody Energy’s North and South Porcupine leases, which expanded the North Antelope Rochelle mine in the Powder River Basin, were improperly approved and that the company should no longer be allowed to mine there.” The complaint urges “OSMRE to investigate the leases, which were signed by a district manager of the Bureau of Land Management rather than a state manager.” 

# US Geological Survey 

## NASA’s Discovery Of ‘Water’ On Mars Might Actually Be Sand, New Study Finds. 

The U.S. News & World Report (11/21, Newman) reports that “the water that NASA revealed might be on Mars is most likely sand, according to a new U.S. Geological Survey study.” In 2015, NASA scientists “confirmed they had strong evidence that dark streaks – known as ‘recurring slope lineae’ – cascading down mountainsides on the red planet were caused by water.” However, “on Monday, the journal Nature Geoscience published a study conducted by a team of researchers from the U.S. Geological Survey, the Planetary Science Institute, the University of Arizona and Durham University in England that revealed the darker streaks were more likely grains of sand and dust rather than seeping water.” USGS scientist and lead author Colin Dundas said in a statement, “We’ve thought of RSL as possible liquid water flows, but the slopes are more like what we expect for dry sand. This new understanding of RSL supports other evidence that shows that Mars today is very dry.” Also reporting are the Los Angeles Times (11/21, Khan), Fox News (11/21, Cofield), Newsweek (11/21, Osborne), and the Economic Times (IND) (11/21). 

## Additional Reading. 

The Real Science Behind The Unreal Predictions Of Major Earthquakes In 2018. Washington Post (11/21, Kaplan). 

U.K. Water Companies Sometimes Use Dowsing Rods To Find Pipes. NPR (11/21, Domonosk). 

Parts Of A Deer With Chronic Wasting Disease Entered Oregon. Oregonian (11/21, Monroe). 

Geologists Keep Finding More Northwest Earthquake Faults. Oregon Public Broadcasting (11/21, Banse). 

Finding Fault(s): Geologists Keep Finding More Nearby Earthquake Makers. Ashland (OR) Jefferson Public Radio (11/21, Banse). 

# Opinion Pieces 

## The Voice Missing From The Elephant Trophy Debate? Africans. 

Rosie Cooney, chair of the International Union for Conservation of Nature’s Sustainable Use and Livelihoods Specialist Group, writes in the Washington Post (11/21) that the debate over US elephant trophy imports from Zimbabwe and Zambia lacks voices from those living alongside the elephants. Cooney argues that the “first step” to resolving the issue “is to recognize that outrage from afar never solved a local problem. We need to hear the voices of local people. Well-meaning people in the West need to stop shouting and start listening.” 

## Realini: National Monuments Inspire Entrepreneurs. 

In an op-ed for the Durango (CO) Herald (11/21, Realini), Carol Realini, a member of the Conservation for Economic Growth Coalition, supports “the protection of public lands for the quality of life they provide as well as their economic importance.” According to Realini, “not only do protected public lands like national parks and monuments support robust recreation and tourism industries, they also act like magnets for economic activity – drawing companies and talented employees alike, that seek out these incredible places.” Realini claims that the Trump Administration’s “attack on our national monuments is an affront to entrepreneurs who choose to live and work near America’s greatest asset: our protected public lands.” 

## Congress Must Fix Wildfire Funding Problem. 

In an op-ed for the Tallahassee (FL) Democrat (11/21, Morgan), Temperince Morgan, the executive director for The Nature Conservancy in Florida, urges Congress to “provide funding for fire suppression and change the way the U.S. pays to fight wildfires.” Morgan notes that “when the U.S. Forest Service and Department of the Interior do their annual budgeting, they have to plan for costs based on past fire seasons, but fires are increasing.” According to Morgan, “fighting fires drains the agencies’ budgets of money that could go toward making sure forests are healthy and provide the benefits expected of our nation’s public lands.” As a result, “they are forced to borrow funds from programs like recreation and forest health to make up shortfalls.” 

## Additional Reading. 

President Trump Puts His Indifference To The Environment On Hold For Elephants. 

Huffington Post (11/21, D'Angelo). 

Don’t Trim Grand Staircase. If Anything, Expand It.. High Country (CO) News (11/22, Worthy). 

National Parks Belong To American People. Montana Standard (11/22, Abbey). 

Monument Expansion Result Of A Faulty Process. Eugene (OR) Register-Guard (11/22, Roberts). 

Elephants’ Reprieve: How About The Rest Of The Animal Kingdom? The Baltimore Sun (11/21). 

Lifting Of Wildlife Trophy Ban Would Be Unacceptable. Palm Springs (CA) Desert Sun (11/21, Chumbley). 

Editorial: Study Of Surface Mining, Health Issues Should Resume. Williamson (WV) Daily News (11/21). 

Lindblom: Western Wildfires Hurt Virginia, Too, But Congress Can Help. Martinsville (VA) Bulletin (11/22, Lindblom). 

Drones Intrude On The Outdoor Experience. High Country (CO) News (11/21, McEachern). 

No Drilling In North America’s Serengeti. Coastal View News (CA) (11/21, Graham). 

Protecting An Endangered Species. Keyser (WV) Mineral Daily News Tribune (11/21, Sanerib). 

A Troubling Look At The Human Toll Of Mountaintop Removal Mining. Yale University (CT) Environment 360 (11/21, Schiffman). 

# Top National News 

## Media Analyses: Trump Tacitly Endorses Moore. 

Addressing reporters at the White House on Tuesday, President Trump publicly spoke for the first time about allegations that Alabama Senate candidate Roy Moore sexually assaulted teenage girls decades ago, saying that the Republican has denied the accusations. Trump also blasted the Democrat in the Dec. 12 special election, ex-US Attorney Doug Jones. Coverage casts Trump as having tacitly endorsed Moore. On NBC Nightly News (11/21, story 2, 2:50, Holt), Lester Holt reported that Trump is “ending his silence, acknowledging Moore’s denial [of the allegations] and extending him backhanded endorsement by urging voters not to support” Jones. NBC’s Kristen Welker added, “About face. President Trump initially distanced himself from...Moore. But today, all but endorse[d] him. Is an accused child molester better than a Democrat?” Trump was shown saying, “He totally denies it. He says it didn’t happen. You have to listen to him, also. You are talking about, he said 40 years ago, this did not happen.” In the lead segment for the CBS Evening News (11/21, lead story, 2:40, Mason), Anthony Mason flatly asserted that “Trump has decided it is better to have an accused serial sexual predator in the Senate than a Democrat.” CBS broadcast a clip of Trump saying, “I can tell you one thing for sure, we don’t need a liberal person in there, a Democrat.” CBS’ Margaret Brennan added that Trump “voiced support for...Moore, who is facing multiple sexual misconduct allegations, including with teen-aged girls when he was in his 30s.” Trump: “Well, he denies. I mean, Roy Moore denies it. And by the way, he gives a total denial. And I do have to say 40 years is a long time. He has run eight races, and this has never come up.” USA Today (11/21, Jackson) reports that Trump “all but endorsed” Moore, telling reporters that “he doesn’t want another Democrat in the US Senate and” emphasizing the GOP candidate’s “denials of multiple allegations of sexual misconduct involving teenage girls. ‘I can tell you one thing for sure: We don’t need a liberal person in there, a Democrat,’ Trump” said. And of the accusations, Trump said, “Roy Moore denies it; that’s all I can say.” Under the headline “Trump Backs Roy Moore For Senate Seat Despite Sex Allegations,” Bloomberg News (11/21, Sink) reports that Trump “effectively backed” Moore and “attacked Jones, a former federal prosecutor, declaring, ‘You don’t need somebody who’s soft on crime, like Jones.’ Trump also said Jones was ‘bad on borders, bad with the military, bad for the Second Amendment.’” The New York Times (11/21, Shear) reports that “Trump’s defense of Mr. Moore and his rejection of” Jones “in the race were tantamount to an endorsement of Mr. Moore, who has been abandoned by nearly all of the Republican establishment in Washington.” The Hill (11/21, Fabian, Hagen) reported, “With Moore refusing to exit the race, Trump has apparently decided to give a tacit endorsement to the embattled candidate in the hopes that a victory in Alabama will keep his agenda on track. It’s a departure from just two weeks ago, when the White House sought to distance itself from Moore and even suggested he might need to step down.” The Washington Post (11/21, Nakamura) reports that Trump “appeared to offer support” for Moore, “saying the former state judge ‘totally denies’ allegations that he sexually molested underage girls years ago.” Trump also blasted Jones “as being ‘terrible on crime, terrible on borders.’” Reuters (11/21, Mason) reports that Trump “defended” Moore, telling reporters the candidate “had denied allegations of sexual misconduct and emphasizing that he did not want” Jones “to win. Trump has previously said that Moore should step aside if the allegations were true.” The AP (11/21, Miller) says that Trump “discounted allegations of sexual assault against...Moore,” addressing “the swirling controversy...for the first time since top Republican leaders called on Moore to step aside more than a week ago.” Trump “noted that the allegations concerned behavior alleged to have happened decades ago. ‘Forty years is a long time,’ Trump said, questioning why it took so long for Moore’s accusers to come forward.” The AP adds that White House press secretary Sarah Sanders “had said only that Trump ‘thinks that the people of Alabama should make the decision on who their next senator should be.’” Under the headline “Trump Backs Moore, Saying Candidate ‘Totally Denies’ Allegations By Women,” the Washington Times (11/21, Boyer) reports that Trump “stood up for” Moore, while the Los Angeles Times (11/21, Bierman) says the President “even left the door open for campaigning on behalf of Moore. ‘I’ll be letting you know next week,’ he said.” The Washington Examiner (11/21, Westwood) says that Trump “seemingly sided with Moore” in saying “he believed the former state supreme court judge’s denials.” The Wall Street Journal (11/21, Radnofsky, Hook), New York Post (11/21, Fredericks), Breitbart (11/21, Spiering), Townhall (11/21, Brown), Politico (11/21, Tamborrino), and Roll Call (11/21, Bennett) are among the media outlets offering similar reports on Trump’s remarks. In an online “analysis” for CNN (11/21, Cillizza), Chris Cillizza said that Trump’s remarks about Moore are “only likely to add to his party’s growing problems in the race.” Cillizza added, “Everything Trump said...about Moore and the Alabama Senate race runs directly opposite of what the leaders within the national GOP have said in recent weeks. Literally everything. The boost Moore will get from Trump’s comments will make it that much harder to remove the controversial judge from the race or to organize a serious write-in campaign against him.” In another online analysis for CNN (11/21, Zeleny), Jeff Zeleny said that Trump’s “decision to embrace” Moore “was rooted in several factors, but one of the biggest: the noise and confusion from a recent tidal wave of sexual harassment and misconduct allegations from Hollywood to media to politics. ‘(It) made it easier and easier to stick with Moore,’ a Republican source close to the White House said.” Zeleny added that Trump’s comments “also reflect precisely what he has been arguing in the West Wing for the last few days: Moore is denying the charges. He isn’t wavering. So who are we to try and step in? Two Republicans familiar with the President’s thinking offered that explanation about his comments.” Rep. Don Beyer (D-VA) said on CNN’s Situation Room (11/21), “It’s not surprising that Donald Trump would really defend all of Roy Moore’s denials, because he’s been denying all the 16 women that have come forward already. These are both men with long histories of women coming forward with these allegations.” Rep. Mike Quigley (D-IL) said on CNN’s Situation Room (11/21), “To paraphrase [Trump’s] own daughter, there’s a special place in hell for those who back a child abuser for the United States Senate. There is absolutely no worse place we can go from here. It’s just unimaginable. ... Let’s just remember, this is a candidate, Trump, who has a lot of women alleging the same sorts of thing about him, so I think in his own mind this is okay, especially if time has passed.” CNN political director David Chalian said on CNN’s Situation Room (11/21), “What is astonishing is that [Trump] has now basically endorsed an accused child molester for the United States Senate. He is going to go down there, perhaps, if he does, and...he’s going to help Roy Moore. ... The core Trump supporters who overlap a lot with the core Moore supporters are going to be feel energized to have the President on board with this campaign.” Rep. Charlie Dent (R-PA) said on MSNBC’s Morning Joe (11/21) that “Moore would be a terrible addition to the Senate. He should not be elected. He was disqualified before the recent allegations of sexual misconduct. He should not be elected. I would never support a man like that.” Amy Walter of the Cook Political Report said on Fox News’ Special Report 

(11/21), “What’s remarkable about the way that Roy Moore has been running the campaign is he’s been focused solely on Roy Moore and he has spent very little time talking about Doug Jones. Today, his campaign [is] going out and defending themselves, going after the credibility of these women. ... If you are Roy Moore and you’re spending more time trying to defend and discredit women than you are talking about policies or about your opponent, that is not a great place to be a couple weeks out form Election Day.” 

Politico: In Private Talks, Trump Expressed Doubt About Moore Accusers’ Allegations. 

Politico (11/21, Isenstadt) reported that Trump’s “near-endorsement” of Moore came after “days of behind-the-scenes talks in which he vented about Moore’s accusers and expressed skepticism about their accounts. During animated conversations with senior Republicans and White House aides,” Trump “said he doubted the stories presented by Moore’s accusers and questioned why they were emerging now, just weeks before the election, according to two White House advisers and two other people familiar with the talks. The White House advisers said the president drew parallels between Moore’s predicament and the one he faced just over a year ago when, during the final weeks of the 2016 campaign, Trump confronted a long line of women who accused him of harassment” – allegations Trump “adamantly denied.” 

Poll: Moore Leads Jones 47%-45%. In an “exclusive,” WBRC-TV Birmingham, AL (11/21, Journey) reported on its website that a Raycom News Network/Strategy Research poll of 3,000 likely Alabama voters shows Moore leading Jones 47%-45%, with 5% undecided and 3% saying they intended to write in a candidate. The report did not indicate when the new poll was in the field, but WBRC-TV said, “The new poll suggests allegations against Moore have chipped away at his lead, which was [11 points] in a November 8th Raycom News Network poll conducted by Strategy Research.” 

Poll By Firm That Has Worked For Moore: Moore Leads By Six Points. Breitbart (11/21, Boyle) reported that a WT&S Consulting (R) poll of 11,641 Alabama likely voters, taken Nov. 18-20, shows Moore leading Jones 46.4%-40.%, with 13% undecided. The poll “includes 60.9 percent Republicans and 39.1 percent Democrats – approximately the margins by which President Donald Trump defeated failed 2016 Democratic presidential nominee Hillary Rodham Clinton in Alabama.” Breitbart said that WT&S Consulting “has done some work for the Moore campaign this election cycle, but before the runoff in the GOP primary where Moore” unseated appointed Sen. Luther Strange. 

Nationwide Poll: 60% Say Moore Should Be Expelled From Senate If Elected. The Hill (11/21, Delk) reported that in a Quinnipiac University national poll of 1,415 US voters, taken Nov. 15-20, 60% of those surveyed said “Moore should be expelled from the chamber if he wins” the Dec. 12 election, while 28% said he “should not. Republicans were the only voter group in the survey to say Moore should not be expelled from the Senate, 49 to 33 percent, while the majority of voters in every other category of political party, gender, and education level said the Senate should remove him from office.” Under the headline “Nearly Half Of Republicans Do Not Want Roy Moore Expelled If He Wins: Poll,” the Washington Times (11/21, Persons) quotes Quinnipiac’s Tim Malloy as saying, “Roy Moore may make it to the Senate chambers, but an overwhelming majority of American voters would like to rip the welcome mat out from under him and send him packing back to Alabama.” 

Jones Ad Invokes Ivanka Trump, Sessions, Shelby. Politico (11/21, Strauss) reported that the Jones campaign is “airing two new television ads aimed at winning over Republicans who could be persuaded to cross over and vote for the Democrat. One ad, called ‘Voices,’ began airing Monday night and highlights Ivanka Trump, Sen. Richard Shelby (R-Ala.), and Attorney General Jeff Sessions saying they have no reason to doubt the accusations of a number of women who have accused Moore of pursuing them romantically while he was in his 30s and they were teenagers.” The Washington Post (11/21, Weigel, Scherer) reports that in that ad, the President’s “daughter is quoted saying of the Moore allegations: ‘There’s a special place in hell for people who prey on children.’ Sessions is quoted from a congressional hearing where he was asked about the Moore story: ‘I have no reason to doubt these young women.’ Shelby, who has been critical of Moore, is quoted on his plan to write in another name on the ballot.” The Hill (11/21, Greenwood) reported that in the spot, a narrator adds, “Conservative voices putting children and women over party – doing what’s right.” 

Woman In UAB Sex Abuse Case: Jones A Hypocrite For Stance On Moore Accusers. 

Alabama Live (11/21, Yurkanin) reported that Brittany Benefield, “who sued her university in 2001 over sexual abuse she allegedly suffered as a 15-year-old,” says that “Jones questioned the timing and motivation of her accusations while defending employees of the University of Alabama at Birmingham in a $40 million lawsuit. ... Jones has said he finds Moore’s accusers credible. ‘I find it to be the height of hypocrisy that he sets his campaign to be on the moral high ground against Roy Moore,’ said Benefield. In public statements about the case, in his role defending university officials, Jones cast doubt on her claim that the university officials were responsible. ‘The charges against UAB administrators and coaches are entirely without merit and represent nothing more than a cynical attempt to extort money by slandering this institution and its employees,’ Jones said at the time.” 

Moore Camp Offers “New Evidence” Undermining Accusers’ Claims. The Washington Examiner (11/21, Morrongiello) reported that supporters of Moore “offered several pieces of ‘new evidence’ on Tuesday that they claimed should discredit the two women who accused” Moore “of sexual assault.” For example, ex-Moore chief of staff Ben Dupree “said Leigh Corfman...was lying when she claimed” Moore “would pick her up around the corner from her mother’s house when she was barely a teenager and take her back to his home. ‘Corfman claims that Moore picked her up around the corner from her house. However, according to public records, we’ve been able to find that Corfman’s supposed pick-up place was more than a mile away from her mother’s house,’ Dupree said, claiming that Corfman was living with her father at the time.” 

## Trump: AT&T Purchase Of Time Warner “Not A Good Deal For The Country.” 

President Trump on Tuesday “stood by his criticism” of AT&T’s deal to buy Time Warner, Inc., Reuters (11/21, Bartz) reports. As he left the White House for Florida, Trump said, “I’m not going to get involved in litigation, but personally I’ve always felt that that was a deal that’s not a good deal for the country. ... I think your pricing’s going to go up, I don’t think it’s a good deal for the country.” The Justice Department has sued to stop the deal, and Reuters says the case will get more attention than other merger challenges “because Trump has been a vocal critic of Time Warner’s CNN, and opposed AT&T’s purchase of Time Warner on the campaign trail last year.” A Wall Street Journal (11/21) editorial takes a negative view of the DOJ lawsuit, arguing that whether or not Trump inspired it, the suit misunderstands markets and undercuts the rule of law. The Hill (11/21, Greenwood) reports that that DOJ “allegedly demanded earlier this month that AT&T sell off CNN’s parent company from Time Warner as a condition for regulatory approval of the sale,” which “immediately prompted questions about whether it was politically motivated, given Trump’s frequent criticism of CNN.” Bloomberg News (11/21, Sink) reports that during the campaign, Trump said his Administration would not allow the merger, and “he’s tweeted repeated criticism of CNN since assuming office. Lawyers for the two companies may argue that Trump’s statements indicate undue political influence over regulators considering the merger.” The Wall Street Journal (11/21, Radnofsky, Fitzgerald) also reports on Trump’s comments. 

## Murkowski Backs Individual Mandate Repeal’s Inclusion In Tax Bill. Politico (11/21, Diamond) reports that Sen. Lisa Murkowski wrote in an op-ed for the Alaskan newspaper Daily News-Miner that she supports efforts to repeal the ACA’s individual mandate. Murkowski wrote, “I have always supported the freedom to choose. ... I believe that the federal government should not force anyone to buy something they do not wish to buy, in order to avoid being taxed.” Murkowski’s support “may be a boon for Senate Republicans’ tax legislation, which includes mandate repeal and is expected to be taken up on the Senate floor next week.” However, a Murkowski spokesperson “told POLITICO that the comments should not be construed as support for the tax bill, which does not yet appear to have sufficient support to pass the chamber.” 

## Senate Security Spending Bill Includes Funds For Border Wall. 

The Washington Times (11/21, Dinan) reports that the new homeland security bill released by Senate Republicans this week includes “$1.6 billion for the first installment of President Trump’s border wall.” The measure does not use the term “wall” but “calls for $1.6 billion in funding for ‘physical barriers’ and border roads – matching Mr. Trump’s original request for money to build or repair fencing along 74 more miles of the U.S.-Mexico line.” A House security spending bill “with the money included” has already passed. 

WPost Analysis: Administration Building A “Bureaucratic Wall” To Limit Immigration. 

The Washington Post (11/21, Sacchetti, Miroff) reports that while Trump’s vision of a wall along the US-Mexico border “may never be realized, and almost certainly not as a 2,000-mile physical structure spanning sea to sea,” in “a systematic and less visible way, his administration is following a blueprint to reduce the number of foreigners living in the United States – those who are undocumented and those here legally – and overhaul the US immigration system for generations to come.” According to the Post, “federal officials are wielding executive authority to assemble a bureaucratic wall that could be more effective than any concrete and metal one.” The Administration has “moved to slash the number of refugees, accelerate deportations and terminate the provisional residency of more than a million people, among other measures.” The White House, the Post adds, “is attempting to shift the country back toward the tighter controls on immigration in place before the 1960s.” 

## FCC Chairman Proposes Repeal Of Net Neutrality Rules. 

FCC Chairman Ajit Pai on Tuesday proposed repealing net neutrality rules, a move that media reports largely case as a victory for large Internet service providers like AT&T, Comcast, and Verizon. The Los Angeles Times (11/21, Puzzanghera) says the move set up “a vote next month to roll back the controversial Obama-era initiative,” and “triggered another round in a fight dating to 2003 over whether the government should be actively involved in assuring the unfettered flow of information on the internet or leave it to market forces.” While Republicans, “who now have a 3-2 majority on the FCC, are poised to win this latest battle,” marking “a significant victory in the party’s deregulatory push since Trump took office,” the fight “is probably headed to courts, assuming the FCC repeals the rules as expected in a vote on Dec. 14.” Pai, the AP (11/21) reports, believes the net neutrality rules “discourage the ISPs from making investments in their network that would provide even better and faster online access.” Pai said in a statement, “Under my proposal, the federal government will stop micromanaging the internet.” The New York Times (11/21, Kang) takes a decidedly negative tone toward Pai’s proposal, saying it “clear[s] the way for companies to charge more and block access to some websites.” The Times adds that the “clear winners” will be “the giant companies that provide internet access to phones and computers, which have fought for years against broadband regulations.” To the Wall Street Journal (11/21, McKinnon, Knutson), the plan is a victory for cable and wireless companies that will make way for deals between ISPs and online media and other services. Similarly, the Washington Post (11/21, Fung) says Pai’s move “hands a win to broadband companies such as AT&T, Verizon and Comcast.” Reuters (11/21, Shepardson) also calls the plan “a victory for big internet service providers such as AT&T Inc, Comcast Corp and Verizon Communications,” and USA Today (11/21, Snider) reports that while passage of the plan “would be seen as a victory for big telecom and cable companies such as AT&T, Comcast and Verizon,” consumer advocates and Net media companies “including Facebook, Google and Netflix are concerned that telecom and cable companies could give preferential benefit to their own services and content.” Similarly, The Hill (11/21, Neidig) says that while the move “is a win for companies like Verizon, Comcast and AT&T,” to “net neutrality supporters, repealing the rules means giving those companies a free pass to block, slow or favor certain internet content.” Politico (11/21, McGill) reports that the plan was “quickly blasted” by the FCC’s two Democrats, Jessica Rosenworcel and Mignon Clyburn. Rosenworcel called it “ridiculous and offensive” to Americans and Clyburn “said it is a giveaway to the country’s largest communications companies.” The plan also drew fire from congressional Democrats. Rep. Frank Pallone and Sens. Ron Wyden, Ed Markey and Brian Schatz “all slammed the announcement, with Markey calling for a ‘firestorm of opposition.’” to the plan. Bloomberg News (11/21, Shields) says House Minority Leader Pelosi blasted the proposal, saying in an email that it is “an all-out assault on the entrepreneurship, innovation and competition at the heart of the internet. ... The administration is moving to destroy the openness and dynamism of the internet.” Meanwhile GOP Reps. Greg Walden and Marsha Blackburn praised Pai’s plan, saying it shows the FCC “understands the importance of making sure the internet continues to flourish under a light-touch regulatory regime,” The Washington Times (11/21, Richardson) describes “outrage” over the plan from “Democrats, progressives and celebrities who have made net neutrality a cause celebre.” In addition to lawmakers, actor and comedian Patton Oswalt “posted a tweet calling on supporters to ‘bombard’ Mr. Pai, listing his email and phone number.” NARAL Pro-Choice America said the proposal “would make it harder to get information on how & where to access abortion. And it will make it harder for activists to organize against Trump’s anti-choice, racist, extremist agenda.” ABC World News Tonight (11/21, story 11, 0:25, Muir) briefly reported on the proposal Tuesday evening. A New York Times (11/21, Saba) analysis says the Administration is “scrambling its media signals” as DOJ sued to block the merger at the same time the FCC “intends to scrap rules that force internet providers to treat web traffic equally.” The Times says Trump Administration “watchdogs...roaming all over the field,” stands “in contrast to President Barack Obama’s tenure, when the F.C.C. and the Justice Department looked to the same lodestar for guidance on competition.” Meanwhile the Trump Administration’s “confused approach makes for a blurry regulatory picture.” In an op-ed for Roll Call (11/21), Sen. Ted Cruz and FCC Commissioner Michael O’Rielly write that the Obama Administration “made the decision to set aside decades of bipartisan agreement and enact a radical proposal that reclassified the internet as a regulated public utility.” Those regulations “give federal bureaucrats new authority to regulate pricing and terms of service and eventually even collect billions in new taxes.” Pai “seeks to repeal the so-called Open Internet Order and return the internet to its original classification as an information service, which allowed the internet to flourish.” However, there are already “scores of politicians and state and local regulators who have indicated an interest in replicating the Obama administration’s fatally flawed rules at the state and local level,” which is why “it is imperative that the FCC establish a strong deregulatory federal framework for broadband regulations and preempt state and local regulators from having the opportunity to implement the next internet power grab.” 

## Gallup Poll Finds Worry About Economy At Lowest Level In 18 Years. 

The Washington Free Beacon (11/21, Meyer) reports that a new Gallup poll found “Americans’ worry about the economy are at the lowest level seen in 18 years, according to a poll from Gallup.” According to the poll, “only 15 percent of Americans see the economy as a top problem facing the United States.” However, Americans “are increasingly seeing poor government as a major problem.” Twenty-three percent “say they are dissatisfied with government, which is a response that rates higher than any other issue and has remained the top problem for every month this year.” 

## Whitefish Suspends Puerto Rico Work Over Unpaid Bills. 

The New York Times (11/21, Robles) reports that Whitefish Energy Holdings, the power company hired to help restore power to Puerto Rico, will be “standing down” because of the tens of millions of dollars it is owed for several weeks of work. Despite being fired last month “after widespread criticism and multiple investigations of a $300 million contract it received to help repair the island’s power grid,” Whitefish and the workers it employed “were supposed to stay on the job until the end of the month.” Whitefish “has billed about $103 million – and $83 million is still outstanding.” 

# Editorial Wrap-Up 

## New York Times. 

“Who To Blame For Your Subway Nightmare.” The New York Times (11/21) editorializes that the failure within New York’s subway system “has plenty of fathers: governors and mayors who, one after another, siphoned money from mass transit to pay for whatever else suited their budgetary fancy.” The Times ridicules the current system as featuring cars that “now wheeze along at the mercy of warped tracks, frayed cables and a signal system that was state of the art, maybe, when Americans were dancing the jitterbug.” The Times points to George Pataki’s tenure as New York governor as the beginning of a streak of elected officials who have been willing to divert money away from the system in favor of other priorities. 

## Washington Post. 

“The United States Torments Its Poorest Neighbor.” The Washington Post (11/21) editorializes that the Administration’s decision “to expel nearly 60,000 Haitians who have lived legally in the United States since a massive earthquake devastated their homeland in 2010” means that “the world’s richest and most powerful country is intentionally giving the Western Hemisphere’s poorest and most vulnerable nation a gratuitous kick in the rear end.” The Post calls DHS assertions that the number of displaced Haitians has decreased significantly and that Haiti can receive normal levels of returned citizens both “unsubstantiated” and “specious.” The Post concludes by labeling the decision “a beggar-thy-neighbor policy unworthy of a great power and unsuited to a nation with a tradition of compassion.” 

“Jeff Sessions Keeps Waging His Failing War Against Sanctuary Cities.” A Washington Post (11/21) says that while the Trump Administration “is on an impressive judicial losing streak” against sanctuary cities, it “remains undeterred, as the Justice Department girds for more battles whose stakes – a few million dollars in federal funds withheld from offending cities – make a mockery of the dire rhetoric deployed by officials in Washington.” The Post argues that the Administration “has no valid legal justification for its insistence that state and local law enforcement officers act as proxies for federal immigration agents and no basis for threatening to withhold funding if they refuse.” 

“Why Would Trump Choose This Academic To Lead The Census Bureau.” The Washington Post (11/21) editorializes that Thomas Brunell, President Trump’s reported preferred candidate for the role of deputy director of the Census Bureau, would be a poor choice for the position. The Post points to Brunell’s “political affiliations and previous work” as factors that could “harm perceptions of the bureau’s integrity, an institution in which Americans must have complete faith.” The Post asserts that Census Bureau leaders should be “seasoned in government operations and ready to take on a huge management challenge” due to the perennially underfunded nature of the bureau. 

## Wall Street Journal. 

“Trump’s Dubious Trust-Busting.” A Wall Street Journal (11/21) editorial takes a negative view of DOJ’s lawsuit to block AT&T’s acquisition of Time-Warner, arguing that whether or not President Trump inspired it, the suit misunderstands markets and undercuts the rule of law. 

“Keystone XL On The Cusp.” The Wall Street Journal (11/21) editorializes that the risks presented by the proposed Keystone XL pipeline are more than justified because of the project’s economic benefits. The Journal opines that the true agenda of critics of the pipeline is to keep oil from being removed from the ground at all, which the Journal finds to be an unrealistic goal. The Journal also asserts that pipelines are the safest way to deliver crude oil. 

“China’s Burma ‘Solution.’” A Wall Street Journal (11/21) editorial says that as international calls for action against the Burmese army over the Rohingya humanitarian crisis intensify, Chinese Foreign Minister Wang Yi proposed a solution that would likely encourage the Burmese government to continue mistreating the Muslim minorities. The Journal says Wang’s remarks signal that Beijing’s support for the Burmese army remains steadfast, threatening to accelerate Burma’s shift toward extreme nationalism. 

# Big Picture 

## Headlines From Today’s Front Pages. 

Wall Street Journal: 

FCC Plans To End Net Neutrality In Win For Cable, Wireless Firms Waking Up Alone: How Elite Plotters Toppled Mugabe’s 37-Year Reign Mueller Probes Jared Kushner’s Contacts With Foreign Leaders Uber Reveals Data Breach And Cover-up, Leading To Two Firings Harvard Faces DOJ Probe Over Affirmative-Action Policies 

New York Times: 

FCC Plans Net Neutrality Repeal In A Victory For Telecoms How Trump’s Hands-Off Approach To Policing Is Frustrating Some Chiefs Trump Defends Roy Moore, Citing Candidate’s Denial Of Sexual Misconduct Democrats Move Swiftly Against Conyers Amid Latest Harassment Charges Toronto Transit Chief Is Tapped To Run New York’s Ailing Subways They Stayed Put, but Their City Disappeared Robert Mugabe Resigns As Zimbabwe’s President, Ending 37-Year Rule ‘Hi, Drumstick.’ President Trump Pardons A Turkey, And Likes It. 

Washington Post: 

Trump Boosts Moore In Ala. FCC Moves To End Net Neutrality Standard Zimbabwe’s Longtime Leader Steps Down Airbnb Takes Up Residence In DC’s Debate On Gentrification How Trump Is Building A Wall Of Bureaucracy 

Financial Times: 

Robert Mugabe Steps Down As President Of Zimbabwe Apple’s iPhone X Assembled By Illegal Student Labor Harassment In The Workplace: FT Readers Share Their Experiences EU And UK Aim To Strike Brexit Divorce Deal Within 3 Weeks 

Washington Times: 

Courts Use Trump’s Pontificating To Rule Against His Policies Progressives Erupt Over FCC Proposal To Repeal Obama-Era Net Neutrality Rules Pakistan’s Islamic Schools Rife With Child Sex Abuse That Goes Unpunished Putin’s Plan To End Syrian War Strengthens Russian Influence In Middle East South Korean Party Leader Choo Sees Promise In Trump’s Hawkish Stand On North Korea Brazil Nears Constitutional Ban On Abortion With No Exceptions Story Lineup From Last Night’s Network News: 

ABC: Trump-Roy Moore; Charlie Rose Fired; Michigan Rep-Sexual Harassment Settlement; Holiday Travel Rush; Weather Forecast; Russia-Syria Meeting; Border Patrol Agents Attacked; Zimbabwe Dictator Resigns; Black Friday Shopping; Alabama-Escapee Manhunt; FCC-Net Neutrality Roll Back; HBO Cyber Attack Suspect Charged; Thanksgiving-American Turkey. 

CBS: Trump-Roy Moore; Charlie Rose Fired; Charlie Rose Fired-CBS; Cleveland Rape Crisis Center; Michigan Rep-Sexual Harassment Settlement; Immigration Policy-Protected Status; Zimbabwe Dictator Resigns; TSA-New Screening Procedure; Uber-Security Breach; WH-Turkey Pardon; Workplace Harassment. 

NBC: Uber-Security Breach; Trump-Roy Moore; Charlie Rose Fired; Michigan Rep-Sexual Harassment Settlement; Border Patrol Agents Attacked; Argentine Missing Sub; Holiday Travel Rush; Generic Drug Price; Harvard-Discrimination Lawsuit; Alaska-Northern Lights; WH-Turkey Pardon; High School Principal-Charity. 

Network TV At A Glance: 

Charlie Rose Fired – 11 minutes, 40 seconds Trump-Roy Moore – 8 minutes, 45 seconds Michigan Rep-Sexual Harassment Settlement – 3 minutes, 35 seconds 

Story Lineup From This Morning’s Radio News Broadcasts: 

ABC: David Cassidy Dies; Uber-Security Breach; Trump-Roy Moore; Michigan Rep-Sexual Harassment Settlement. 

CBS: David Cassidy Dies; Trump-Roy Moore; Charlie Rose Fired; Uber-Security Breach; Black Friday Shopping. 

FOX: Michigan Rep-Sexual Harassment Settlement; Trump-Roy Moore; Charlie Rose Fired; David Cassidy Dies. 

NPR: Trump-Roy Moore; Michigan Rep-Sexual Harassment Settlement; Federal Reserve Appointment; David Cassidy Dies; FCC-Net Neutrality Roll Back. 

# Washington Schedule 

## Today’s Events In Washington. 

White House: 

PRESIDENT TRUMP — No public events scheduled. VICE PRESIDENT PENCE — No public schedule announced. 

US Senate: On recess until 27 November. 

US House: On recess until 27 November. 

Other: No relevant event scheduled. 

# Last Laughs 

## Late Night Political Humor. 

Stephen Colbert: “First Cosby, then Weinstein, now Charlie Rose. Who’s next? Yoda? ‘Mmm, tense you seem, shoulders I will rub. Reported to HR I am.’” 

Stephen Colbert: “But of all the recent sexual abuse allegations, the creme de la creep is Alabama Senate candidate and founder of ‘take daughter from school day,’ Roy Moore.” 

James Corden: “It was announced that the Donald J. Trump Foundation, the Trump family’s charity, is shutting down. He’s shutting down his charity right before Christmas. If Trump wasn’t going to be visited by three ghosts on Christmas Eve before, he definitely is now. Apparently, Trump said he’s closing the foundation because he already has his hands full with too many other charity cases like Eric, Donald Junior, Ivanka. Not Tiffany, she’s out on her own, and she knows that.” 

James Corden: “The Attorney General says they can’t shut down the charity because it’s currently being investigated. I guess when they heard Trump was doing something nice for other people, they were, like, ‘This sounds suspicious. We need to investigate.’” 

James Corden: “The President pardoned two turkeys today and then immediately criticized them on Twitter for not being grateful enough.” 

James Corden: “Yesterday, Melania Trump welcomed the official White House Christmas tree. Take a look. That poor, lifeless thing, standing behind the tree.” 

Jimmy Fallon: “Today, the White House held its annual turkey pardon, and President Trump pardoned a turkey named Drumstick, which was nice until he told the turkey, ‘Okay, now you pardon me.’ No, sorry, he didn’t mean that. That’s not how it works.” 

Jimmy Fallon: “CBS just fired Charlie Rose after allegations of sexual harassment. Yep. They told him to clear out his desk, put on some pants, and leave.” 

Jimmy Fallon: “If all the sexual assault allegations coming out of the entertainment industry or news agency have got you down, you can take a break and distract yourself with the sexual assault allegations coming out of Washington.” 

Seth Meyers: “An Alabama pastor expressed his support for accused Senate candidate Roy Moore in a recent interview and said, quote, ‘There are some 14-year-old who, the way they look, could pass for 20.’ He’s the pastor of the First Church of the Virgin Mary, according to her, anyway.”  

> Copyright 2017 by Bulletin Intelligence LLC Reproduction or redistribution without permission prohibited. Content is drawn from thousands of newspapers, national magazines, national and local television programs, radio broadcasts, social-media platforms and additional forms of open-source data. Sources for Bulletin Intelligence audience-size estimates include Scarborough, GfK MRI, comScore, Nielsen, and the Audit Bureau of Circulation. Data from and access to third party social media platforms, including but not limited to Facebook, Twitter, Instagram and others, is subject to the respective platform’s terms of use. Services that include Factiva content are governed by Factiva’s terms of use. Services including embedded Tweets are also subject to Twitter for Website's information and privacy policies. The Department of the Interior News Briefing is published five days a week by Bulletin Intelligence, which creates custom briefings for government and corporate leaders. We can be found on the Web at BulletinIntelligence.com, or called at (703) 483-6100. MEMBER ALERT from DSC Executive Director
> View this email in your browser

Dear Members of DSC and Fellow Hunters, You have probably heard the news about the positive enhancement finding for elephants from Zambia and Zimbabwe. DSC has been and remains active in the 

# Conversation Contents 

## Fwd: MEMBER ALERT from DSC Executive Director 

# Corey Mason <Corey@biggame.org> 

## From: Corey Mason <Corey@biggame.org> 

## Sent: Tue Nov 21 2017 23:44:35 GMT-0700 (MST) 

## To: " @fws.gov" @fws.gov> 

## Subject: Fwd: MEMBER ALERT from DSC Executive Director Director Sheehan, Wanted to pass this along. Please let me know how I can help you. Corey Mason Executive Director Dallas Safari Club Office: 972.980.9800 Cell: 214.600.5284 

## From: Info <info@biggame.org> 

## Date: November 22, 2017 at 1:45:46 AM GMT+2 

## To: Corey Mason <Corey@biggame.org> 

## Subject: MEMBER ALERT from DSC Executive Director Reply-To: Info <Info@biggame.org> (b) (6) (b) (6) discussions and is working purposefully to support the USFWS. Last week, we created a video explaining what it means, sending it to social media outlets, and on Friday sent a press release to broadcast and traditional media outlets. Please follow the links for both to hear the messages. DSC is proud to advocate for conservation and hunters at the local, state, federal and international levels. In fact, DSC President, Craig Nyhus, and I are currently attending meetings in South Africa and Namibia with the conservation and hunting community. Please keep an eye on our Facebook page and our news blog, www.DSCNewsCenter.org, to stay current. We appreciate your staunch support and also your faith that DSC will advocate for hunters worldwide. Good hunting, Corey Mason DSC Executive Director    

> Copyright © Dallas Safari Club 2017 All rights reserved. Become a DSC volunteer!
> Our mailing address is:
> Dallas Safari Club, 13709 Gamma Road, Dallas, TX 75244 972-980-9800 Check out the newly redesigned DSC News Center unsubscribe from this list update subscription preferences
> This email was sent to corey@biggame.org
> why did I get this? unsubscribe from this list update subscription preferences Dallas Safari Club · 13709 Gamma Road · Dallas, TX 75244 · USA

# Conversation Contents 

## U.S. Department of the Interior News Briefing for Tuesday, November 21, 2017 

# Bulletin Intelligence <Interior@bulletinintelligence.com> 

## From: Bulletin Intelligence <Interior@bulletinintelligence.com> 

## Sent: Tue Nov 21 2017 04:00:20 GMT-0700 (MST) 

## To: <Interior@bulletinintelligence.com> 

## Subject: U.S. Department of the Interior News Briefing for Tuesday, November 21, 2017  

> Mobile version and searchable archives available here. Please click here to subscribe.
> DATE: TUESDAY, NOVEMBER 21, 2017 6:00 AM EST

# Today's Table Of Contents 

DOI In The News 

• Los Alamos (NM) Daily Post: ‘Finally!’ Secretary Zinke Welcomes Confirmation Of Reclamation Nominee Brenda Burman. • Politico: ‘UGH!’: Zinke’s Wife’s Travel Caused Headaches For Interior Staff. • Palm Springs (CA) Desert Sun: Ryan Zinke Extends Comment Deadline. • Washington Post: The Energy 202: New ‘Acting Director’ At Interior Office Worries Public Lands Advocates. • Salt Lake (UT) Tribune: What Does Kane County Want In A Redrawn Grand Staircase-Escalante Monument? • Washington Times: Navy SEALs Remember Christian Lambertsen, Humble Beginnings Of Swimmer-commandos. • Daily Caller: US Forest Service Internal Review Finds 34 Cases Of Sexual Harassment. • Snopes: Is This Ryan Zinke Posing With A Dead Elephant? • Minneapolis Star Tribune: Additional Coverage: Mille Lacs Band Rallies For Police. 

Bureau Of Indian Affairs 

• DOI Still Seeking Cobell Claimants As Deal Deadline Looms. 

Bureau Of Indian Education 

• Chemawa Staff, Students Question Hiring Practices And Non-Native Administration. 

Bureau Of Land Management 

• Law360: BLM Tells 10th Circ. No Need To Revisit Frack Rule Decision. • KNPR-FM Las Vegas: Burning Man, BLM To Study Festivals Impact On Black Rock Desert. Bureau Of Ocean Energy Management 

• Panel’s Approval Of Offshore Drilling Bill Could Threaten Ban Off Florida. 

Fish And Wildlife Service 

• The Hill: Greens Sue Trump Over Elephant Trophy Decision. • U.S. News & World Report: Before Elephants, US Loosened Limits On Lion Trophies. • Anderson (SC) Independent-Mail: Docks To Be Expanded At Green Pond Landing Before Bassmaster Classic. 

National Park Service 

• WATE-TV Knoxville (TN): Sevier County Wildfires: Lessons Learned. • Omaha (NE) World-Herald: ‘A Great Gift To America’: After Long Journey, Tractor Belonging To Last Homesteader Is On Display In Nebraska. • Fresno (CA) Bee: Giant Sequoias: Trees Suffered In California Drought. • Clark County (WA) Columbian: Vancouver Barracks Renovation Underway. • Government Video: GV Expo: Staying Within The Budget When Creating Video. 

Office Of Insular Affairs 

• New York Times: Small Island Nations Losing Faith In Global Efforts Against Climate Change. • NPR: Tourists Are Returning To The U.S. Virgin Islands As Recovery Is Still Happening. • Virgin Islands Daily News: Mapp Makes Case For $7.5 Billion To Senate Committee. • Virgin Islands Consortium (VIR): Medical Evacuees And Their Caretakers Say They’ve Been Neglected By Mapp Administration. • Saipan (MNP) Tribune: CW-1 Cap Delay 2nd-Longest In Program’s History. • U.S. News & World Report: Wildlife Agencies Meet On Guam To Discuss Brown Tree Snakes. • Washington Post: Spend A Day With The Longest Serving Ambassador To The U.S. He’s From Palau. 

US Geological Survey 

• Washington Post: The Case For Flowing Water On Mars Is Drying Up. • Additional Reading. 

Opinion Pieces 

• Tribune Editorial: Bring The Government To The People? • Kudos To Air Force, Donors For Operation Christmas Drop: Our View. • Additional Reading. 

Top National News 

• Bloomberg News: Trump Names North Korea A State Sponsor Of Terrorism. • Associated Press: Trump Promises Tax Reform By Christmas. • Associated Press: Yellen To Resign From Federal Reserve Board. • Associated Press: Nebraska PSC Approves Alternative Keystone XL Route. 

Editorial Wrap-Up 

• New York Times. - “Justice At Last For The Youngest Inmates?” - “‘Only Morons Pay The Estate Tax.’” • Washington Post. - “Children Are Starving In Yemen. This White House Should Intercede.” - “Time For Republicans To Denounce This Tax Nonsense.” - “A Judge Makes The Right Call On Trump’s Would-Be Transgender Ban.” • Wall Street Journal. - “Have They Got A Bond For You.” - “North Korea, Terror Sponsor.” - “Angela Merkel’s Failing Center.” Big Picture 

> • Headlines From Today’s Front Pages.

Washington Schedule 

> • Today’s Events In Washington.

Last Laughs 

> • Late Night Political Humor.

# DOI In The News 

## ‘Finally!’ Secretary Zinke Welcomes Confirmation Of Reclamation Nominee Brenda Burman. 

The Los Alamos (NM) Daily Post (11/20) reports that the U.S. Senate last Friday confirmed Brenda Burman as the Commissioner of the Bureau of Reclamation. Burman is “the first woman to ever lead the Bureau.” Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke said, “Finally! After more than 142 days, I’m excited to welcome Brenda Burman to lead the Bureau of Reclamation. Brenda is a veteran of the Bureau and her extensive experience on water projects across the country will be an incredible asset for the Department. After senseless and unprecedented hold-ups in the Senate, we can finally move forward with key water projects across the country.” Arizona Public Media (11/20, Maxedon) reports that Burman said, “The men and women of Reclamation have helped the West work through our most difficult water issues for more than 100 years. I look forward to working with Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke.” Additional coverage was provided by the Klamath Falls (OR) Herald And News (11/20, Dillemuth) and Federal News Radio (DC) (11/20, Wing). 

## ‘UGH!’: Zinke’s Wife’s Travel Caused Headaches For Interior Staff. 

Politico (11/20, Lefebvre) reports new records – which the “liberal watchdog group” The Western Values Project says “uncover the potential misuse of government resources” – show that Lola Zinke, wife of Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke, “has frustrated department staffers by saddling them with extra work when she traveled with him on official business.” The records last-minute show requests by Mrs. Zinke “to join high-level dinners and additions to the guest list for a conservative group’s event near the couple’s home in Southern California earlier this year.” Politico adds that “the documents shed new light on the outsize profile Lola Zinke has established compared with the typical Cabinet secretary’s spouse.” The AP (11/19) reports that the Interior Department “denied any wrongdoing.” The department said Mrs. Zinke “pays her own way when she accompanies her husband on trips, and the travel is approved by ethics officials in advance.” Also reporting are the Washington Post (11/20, Eilperin), the Washington Examiner (11/20, Siegel), and Raw Story (11/20, AL-SIBAI). 

## Ryan Zinke Extends Comment Deadline. 

The Palm Springs (CA) Desert Sun (11/20, Roth) reports that the Trump Administration has “given the public an extra month to comment on its proposal” to raise fees popular national parks. Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke “originally set a comment deadline of Thanksgiving Day, November 23, giving the public just one month to weigh in.” However, “as of Monday evening, the public comment page on the National Park Service’s website had been updated to show a deadline of December 22 at 11:59 p.m.” 

Cantwell: Upping National Park Admission Fee To $70 Is ‘Unconscionable’. The Seattle Post-Intelligencer (11/20, Connelly) reports that a proposal to raise fees at popular national parks was panned by Sen. Maria Cantwell on Monday. Cantwell said, “The outdoor economy has been an unbelievable juggernaut as it has reached 201,000 jobs in the state of Washington, $7.6 billion in wages, $28 billion in consumer spending, and $2.3 billion in state and local tax revenue.” She added, “To me, this price increase is unconscionable.” 

Additional Coverage. Also reporting on the proposal are the Bellingham (MA) Bulletin (11/20, Johnson) and WVLA-TV Baton Rouge (LA) Baton Rouge, LA (11/20, Scheidt). 

## The Energy 202: New ‘Acting Director’ At Interior Office Worries Public Lands Advocates. 

The Washington Post (11/20, Grandoni) reports that the Interior Department’s pick to temporarily run the Bureau of Land Management has “raised eyebrows among public land advocates.” Last week, Interior named Brian Steed to be interim BLM director. The article notes that “before that appointment, Steed was chief of staff for Rep. Chris Stewart (R-Utah), an advocate for land transfer who co-founded a congressional caucus called the Federal Land Action Group, intent on crafting legislation to put federal holdings under local control.” But “in an email, an Interior Department spokeswoman, Heather Swift, said Zinke has not wavered in his stance on public lands.” Swift wrote, “The Secretary’s position is unchanged.” 

## What Does Kane County Want In A Redrawn Grand Staircase-Escalante Monument? 

The Salt Lake (UT) Tribune (11/20, Maffly) reports that it obtained a version of a map “indicating roughly 200,000 acres that county officials believe are worthy of monument status” for the Grand Staircase-Escalante National Monument presented by Kane County staff to Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke. Officials had “refused to release it, arguing it’s an incomplete draft that could mislead the public.” According to the article, “the map offers a glimpse into how Zinke may have arrived at his recommendations, which remain shrouded in secrecy, to the frustration of local businesses and pro-monument groups.” 

## Navy SEALs Remember Christian Lambertsen, Humble Beginnings Of Swimmer-commandos. 

The Washington Times (11/20, Boylan) reports that “prominent former SEALs,” including Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke, last week gathered at the Omni Shoreham Hotel above Rock Creek Park to mark the 75th anniversary of a “top-secret World War II-era experiment” that was “the critical opening chapter in the evolving history of the U.S. Navy SEALs.” 

## US Forest Service Internal Review Finds 34 Cases Of Sexual Harassment. 

The Daily Caller (11/20, Volpe) reports that “after decades of denying it, the US Forest Service has finally acknowledged it has systemic problems with sexual harassment.” The agency said, “Since implementing an updated anti-harassment policy in September 2016, the agency has carefully reviewed and resolved over 400 cases of alleged harassment.” The agency added that of the 400 cases, 83 have been substantiated. 

## Is This Ryan Zinke Posing With A Dead Elephant? 

Snopes (11/20, Evon) examines whether a photograph purportedly showing Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke posing with a dead elephant is true. The website concludes that “image is genuine,” but it does not show Zinke. Rather, the man is identified as Ian Evans. 

## Additional Coverage: Mille Lacs Band Rallies For Police. 

Additional coverage of Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke’s visit to the Mille Lacs Indian Reservation last Friday was provided by the Minneapolis Star Tribune (11/19, Smith), the Grand Forks (ND) Herald (11/20, Davis), and the Worthington (MN) Daily Globe (11/20, Davis). Bureau Of Indian Affairs 

## DOI Still Seeking Cobell Claimants As Deal Deadline Looms. 

Law360 (11/20, Lidgett) reports that “with a looming deadline for Native American tribal members to make a claim for a bite of the landmark Cobell settlement over the alleged mismanagement of tribal trust funds, the federal government said on Friday it is still looking to identify thousands of possible claimants.” The Interior Department “said in an announcement that it is in the final stages of identifying where about 17,000 Native American individuals who could make claims for settlement compensation are before a court-imposed Nov. 27 deadline.” Additional coverage was provided by the Farmington (NM) Daily Times (11/21, Smith) and the Pierre (SD) Capital Journal (11/21). 

# Bureau Of Indian Education 

## Chemawa Staff, Students Question Hiring Practices And Non-Native Administration. 

Continuing its series on problems at the Chemawa Indian School, Oregon Public Broadcasting (11/20, Schick, Manning) reports that “in interviews, emails and court documents, Chemawa staff members said they have observed nepotism and favoritism over the past several years within the Bureau of Indian Education that formed a roadblock to accountability.” They claim “it also raised doubts about whether the federal government’s hiring processes are truly designed to ensure the most qualified staff are in place to serve the students who arrive at Chemawa.” Meanwhile, “as Chemawa retained a largely non-Native administration, students have questioned why a school for Native youth has so few examples of Native people in positions of leadership.” 

# Bureau Of Land Management 

## BLM Tells 10th Circ. No Need To Revisit Frack Rule Decision. 

Law360 (11/20, Rodriguez) reports that the Bureau of Land Management on Monday “urged the Tenth Circuit not to grant four states’ request that it revisit its rejection of their challenge to an Obama-era hydraulic fracturing rule for federal and Native American lands.” 

## Burning Man, BLM To Study Festivals Impact On Black Rock Desert. 

KNPR-FM Las Vegas (11/20) reports that “the organizers of Burning Man will assist the federal Bureau of Land Management in conducting an environmental impact study of the event’s impact on the Black Rock Desert.” The study is “part of the process of applying for a new ten-year permit to continue holding the event.” The new analysis will “evaluate the potential impact on Black Rock of possible changes in the size of Burning Man.” 

# Bureau Of Ocean Energy Management 

## Panel’s Approval Of Offshore Drilling Bill Could Threaten Ban Off Florida. 

The Fort Myers (FL) News-Press (11/20, King) reports that Florida Republican Rep. Francis Rooney said he’s concerned about a new House proposal to open offshore drilling along Florida’s Gulf Coast. Rep. Rooney is hoping to rally support among fellow lawmakers in Florida to back an amendment making the moratorium on drilling within 125 miles of Florida’s coast permanent, saying, “We cannot have drilling in the Eastern Gulf. It will destroy our tourist economy.” Meanwhile, American Petroleum Institute President and CEO Jack Gerard said, “The eastern Gulf is in close proximity to existing production and infrastructure, and opening it would most quickly spur investment and economic activity, which could create thousands of jobs and provide billions of dollars in government revenue.” The Naples (FL) Daily News (11/20, King) also carried the story. 

# Fish And Wildlife Service 

## Greens Sue Trump Over Elephant Trophy Decision. 

The Hill (11/20, Cama) reports that the Center for Biological Diversity and Natural Resources Defense Council on Monday filed a lawsuit against the Trump Administration “over its decision to allow hunters to import trophies from hunting African elephants and lions in Zimbabwe.” The lawsuit claims that the Fish and Wildlife Service “violated the Endangered Species Act when it reversed Obama administration policies banning hunters from bringing into the U.S. heads or other body parts from elephants and lions they killed in the southern African country.” Also reporting are Reuters (11/20, Simpson), Reuters (11/20, Simpson), Politico (11/20, Gerstein), the Washington Examiner (11/20, Siegel), the New York Post (11/20, Musumeci), and Courthouse News (11/20, Solis). Additional coverage of the controversy was provided by the Washington Post (11/20, Fears), the Washington Post (11/20, Medina), the Washington Post (11/20, Ingraham), Bloomberg News (11/20, Wallbank), the Sunshine State (FL) News (11/20, Derby), and The Hill (11/20, Samuels). 

## Before Elephants, US Loosened Limits On Lion Trophies. 

The AP (11/20, Biesecker) reports that “one month before the Trump administration sparked outrage by reversing a ban on trophies from threatened African elephants, federal officials quietly loosened restrictions on the importation of heads and hides of lions shot for sport.” The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service “began issuing permits Oct. 20 for lions killed in Zimbabwe and Zambia between 2016 and 2018.” The FWS is “also currently studying whether to add three additional countries to the list – Mozambique, Namibia and Tanzania.” 

## Docks To Be Expanded At Green Pond Landing Before Bassmaster Classic. 

The Anderson (SC) Independent-Mail (11/20, Brown) reports that “Anderson County officials announced Monday that they have received $650,000 in federal money for improvements at Green Pond Landing and Event Center, which will host the Bassmaster Classic next year.” The Sports Fish Restoration Act funding from the Fish and Wildlife Service will “cover the bulk of the $866,000 cost for expanding courtesy docks at the Lake Hartwell venue.” The rest of the funds “for the dock expansion will come from accommodations tax revenues, according to a statement issued by the county Monday.” 

# National Park Service 

## Sevier County Wildfires: Lessons Learned. 

WATE-TV Knoxville, TN (11/20) reports that “an extensive after-action review completed by the Interior Department found that, while no wrongdoing was found by Great Smoky Mountains National Park crews, there were ‘weaknesses in the park’s response.’” The park is “now embarking on a $2.5 million effort to replace park communications to allow officials to not only more effectively communicate within the park, but also speak to emergency responders outside of park boundaries.” Cassius Cash, the Great Smoky Mountains National Park superintendent, said, “We did assign some of our ground folks to ride around together and make decisions, but that’s not the most effective way you do that under these kind of dark conditions.” 

## ‘A Great Gift To America’: After Long Journey, Tractor Belonging To Last Homesteader Is On Display In Nebraska. 

The Omaha (NE) World-Herald (11/20, Hendee) reports that “homesteader Ken Deardorff’s 1945 Allis Chalmers Model C tractor joined the collections of Americana preserved by the National Park Service when it went on permanent exhibit Monday at Homestead National Monument of America near Beatrice.” A crowd of about 160 people witnessed “the unveiling of America’s most famous tractor at its balcony perch overlooking the museum.” A National Park Service team “financed by the Friends of Homestead National Monument recovered the tractor from the western interior of Alaska in mid-June.” 

## Giant Sequoias: Trees Suffered In California Drought. 

The Fresno (CA) Bee (11/20, Calix) reports that a “study shows California’s Giant Sequoia trees may not survive severe droughts and warming temperatures much longer.” The article says that “while the historically resilient trees managed to largely withstand the die-off that was prevalant in California forests, they did so at a price: depleting their underground water storage, according to a study conducted by the U.S. National Park Service, the Sierra Nevada Research Institute at UC Merced and the Chinese Academy of Sciences and Sun Yat-sen University.” Koren Nydick, a coauthor of the study and the science coordinator at Sequoia and Kings Canyon National Parks, said, “Giant Sequoias have this mystique, that once they reach maturity, they are practically immune to the forces that kill other trees. But during and just after the recent severe drought, we’ve seen a small number of sequoias die, at least in part to the dry conditions. It’s an important wake-up call.” 

## Vancouver Barracks Renovation Underway. 

The Clark County (WA) Columbian (11/20, Vogt) reports that five historic buildings at Vancouver Barracks are undergoing renovation. Alex Patterson, facility manager at Fort Vancouver National Historic Site, explained that means “a nice, tight roof and exterior” for the structures. The total contract cost is $485,820. 

## GV Expo: Staying Within The Budget When Creating Video. 

The Government Video (11/20, Scutt) reports that Mathew John, “an audiovisual production specialist with the National Park Service, will address Government Video Expo attendees at 10:15 a.m. on Wednesday, Nov. 29.” His session “National Park Service Centennial — Thinking Outside the Box With a Low or No Budget” will “take a look at how he created the signature video to celebrate last year’s NPS Centennial on a very tight budget and share strategies for other institutions to do the same.” In an interview, John talked “about his work with the National Park Service.” 

# Office Of Insular Affairs 

## Small Island Nations Losing Faith In Global Efforts Against Climate Change. 

The New York Times (11/17, Plumer, Friedman) reported that small island nations “are among the smallest contributors to climate change, producing less than 1 percent of global greenhouse gas emissions,” but they “are among the most vulnerable nations to global warming.” Leaders of small islands say the industrialized world “owes some recompense for the disasters these vulnerable nations will suffer in the years ahead,” but as the United Nations climate talks “on bolstering the Paris agreement draw to a close, island leaders say” the island décor in the conference hall “seems a cruel taunt.” Hopes among island nation leaders that they “will see a major increase in financial support to help address the consequences of climate change” also are waning, as are efforts “to expand ways for nations to adapt to future disasters.” As a result, some island officials, including those in Seychelles, “frustrated by the slowness of the United Nations process, have decided to take matters into their own hands.” 

## Tourists Are Returning To The U.S. Virgin Islands As Recovery Is Still Happening. 

NPR (11/17) reports the U.S. Virgin Islands “welcomed back the first cruise ships since Hurricanes Irma and Maria tore through.” The article says that “tourists are coming back, but there are other parts where recovery efforts are still moving slowly.” In an interview, Gov. Kenneth Mapp discussed the recovery efforts. 

## Mapp Makes Case For $7.5 Billion To Senate Committee. 

The Virgin Islands Daily News (11/16, O'CONNOR) reports that Gov. Kenneth Mapp “worked to dispel criticism of past WAPA actions and bring senators around to supporting disaster funding for the territory at a U.S. Senate hearing on Tuesday.” Appearing before the Senate Energy and Natural Resources Committee, Mapp and Puerto Rico Gov. Ricardo Rosselló “made the case for not just repairing the infrastructure of both territories to where it was pre-storm – as mandated by the Stafford Act, the central disaster recovery law of the United States – but also improving it.” Mapp said, “We cannot squander this opportunity to rebuild a better and stronger and more resilient Virgin Islands to simply rebuild it quickly. If we do, we will only compound the suffering that so many of our citizens have endured. With your support, that won’t happen.” 

## Medical Evacuees And Their Caretakers Say They’ve Been Neglected By Mapp Administration. 

The Virgin Islands Consortium (VIR) (11/17) reports that “over two months following Hurricanes Irma and Maria, and medical evacuees from the U.S. Virgin Islands keep pouring into the state of Georgia at various facilities, including hotels, for medical care.” However, “medical evacuees and their caretakers, a number of whom recently made contact with The Consortium, continue to complain about the lack of communication from the Mapp administration relative to their wellbeing and, importantly, a timeline on when they will be returning home.” 

## CW-1 Cap Delay 2nd-Longest In Program’s History. 

The Saipan (MNP) Tribune (11/17, Encinares) reports that the U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services has “yet to release a numerical limit on the CNMI’s foreign workforce fiscal year 2018.” The article notes “that makes it the second-longest delay in the program’s history since 2013.” According to a previous statement from the administration of Gov. Ralph DLG Torres, “the delay is possibly due to the White House’s investigation on the CNMI economy.” 

## Wildlife Agencies Meet On Guam To Discuss Brown Tree Snakes. 

The AP (11/15) reported that wildlife agencies were meeting last week on Guam “to provide updates on numerous projects targeting the invasive brown tree snake, which has proved detrimental to Guam’s native bird population.” Among the main topics of discussion were “increased inspections, awareness programs and effective baiting methods.” 

## Spend A Day With The Longest Serving Ambassador To The U.S. He’s From Palau. 

A video posted by the Washington Post (11/16), highlighted the service of Palauan Ambassador Hersey Kyota, who has been “representing his island nation for two decades.” 

# US Geological Survey 

## The Case For Flowing Water On Mars Is Drying Up. 

The Washington Post (11/20, Kaplan) reports that “in 2015, NASA announced that it had ‘the best evidence yet’ for water flowing on the surface of Mars: Dark, apparently damp streaks spotted on the Red Planet contained salts associated with liquid water.” However, “in a study published Monday in the journal Nature Geoscience,” U.S. Geological Survey scientists says “hat those promising streaks are merely marks made by flowing sand or dust.” Lead author Colin Dundas said, “This new understanding . . . supports other evidence that shows that Mars today is very dry.” Also reporting are CNN (11/21, Strickland), CNET News (11/20, Kooser), Stuff (NZL) (11/21, Kaplan), the Australian Broadcasting Corporation (11/21, Smith), ABC Radio Australia (11/21, Smith), and SlashGear (11/20, Roston). 

## Additional Reading. 

Finding Fault(s): Geologists Keep Finding More Nearby Earthquake Makers. KUOW-FM Seattle (11/20, Banse). 

Magnitude 6 Earthquake Strikes Off Samoa, American Samoa. AP (11/20). 

Will The World Shake With More Large Earthquakes In 2018? Time Will Tell. Popular Science (11/20, Griggs). 

# Opinion Pieces 

## Tribune Editorial: Bring The Government To The People? 

In an editorial, the Salt Lake (UT) Tribune (11/20) argues that a proposal to relocate the agencies in the Interior Department to the West should receive serious consideration. The paper points out “with modern communication technology, there is not the need there was 200 years ago to have all the executive agencies in close physical proximity to one another and to Congress.” The editorial also acknowledges that “the risk” is that “even with the latest in online teleconferencing, we might reach an out-of-sight-out-of-mind situation where Congress — and the national press — would begin to neglect their oversight responsibilities.” In conclusion, the paper think the idea is “reasonable” and the pros and cons should be carefully weighed. 

## Kudos To Air Force, Donors For Operation Christmas Drop: Our View. 

In an editorial, the Pacific (GUM) Daily News (11/17) lauds Operation Christmas Drop, “the Department of Defense’s longest-running humanitarian airlift operation.” The paper notes that “air drops are made to more than 50 islands in the Commonwealth of the Northern Marianas, Federated States of Micronesia and Republic of Palau.” It commends “the Air Force for its continued commitment to Operation Christmas Drop for the past 65 years, and hope to see it continue for many years to come.” 

## Additional Reading. 

Why Trump’s Right On Banning Elephant Trophies. New York Post (11/20, Lowry). 

Editorial: A Welcome Retreat On Elephant Trophies. Richmond (VA) Times-Dispatch (11/20). 

Trump’s Best Decision So Far: Doubling Down On Banning Elephant Trophies. Los Angeles Times (11/20, Hall). 

Donald Trump & Trophy-Hunting Ban – Trump Is Right To Keep The Ban. National Review (11/21, Lowry). 

Don’t Hunt Elephants, Hunt These 5 Animals In America Instead. Washington Examiner (11/20, Rogan). 

# Top National News 

## Trump Names North Korea A State Sponsor Of Terrorism. 

Media reports cast President Trump’s announcement Monday that he will designate North Korea a state sponsor of terrorism as symbolic, but still likely to further increase tensions with Pyongyang. Bloomberg News (11/20, Sink), for example, says the move “at least symbolically ratchets up the roiling standoff between the US and North Korea,” and USA Today (11/20, Jackson, Shesgreen) says it comes as the President “seeks to ratchet up the pressure on North Korea over its nuclear weapons program.” Speaking during a Cabinet meeting, Trump said, “In addition to threatening the world by nuclear devastation, North Korea has repeatedly supported acts of international terrorism including assassinations on foreign soil.” He also said the designation “should have happened a long time ago.” All three networks reportedly briefly on the move. NBC Nightly News (11/20, story 4, 1:10, Holt) called it “a major reversal in US policy,” but Kristen Welker noted that former President George W. Bush “lifted the terror designation to foster diplomatic talks over its nuclear program. That effort failed. So will this attempt work, or is it purely a symbolic move?” On the CBS Evening News (11/20, story 5, 1:05, Mason), Margaret Warner said the action “has no direct link to North Korea’s nuclear program.” The Washington Post (11/20, Nakamura) reports Trump called it “a very critical step” that “should’ve happened a long time ago,” and vowed Pyongyang will face further sanctions that will amount to the “highest level of sanctions by the time it’s finished.” According to the Los Angeles Times (11/20, Bierman, Wilkinson), Trump said the designation would include “a very large” new sanction on Tuesday and “increase in intensity over the next two weeks.” The New York Times (11/20, Shear), however, says that it is still “unclear whether the terror designation will provide the president with new and powerful leverage to force nuclear negotiations or will simply deepen the rhetorical war of words” between Trump and North Korean leader Kim Jong-un. In the lead story for Fox News’ Special Report (11/20), Kristin Fisher reported the designation is “accompanied by a sweeping set of sanctions,” but North Korea is “already so heavily penalized by the United States” that Secretary of State Tillerson “acknowledged this new designation can only do so much.” The AP (11/20, Pennington, Miller) reports Tillerson said the designation was a “very symbolic move” with limited practical effects, although it could close a “few loopholes” in existing sanctions. The AP says the move is also “likely to exacerbate sour relations between Washington and Pyongyang.” Reuters (11/20, Mason, Brunnstrom) reports that “experts say the designation will be largely symbolic...a reality that...Tillerson seemed to acknowledge.” Said Tillerson, “The practical effects may be limited but hopefully we’re closing off a few loopholes with this.” In the lead story for CNN’s Situation Room ’s (11/20) first hour, Jeff Zeleny said that Tillerson called the move a “peaceful pressure campaign,” and ABC World News Tonight (11/20, story 7, 0:20, Muir) reported briefly that he also said the “two-month pause since North Korea’s last missile test shows there is still hope for diplomacy.” Politico (11/20) too says the move “could exacerbate tensions among North Korea, its neighbors and the US amid escalating concern about the isolated nation’s nuclear ambitions.” The Washington Times (11/20, Miller) reports that in making the announcement, Trump referenced the regime’s assassination of leader Kim’s half brother and the death of American Otto Warmbier, who was held in North Korea for 17 months and died after suffering severe brain damage. House Foreign Affairs Committee Chairman Ed Royce “applauded the President’s move.” The Hill (11/20, Fabian) quotes Royce as saying, “Over the past year alone, Kim Jong Un and his regime brazenly assassinated his brother with a chemical weapon and brutally tortured Otto Warmbier, leading directly to his tragic death. These aren’t isolated incidents, but are examples of a consistent pattern of terror.” The Wall Street Journal (11/20, Schwartz, Cheng) reports the move was welcomed by Republican lawmakers, including Royce. The Daily Caller (11/20, Pickrell) notes the President “mulled relisting” North Korea as a state sponsor of terror during his recent trip to Asia, and had announced he would make a decision upon his return. The Washington Post (11/20, Taylor), meanwhile, notes that “this isn’t North Korea’s first time on the list. The country was designated a state sponsor of terrorism in 1988 and stayed on the list until it was removed in 2008.” A Wall Street Journal (11/20, Board) editorial also welcomes the move by the Administration, which it says rights a wrong made by the Bush Administration when it removed North Korea from the list in 2008. Steve Hayes of the Weekly Standard said on Fox News’ Special Report (11/20), “It is a significant action and it’s long overdue in my view. President Bush was wrong what he said in June of 2008 about North Korea’s actions.” Hayes added, “If you look at North Korea’s activities since they been taken off the list,” it is “not a country that’s behaved as if it wants to stay off the terror list.” Mara Liasson of NPR said on Fox News’ Special Report (11/20), “What’s interesting about the move today, I think it is symbolic. That’s what Rex Tillerson said on a rare visit to the White House briefing room. He also said that as a practical matter, it might not make that much difference since North Korea already is the subject of so much tough sanctions, but it does send a signal that the US is going to be tough about this and it’s just one more punishment that we can put on North Korea.” 

North Korean Nuclear Tests Pose Radiation Threats. Deutsche Welle (11/20, Kretschmer) reports North Korea has conducted six nuclear tests since 2006 in Punggye-ri. The latest test in September “marked a significant upgrade of the nation’s nuclear program” and has sparked concerns about nuclear contamination. Suh Kyun-ryul, professor of nuclear engineering at Seoul National University, warns, “If the North Koreans continue to test similarly heavy nuclear bombs on the same site, sooner or later they will lead to a premature collapse, where radioactive material could reach and contaminate both the groundwater and the surface of the earth.” 

Kim Disciplines Top Military Organization. The New York Times (11/20, Choe) reports North Korean leader Kim Jong-un is “disciplining the leadership of his country’s most powerful military organization, the latest sign of his efforts to tighten his grip on party elites and the armed forces,” South Korea’s intelligence agency said Monday. During a closed-door parliamentary briefing Monday, South Korea’s National Intelligence Service told lawmakers that the North’s General Political Bureau was being “audited” by the country’s leadership for the first time in 20 years, and that the organization’s director, Vice Marshal Hwang Pyong-so, and his deputies were “punished.” South Korean intelligence officials said the organization was being audited for “impure attitude.” 

## Trump Promises Tax Reform By Christmas. 

The AP (11/20, Superville) reports that in remarks for a Cabinet meeting Monday, President Trump “promised a tax overhaul by Christmas,” saying, “We’re going to give the American people a huge tax cut for Christmas – hopefully that will be a great big, beautiful Christmas present.” His comments came “a day after the White House signaled its willingness to strike” a repeal of the ACA’s individual mandate from the legislation if it hinders passing it. The repeal “has emerged as a major sticking point for Republican Sen. Susan Collins of Maine, whose vote the White House needs.” However, removing the provision “would blow a big hole in the senators’ tax cut plan, leaving them $338 billion short of their revenue goal over the next 10 years.” NBC Nightly News (11/20, story 5, 1:05, Welker) reported that tax reform was “front and center at the cabinet meeting,” but Kristen Welker added that “with a razor-thin majority in the Senate, the President could be imperiling the tax bill by waging wars with his fellow Republicans on Twitter.” At least five Republicans “have expressed skepticism about the tax plan,” and they “can only afford to lose two votes to pass the legislation. A senior official says the President will work the phones to try to win over votes.” The Washington Times (11/20, Miller) says Trump on Monday “scolded Democratic lawmakers for their lockstep opposition to the GOP tax reform plans,” saying, “With the Democrats giving us no votes on tax cuts for purely political reasons – obstructionism – it will be up to the Republicans to come through for America. ... I think they will, I hope they will, it’s up to the Senate.” Counselor to the President Kellyanne Conway said on Fox News’ Fox & Friends 

(11/20), “We feel very confident, but it is up to those legislators who for years, if not decades, have been promising their constituents they are going to get meaningful tax cuts and tax overhaul. And we are very happy that the House and Senate have come up with what I call Trump speed, not swamp speed, in getting their bills to the floor fairly quickly. We feel really great that both bills adhere to the President’s four core principles for tax cuts and tax relief: repatriation, simplification, middle-class tax cut, and reducing that corporate cut tax rate so that we’re below the average for developed countries instead of the highest in the entire OECD.” 

Attention Turns To Group Of Undecided GOP Senators. The New York Times (11/20, Kaplan) reports that Republican tax reform efforts rest “in the hands of a small number of fence-sitting senators with disparate concerns, like how small businesses are taxed and whether health insurance costs will spike after the repeal of the Affordable Care Act’s requirement to have coverage or pay a penalty.” If Democrats are unified against the bill, Senate Majority Leader McConnell “can afford only two defections.” Currently, undecided Republicans include Sens. Jeff Flake, Ron Johnson, Susan Collins, and Lisa Murkowski. 

Trump: Healthcare, Infrastructure, Welfare Reform Will Follow Tax Overhaul. Reuters (11/20, Mason) reports that Trump “said he plans to take up healthcare, infrastructure and welfare reform issues soon after Republicans’ tax overhaul is finalized, which the party has pledged to complete by the end of the year.” He said, “We’ll be submitting plans on healthcare, plans on infrastructure and plans on welfare reform, which is desperately needed in this country, soon after taxes.” White House press secretary Sarah Sanders said Monday that the Administration will provide details of its welfare reform plan in the first weeks of 2018, Reuters (11/20, Oliphant) reports. Sanders said, “This is something that the president has a great deal of interest in and I think you can count on probably the first part of next year seeing more specifics and details come out on that.” 

## Yellen To Resign From Federal Reserve Board. 

The AP (11/19, Crutsinger) reports that “Janet Yellen submitted her resignation from the Federal Reserve board to President Donald Trump on Monday, announcing that she will leave when her successor is sworn in as Fed chairman.” The move “gives Trump in his first year in office the chance to fill five positions on the Fed’s seven-member board, in addition to picking Powell to be the next Fed chairman.” Yellen called serving in the Fed system for more than three decades a “great privilege and honor.” 

## Nebraska PSC Approves Alternative Keystone XL Route. 

The AP (11/20) reports that on Monday the Nebraska Public Service Commission voted and approve a route for TransCanada’s Keystone XL oil pipeline. Although a route was approved, it is “five miles longer” than the company’s preferred path and also requires another pumping station. In a statement, TransCanada CEO Russ Girling said the company will be studying “how the decision would impact the cost and schedule of the project.” The 3-2 PSC decision will likely face a legal challenge and may also require another route analysis performed for federal approval. The only Democrat in the PSC, Crystal Rhoades said that the company did not show how the project was in the public interest. Rhoades also expressed concerns over the alternative route that was approved as it relates to landowners. Meanwhile, TransCanada will now be able “to gain access to the land of holdout landowners through eminent domain proceedings.” Reuters (11/20, O'Hanlon, Lou) reports that the Nebraska PSC has lifted “the last big regulatory obstacle for the long-delayed project that U.S. President Donald Trump wants built.” Nebraska Democratic Party Chair and Bold Alliance President Jane Kleeb said “we are going to fight like hell to make sure this pipeline never gets built.” The PSC’s decision leaves it “unclear whether the alternative route lacks any state or federal permits that the preferred route had already obtained, a situation that could drag out the regulatory process.” In response to the PSC decision, Alberta Premier Rachel Notley said the project “will mean greater energy security for all North Americans.” The AP (11/20) also reports that, following the Nebraska PSC decision, Sisseton Wahpeton Oyate Tribal Chairman Dave Flute “said Monday his tribe will stand with other tribal nations to oppose pipelines.” Keystone XL opponents say that approving the alternative route provides more legal “actions that could indefinitely block the project.” The attorney for environmental groups Ken Winston said the vote “opens up a whole new bag of issues that” can be raised. The AP (11/20) reports that South Dakota’s Republican Gov. Dennis Daugaard said he hopes those choosing to exercise their First Amendment rights following the Nebraska PSC decision should do so peacefully. Daugaard said he is planning to support the project so “long as it can be built and operated safely.” Meanwhile, the Republican US Sen. Mike Rounds of South Dakota said that he is concerned about last week’s 210,000 gallon oil spill although he still supports Keystone XL and other pipelines. CNN (11/20, Hackney, Yan) reports that Kleeb said “TransCanada did not get their preferred route which means years of new review and legal challenges are now on the table.” The proposed project would start in Hardisty, Alberta and reach to Steele City, Nebraska. CNBC (11/20, DiChristopher) reports that groups opposing the project are able to “appeal the commission’s decision in state district court.” In a statement, Oil Change International Executive Director Stephen Kretzmann said that “today the Nebraska PSC chose to stand with Trump, climate denial, and Big Oil.” Kretzmann added “good luck with that.” Also in a statement, Association of Oil Pipe Lines CEO and President Andy Black said that “Nebraska recognizes the Keystone XL pipeline is in the public interest bringing good paying jobs and more affordable energy for U.S. consumers.” Bloomberg News (11/20, Harris, Vamburkar, Orland) reports that the alternative route “could throw more uncertainty into the mix for the long-delayed” pipeline. Moody Investors Service VP Gavin MacFarlane said that “while today’s Keystone XL pipeline approval is an important milestone, it does not provide certainty that the project will ultimately be built and begin operating.” MacFarlane added that “pipeline construction would negatively affect TransCanada’s business risk profile through increased project execution risk, and would likely put pressure on financial metrics.” Bloomberg News (11/20) website posts a video of Bloomberg anchor David Weston’s discussion with NextGen Climate founder Tom Steyer on the Keystone XL pipeline project approval. Steyer said the decision is a “tragic mistake.” Steyer added that “this kind of decision, where it will lead to the old fashioned kind of pollution, is also incredibly short sighted and just plain dumb.” Bloomberg News (11/20, Vamburkar, Harris) reports that a lawyer for landowners opposing TransCanada Brian Jorde said the Nebraska PSC decision was actually “an incredible victory” and said that “they won nothing.” Jorde also said the approved route is one that TransCanada said is an inferior path. Meanwhile, the landowners who are now affected by the alternative route could argue due process “before the state commission, said Katie Bays, an analyst at Height Securities LLC in Washington.” Bay added that “by making this a due process issue, you can involve a federal court” where a there is a chance for a more favorable panel. Bold Alliance issued a statement that said they might petition for a rehearing before the PSC within 10 days or file an appeal in Nebraska within 30 days. The Los Angeles Times (11/20, Schneider) reports that during a conference call this month, Girling discussed the Keystone XL pipeline and said that “production of Canadian heavy oil continues to grow, and the need for new pipeline transportation capacity remains high.” Meanwhile, some analysts are projecting “that even with the Nebraska go-ahead, the pipeline will not be built.” Regarding the financial feasibility of the project, Institute for Energy Economics and Financial Analysis Director of Finance Tom Sanzillo said “there is no economic rationale, no validity to the investment calculation, no positive bottom line.” Sanzillo added, “our view is that TransCanada is unlikely to build it.” The Washington Times (11/20, Wolfgang) reports that American Petroleum Institute President and CEO Jack Gerard reacted to the Nebraska PSC decision and said the commission “set an example for how to carefully evaluate critical energy infrastructure projects, even in the face of strongly held views and opinions.” UPI (11/20, Graeber) reports that the decision from the Nebraska PSC said that “after careful evaluation and consideration of all the evidence adduced, and the careful weighing of all the issues, factors and aspects of the proposed routes of the Keystone XL pipeline, we find that the alternative mainline route is in the public interest and shall be approved.” The Washington Post (11/20, Mufson) reports that in the dissenting opinion by Commissioner Rhoades, she said “all human-made infrastructure degrades and fails over time.” Rhoades also wrote that “no infrastructure ever designed has lasted for eternity and there is no reason to believe this pipeline will be an exception.” The Canadian Press (11/20) reports that project opponents “say the pipeline would pass through the Sandhills, an ecologically fragile region in Nebraska of grass-covered sand dunes, and would cross the land of farmers and ranchers who don’t want it.” Politico (11/20, Lefebvre) reports that Kleeb said a legal challenge will be raised and also said “we will challenge a foreign corporation being given eminent domain in the county courts, with every intent to bring it to the Supreme Court if needed.” The Wall Street Journal (11/20, Matthews, Monga), E&E Publishing (11/20, Gilmer), BBC News (UK) (11/20), NPR (11/20, Dwyer), the Daily Caller (11/20, White), Vox (11/20, Irfan), the Washington Examiner (11/20, Siegel), the Omaha (NE) World-Herald (11/20, Hammel), Voice of America (11/20), the York (NE) News-Times (11/20, Wilkinson), the Daily Intelligencer (NY) (11/20, Hart), WOWT-TV Omaha, NE (11/20), Columbus News Team (NE) (11/20, Jordan) also report. 

State Department May Need To Reapprove Keystone XL Pipeline. The Washington Examiner (11/20, Siegel) reports that “the State Department is considering whether it needs to reapprove the Keystone XL pipeline” following Monday’s decision. State Department spokesperson Vincent Campos said, “we won’t know about any impacts until we learn precisely the extent of any changes, something we are currently engaged in.” The Hill (11/20, Henry) reports that as the Nebraska PSC decided to approve the Keystone XL pipeline’s alternative route, “the State Department is reviewing its cross-border permit” for the project. Meanwhile, two federal agencies must “still...approve permits for” the Keystone XL project. 

Rogan: Celebrate Nebraska PSC Decision. In a column for the Washington Examiner (11/20, Rogan), Tom Rogan suggests that “you should celebrate the Nebraska Public Service Commission’s decision Monday to approve the Keystone XL pipeline.” Rogan argues that although the PSC did not approve the preferred route, it “was the last major regulatory hurdle standing in the way of the oil pipeline’s construction.” While liberals suggest “that conservative energy policies are bad for the environment,” they “ignore the fact that technologies like fracking offer far more sustainable (I.E. not economy destroying) carbon-reduction potential than the Paris accord Ponzi schemes endorsed by China and Germany.” 

Withering Supplies From Venezuela, Mexico Strengthens Argument For Keystone XL. 

Bloomberg News (11/20, Nussbaum) reports that one of the strongest arguments to support the building of the Keystone XL pipeline is the “withering supplies of heavy crude from Venezuela and Mexico” that is “making U.S. Gulf Coast refineries more dependent on the thick, sticky bitumen that Keystone XL would” provide from Canada’s oil sands. Refineries have been built to process the thicker grades “and adapting them to the light grades that are pumped from American shale fields requires costly revamping work.” According to Bloomberg’s compiled data, “since the start of the decade, U.S. imports of heavy crude have fallen by more than a third from Venezuela, and by almost half out of Mexico.” The Houston Chronicle (11/20, Osborne) reports that Wood Mackenzie Refining and Oil Markets Research Analyst Zachary Rogers said that “the pipeline’s commercial viability is strengthened as declining heavy oil production in Mexico and ongoing Venezuelan risk has recently tightened the heavy-crude market in the Gulf Coast.” 

# Editorial Wrap-Up 

## New York Times. 

“Justice At Last For The Youngest Inmates?” The New York Times (11/20) editorializes that the Supreme Court should categorically ban sentences of life-without-parole for juveniles when it considers the matter on Tuesday. The Times approves of the recently “developing awareness that young people are ‘constitutionally different’ from adults — less in control of their emotions and more able to change over time — and should be punished differently.” The Times warns that if the Court does not act, prosecutors in a few states will still adhere to the older view of those types of sentences and ignore the so-called “mitigating qualities of youth.” “‘Only Morons Pay The Estate Tax.’” A New York Times (11/20) editorial argues against repealing the estate tax, saying it “would provide a tax windfall of more than $3 million apiece for the top 0.2 percent of earners, and more than $20 million for the wealthiest Americans,” but would offer “nothing for middle-class people, except more evidence of Mr. Trump’s and Republicans’ bad faith.” 

## Washington Post. 

“Children Are Starving In Yemen. This White House Should Intercede.” AWashington Post (11/20) editorial urges the Administration to “act immediately” and compel Saudi Arabia to end its land, sea, and air blockade on Yemen. The Post concedes Yemen was already “suffering from the world’s worst humanitarian crisis” when the blockade was imposed, but cautions that the situation is rapidly deteriorating, “and yet the Saudis persist with their siege.” The Post notes the State Department “has objected to the ongoing blockade and called for ‘unimpeded access’ for humanitarian supplies,” but adds that “many in Yemen suspect, with some reason, that the White House is tolerating, if not encouraging, the crime.” The Post argues that “the White House has the leverage to put a stop” to its indulgence of the Saudi leadership, and if it does not, “it will be complicit in a crime against humanity.” 

“Time For Republicans To Denounce This Tax Nonsense.” In an editorial, the Washington Post (11/20) says OMB Director Mulvaney on Sunday said that Republicans “are trying to ‘game the system’ by pretending that expensive tax cuts will expire in several years, arguing that the pretense is necessary to ‘shoehorn the bill into the rules’ of the Senate.” The Post calls this “a gut-check moment for any senator who has ever claimed to care about the debt,” and calls on senators “from whom the public should expect more – such as Susan Collins (R-Maine), Bob Corker (R-Tenn.), Jeff Flake (R-Ariz.), John McCain (R-Ariz.) and Lisa Murkowski (R-Alaska)” to “finally denounce this nonsense.” 

“A Judge Makes The Right Call On Trump’s Would-Be Transgender Ban.” The Washington Post (11/20) editorializes that a recent federal court ruling against President Trump’s proposed ban on transgender people in the US military “is a welcome blow to this pointless and cruel policy.” The Post applauds the US District Court for the District of Columbia’s ruling’s assertion that “there’s little evidence to support Mr. Trump’s declaration that the ‘medical costs and disruption’ of transgender service necessitated the ban.” The Post concludes by opining that if James Mattis’ review of the policy “is fair, he will conclude that there is no reason these men and women should not continue to serve.” 

## Wall Street Journal. 

“Have They Got A Bond For You.” The Wall Street Journal (11/20) editorializes that investors who invest in Chicago’s sales-tax bonds, set to be issued next month, or Connecticut’s new bonds secured by state income taxes shouldn’t be surprised if the investments don’t pay off later. The Journal points out that Chicago might be authorized to declare bankruptcy at some point, and Connecticut may seek to renegotiate some of its debt, making both bonds risky in the editorial board’s opinion. 

“North Korea, Terror Sponsor.” A Wall Street Journal (11/20, Board) editorial welcomes the Administration’s designation of North Korea as a state sponsor of terrorism, which it says rights a wrong made by the Bush Administration when it removed North Korea from the list in 2008. 

“Angela Merkel’s Failing Center.” The Wall Street Journal (11/20) editorializes that the collapse of German Chancellor Angela Merkel’s talks to form a coalition government is a good thing, in part because the parties involved in the negotiations are starkly divided on a number of issues. The Journal says that German voters had hoped for more political competition in September’s election, and the establishment of a tenuous coalition is not the preferred way to assuage those voters and meet their desires. 

# Big Picture Headlines From Today’s Front Pages. 

Wall Street Journal: 

US Files Lawsuit Challenging AT&T-Time Warner Deal US To Label North Korea As ‘State Sponsor Of Terrorism’ Takeovers Roar To Life As Companies Hear Footsteps From Tech Giants Germany’s Political Impasse Will Stymie Further European Change 

New York Times: 

Trump Returns North Korea To List Of State Sponsors Of Terrorism Germany Plunged Into Political Crisis After Coalition Talks Fail US Sues To Block AT&T-Time Warner Merger After Late Help For Elephants, A Question: Why? Trump Administration Ends Temporary Protection For Haitians Charles Manson Dies At 83; Wild-Eyed Leader Of A Murderous Crew 

Washington Post: 

8 Women: Charlie Rose Harassed Us US Sues Over AT&T’s Bid For Time Warner Trump Relists N. Korea As A Terrorism Sponsor US Ending 60,000 Haitians’ Provisional Residency Status 597 Days. And Still Waiting. 

Financial Times: 

Merkel Refuses To Resign Despite Breakdown Of Coalition Talks Robot Army Is Transforming The Global Workplace Uber To Buy 24,000 Volvo Cars For Driverless Fleet 

Washington Times: 

Higher Cable Bills, Less Innovation: Justice Department Says AT&T Decision Not Trump’s Haitians Get Notice Of End To Protected Status, Must Go Back Home By July 2019 Navy SEALs Remember Christian Lambertsen, Humble Beginnings Of Swimmer-Commandos Merkel’s Failure To Form German Government Puts Chancellorship In Serious Doubt Nebraska’s Approval Of Keystone XL Route Is No Guarantee Of Pipeline’s Completion 

Story Lineup From Last Night’s Network News: 

ABC: Roy Moore Campaign; Al Franken Sexual Misconduct Allegations; Charlie Rose Sexual Misconduct Allegations; NYC-Factory Explosion; US Border Patrol Ambushed; Argentine Submarine Missing; Trump-North Korea; AT&T-Time Warner Merger Blocked; Freed Taliban Hostage Family Mother; Charles Manson Dies; Black Friday Shopping; Weather Forecast; Pesticide Company Ruling; Della Reese Dies; Georgia Dome-Demolition; Girls-Charity Race. 

CBS: US Border Patrol Ambushed; Charlie Rose Sexual Misconduct Allegations; Roy Moore Campaign; Russia Meddling Investigation; Trump-North Korea; AT&T-Time Warner Merger Blocked; Argentine Submarine Missing; Charles Manson Dies; Uber-Driverless Car; Della Reese Dies; Georgia Dome-Demolition; British Queen-Anniversary. 

NBC: Charlie Rose Sexual Misconduct Allegations; Roy Moore Campaign; Al Franken Sexual Misconduct Allegations; Trump-North Korea; WH-Tax Reform Plan; Argentine Submarine Missing; Charles Manson Dies; NYC-Factory Explosion; US-Afghanistan Deployment; Black Friday Shopping; Della Reese Dies; Georgia Dome-Demolition; WH-Turkey Pardon; Thanksgiving Charity. 

Network TV At A Glance: 

Roy Moore Campaign – 8 minutes, 15 seconds Charlie Rose Sexual Misconduct Allegations – 6 minutes, 35 seconds Charles Manson Dies – 5 minutes, 50 seconds Argentine Submarine Missing – 4 minutes, 5 seconds Trump-North Korea – 2 minutes, 35 seconds 

Story Lineup From This Morning’s Radio News Broadcasts: 

ABC: Trump-North Korea; Sanctuary Cities-California Court; Immigration Policy-Protected Status; Roy Moore Campaign; Charlie Rose Sexual Misconduct Allegations. 

CBS: Al Franken Sexual Misconduct Allegations; Charlie Rose Sexual Misconduct Allegations; Roy Moore Campaign; Trump-North Korea; Russia Meddling Investigation; Della Reese Dies. 

FOX: Las Vega Shooting-Hotel Lawsuit; Trump-North Korea; Charlie Rose Sexual Misconduct Allegations; Al Franken Sexual Misconduct Allegations. 

NPR: Trump-North Korea; Immigration Policy-Protected Status; AT&T-Time Warner Merger Blocked; Charlie Rose Sexual Misconduct Allegations. 

# Washington Schedule 

## Today’s Events In Washington. 

White House: 

PRESIDENT TRUMP — Meets with the President of the National Turkey Federation; participates in the National Thanksgiving Turkey Pardoning Ceremony. VICE PRESIDENT PENCE — Participates in a phone call with EU High Representative and Vice President Federica Mogherini. 

US Senate: 11:00 AM Senate convenes for a pro forma session 1:15 PM Senate Veterans’ Affairs Committee field hearing on VA services in Ohio – Field hearing on ‘The State of VA Services in Ohio’, with testimony from Ohio Department of Veterans Services Director Chip Tansill; Veterans of Foreign Wars Commander-in-Chief Keith Harman; Benjamin Fitzgerald of Westlake, OH; James Powers of Massillon, OH; Melissa Twine of Batavia, OH; Veterans Benefits Administration Assistant Deputy Under Secretary for Field Operations Ronald Burke, and Education Service Director Robert Worley; and Veterans Health Administration Deputy Executive Director of Provider Relations and Services Dr Kameron Matthews, and Veterans Integrated Service Network 10 Director Robert McDivitt Location: Columbus Metropolitan Library, 96 S Grant Ave, Columbus, OH Columbus http://veterans.senate.gov/ https://twitter.com/VAChair Senate on recess until 27 November. 

US House: 11:00 AM House of Representatives meets for a pro forma session House on recess until 27 November. 

Other: 11:00 AM New Afghanistan and Iraq engravings on the U.S. Marine Corps War Memorial shown via press conference – Press conference held to give a first look at the newly-carved engravings of the Afghanistan and Iraq campaigns on the U.S. Marine Corps War Memorial – the first campaigns to be added since 1996. Participants include Secretary of the Interior Ryan Zinke, U.S. Marine Corps Commandant Gen. Robert Neller, The Carlyle Group co-CEO David Rubenstein, National Park Service Acting Director Michael Reynolds, National Park Foundation President and CEO Will Shafroth, and George Washington Memorial Parkway Superintendent Alex Romero Location: U.S. Marine Corps War Memorial, (Iwo Jima), Arlington, VA Arlington www.nps.gov https://twitter.com/NatlParkService 

# Last Laughs 

## Late Night Political Humor. 

Stephen Colbert: “You might remember that while [President Trump] was in China, Trump asked China’s President Xi Jinping to release three UCLA players who had been arrested for shoplifting from a Chinese mall? Easily, the most scandalous thing to happen in a mall that didn’t involve Roy Moore.” Stephen Colbert: “[President Trump] tweeting, ‘Now that the three basketball players are out of China and saved from years in jail, Lavar Ball, the father of LiAngelo, is unaccepting of what I did for his son and that shoplifting is no big deal. I should have left them in jail!’ Mr. Trump, maybe now’s not the best time to be implying that someone’s kid should go to jail for what their dad did.” 

Stephen Colbert: “[Sen. Jeff] Flake was caught on camera dissing his own party. ‘If we become the party of Roy Moore and Donald Trump, we are toast.’ Senator Flake, that’s a little too hard on toast. May I remind you, sir, toast doesn’t cruise the mall looking for dough that hasn’t risen yet.” 

James Corden: “This weekend, President Trump lashed out at NFL running back Marshawn Lynch after photos showed Lynch at a game in Mexico where he was standing during the Mexican national anthem, but sitting during the US national anthem. By the way, ‘Marshawn Lync stood for the Mexican anthem’ is also the sentence that will start 70 percent of your Thanksgiving fights this year. No question. I mean, I’m surprised Donald Trump could even see Marshawn sitting down in Mexico, through that big border wall he built. Oh wait, that’s right, it doesn’t exist.” 

James Corden: “Trump, of course, shot back [at Sen. Jeff Flake] on Twitter, saying, ‘Sen. Jeff Flake(y), who is unelectable in the great state of Arizona, was caught (purposely) on ‘mike saying bad things about your favorite President.’ Favorite President? Jeff Flake said bad things about Rutherford B. Hayes?” 

James Corden: “Trump also attacked a man named Lavar Ball, the father of one of the UCLA basketball players arrested for shop lifting in China, after Ball failed to recognize Trump’s role in his son’s release. Trump tweeted he ‘is unaccepting of what I did for his son. I should have left them in jail!’ And there he is. America’s favorite President, ladies and gentlemen. ‘I should have left them I jail!’ At which point, Paul Manafort and the rest of Trump’s campaign staff were like, ‘Haha, okay, let’s not talk about leaving people in jail.’” 

Jimmy Fallon: “It came out that national security adviser H.R. McMaster called President Trump an idiot, and said he had the intelligence of a kindergartner. And Trump said, ‘Oh, yeah? Then why am I reading at a first-grade level?’” 

Jimmy Fallon: “This weekend, Trump sent a tweet where he criticized Senator Jeff flake for saying bad things about ‘Your favorite President.’ People were like, ‘He said bad things about Obama?’” 

Jimmy Fallon: “Meanwhile, [Sen.] Al Franken said that he isn’t resigning, but will spend the next few days reflecting. Reflecting is a political term meaning, ‘Hoping someone else gets busted and this whole thing blows over.’” 

Seth Meyers: “The White House has announced that President Trump will pardon two turkeys at a ceremony tomorrow, despite the fact that both turkeys lied under oath about meeting with Russian officials.” 

Seth Meyers: “The flagship location of Macy’s in New York this year will require children to schedule an appointment to sit on Santa’s lap. ‘No line to sit on this lap,’ said a man running for Senate.” 

Seth Meyers: “Today, a second woman came forward to accuse Franken of inappropriately touching her, telling CNN that he grabbed her buttocks while taking a photo at the Minnesota state fair. She said, ‘You just feel gross like, ew, I wanna wash that off me.’ And you know it’s bad when you’re the grossest thing at a state fair. That’s where they deep fry Twinkies.” Seth Meyers: “Today, White House counselor Kellyanne Conway went on Fox to slam Moore’s Democratic opponent, Doug Jones. And while she didn’t explicitly say it, she seemed to be urging people to vote for Moore. ... So according to Kellyanne Conway, there’s now a lower bar of entry for the Senate than a mall in Alabama. ‘Hey, creep we told you. You’re not welcome in this mall.’ ‘Well, then I guess I’ll be off to Washington, DC, where people aren’t so picky.’” 

Copyright 2017 by Bulletin Intelligence LLC Reproduction or redistribution without permission prohibited. Content is drawn from thousands of newspapers, national magazines, national and local television programs, radio broadcasts, social-media platforms and additional forms of open-source data. Sources for Bulletin Intelligence audience-size estimates include Scarborough, GfK MRI, comScore, Nielsen, and the Audit Bureau of Circulation. Data from and access to third party social media platforms, including but not limited to Facebook, Twitter, Instagram and others, is subject to the respective platform’s terms of use. Services that include Factiva content are governed by Factiva’s terms of use. Services including embedded Tweets are also subject to Twitter for Website's information and privacy policies. The Department of the Interior News Briefing is published five days a week by Bulletin Intelligence, which creates custom briefings for government and corporate leaders. We can be found on the Web at BulletinIntelligence.com, or called at (703) 483-6100. President Trump reversed course on allowing elephant trophy imports from Africa. Calle v H/Wikimedia Commons 

President Trump's abrupt U-turn on elephant trophy imports could undermine his own appointees, break standard practice and all but invite a legal challenge from his customary allies. Already, the president's move has sent Fish and Wildlife Service officials scrambling to figure out how they might unwind a decision that was painstakingly vetted and formally published. The officials must also handle hunters who may have already received trophy permits. "In my experience, it's unprecedented for a final decision to be put on hold and reversed by the White House," former Fish and Wildlife Service Director Dan Ashe said in an interview today. Citing the confusion, the Center for Biological Diversity and Natural Resources Defense Council sued the Trump administration today in a bid to keep the initial ban in place. "Trump's abrupt backpedaling after public outcry, while appreciated, shows how arbitrary this deplorable decision was. These incredibly imperiled creatures need a lot more than vague promises," said Tanya Sanerib, a senior attorney with the Center for Biological Diversity. The mess follows Trump's second-guessing of the service's elephant trophy import decision that had officially been made public Thursday and published early Friday in the 

Federal Register (Greenwire , Nov. 17). Citing a detailed 39-page assessment , the agency declared it could "make a determination that the killing of trophy animals in Zimbabwe, on or after January 21, 2016, and on or before December 31, 2018, will enhance the survival of the African elephant." With the so-called enhancement finding, and a similar 23-page one for Zambia, Fish and Wildlife announced it would resume issuing trophy import permits for the two African countries. Each assessment examined what officials termed a "number of factors." Within hours, facing heat, Trump said on Twitter that he would put the decision "on hold" so he could "review all conservation facts." He then retweeted commentators who praised him, and yesterday foreshadowed what he's going to do. "Big-game trophy decision will be announced next week but will be very hard pressed to change my mind that this horror show in any way helps conservation of Elephants or any other animal," Trump wrote. Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke said in a statement that he and Trump had talked and "as a result, in a manner compliant with all applicable laws, rules, and regulations, the issuing of permits is being put on hold as the decision is being reviewed." It's extraordinary for an administration, let alone a president, to immediately put on hold an agency decision that had gone through routine procedures including final publication in the Federal Register ."I never experienced anything like that," said Ashe, who served 22 years with Fish and Wildlife — nearly six of them as director — and now is president and CEO of the Association of Zoos & Aquariums. Potentially, a legal challenge could be mounted by hunting proponents claiming that the reversal violated the federal Administrative Procedure Act. Safari Club International and the National Rifle Association cited this same law in a 2014 suit challenging the earlier import ban. The Fish and Wildlife Service in 2014 had banned the trophy imports from Zimbabwe, after concluding that it could not make the finding that sport killing of the Zimbabwe elephants "would enhance survival of the species," as the law requires. "Federal defendants ... violated APA rulemaking procedures by abruptly suspending the ability of Safari Club members to import their African elephant trophies from Zimbabwe, without first giving the public advance notice and the opportunity to comment and without providing data," the 2014 lawsuit stated. Summoning the words that can kill a federal agency's decisionmaking, the hunting advocates in their 2014 suit further termed Fish and Wildlife's earlier import ban "arbitrary and capricious" and "an abuse of discretion." The lawsuit is now on appeal. In a weekend statement, Safari Club International decried the "shrill, negative reactions" from "hysterical anti-hunters and news media outlets" and urged hunters to contact the White House and Interior Department. The Fish and Wildlife Service has revised upward Zimbabwe's estimated elephant population, citing in its new notice a 2014 aerial survey called the Great Elephant Census that pegged the number at 82,304 individuals. 

Want to read more stories like this?  

> Click here to start a free trial to E&E -- the best way to track policy and markets.

ABOUT GREENWIRE – THE LEADER IN ENERGY AND ENVIRONMENT NEWS 

> Greenwire is written and produced by the staff of E&E News. The one-stop source for those who need to stay on top of all of today's major energy and environmental action with an average of more than 20 stories a day, Greenwire covers the complete spectrum, from electricity industry restructuring to Clean Air Act litigation to public lands management. Greenwire publishes daily at 1 p.m.

E&E News 122 C Street NW 7th Floor Washington, DC 20001 Phone: 202-628-6500 Fax: 202-737-5299 www.eenews.net 

All content is copyrighted and may not be reproduced or retransmitted without the express consent of Environment & Energy Publishing, LLC. Click here to view our privacy policy. Conversation Contents 

## U.S. Department of the Interior News Briefing for Monday, November 20, 2017 

# Bulletin Intelligence <Interior@bulletinintelligence.com> 

## From: Bulletin Intelligence <Interior@bulletinintelligence.com> 

## Sent: Mon Nov 20 2017 04:01:50 GMT-0700 (MST) 

## To: <Interior@bulletinintelligence.com> 

## Subject: U.S. Department of the Interior News Briefing for Monday, November 20, 2017  

> Mobile version and searchable archives available here. Please click here to subscribe.
> DATE: MONDAY, NOVEMBER 20, 2017 6:00 AM EST

# Today's Table Of Contents 

DOI In The News 

• Politico: Trump Says Decision On Elephant Hunting Trophies To Come This Week. • Washington Post: Zinke Rocked Moccasins To Celebrate Native Cultures. But Tribes Are Focused On His Plans To Rock Bears Ears. • Brainerd (MN) Daily Dispatch: Interior Secretary Visits Mille Lacs, Discusses Law Enforcement Crisis. • St. Thomas Source: Mapp Meets Interior Secretary Zinke In D.C. • U.S. News & World Report: Transmission Line From Oregon-To-Idaho Gets Approval. • Salt Lake (UT) Tribune: Congress Pushes Back On Interior Plan That Would More Than Double National Park Fees. • Austin (TX) American Statesman: Susan Combs Hits A New Hurdle In Her Path To Washington Post. • Federal News Radio (DC): House Committee Backs Westward Move For Interior Employees. • Grand Junction (CO) Daily Sentinel: BLM Advisory Councils Are Free To Meet Again After Initial Review. • CNN: Additional Coverage: Poor Record-Keeping Hindering Zinke Travel Investigation, IG Says. 

Bureau Of Indian Affairs 

• Program Helps Tribal Court Employees Increase Navajo Language Skills. 

Bureau Of Land Management 

• Casper (WY) Star-Tribune: The Powder River Basin Is Poised For Another Boom, But Some Say The Feds Are In The Way. • Grand Junction (CO) Daily Sentinel: BLM Picks Up Tab For Plugging Old Wells Near Douglas Pass. 

Bureau Of Ocean Energy Management 

• Mark Sanford Opposes Energy Bill Championed By GOP Leaders. • BOEM Looks For Comments On Hilcorp’s Liberty Development. • Louisiana May See More Offshore Oil Money Under Cassidy Budget Amendment. 

Bureau Of Reclamation 

• Wash. Reps Float Bill To Speed Up DOI Water Project Reviews. 

Fish And Wildlife Service 

• USA Today: Congress Moves To ‘Drill, Baby, Drill’ In Alaska’s ANWR Refuge. Here’s What You Should Know. • High Country (CO) News: Fish And Wildlife Retracts Opposition To Arizona Project. • Palm Beach (FL) Post: How A Neon Green Fern Sparked An Environmental Showdown. • U.S. News & World Report: With Dam Cleared From Creek, Endangered Fish Expand Range. 

National Park Service 

• Roll Call: Proposal Restricting National Mall Access A ‘Game Changer’ For Hill Athletes. • WRC-TV Washington: Beach Boys, Wynonna To Play National Christmas Tree Lighting. • U.S. News & World Report: Fort Sumter Seeks Comment On New Plan For Disabled Access. • U.S. News & World Report: Grand Teton Park Increases Fees To Camp, Boat, Get Married. • Omaha (NE) World-Herald: Last Homesteader’s Tractor Goes On Display At Homestead National Monument. • Arizona Daily Star: Saguaro National Park, Open Space Highlight Debate Over New Fry’s. • Harrison (AR) Daily Times: $5K Grant For Compton VFD. • Marin (CA) Independent Journal: Point Reyes Ranch Plan Comment Period Extended. • KOMO-TV Seattle: Man Gets Prison Time For 2001 Sex Assault Of Child In Olympic National Park. 

Office Of Insular Affairs 

• Saipan (MNP) Tribune: Snake Program Obtains Two New ‘Sniffer’ Dogs. 

Office Of Surface Mining 

• West Virginia Retraining Program Provides Unemployed Coal Miners With Computer Skills. • Powder River Basin Mines Earn Awards For Land Management Efforts. 

US Geological Survey 

• San Francisco Chronicle: Danger Endures In Wine Country As Fight Shifts From Fires To Mudslides. • Additional Reading. 

Opinion Pieces 

• Trump Does The Right Thing For Elephants. He Shouldn’t Back Down Now. • Trump Bags Another Anti-Obama Trophy: Dead Elephants. • Commentary: Assault On ESA Endangers Utah Coffers. • Additional Reading. 

Top National News 

• Washington Post: Media Analyses: Officials Send Mixed Signals On Keeping ACA Mandate Repeal In Tax Bill. • New York Post: Trump Says He Should Have Left UCLA Players “In Jail.” • Washington Post: Trump Touts Economy, Promotes Tax Reform. • Associated Press: STRATCOM Commander Says Would Refuse Nuclear Strike Order If Illegal. • New York Times: White House Requests $44 Billion In Additional Disaster Relief. • New York Times: Puerto Rico Power Authority CEO Resigns Amid Prolonged Post-Hurricane Blackout. • Associated Press: Officials Say Keystone Leak Will Not Factor Into Monday’s Expansion Vote. • Los Angeles Times: LATimes Analysis: Strong Economy A “Lifeline” For Trump’s “Embattled Presidency.” • New York Times: NYTimes Analysis: Trump Still Facing Challenges In Push For Faster Infrastructure Projects. • Washington Times: Administration Officials Say “Administrative State” Is Being Rolled Back. • Associated Press: Paris Climate Signatories Agree On Path Forward To Reduce Greenhouse Gas Emissions. 

Editorial Wrap-Up 

• New York Times. - “The Trump Administration Is Making War On Diplomacy.” • Washington Post. - “The House Tax Bill Unleashes A Dangerous Avalanche Of Campaign Cash.” - “The White House’s Much-Needed Rebuke To A Country Smothering Democracy.” - “A School Volunteer Abused At Least 23 Children. Officials Ignored It.” • Wall Street Journal. - “Germany’s Green Energy Meltdown.” - “A Blue Slip – Not A Franken Veto.” - “The Menendez Mistrial.” 

Big Picture 

• Headlines From Today’s Front Pages. 

Washington Schedule 

• Today’s Events In Washington. 

Last Laughs 

• Late Night Political Humor. 

# DOI In The News 

## Trump Says Decision On Elephant Hunting Trophies To Come This Week. 

Politico (11/19, Griffiths) reports President Trump tweeted Sunday a final decision would come this week on whether to maintain a ban on importing elephant hunting trophies from Zimbabwe and Zambia, “indicating he was leaning toward keeping the Obama-era rules in place.” Trump wrote, “Big-game trophy decision will be announced next week but will be very hard pressed to change my mind that this horror show in any way helps conservation of Elephants or any other animal.” The Washington Post (11/19, Gearan) says it was “not immediately clear whether the reference to ‘any other animal’ might mean he is also reconsidering his administration’s separate lifting of import bans on lion trophies last month.” Also reporting are The Hill (11/19, Beavers), the Washington Examiner (11/19, Feldscher), CNN (11/19, Graef, Green), and the AP (11/19). 

Trump Decision To Delay Repeal Of Elephant Trophy Import Ban Prompts Praise. 

Roxana Saberi of the CBS Weekend News (11/18, story 4, 2:00, Ninan) reported, “Faced with growing outrage over a move that would have lifted a ban on imports of elephant trophies from two African countries,” President Trump on Friday tweeted he is putting the decision “on hold until such time as I review all conservation facts.” The decision initially “sparked backlash from celebrities, including Ellen DeGeneres,” and the “anger spread online through the #bekindtoelephants. Animal rights groups argue the ban has helped protect Africa’s endangered elephants. And The Humane Society of the United States found that after the ban was put in place in 2014, imports of elephant trophies from Zimbabwe fell dramatically.” HSUS President Wayne Pacelle “is welcoming President Trump’s announcement to delay a decision on lifting the ban, but says the ban should be permanent.” Pacelle argued that a live elephant can generate more than $1 million in tourist revenues, compared to only $20,000 for its tusks. The New York Times (11/17, Cochrane) reports Trump’s “evening Twitter message reversed a decision by his own administration that was announced this week and promoted as recently as Friday afternoon by the White House press secretary, Sarah Huckabee Sanders.” The Washington Post (11/18, Eilperin, Gearan) says the “public and private pressure prompted President Trump to overturn his administration’s...move to allow elephants shot for sport in Zimbabwe and Zambia to be imported back to the United States as trophies, according to interviews with several individuals briefed on the decision.” The Post adds that the announcement “marked animal welfare activists’ first federal victory since the president took office in January, and came just hours after” White House press secretary Sarah Huckabee Sanders “defended the trophy import authorization, saying it resulted from a review by ‘career officials’ that began in 2014 under former president Barack Obama.” While the Post acknowledges Career Fish and Wildlife Service officials did make the decision, “political appointees at Interior did press for resolution of the issue, which is a top priority for hunting industry allies of” Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke, who said following Trump’s announcement that “the issuing of permits is put on hold as the decision is being reviewed.” Prior to the President’s announcement, ABC World News Tonight (11/17, story 7, 1:30, Muir) reported on the growing “outrage” over “a decision by the Trump Administration lifting a ban on importing trophies of elephants hunted in Africa.” Correspondent David Wright said the African elephant is still “a ‘threatened’ species, but as of today, big game hunters who kill these creatures in Zambia or Zimbabwe will be allowed to get their trophies through US Customs.” President Trump himself “is not a big game hunter, but his sons are.” Wright said the Administration’s “announcement is sparking outrage across the political spectrum, from Fox News commentator Laura Ingram to, just today, Ellen DeGeneres.” The White House has pushed back against the criticism, “saying this action comes after a study by professionals of the Department of Fish and Wildlife. Still, conservationists are not convinced.” Meanwhile, the Wall Street Journal (11/18, Stokols) reports the President on Saturday morning retweeted comments by cable television hosts Greta Van Susteren and Piers Morgan expressing their thanks for his decision. Additional coverage was provided by the AP (11/17, Cassata), the Washington Post (11/17, Parker, Eilperin), the Washington Post (11/17, Parker, Eilperin), the Washington Post (11/18, Wootson), the Washington Post (11/17, Ingraham), the Washington Examiner (11/17, Siciliano), the Los Angeles Times (11/17, Pearce), Bloomberg News (11/17, Marois), Reuters (11/17, Shepardson, Beech), Reuters (11/17, Herskovitz), Reuters (11/17, Shepardson, Beech), Politico (11/17, Lacy), The Hill (11/17, Cohn), USA Today (11/17, Cummings), USA Today (11/18, Walker, Welle), Newsweek (11/17, Valencia), the Christian Science Monitor (11/17, Biesecker), the Huffington Post (11/17, D'Angelo), Fox News (11/17), CNN (11/17, Diaz), CNN (11/18, Green), CBS News (11/17), NBC News (11/17, Silva), NBC News (11/18, Helsel), ABC News (11/17, Keneally), ABC News (11/17, Ebbs), CNBC (11/18), CNBC (11/17, Wilkie), the Washington Times (11/17, Miller), MarketWatch (11/18, Coffey), MarketWatch (11/17, Linnane), the Daily Intelligencer (NY) (11/18, Danner), the New York Post (11/17, Tacopino), the Boston Herald (11/18), the San Francisco Chronicle (11/17, Boucher), the New York Daily News (11/17, Scott-Reid), the Arizona Republic (11/17, Cummings), the Independent (UK) (11/18, Francisco), BBC News (UK) (11/18), BBC News (UK) (11/18), The Guardian (UK) (11/17, Wong, Helmore), the Telegraph (UK) (11/18, Riley-Smith), UPI (11/17, Haynes), and Townhall (11/18, Meads). Also reporting are The Hill (11/17, Byrnes), the AP (11/17, Cassata), and the New York Daily News (11/17). 

## Zinke Rocked Moccasins To Celebrate Native Cultures. But Tribes Are Focused On His Plans To Rock Bears Ears. 

The Washington Post (11/17, Fears, Eilperin) reports that while Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke this week “proudly showed his support for the worldwide Native American and indigenous peoples cultural celebration, sporting a pair of beaded moccasins over star-spangled socks,” Western tribes “remain upset over a larger Indian symbol that the secretary plans to rock to its foundation: the 1.35 million-acre Bears Ears National Monument in southern Utah.” According to the Post, “outraged representatives of the tribes involved with Bears Ears said Friday that they will lose a key part of their cultural heritage if the monument, designated last December by President Barack Obama, is reduced to a small fraction of its current size.” 

## Interior Secretary Visits Mille Lacs, Discusses Law Enforcement Crisis. 

The Brainerd (MN) Daily Dispatch (11/18) reports that Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke arrived on the Mille Lacs Reservation “for an impromptu visit” Thursday and Friday “to discuss the current law enforcement crisis.” Chief Executive Melanie Benjamin “described the meeting as very positive,” saying, “Secretary Zinke wanted to hear from us about this issue and listened intently, and promised to do what he can to help.” Following the meeting, Zinke and his staff “joined about 800 Mille Lacs Band members for the annual Community Feast.” 

## Mapp Meets Interior Secretary Zinke In D.C. 

The St. Thomas Source (11/18) reports that Gov. Kenneth Mapp met with Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke on Thursday “to discuss hurricane response and recovery in the U.S. Virgin Islands.” Zinke said, “Recovering from natural disasters requires a team effort, and the Department of the Interior is absolutely committed to helping the Virgin Islands return to normal. Our Insular Affairs team has been working around the clock to provide relief to those ravaged by hurricane, and we will continue these efforts in the weeks and months to come.” 

## Transmission Line From Oregon-To-Idaho Gets Approval. 

The AP (11/17) reports that the Bureau of Land Management has “signed off on a right-of-way that will allow Idaho Power to build a 293-mile transmission line from Oregon to Idaho.” The Interior Department announced the approval the Boardman-to-Hemingway project on Friday, “saying it will create nearly 500 jobs.” The Ontario (OR) Argus Observer (11/19, Meyer) reports that Katherine MacGregor, acting assistant secretary of land and mineral management, said in a statement, “This project will help stabilize the power grid in the Northwest, while creating jobs and carrying low-cost energy to the families and businesses who need it.” Also reporting are The East Oregonian (11/17, Plaven), KNDU-TV Yakima (WA) Yakima, WA (11/17), and KTVZ-TV Bend (OR) Bend, OR (11/17). 

## Congress Pushes Back On Interior Plan That Would More Than Double National Park Fees. 

The Salt Lake (UT) Tribune (11/17, Burr) reports that Congress is “pushing back on an Interior Department proposal to more than double entrance fees at some national parks during peak times and could look at legislation to halt any increases.” Rep. Rob Bishop, chairman of the House Natural Resources Committee, “says he will hold hearings on the park-fee proposal and look at legislation to prohibit an agency from raising fees without consulting Congress.” Bishop said, “It is very difficult to allow an agency to raise money by itself. That’s troublesome to me. Raising fees should have congressional input.” Rep. Mia Love is “also pushing back, arguing that the fee increases would hurt Utah families and the Interior Department should be looking to charge international tourists more money than Americans who own the system.” Love “noted the opposition isn’t partisan...and although Love supports most of Zinke’s efforts at the Interior Department, she said, ‘I’ve got to fight him on this.’” Additional coverage of the proposal was provided by the Boulder (CO) Daily Camera (11/17, Bear), the St. George (UT) News (11/17, Wadsworth) and the St. George (UT) News (11/17, Wadsworth). 

## Susan Combs Hits A New Hurdle In Her Path To Washington Post. 

The Austin (TX) American Statesman (11/17, Recio) reports that “former Texas Comptroller Susan Combs has hit yet another roadblock on the way to a U.S. Senate vote for a top position at the Interior Department.” Sen. Dick Durbin has “put a ‘hold’ on Combs and another Interior Department nominee – blocking them from getting a Senate vote – until he gets ‘clarification’ of the agency’s plans to re-designate environmentally sensitive public lands known as national monuments.” 

## House Committee Backs Westward Move For Interior Employees. 

Federal News Radio (DC) (11/17, Wing) reports that Republican leaders on the House Natural Resources Committee have written to President Trump “in support of an Interior Department re-organization.” Committee Chairman Rob Bishop and “six of his colleagues from Western states urged the White House to strongly consider moving some Interior offices out of Washington and closer to the people they serve.” 

## BLM Advisory Councils Are Free To Meet Again After Initial Review. 

The Grand Junction (CO) Daily Sentinel (11/19, Webb) reports that “after a suspension for an Interior Department review, Resource Advisory Councils (RACs) to the Bureau of Land Management and other similar advisory groups ‘are free to meet according to normal procedures.’” That’s following “completion of the initial phase of the review process, Interior spokeswoman Heather Swift said in an email Friday.” 

## Additional Coverage: Poor Record-Keeping Hindering Zinke Travel Investigation, IG Says. 

Additional coverage of Inspector General Mary Kendall’s Wednesday memorandum on the “poor” record-keeping hindering the watchdog’s investigation of Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke’s travel expenses was provided by CNN (11/17, Wallace) and Vanity Fair (11/17, Levin). 

# Bureau Of Indian Affairs 

## Program Helps Tribal Court Employees Increase Navajo Language Skills. 

The Farmington (NM) Daily Times (11/19, Smith) reports on a program that helps tribal court employees increase Navajo language skills. The program, a collaboration between the Navajo Nation Judicial Branch and Navajo Technical University, “funded by a $150,000 grant from Tribal Justice Support under the U.S. Department of the Interior.” 

# Bureau Of Land Management 

## The Powder River Basin Is Poised For Another Boom, But Some Say The Feds Are In The Way. 

A 1,600-word Casper (WY) Star-Tribune (11/18, Richards) analysis highlighted opinion that the Powder River Basin (PRB) “is poised for a boom Wyoming desperately needs,” but industry observers say the Bureau of Land Management is “slowing down opportunities and hampering development, while environmentalists say Wyoming needs federal regulations to avoid disaster when a bust inevitably strikes.” US Rep. Liz Cheney (R-WY) “has floated a number of bills that establish the right for states to take over more of the oil and gas permitting process on federal land, or with federal minerals,” but these proposals have been stalled by divided opinion. 

## BLM Picks Up Tab For Plugging Old Wells Near Douglas Pass. 

The Grand Junction (CO) Daily Sentinel (11/18, Webb) reports that the Bureau of Land Management is “busy plugging six oil and gas wells that a company left unplugged in the Douglas Pass area, a project that apparently will cost the agency far more money than it recovered in bond funds from the operator.” BLM spokesman David Boyd said “the wells were on five leases operated by Diamond Oil and Gas or Diamond Operations Group LTD.” He explained that “the BLM’s Northwest District in Colorado asked for funding from the agency’s national office to plug the wells and received $550,000 to complete the work, although the actual cost likely will end up being lower.” 

# Bureau Of Ocean Energy Management 

## Mark Sanford Opposes Energy Bill Championed By GOP Leaders. 

The Miami Herald (11/17, Dumain) reports that Rep. Mark Sanford (R-S.C.) said he opposes aspects of a proposed House bill aimed at expanding domestic energy production because it would promote offshore drilling. Rep. Sanford “plans to form a coalition of Republicans and Democrats to formally ask for changes to the bill.” The bill includes a controversial provision to partially rollback the 1972 Marine Mammal Protection Act, which has been “endorsed by powerful industry lobbyists such as the American Petroleum Institute.” Opponents to the rollback say the Marine Mammal Protection Act “is effectively the last remaining law in place preventing indiscriminate drilling and testing for oil and natural gas in the Atlantic Ocean.” 

## BOEM Looks For Comments On Hilcorp’s Liberty Development. 

UPI (11/17, Graeber) reported the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management is looking for comments about a draft environmental impact statement on Hilcorp Alaska’s plan to build artificial islands to drill in the Beaufort Sea. Lois Epstein, the Arctic program director for the Wilderness Society, expressed several concerns about the development. She said Hilcorp has a record of pipeline releases in the state, the last of which needed intervention from Gov. Bill Walker. 

## Louisiana May See More Offshore Oil Money Under Cassidy Budget Amendment. 

The New Orleans Times-Picayune (11/17, Schleifstein) reported Sen. Bill Cassidy said Louisiana’s share of Gulf of Mexico offshore revenue may increase by $100 million during 2020 and 2021. The senator attached an amendment to the legislation opening the Alaska National Wildlife Refuge for drilling to offset an expected shortfall in revenue from the Gulf of Mexico Energy Security Act. Cassidy’s amendment would alter the way money from the GOMESA is shared between the federal government, Louisiana, Texas, Mississippi and Alabama. 

# Bureau Of Reclamation 

## Wash. Reps Float Bill To Speed Up DOI Water Project Reviews. 

Law360 (11/17, Westney) reports that “two Republican lawmakers introduced a bill Thursday meant to speed up the environmental planning and review of water projects by two U.S. Department of the Interior agencies and to advance a specific water management project for the Yakima River in Washington state.” Reps. Dan Newhouse and Dave Reichert “put forward H.R. 4419, the Bureau of Reclamation and Bureau of Indian Affairs Water Project Streamlining Act of 2017.” 

# Fish And Wildlife Service 

## Congress Moves To ‘Drill, Baby, Drill’ In Alaska’s ANWR Refuge. Here’s What You Should Know. 

USA Today (11/19, Collins) reports that “Congress may be on the verge of finally handing” backers of oil and gas drilling in the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge permission to do so. The Senate Energy and Natural Resources Committee voted last week “to approve a bill that would allow oil and gas exploration in the refuge’s 1.5-million-acre coastal plain. The measure will be added to the Senate’s tax-reform package.” NPR (11/18, Detrow) reported thatSen. Maria Cantwell opposes the drilling and said, “The fact our committee’s contribution to that deal is about 7/100th of one percent of the Republicans’ increased deficit spending shows that this is not a serious budget proposal. It’s a cynical effort to open up the heart of the Artic Wildlife Refuge for oil.” Sen. Lisa Murkowski defended the proposal saying, “Alaskans will do this the right way. ... We will protect the environment while providing substantial economic benefits all across America.” 

## Fish And Wildlife Retracts Opposition To Arizona Project. 

The High Country (CO) News (11/17, Shogren) reports that tthe U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service “last month lifted its longstanding objections to the construction of a city-sized development that threatens the last free-flowing major river in the arid Southwest.” The FWS “had twice in recent years warned that a key federal permit to build 28,000 homes, golf courses and other amenities near the San Pedro River in southern Arizona would have ‘appreciable’ effects on wildlife.” However, “last month, the Fish and Wildlife Service reversed itself, according to an Oct. 26 letter obtained by High Country News through a Freedom of Information Act request.” 

## How A Neon Green Fern Sparked An Environmental Showdown. 

The Palm Beach (FL) Post (11/17) reports on the dispute “between the South Florida Water Management District and the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service concerning a 65-year relationship that required the federal government to control invasive species in the popular Arthur R. Marshall Loxahatchee National Wildlife Refuge.” This month, the water management district’s governing board gave the approval “to finalize a new 20-year lease on the land with Fish and Wildlife.” The agreement “puts the onus for invasive cleanup on the district, but the wildlife service agreed to pay at least $1.25 million annually to the district for the effort.” 

## With Dam Cleared From Creek, Endangered Fish Expand Range. 

The AP (11/19) reports that “populations of an endangered fish have been found in new areas of an Alabama creek, upstream of where a dam was removed four years ago in an effort to expand the fish’s range.” The vermilion darter “needs clear, free-flowing streams to survive and had been blocked from moving upstream by the old dam.” The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service “partnered with the Freshwater Land Trust to remove the nearly 100-year-old Shadow Lake dam in 2013, and this month confirmed the darters have expanded their range upstream of the old dam site.” 

# National Park Service 

## Proposal Restricting National Mall Access A ‘Game Changer’ For Hill Athletes. 

Roll Call (11/17, Connolly) reports the National Park Service “held meetings last week with leagues from across the city — including the House softball league — informing them that it planned to permanently close access” on the National Mall, “from Third Street to 17th Street, to ‘organized sports.’” Also, “the park service plans to raise permit fees from as little as $7 for an entire season to $70 per two-hour period on the Mall fields west of the Washington Monument.” Those meetings were “preliminary, informal efforts to give those stakeholders background information about the possible changes, including modifications to the reservation system/process and fees, as well as locations available for use by organized sports,” park service spokesman Mike Litterst said in a statement Wednesday. Additional coverage was provided by Fox News (11/17, Weber). 

## Beach Boys, Wynonna To Play National Christmas Tree Lighting. WRC-TV Washington (11/17, Vesoulis) reports that “the Beach Boys, Wynonna and The Texas Tenors will play the White House’s National Christmas Tree Lighting Ceremony, National Park Service officials said.” The tree will “arrive in Washington Monday, and it will be illuminated Nov. 30 on the Ellipse at President’s Park, also known as the White House.” 

## Fort Sumter Seeks Comment On New Plan For Disabled Access. 

The AP (11/19) reports that the Fort Sumter National Monument is seeking public input “on a proposal to add ramps and an enclosed elevator for the disabled.” The monument currently has “inoperable accessibility chairlifts.” According to the article, “the proposed design includes a ramp leading from the parade ground of Fort Sumter to the lower level of Battery Huger which will provide access to restrooms and water.” Additional coverage was provided by the Charleston (SC) Post and Courier (11/19, Petersen). 

## Grand Teton Park Increases Fees To Camp, Boat, Get Married. 

The AP (11/19) reports that Grand Teton National Park will “increase fees for various permits, including backcountry camping, weddings and motor boats.” According to park spokesman Andrew White, “the fee adjustment is part of the park’s annual review of programs.” White said, “It’s not a response to any sort of budget issue. We’re just making sure we’re recovering the cost associated with these programs.” 

## Last Homesteader’s Tractor Goes On Display At Homestead National Monument. 

The Omaha (NE) World-Herald (11/19, Hendee) reports that “the tractor used on the nation’s last homestead will be unveiled Monday at Homestead National Monument of America near Beatrice, Nebraska.” According to Superintendent Mark Engler, “the tractor represents the end of America’s epic homestead movement,” He said, “When most people think of homesteading, they have an image in their minds of a single-bottom plow being pulled by a team of horses. This tractor will show the size and scope of homesteading ... (and) the relevancy of this law that transformed our nation.” 

## Saguaro National Park, Open Space Highlight Debate Over New Fry’s. 

The Arizona Daily Star (11/18, Davis) reports that “for the second time in six months, Saguaro National Park is in the middle of a development dispute, with the National Park Service fighting a proposed project near its boundaries.” The first project was “the 178-home, gated Lazy K Bar housing on 138 acres near Saguaro Park-West in Marana that was approved this spring after a nearly three-year dispute.” Now, “it’s a much smaller project – a Fry’s supermarket, two smaller stores and a nine-pump gas station – on 16.3 acres, lying across town, near Saguaro National Park-East.” 

## $5K Grant For Compton VFD. 

The Harrison (AR) Daily Times (11/17) reports that “the Compton Volunteer Fire Department received a $5,000 National Park Service Rural Fire Assistance Program grant from Buffalo National River at a ceremony at Compton on Monday, Nov. 13.” While presenting the grant to members of the department, Buffalo National River deputy superintendent Laura Miller said, “This grant will be used to purchase much needed firefighting equipment and personal protective gear.” 

## Point Reyes Ranch Plan Comment Period Extended. 

The Marin (CA) Independent Journal (11/18, Prado) reports that “the comment period dealing with the roiling issue of the future of ranching in the Point Reyes National Seashore has been extended by the National Park Service.” According to the article, “a 30-day comment period on the alternatives was to run through Nov. 15, but because of the interest, it has been extended through Wednesday.” Melanie Gunn, Point Reyes National Seashore spokeswoman, said, “We had multiple requests for an extension to this first comment period. Although we are working under a tight timeline for the General Management Plan Amendment, we are able to extend this comment period for an additional week with an interest in robust public engagement.” 

## Man Gets Prison Time For 2001 Sex Assault Of Child In Olympic National Park. 

KOMO-TV Seattle (11/17) reports that “a Port Angeles man was sentenced to eight years in federal prison this week after he was convicted of sexually assaulting a child back in 2001 in Olympic National Park.” Charles Jason Butcher “admitted the assault in a recorded phone call with his victim in 2016.” The Peninsula (WA) Daily News (11/19, Gottlieb) reports that Butcher “pleaded guilty to the charge in May, denying that he sexually assaulted a second minor in 2001.” 

# Office Of Insular Affairs 

## Snake Program Obtains Two New ‘Sniffer’ Dogs. 

The Saipan (MNP) Tribune (11/20) reports that “the Division of Fish and Wildlife and the CNMI Brown Tree Snake program recently welcomed two new detector canines from Oklahoma.” The dogs, named Greta and Zing’r, “took 60 hours to travel from Aachen Dutch Shepherds in Oklahoma to Saipan via Micronesia Air Cargo Services, with an overnight stop in both Hawaii and Guam.” Acting Lands and Natural Resources secretary Augustin Kaipat said, “I extend a well-deserved thank you to everyone who assisted in the procurement of our two new canines here at the BTS program as well as funding provided by the Office of Insular Affairs.” 

# Office Of Surface Mining 

## West Virginia Retraining Program Provides Unemployed Coal Miners With Computer Skills. 

The CBS Weekend News (11/18, story 9, 2:05, Ninan) reported on a West Virginia retraining program for unemployed coal miners, an industry that has seen its workforce shrink by over 40 percent in recent years. Correspondent Weijia Jiang says the “free training program called ‘Mined Minds’ that teaches former coal miners to become computer coders, creating apps, websites, and games. Founder Amanda Laucher started the nonprofit in Pennsylvania in 2015 because her younger brother was worried about losing his coal mining job.” West Virginia Sen. Joe Manchin (D) “helped Mined Minds establish headquarters near West Virginia’s capital with federal grants.” Manchin said the program “gives us a chance to diversify ourselves and be something that people think we’re not.” 

## Powder River Basin Mines Earn Awards For Land Management Efforts. 

The Gillette (WY) News Record (11/19) reports that “four of the Powder River Basin’s largest coal producers have been named winners of the Good Neighbor Award by the federal Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement (OSMRE).” Arch Coal, Cloud Peak Energy, Kiewit Mining Group and Peabody Energy were “recognized for working with the local community while completing their mining and reclamation operations, according to a press release announcing the awards.” According to Travis Deti, executive director of the Wyoming Mining Association, “by singling out more than half of the mines in the Powder River Basin, which produces more than 30 percent of the coal burned in U.S. coal-fired power plants, OSMRE sends a message that mining coal can be done in a way that respects the environment.” 

# US Geological Survey 

## Danger Endures In Wine Country As Fight Shifts From Fires To Mudslides. 

The San Francisco Chronicle (11/19, Alexander) reports that “with hundreds of square miles littered with trees and stripped of vegetation in the wake of the Northern California fires, mudslides are a near certainty as winter rains arrive.” The article notes that “a huge effort among federal, state and local agencies is working to tame the threat.” Notably, the U.S. Geological Survey has “mapped areas where damaging flows are most likely to strike.” 

## Additional Reading. 

Alaskan Town’s Polar Bear Problem Leads To Tourism Boom. ABC News (11/18, Robach, Crawford, Dawson, Vollmayer, Effron). 

Strong Earthquake Rattles Tibet But Only Minor Damage Reported. Reuters (11/17, Blanchard). 

Strong Earthquake Strikes East-northeast Of Tadine, New Caledonia: USGS. Reuters (11/19, Von Ahn). 

# Opinion Pieces 

## Trump Does The Right Thing For Elephants. He Shouldn’t Back Down Now. 

Washington Post (11/19) editorial says African elephants are “a species in crisis, and the US government should not do anything that could endanger them further.” The Post welcomes Trump’s intervention Friday to put hold a decision by the Interior Department. It argues that the “threat of an import ban creates a large incentive for African countries seeking tourist dollars from American safari hunters to ensure their hunts are sustainable.” 

## Trump Bags Another Anti-Obama Trophy: Dead Elephants. 

In an editorial, the New York Times (11/17) says the Trump Administration’s decision this week to lift a ban on importing elephant trophies from Zimbabwe “is a gift to the big game trade from Ryan Zinke, the interior secretary, who’s apparently not satisfied with scrapping environmental and species protections on just one continent.” The Times argues the move will not only “endanger gains made by governments and environmental groups to protect elephants from illegal trade in ivory and other body parts,” but also send “yet another message that this is an administration in service of itself and its cronies.” 

## Commentary: Assault On ESA Endangers Utah Coffers. 

In an op-ed for the Salt Lake (UT) Tribune (11/18, Feral, Harris), Priscilla Feral, the President of Friends of Animals, and Michael Harris, the director of Friends of Animals’ Wildlife Law Program, criticize five bills making hteir way “through Congress aimed squarely at dismantling the Endangered Species Act piece by piece.” The authors warn that the bills “should matter to Utah residents, as the state is ground zero for legal assaults against the act.” They warn that Rep. Rob Bishop’s “attempt to disembowel the ESA not only imperils Utah’s unique wildlife but more than one thousand species across the U.S. as well as state coffers.” 

## Additional Reading. 

Elephant Trophies? Seriously? This Is What Washington Is Spending Its Time On? Fox News (11/20, Velicovich). 

Why Can’t We Protect Elephants? New York Times (11/18, Shipstead). 

The Beauty Of Bears Ears And Of Protecting It. Boston Globe (11/16, Nash). 

Stop The Assault On U.S. National Monuments. Baltimore Sun (11/17). 

Trump Threatening National Marine Monuments. Marin (CA) Independent Journal (11/17, Martin). 

Push Back Against Joshua Tree National Park Fee Increase. Palm Springs (CA) Desert Sun (11/18, Schneider). Editorial Board: Respect Local Compromise On Sage Grouse. Casper (WY) Star-Tribune (11/19). 

Opening Sabinoso A Major Gain For New Mexico. Santa Fe New Mexican (11/18, Heinrich). 

We Must Strive To Be Responsible Stewards Toward Our Wild Places. Albuquerque (NM) Journal. 

Development And Conservation Go Hand In Hand In New Mexico. Albuquerque (NM) Journal (11/19). 

Another Look At BLM Gas Flaring Rules. Montana Standard (11/19, Freeman). 

The Forefront Of Renewable Power. Kokomo (IN) Perspective (11/18, Floyd). 

EDITORIAL: Bid To Ban Offshore Leases Shortsighted. Waynesboro (VA) News Virginian (11/19). 

Editorial: Military Can Learn To Live With Energy Exploration In The Atlantic. Richmond (VA) Times-Dispatch (11/18). 

Study Needed: Mountaintop Removal Mining Deserves Scrutiny. Parkersburg (WV) News and Sentinel (11/20). 

Editorial: If The Blues And The County Want The Public’s Help, They Should Play It Straight. St. Louis Post-Dispatch (11/19). 

My Freedom Is On The Line To Fight Climate Change, More Will Follow. The Hill (11/17, Ward). 

# Top National News 

## Media Analyses: Officials Send Mixed Signals On Keeping ACA Mandate Repeal In Tax Bill. 

OMB Director Mulvaney told CNN’s State Of The Union Sunday that if repealing the ACA’s individual mandate becomes an “impediment” to passing tax reform legislation, the White House is open to removing that provision from the legislation, the Washington Post (11/19, Sullivan) reports. Mulvaney said, “If we can repeal part of Obamacare as part of a tax bill and have a tax bill that is still a good tax bill, that can pass, that’s great. ... If it becomes an impediment to getting the best tax bill we can, then we are okay with taking it out.” However, he added that “he does not think it is currently an impediment,” and House and Senate negotiators would have to determine whether to include the provision in the final bill. Similarly, Mulvaney told CBS’ Face The Nation (11/19, Dickerson) that the Administration is looking for the “best tax bill that can pass,” even if that means removing the mandate repeal. Politico (11/19, McCaskill) quotes Mulvaney as telling CNN, “If they do get rid of this penalty, the folks who benefit from that are predominantly folks who make less than $50,000 or $100,000 a year. ... There’s actually a benefit if the repeal goes away, but it’s up to the House and Senate to hammer through those details.” The Washington Times (11/19, Wolfgang) also reports on Mulvaney’s comments, as does Reuters (11/19, Mutikani, Volcovici). In a separate story, Reuters (11/19) reports that Treasury Secretary Mnuchin told Fox News Sunday that repealing the mandate was not a “bargaining chip” in negotiations. Mnuchin said, “This is all about getting this passed in the Senate. This isn’t a bargaining chip, the President thinks we should get rid of it and I think we should get rid of it. ... It’s an unfair tax on poor people.” The Washington Post (11/19, Sullivan, Paletta) reports on Mulvaney’s comments under the headline, “As Clock Ticks On Tax Bill, White House Signals A Compromise.” However, the AP (11/19, Superville) says Administration officials “sent mixed signals Sunday,” citing Mulvaney’s comments and comments from White Director of Legislative Affairs Marc Short, who told ABC’s This Week (11/19) that the White House “is very comfortable with the House bill,” which does not include the repeal, but sees the mandate as a tax and “we like the fact that the Senate has included it in its bill.” The New York Post (11/19, Moore) also says Administration officials “gave conflicting signals” about the mandate. Sen. Susan Collins said CNN’s State Of The Union (11/19, Tapper), “I hope the Senate will follow the lead of the House and strike it. If not, I think we need to fix it, by passing two bills: the Alexander-Murray bill, which will help to stabilize markets and reduce premiums; and the bill I have introduced with Bill Nelson of Florida that would create high-risk pools that would protect people with preexisting conditions and also help to reduce premiums by 20 percent.” USA Today (11/19, Slack) reports that Collins said removing the mandate could cause premium increases and “cancel out the tax cut that they would get.” The Wall Street Journal (11/19, Torry, Rubin) reports that Collins also said that the Senate bill should lower the corporate rate to 22 percent instead of 20 percent and use the additional revenue to keep the so-called SALT deduction, which the Senate bill currently eliminates. 

NYTimes Analysis: Savings From Mandate Repeal Could Be Less Than Republicans Anticipate. A New York Times (11/19, A1, Zernike, Goodnough) analysis says Republicans, who are relying on the mandate repeal “to free up hundreds of billions of dollars to pay for an array of tax cuts to corporations and individuals,” are “assuming that without a mandate, many people would no longer buy insurance, so the government would spend billions of dollars less on” subsidies to help people pay for premiums. However, “polling data, analysis from a private forecasting agency and interviews with people who buy coverage through the Affordable Care Act marketplaces suggest the savings could be far less, largely because many people who qualify for the subsidies will still want to take advantage of them.” A Kaiser Family Foundation survey “found that just 7 percent of people who buy insurance on the individual market said they would go without coverage if the mandate were no longer enforced,” and “a majority said the mandate was not a reason they bought insurance.” 

## Trump Says He Should Have Left UCLA Players “In Jail.” 

Media reports describe President Trump as lashing out via Twitter Sunday at LaVar Ball, the father of LiAngelo Ball, one of the UCLA basketball players caught shoplifting in China, after the elder Ball downplayed both Trump’s role in his son’s release and the seriousness of the accusations his son was facing. Sunday afternoon, Trump tweeted, “Now that the three basketball players are out of China and saved from years in jail, LaVar Ball, the father of LiAngelo, is unaccepting of what I did for his son and that shoplifting is no big deal. I should have left them in jail!” The New York Post (11/19, Moore) reports that “shortly before 7 p.m.,” Trump tweeted, “Shoplifting is a very big deal in China, as it should be (5-10 years in jail), but not to father LaVar. ... Should have gotten his son out during my next trip to China instead. China told them why they were released. Very ungrateful!” The Washington Examiner (11/19, Cohen) reports that Trump “fired back at LaVar Ball,” while The Hill (11/19, Samuels) says Trump “lashed out” at Ball, and ABC World News Tonight (11/19, story 10, 0:30, Llamas) described a “brewing battle” between Trump and Ball. The Daily Caller (11/19, Caruso) also reports on Trump’s tweet as does the Wall Street Journal (11/19, Rubin). The Los Angeles Times (11/19, King) says Trump’s Sunday morning tweet “drew a quick backlash on social media,” with “many” expressing “incredulity that a sitting US president would publicly regret having come to the aid of American citizens being held by an authoritarian government.” Rep. Adam Schiff was “among Trump’s sharper critics,” tweeting, “How can someone in such a big office be so small?” A report (11/19, Thompson) on Trump’s tweet on the sports website Deadspin was headlined, “Donald Trump Wishes He’d Left UCLA Teens in Chinese Prison Because His Feelings Are Hurt.” The New York Times (11/19, Hoffman) says Trump “made it clear on Twitter that he expected the players to thank him for his involvement, claiming they faced 10 years in jail, though many legal experts weighed in to say it was unlikely the charges would have been that serious.” All three did thank the President once they returned to the US, and “apparently satisfied with their level of thanks,” Trump “took to Twitter to acknowledge their gratitude.” Townhall (11/19, Meads) reports that after the player “promptly said thank you,” it “seemed as if the saga was over.” But, Politico (11/19, Griffiths) says LaVar Ball’s comments in an interview with ESPN, “seemed to catch his attention again.” Bloomberg News (11/19) reports that in the interview, Ball “minimized Trump’s involvement in winning the players’ release.” USA Today (11/19, Schad) says Ball was asked about Trump’s involvement in his son’s release and replied, “Who? ... What was he over there for? Don’t tell me nothing. Everybody wants to make it seem like he helped me out.” He added, “Like I told him, ‘They try to make a big deal out of nothing sometimes.’ ... I’m from L.A. I’ve seen a lot worse things happen than a guy taking some glasses.” 

## Trump Touts Economy, Promotes Tax Reform. 

Washington Post (11/17, Bump) correspondent Philip Bump says “it’s rare when President Trump lays bare the contradiction at the heart of his push for tax reform so specifically,” but on Friday he did so in a pair of tweets. The President tweeted, “Great numbers on Stocks and the Economy. If we get Tax Cuts and Reform, we’ll really see some great results!” Trump added, “If Democrats were not such obstructionists and understood the power of lower taxes, we would be able to get many of their ideas into Bill!” Meanwhile, Politico (11/17, Haberkorn, Bresnahan) reports Sens. Lindsey Graham, Lamar Alexander, Susan Collins, and Bill Cassidy on Thursday had “personally lobbied...Trump to support a bill to shore up Obamacare markets while repealing the law’s individual mandate as part of tax reform, according to GOP sources.” A White House spokesman said Trump and the lawmakers “discussed the ongoing efforts to pass historic tax reform and other legislative objectives.” 

Mnuchin Touts Benefits Of Tax Reform. Bloomberg News (11/17, McGregor) reports Treasury Secretary Mnuchin in an interview on Fox News said Friday that the Republican tax reform plan will “benefit” New York’s economy “by lowering the corporate tax to 20 percent.” Mnuchin added, “That’s a huge boom for the financial services industry – they can hire more people, they can pay more people, they can create more jobs, they can be competitive.” Meanwhile, the Washington Times (11/17, Persons) reports Mnuchin conceded, “There will be people who make more than $1 million, in high-tax states, who will be paying more.” Mnuchin added, “As the president has said, this is not a tax plan to cut taxes for rich people. This is a plan to make businesses competitive.” Reuters (11/17, Johnson) reports that in an interview with CNBC, he also insisted “the majority of small businesses and non-corporate enterprises known as ‘pass-throughs’ would see a significant tax cut under the Republican tax plan.” Mnuchin said 98 percent “of the number of pass-throughs have $500,000 or less of income. ... Those people will get substantial reductions.” 

Hassett: “Not Economically Rational” To Argue Tax Cuts Will Increase Deficit. 

Bloomberg News (11/17, Voskuhl) reports Kevin Hassett, Chairman of the White House Council of Economic Advisers, during a White House briefing on Friday argued “it’s just not economically rational” to assume Republican tax reform proposals will increase the deficit in the long term. However, Bloomberg asserts “independent studies have reached differing conclusions.” Bloomberg says “the conservative-leaning Tax Foundation, a Washington policy group, said earlier this month that the House’s tax bill would cost $1.98 trillion over a decade – compared with current law” while the Penn Wharton Budget Model at the University of Pennsylvania “found that, after accounting for larger economic effects, the House bill would ‘reduce revenues between $1.5 trillion and $1.7 trillion’ over 10 years. The Senate plan would reduce revenue by $1.4 trillion to $1.7 trillion, the model found.” 

Bureau of Labor Statistics: Unemployment Rate Has Fallen To Record Low In 13 States This Year. The Hill (11/17, Wilson) reports that according to the monthly Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) report released Friday, “the unemployment rates in Alabama, Hawaii, Maine, Mississippi, Tennessee, Texas and Washington all met or beat their lowest rates ever” while “California, Colorado, Idaho, North Dakota and Oregon also hit new lows earlier this year.” The Hill adds that “nationally, the unemployment rate sits at 4.1 percent, the lowest level since December 2000, when it hit 3.9 percent.” 

Washington Examiner: Cutting Corporate Tax Rates Benefits Everyone. In an editorial, the Washington Examiner (11/17) criticizes Democratic opposition to cutting the corporate tax rate, adding that doing so “is neither corporate welfare nor a massive giveaway to the wealthy.” According to the Examiner, the cut “is a fair and even-handed way of reducing economic distortions, making American businesses more competitive worldwide, and encouraging them to reinvest overseas profits in jobs and growth back home.” What’s more, corporations will have less incentive to pass costs on to taxpayers by raising prices, paying lower wages, and issuing smaller dividends. 

## STRATCOM Commander Says Would Refuse Nuclear Strike Order If Illegal. 

The AP (11/18, Gillies) reports that at the Halifax International Security Forum on Saturday, Air Force Gen. John Hyten, the commander of US Strategic Command, said that if he received orders from President Trump to launch nuclear weapons, and if such a strike would be illegal, then he would refuse the order. Hyten said he has discussed such a scenario with the President, adding, “If it’s illegal, guess what’s going to happen. I’m going to say, ‘Mr President, that’s illegal.’ And guess what he’s going to do? He’s going to say, ‘What would be legal?’” Hyten said he would then provide Trump “with options with a mix of capabilities to respond to whatever the situation is, and that’s the way it works.” Reuters (11/18, Brunnstrom, Stone) reports Hyten also “said running through scenarios of how to react in the event of an illegal order was standard practice, and added: ‘If you execute an unlawful order, you will go to jail. You could go to jail for the rest of your life.’” Reuters says some lawmakers are pursuing legislation aimed at restricting the president’s nuclear authority, and on Tuesday, a Senate committee “held the first congressional hearing in more than four decades on the president’s authority to launch a nuclear strike.” 

LATimes: Bill To Restrict President’s Nuclear Authority Jeopardizes Means To Deter Aggression. The Los Angeles Times (11/18) editorializes that while it is “dismayed” by “President Trump’s bellicose statements and impulsive governing style,” it cannot “support the Restricting First Use of Nuclear Weapons Act of 2017 proposed by Sen. Ed Markey of Massachusetts and Rep. Ted Lieu of Torrance.” The Times says its “principal concern about this bill is that it would make it harder for a president not just to use nuclear weapons, but also to deter aggression by leaving adversaries in doubt about whether and when such weapons might be used.” The Times reiterates that it shares concerns over Trump’s rhetoric, but notes “the president has deferred to the advice of his national security team, including on nuclear strategy.” As such, the Times concludes, “Congress shouldn’t attempt to legislate a drastic change in the president’s authority to defend the nation.” 

## White House Requests $44 Billion In Additional Disaster Relief. 

The New York Times (11/17, A1, Kaplan) reports on its front page that the White House on Friday asked Congress “for $44 billion in additional relief in response to this year’s devastating hurricanes, but facing rising budget deficits and pushing a tax cut that could cost $1.5 trillion, the administration also suggested that lawmakers make spending cuts to offset disaster costs.” According to the Times, “Administration officials laid out a menu of options for budget cutting, totaling $59 billion, from small nicks like $8 million from a rural energy program to far larger options, such as $3.9 billion from student financial aid and $1 billion from transportation infrastructure funds.” Budget Director Mulvaney asserted “the administration believes it is prudent to offset new spending.” However, the Times acknowledges “some of those proposals were sure to raise eyebrows” and lawmakers “swiftly dismissed [the request] as inadequate.” The Wall Street Journal (11/17, Peterson, Andrews) highlights the bipartisan criticism to the aid proposal. Senate Majority Whip John Cornyn in a hearing Thursday condemned the proposal as “wholly inadequate” while Rep. Nita Lowey, the ranking member on the House Appropriations Committee, in a statement said Friday that the request “does not come close to what local officials [in Puerto Rico] say is needed.” 

## Puerto Rico Power Authority CEO Resigns Amid Prolonged Post-Hurricane Blackout. 

The New York Times (11/17, Robles) reports Ricardo L. Ramos, CEO of the Puerto Rico Electric Power Authority, resigned yesterday “amid a two-month island-wide blackout and weeks of bruising public outcry over a costly contract to restore service.” According to the article, “The governor, Ricardo A. Rosselló, told reporters that he accepted the resignation because Mr. Ramos had become a distraction,” and “a spokeswoman for Mr. Rosselló said the governor had not asked for Mr. Ramos to step down.” The Washington Post (11/17, Mufson, Hernández) reports Rosselló said, “The executive director is a professional. He has worked hard to restore the system in Puerto Rico but understands that this is a context that has greatly distracted from what could be recovery.” Bloomberg News (11/17, Levin, Spalding) reports Ramos’’s resignation “made clear” that Rosselló “wants to remain in charge of the battered island’s recovery.” USA Today (11/17, Stanglin) reports San Juan Mayor Carmen Yulin Cruz called the resignation the “right thing.” She added, “That he helped destroy the credibility of the PR government is a disgrace.” The Hill (11/17, Henry) reports “less than 45 percent of power has been restored to Puerto Rico since Hurricane Maria swept across” the island. The Washington Examiner (11/17, Siegel) reports PREPA and Ramos “have been especially criticized for signing a $300 million contract with small Montana firm Whitefish Energy to restore the island’s power.” The Daily Caller (11/17, White) and the AP (11/18, Coto) also provide coverage of Ramos’ resignation. 

WPost: Puerto Rico Still Faces Enormous Problems. The Washington Post (11/17) writes in an editorial that despite depictions the departure from Puerto Rico of the Army general tasked with leading the military’s response to Hurricane Maria is “a sign the island is no longer in crisis mode but instead is transitioning to long-term recovery,” there are clearly enormous problems on the island still. Considering this, the Post argues that “more than ever, the people of Puerto Rico must not be forgotten,” and that “those charged with rebuilding the island need to show they are up to the task and not repeat the mistakes that marked the initial response to the catastrophic storm.” 

## Officials Say Keystone Leak Will Not Factor Into Monday’s Expansion Vote. 

The AP (11/17, Schulte, Nord) reports that despite the seemingly poor timing of the Keystone pipeline leak, officials “say state law does not allow pipeline safety to be a factor” in their decision on whether to expand the system. The Nebraska Public Service Commission is scheduled to vote Monday on whether to allow the Keystone XL expansion proposed by TransCanada. The decision “will hinge on testimony and documents generated from public hearings over the summer and from more than 500,000 public comments, Nebraska Public Service Commission spokeswoman Deb Collins said.” A state law passed in 2011 “prevents the commission from factoring pipeline safety or the possibility of leaks into its decisions.” Opponents of Keystone XL “are incensed that the leak won’t be considered.” Meanwhile, the New York Times (11/17, Smith) reports the images of “South Dakota grassland blemished by 210,000 gallons of leaked Canadian crude oil could not have come at a worse time for the Keystone Pipeline’s operator, TransCanada.” The Times adds that a preliminary report filed with the state “listed ‘equipment failure’ as the cause.” The company had about 75 TransCanada workers and contractors at the site on Friday, “along with federal and state regulators, to begin a lengthy cleanup that will include the excavation of part of the pipeline.” 

## LATimes Analysis: Strong Economy A “Lifeline” For Trump’s “Embattled Presidency.” 

A Los Angeles Times (11/19, Lauter) analysis reports that the economy “has become a lifeline” for President Trump’s “otherwise embattled presidency.” Increasingly, the President has “tout[ed] low unemployment, record high stock market values and healthy economic growth rates in speeches and his ubiquitous tweets,” and the reaction from voters, “even some who are otherwise skeptical of the president, show how the economy’s strong performance has bolstered Trump’s standing.” The Times cites a focus group conducted by Democratic pollster Peter Hart which found that “even participants who voted for Trump last year sharply criticized his administration,” but “when the subject turned to the economy, opinions of Trump noticeably warmed.” 

## NYTimes Analysis: Trump Still Facing Challenges In Push For Faster Infrastructure Projects. 

The New York Times (11/18, Meier) examines President Trump’s pledge to accelerate the review process for completing major construction projects, including his goal for agencies to complete environmental reviews in two years. The centerpiece of President Trump’s plan gives an office within the White House called the Council on Environmental Quality “the authority to coordinate actions and direct how environmental reviews are performed. Much of the plan’s inspiration lies in a report, ‘Two Years Not Ten Years,’ issued in 2015 by Common Good, a nonpartisan research and advocacy group.” The Trump Administration’s recent budget proposal included “a six-page fact sheet about infrastructure funding, including private investment,” but “several recent projects illustrate the pitfalls new proposals confront and the challenge Mr. Trump faces in breaking the logjams,” including maintenance at Penn Station in Manhattan and construction to build the proposed Northern Corridor. 

## Administration Officials Say “Administrative State” Is Being Rolled Back. 

The Washington Times (11/19, Richardson) reports that at the Federalist Society’s national convention this weekend, “top-ranking members of the Trump administration...share[d] their progress rolling back the administrative state.” White House Counsel Donald McGahn said, “The President is making fundamental changes to how the regulatory state interacts with the people, and he is selecting judges who will enforce the law as written and respect the separation of powers.” HHS Office for Civil Rights Director Roger Severino similarly said, “The project of regulatory roll-back is well underway under this Administration.” He cited several of what he called “great developments for shutting down the regulatory state.” 

## Paris Climate Signatories Agree On Path Forward To Reduce Greenhouse Gas Emissions. 

The AP (11/18, Jordans) reported that the Bonn climate talks ended Saturday after an “all-night negotiating session” and progress toward “creating a comprehensive rule book for fighting global warming.” Fiji’s Prime Minister Frank Bainimarama, who presided over the meeting, said “notable achievements” were made regarding agriculture, ocean protection, indigenous people’s rights and the launch of a new system to help people in poor countries get insurance against the effects of climate change. Reuters (11/18, Chestney, Doyle) reported that despite the Trump administration’s decision to withdraw from the Paris climate accord, nearly 200 nations remain committed to keeping the global agreement on track. Delegates “agreed to launch a process in 2018 to start reviewing existing plans to limit greenhouse gas emissions as part of a long-term effort to ratchet up ambition,” which will be known to as the “Talanoa Dialogue.” Politico (11/18, Holden) reported that the White House “goaded activists at the international climate talks by pushing coal and other fossil fuels,” although behind closed doors, “U.S. negotiators stuck to their Obama-era principles on the 2015 Paris deal.” Observers at the conference “said the U.S. made no effort to disrupt the talks,” but that “Washington was ‘not in the negotiations with the same credibility as before.’” Bloomberg News (11/17, Shankleman) reported that Trump has “weakened” the Paris deal, according to Christian Ehler, a German member of the European Parliament, who said, “the U.S. was creating a huge vacuum, so now you see people trying to fill it up. There’s a leadership gap, and I think now the interests are falling apart in a way.” 

Future Success Of Paris Accord Unclear After UN Climate Talks. The New York Times (11/18, Plumer) reported that on Wednesday at the United Nations climate talks in Bonn, German Chancellor Angela Merkel declared that “climate change is an issue determining our destiny as mankind.” She then conceded that because of Germany’s continued reliance on coal energy, her own nation will likely miss its own greenhouse gas emissions reduction goals, delivering “a stark reminder that the real action on global warming does not unfold in international venues.” Ultimately, the Times says, the Paris climate accord is “a giant bet on the power of peer pressure – with the future of the planet at stake.” The biggest unknown centers on “whether this whole process will translate into meaningful further action to cut emissions,” says the Times. In Bonn, however, “there were a few signs peer pressure is working and that some countries are indeed feeling compelled to take stronger action.” 

Small Island Nations Losing Faith In Global Efforts Against Climate Change. The New York Times (11/17, Plumer, Friedman) reported that small island nations “are among the smallest contributors to climate change, producing less than 1 percent of global greenhouse gas emissions,” but they “are among the most vulnerable nations to global warming.” Leaders of small islands say the industrialized world “owes some recompense for the disasters these vulnerable nations will suffer in the years ahead,” but as the United Nations climate talks “on bolstering the Paris agreement draw to a close, island leaders say the décor seems a cruel taunt.” Hopes among island nation leaders that they “will see a major increase in financial support to help address the consequences of climate change” are also waning, as are efforts “to expand ways for nations to adapt to future disasters.” As a result, some island officials, like those in Seychelles, “frustrated by the slowness of the United Nations process, have decided to take matters into their own hands.” 

# Editorial Wrap-Up 

## New York Times. 

“The Trump Administration Is Making War On Diplomacy.” In an editorial, the New York Times (11/18) says Secretary of State Tillerson “has shown that business experience isn’t easily transferable to government,” as he is “widely seen as ill suited to diplomatic leadership and determined to dismantle his own department.” The Times explains the State Department “is being undermined by budget cuts, a failure to fill top jobs, an erratic president and a secretary who has called reorganization, rather than policy, his most important priority.” The timing of the State Department’s redesign “could hardly be worse,” the Times says, in light of “the aggressive behavior of North Korea, Russia and China.” Ultimately, the Times concludes, Tillerson’s tenure will be based on his efforts to “forestall war with North Korea, manage the rise of China, check Russia’s efforts to undermine democracy, lay the groundwork for postwar stability in Syria and Iraq, and protect America’s international standing.” 

## Washington Post. 

“The House Tax Bill Unleashes A Dangerous Avalanche Of Campaign Cash.” In an editorial, the Washington Post (11/18) argues against a provision in the Republican tax bill that would roll back the Johnson Amendment, which would permit “churches, charities and foundations to engage in candidate-specific politicking and enable donors to reap tax breaks for political contributions.” The Post warns that churches and church-affiliated groups have lax filing requirements and could be used to completely mask donors, making them the “latest vessels for dark-money politics.” The Post concludes that this change is unwanted, and would only serve to make churches “servants of special interests seeking to further warp the nation’s electoral politics.” 

“The White House’s Much-Needed Rebuke To A Country Smothering Democracy.” AWashington Post (11/18) editorial says that at the ASEAN summit last week, Cambodian Prime Minister Hun Sen, “who has been slowly squeezing the life out of democracy in Cambodia, delivered a fawning tribute to President Trump” and even “expressed delight” about Trump’s pledge to abstain from other nations’ internal affairs. The Post argues that the President’s “declaration in his inaugural address that ‘we do not seek to impose our way of life on anyone’ was an invitation to potentates such as Hun Sen to smother liberty.” On Thursday, however, the White House delivered “a much-needed rebuke to Hun Sen,” potentially signaling that “the Trump administration is waking up, belatedly, to the reality that the United States can’t ignore the internal affairs of other nations when democracy is under siege.” 

“A School Volunteer Abused At Least 23 Children. Officials Ignored It.” In an editorial, the Washington Post (11/18) blasts Prince George’s County school officials for ignoring red flags that school volunteer Deonte Carraway sexually abused at least 23 minors “during school hours and on school property.” The Post says, “School officials have not been forthcoming, but information revealed in a lawsuit against the system provides troubling answers. Not only were there warning signs – lots of them – but they were ignored.” The Post calls for “a complete, public accounting of exactly what went wrong at this school and who was responsible.” 

## Wall Street Journal. 

“Germany’s Green Energy Meltdown.” The Wall Street Journal (11/17) editorializes that Germany has admitted it will fall short of its 2020 carbon emissions-reduction goal, and its 2030 goal is almost certainly out of reach as well. The Journal says the failure of Chancellor Angela Merkel, who herself championed the now-failing energy revolution, to form a coalition government will come at significant price, and if she again recommits to dirty-coal and high-cost energies at the expense of clean energy, she should expect voters to once again rebel in 2021. 

“A Blue Slip – Not A Franken Veto.” The Wall Street Journal (11/17) discusses in an editorial the news that as Sen. Al Franken faces calls for him to resign, Senate Judiciary Committee Chairman Chuck Grassley said earlier this week he will move ahead with a confirmation hearing for Minnesota Supreme Court Justice David Stras, ending a veto by Franken on the issue. The piece concludes by lauding Grassley for restoring Senate courtesy to its rightful purpose. 

“The Menendez Mistrial.” The Wall Street Journal (11/17) writes in an editorial that the corruption charges against Sen. Robert Menendez were thin, in light of the news that a jury failed to convict the senator, resulting in a mistrial. The Journal argues that while Menendez is not a model public servant, it is not clear that his actions amounted to criminal activity. The editorial concludes that although prosecutors will likely move to retry the senator to vindicate their initial charges, it would be more prudent to simply drop the case. 

# Big Picture 

## Headlines From Today’s Front Pages. 

Wall Street Journal: 

GE Housecleaning Will Alter Board’s Makeup German Coalition Talks Collapse Trump Administration Tightens Scrutiny Of Skilled Worker Visa Applicants How China’s Acquisitive HNA Group Fell From Favor 

New York Times: 

Behind Mugabe’s Rapid Fall: A Firing, A Feud And A First Lady Will Cutting The Health Mandate Pay For Tax Cuts? Not Necessarily He Took On The Voting Rights Act And Won. Now He’s Taking On Harvard. In Race Against Roy Moore, Democratic Candidate Is Mostly On His Own Mel Tillis, Country Star Known For His Songs And His Stutter, Dies At 85 Washington Post: 

Kitchen Nightmares Mugabe Declines To Step Down West Wing Aides Split On Russia Inquiry As Business Booms, A Tax Cut Is Seen As ‘Overdue’ Fake Opioid Pills Are Flooding Into The US — With Lethal Results 

Financial Times: 

Mugabe Defies Calls To Step Down As Zimbabwe President Banks Prepare To Settle With Brussels Over Forex Cartel Probe Companies Face High Cost To Meet New EU Data Protection Rules Beijing Vies For Greater Control Of Foreign Universities In China 

Washington Times: 

Doug Jones, Roy Moore’s Opponent In Alabama, Campaigns As A Political Bridge-Builder Roy Moore Focuses Battle On Establishment Republicans Lerner, Paz Say They Fear Physical Harm From Enraged Public, Want IRS Testimony Sealed Permanently ‘Year Of The Woman’ Senators Condemn Sexual Harassment, Campaigned For Ted Kennedy Democrats Give Dubious Credit To Trump-Russia Dossier Despite Public Information Debunking Claims 

Story Lineup From Last Night’s Network News: 

ABC: Severe Weather; Weather Forecast; Argentina-Missing Submarine; Police Shooters-Manhunt; Roy Moore Campaign; Russia Meddling Investigation; Nursing Home Mismanagement; Black Friday Shopping; Jeffrey Tambor Sexual Misconduct Allegation; Trump-Lavar Ball Twitter War; NASCAR News; Challenger Incident Memorial. 

CBS: Roy Moore Campaign; Roy Moore Campaign, Tax Reform Bill-Expert Comment; Hollywood Sexual Misconduct Allegations; Keystone Pipeline Spill; Zimbabwe-Military Coup; Argentina-Missing Submarine; NASCAR News; Britain-New Royal Portrait; Puerto Rico Recovery; Teens-International Charity. 

Network TV At A Glance: 

Roy Moore Campaign – 4 minutes, 50 seconds Hollywood Sexual Misconduct Allegations – 2 minutes, 40 seconds Argentina-Missing Submarine – 2 minutes, 20 seconds 

Story Lineup From This Morning’s Radio News Broadcasts: 

ABC: Russia Meddling Investigation; Argentina-Missing Submarine; Country Music Star Dies. 

CBS: Tax Reform Plan; Roy Moore Campaign; Country Music Star Dies; Wall Street News. 

FOX: Roy Moore Campaign; Trump-Lavar Ball Twitter War. 

NPR: Zimbabwe-Military Coup; Puerto Rico Recovery; Argentina-Missing Submarine; Kenya-Political Instability; Morocco-Stampede. 

# Washington Schedule 

## Today’s Events In Washington. 

White House: 

PRESIDENT TRUMP — Holds a Cabinet Meeting; has lunch with Vice President Mike Pence and Secretary of Housing and Urban Development Ben Carson; meets with Secretary of State Rex Tillerson and US Ambassador to the United Nations Nikki Haley. VICE PRESIDENT PENCE — Joins the President to participate in a Cabinet Meeting; joins the President for lunch with Secretary of Housing and Urban Development Ben Carson. 

US Senate: 9:30 AM Senate Finance subcommittee field hearing on NAFTA – International Trade, Customs, and Global Competitiveness Subcommittee field hearing on ‘Modernization of the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA)’, with testimony from Office of the U.S. Trade Representative General Counsel Stephen Vaughn; Alliance of Automobile Manufacturers CEO and President Mitch Bainwol; Border Trade Alliance Chair Paola Avila; San Antonio Chamber of Commerce CEO and President Richard Perez; Texas Association of Business CEO Jeff Moseley; Texas Farm Bureau President Russell Boening; and Texas Oil and Gas Association President Todd Staples Location: San Antonio Marriott Plaza Hotel, 555 S Alamo St, San Antonio, TX San Antonio http://finance.senate.gov Senate on recess until 27 November. 

US House: House of Representatives on recess until 27 November. 

Other: 2:00 PM Spain Ambassador to the U.S. speaks at Potomac Institute – Potomac Institute Inter-University Center for Terrorism Studies Ambassador’s Forum on ‘Spanish-U.S. Strategic Partnership’, with Spain Ambassador to the U.S. Amb. Pedro Morenes and former U.S. Marine Corps Commandant Gen. (Ret.) Alfred Gray Location: Potomac Institute for Policy Studies, 901 N Stuart St, Arlington, VA www.potomacinstitute.org https://twitter.com/PotomacInst 

# Last Laughs 

## Late Night Political Humor. 

No late-night talk show aired on Sunday night.  

> Copyright 2017 by Bulletin Intelligence LLC Reproduction or redistribution without permission prohibited. Content is drawn from thousands of newspapers, national magazines, national and local television programs, radio broadcasts, social-media platforms and additional forms of open-source data. Sources for Bulletin Intelligence audience-size estimates include Scarborough, GfK MRI, comScore, Nielsen, and the Audit Bureau of Circulation. Data from and access to third party social media platforms, including but not limited to Facebook, Twitter, Instagram and others, is subject to the respective platform’s terms of use. Services that include Factiva content are governed by Factiva’s terms of use. Services including embedded Tweets are also subject to Twitter for Website's information and privacy policies. The Department of the Interior News Briefing is published five days a week by Bulletin Intelligence, which creates custom briefings for government and corporate leaders. We can be found on the Web at BulletinIntelligence.com, or called at (703) 483-6100.

# Conversation Contents 

## U.S. Department of the Interior News Briefing for Friday, November 17, 2017 

# Bulletin Intelligence <Interior@bulletinintelligence.com> 

## From: Bulletin Intelligence <Interior@bulletinintelligence.com> 

## Sent: Fri Nov 17 2017 04:01:18 GMT-0700 (MST) 

## To: <Interior@bulletinintelligence.com> 

## Subject: U.S. Department of the Interior News Briefing for Friday, November 17, 2017  

> Mobile version and searchable archives available here. Please click here to subscribe.
> DATE: FRIDAY, NOVEMBER 17, 2017 6:00 AM EST

# Today's Table Of Contents 

DOI In The News 

• CBS: US Reverses Ban On Elephant Trophies From Zimbabwe, Zambia. • Washington Post: Watchdog Says Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke Failed To Properly Document Travel. • Grand Junction (CO) Daily Sentinel: US Lands Open For Biz. • U.S. News & World Report: Congress Debates Oil Drilling In Largest US Wildlife Refuge. • U.S. News & World Report: Justice Department Won’t Release National Monument Documents. • Public News Service: Groups Call For Zinkes Commitment To Public Lands. • Independent Journal Review: Int Sec Ryan Zinke Spent The Day In Moccasins And A Fashion Staple That Would Make George H.W. Bush Proud. • NBC News: Drones Are Fighting Wildfires In Some Very Surprising Ways. • WXPR-FM Rhinelander (WI): Wisconsin Trump Supporters: Hands Off Our Public Lands. 

Bureau Of Indian Affairs 

• Tribes Hoping Overhaul Of BIA Regs Will Catalyze Deals. • Tribes Make Renewed Push For Pipeline Protections. 

Bureau Of Land Management 

• Elko (NV) Daily Free Press: Kinross Earns First Sage-Grouse Conservation Credit. • E&E Publishing: Bundy Would Have Received BLM Permit. • Nevada Appeal: BLM Plans To Reseed Wildfire Affected Areas. • U.S. News & World Report: 3 Injured In Plane Crash Near Wyoming Airport. 

Bureau Of Ocean Energy Management 

• House Energy Bill Promotes Offshore Wind Development. Bureau Of Reclamation 

• Arizonan Confirmed As First Woman To Lead U.S. Bureau Of Reclamation. • Spring Runoff, Late Rains Boost Reservoirs In New Mexico. 

Bureau Of Safety And Environmental Enforcement 

• Chemical Safety Board Scraps Recommendation On Offshore Safety. 

Fish And Wildlife Service 

• WTVY-TV Dothan (AL): Alabama Getting Additional $33 Million In BP Oil Spill Settlement Funds. • Alabama Live: Endangered Alabama Fish Expands Its Range After Dam Removal. 

National Park Service 

• U.S. News & World Report: Wounded Veterans Dive For History, Healing In Waters. • San Jose (CA) Mercury News: In A U.S. First, Muir Woods To Require Reservations For All Cars. • U.S. News & World Report: National Park Service Seeks Ways To Manage Non-Native Fish. • Mount Desert (ME) Islander: Acadia To Take Over Lighthouse. • Arizona Daily Sun: Park Service To Create New Fish Plan For Grand Canyon And Glen Canyon. • U.S. News & World Report: Yellowstone Sees Fewer Visitors In Snowy October. • Asheville (NC) Citizen-Times: Land Trust Conserves 127 Acres Bordering Smokies. 

Office Of Insular Affairs 

• Saipan (MNP) Tribune: Robotics Kits Arrive In Yap. • St. Croix Source: Echols Named Acting Superintendent As VINP Undergoes Changes. 

US Geological Survey 

• High Plains and Midwest AG (KS) Journal: New Map Of Worldwide Croplands Supports Food And Water Security. • Kallanish Energy News (UK): Additional Coverage: USGS: 40 Million Pounds Of Uranium In Southern High Plains. 

Opinion Pieces 

• National Monuments Have A Military Defense Mission, Too. • America’s Statue Wars Are A Family Feud. • The World’s Strongest Conservation Law Is Under Attack. It Needs To Be Fixed Instead. • Feds Must Bolster Resources To Eradicate Invasive Snakes: Our View. • Worst Engineering Failure In U.S. History Made Us Safer. • Additional Reading. 

Top National News 

• Washington Times: Media Analyses: House Passes Sweeping Tax Reform Bill In Win For Trump, Ryan. • NBC: Senate Panel To Investigate Franken After Sexual Harassment Accusations. • CBS: White House: Trump Finds Moore Allegations “Troubling,” But Fate Up To Alabama Voters. • New York Times: US Strikes “More Conciliatory” Tone At Climate Talks. • Associated Press: Keystone Pipeline Leaks Oil In South Dakota. 

Editorial Wrap-Up 

• New York Times. - “A Tax Cut Bill To Make Scrooge McDuck Proud.” - “The Da Vinci Lode.” • Washington Post. - “The Destructive Part Of The Republican Tax Bill You’re Not Paying Attention To.” - “Al Franken Is Just The Start Of Congress’s Reckoning With Sexual Harassment.” - “The Pentagon Has Detained A US Citizen For More Than Two Months – And Said Little.” • Wall Street Journal. - “A Solution For Ron Johnson.” - “No Republicans Need Apply.” - “Trump’s South China Sea Message.” 

Big Picture 

> • Headlines From Today’s Front Pages.

Washington Schedule 

> • Today’s Events In Washington.

Last Laughs 

> • Late Night Political Humor.

# DOI In The News 

## US Reverses Ban On Elephant Trophies From Zimbabwe, Zambia. 

The CBS Evening News (11/16, story 9, 0:20, Mason) reported the Fish and Wildlife Service is reversing an “Obama-era ban on elephant trophies” that will allow hunters to bring “elephant remains” into the US from Zimbabwe and Zambia. Animal protection groups argue that killing elephants for sport “could threaten an already endangered species,” and NBC Nightly News (11/16, story 9, 0:25, Holt) said the move “has left many animal lovers and animal rights groups outraged,” although a Fish and Wildlife spokesman “says that legal hunting in and management programs actually help species survive by putting much needed revenue back into conservation.” CNN’s Anderson Cooper 360 (11/16) reported on the ban reversal while noting that Donald Trump Jr. has gone to Africa “many times to hunt” elephants and “defends it.” Also reporting are the AP (11/16, Biesecker), the New York Times (11/16, Chokshi), the Los Angeles Times (11/16, Pearce), Reuters (11/16, Malone), Reuters (11/16, Malone), USA Today (11/16, Diebel), TIME (11/16, Worland), TIME (11/17, Hincks), NPR (11/16, Wamsley), Fortune (11/16, Meyer), Forbes (11/16, Nace), USA Today (11/16), the Huffington Post (11/15, D'Angelo), the Huffington Post (11/17), CNN (11/15, Wallace), NBC News (11/16, EDELMAN, WELKER), CBS News (11/16, Tillett), and CNBC (11/16, Diebel). 

White House Says Elephant Trophy Decision Not Yet Finalized. Reuters (11/16, Malone) reports that the White House on Thursday “said it had not yet finalized a decision to allow trophy hunters who kill elephants in two African countries to bring the endangered animals home as trophies, a move that had outraged U.S. conservation groups.” The proposal, “disclosed this week by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, had triggered protests from conservation groups and a frenzy on social media.” White House spokeswoman Sarah Sanders said, “There hasn’t been an announcement that’s been finalized on this front. Until that’s done I wouldn’t consider anything final.” 

Fox’s Laura Ingraham Rips Trump For Ending Ban On Importing Elephant Trophies From Africa. The Hill (11/16, Savransky) reports that “Fox News’ Laura Ingraham on Thursday ripped the decision by the Trump administration to lift the ban on importing elephant trophies from Africa.” Ingraham tweeted Thursday morning, “I don’t understand how this move by @realDonaldTrump Admin will not INCREASE the gruesome poaching of elephants. Stay tuned.” 

Trump Admin. Began Accepting Permits To Import Lion Trophies Last Month. ABC News (11/16, Ebbs) reports that U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service officials “began issuing permits for lion trophies hunted in Zambia and Zimbabwe about a month ago.” FWS officials “said the decision was made after concluding that regulated hunting would help the survival of the endangered species in the wild.” An agency spokesperson “said they found that ‘legal, well-regulated sport hunting’ can benefit conservation by providing incentives to local communities and generating revenue that can be directed to conservation programs, saying that the programs in Zambia and Zimbabwe will enhance the survival of the species in the wild.” 

## Watchdog Says Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke Failed To Properly Document Travel. 

Interior Department Deputy Inspector General Mary Kendall told department officials this week that Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke “has failed to keep complete records – and in some cases kept none at all – of his travel since taking office,” the Washington Post (11/16, Rein, Harwell) reports. In “a rare alert” to Zinke’s office, Kendall “said her investigation into allegations of improper travel practices by Zinke has been stymied by ‘absent or incomplete documentation for several pertinent trips.’” In addition, Kendall wrote that lawyers and ethics officials have not shown investigators that they can “distinguish between personal, political and official travel” or cost-analyses to justify Zinke’s use of military or charter flights. The alert also says the IG is looking into “the travel of Zinke’s wife, Lola, who often accompanied him on official trips.” According to Kendall, the department’s documentation was so deficient that investigators were unable to determine “the full extent” of her travel and how it was paid for. The AP (11/16, Daly) reports that Deputy Interior Secretary David Bernhardt “said in a memo Thursday that travel procedures followed by previous Interior secretaries were “dysfunctional,” adding that most of those policies and procedures remain in effect, 10 months into the Trump administration.” Bernhardt “promised to turn over documents for all travel by the secretary in the fiscal year that ended Sept. 30, including at least 10 travel vouchers related to trips taken by former Interior Secretary Sally Jewell.” He added that “the department also will provide information related to trips where Zinke’s wife or Jewell’s husband traveled in government-owned vehicles, watercraft or aircraft, and document whether payments were made or if reimbursements were required.” Also reporting are The Hill (11/16, Henry), Bloomberg News (11/16, Natter), Reuters (11/16, Gardner), Politico (11/16, Wolff), the New York Daily News (11/16, Sommerfeldt), My Central Oregon (11/16), ABC News (11/16, Ebbs), the Huffington Post (11/16, D'Angelo), and The Week (11/16, Lange). 

## US Lands Open For Biz. 

The Grand Junction (CO) Daily Sentinel (11/16, Hamilton) reports that “more than 250 people applauded” Kate MacGregor, acting assistant secretary for land and minerals management, “who came to Grand Junction on Thursday night with news that the federal government is dedicated to making federal lands welcome to energy development.” MacGregor “outlined President Donald Trump’s and U.S. Department of the Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke’s plans to remove roadblocks to mining and drilling.” MacGregor said, “This Department of the Interior supports energy and mineral production in all of its many forms but recognizes where those raw materials come from. that’s because one barrel of oil, one mcf of gas or one ton of coal produced here in this nation is better than one that we have to import. Under Secretary (Ryan) Zinke’s leadership we are committed to serving as agents of change. We have been charged by this president to identify and eliminate the obstacles to development of these important resources.” Additional coverage was provided by KKCO-TV Grand Junction, CO (11/16, Prechtl). 

## Congress Debates Oil Drilling In Largest US Wildlife Refuge. 

The AP (11/16, Joling) reports that Congressional Republicans are pushing for drilling in the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge “with a projected $1 billion from lease sales to help pay for President Donald Trump’s proposed tax cut.” The Senate Energy and Natural Resources Committee on Wednesday “advanced the drilling measure.” Chairwoman Lisa Murkowski “says oil production later would bring in much more revenue.” Also reporting are UPI (11/16, Graeber), Forbes (11/16, Blackmon), and Yale University (CT) Environment 360 (11/16, Wight). 

## Justice Department Won’t Release National Monument Documents. The AP (11/16, Ridler) reports that “documents possibly outlining legal justifications for President Donald Trump to shrink national monuments don’t have to be provided to an Idaho environmental law firm because they’re protected communications, federal officials say.” The U.S. Department of Justice on Wednesday “asked a federal judge to dismiss a lawsuit from Advocates for the West seeking the information.” The Justice Department “released more than 60 pages in May,” but the agency “withheld 12 pages...contending they are protected by attorney-client privilege and intra-agency communication rules, making them exempt from Freedom of Information Act requests.” 

## Groups Call For Zinkes Commitment To Public Lands. 

Public News Service (11/17) reports that “on Thursday, a national coalition of sportsmen and women, recreation, business and conservation groups challenged Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke to make good on his promises not to hand over public lands to states.” Also on Thursday, Zinke “announced the appointment of Brian Steed – a vocal proponent of transferring public lands to private interests – to head the Bureau of Land Management.” The article notes that “Zinke has also recommended removing national monument protections, claiming previous administrations over-reached their authority by limiting fossil-fuel development.” 

## Int Sec Ryan Zinke Spent The Day In Moccasins And A Fashion Staple That Would Make George H.W. Bush Proud. 

Independent Journal Review (11/15, Fink) reports that on Wednesday, Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke “marked Native American Heritage Month by participating in #RockYourMocs.” Throughout the day, Zinke “experienced ‘beautiful craftsmanship’ and ‘rich culture’ and met with Indian Affairs Acting Secretary John Tahsuda II.” Zinke also “offered a statement of remembrance of Native American Veteran Michael Bell and was given a quilt his family made as a gift.” 

## Drones Are Fighting Wildfires In Some Very Surprising Ways. 

NBC News (11/16, Baggaley) reports that aerial drones are “showing that they can detect, contain and even extinguish fires faster and with greater safety.” Drones “give firefighters a bird’s-eye view of the terrain and help them determine where a fire will spread – so they can make swift decisions about where fire crews should go and which residents need to be evacuated.” According to the article, “as fires raged across California last summer, dozens of helicopters were grounded.” Brad Koeckeritz, chief of the Interior Department’s unmanned aircraft systems division, said, “The drones provided an opportunity to gather intelligence at a time when we wouldn’t be able to gather it any other way.” 

## Wisconsin Trump Supporters: Hands Off Our Public Lands. 

WXPR-FM Rhinelander, WI (11/16, Morrissey) reports that “a new survey shows Wisconsinites clearly disagree with President Donald Trump’s proposals to roll back federal protections on public lands.” According to the poll commissioned by Wisconsin for Public Lands, “while 68 percent of Wisconsin Trump voters approve of the job he’s doing, 69 percent don’t support selling off public lands for commercial development.” The article notes that “the poll by RABA Research showed similar sentiment among Trump supporters in Michigan, Ohio and Pennsylvania.” In fact, “large majorities of voters in all four state recommended instead that Trump create new national monuments, or leave the current monuments as they are today.” 

# Bureau Of Indian Affairs 

## Tribes Hoping Overhaul Of BIA Regs Will Catalyze Deals. 

Law360 (11/16, Westney) reports that “the Bureau of Indian Affairs’ invitation for tribes to comment on the potential impact of updating the federal government’s regulations for doing business on Native American lands elicited stories of economic development deals hampered by red tape and calls to stop state governments from imposing taxes in Indian Country.” The article “looks at why and how tribes and tribal organizations say the so-called Indian Trader regulations need to be changed.” 

## Tribes Make Renewed Push For Pipeline Protections. 

The AP (11/16, Nicholson) reports that on Wednesday the Standing Rock and Cheyenne River Sioux tribes made “a renewed push to bolster protections for their water supply while federal officials further study the potential impact of the recently completed Dakota Access oil pipeline.” The groups are requesting that the court reject arguments made by the Army Corps of Engineers and Energy Transfer Partners over the tribes’ proposals. Attorneys for the groups’ submitted documents that said, “neither (the company) nor the Corps even attempts to make the case that” the proposed protections “present any hardship to either of them, or that the public interest would be disserved.” 

# Bureau Of Land Management 

## Kinross Earns First Sage-Grouse Conservation Credit. 

The Elko (NV) Daily Free Press (11/16) reports that “the Nevada Department of Conservation and Natural Resources and Kinross Gold U.S.A. announced the first sage-grouse credit transaction under the Nevada Conservation Credit System program.” It is “expected to protect nearly 10,000 acres of primary sage-grouse habitat in northeastern Nevada.” It also “sets a precedent and is expected to make the process more efficient for landowners to participate in the CCS in the future.” Marci Todd, acting Nevada Director of the Bureau of Land Management, said, “This is an excellent example of partnership and stewardship by federal, state and private sector stakeholders to conserve sagebrush habitat. This is about working cooperatively and working smartly. The BLM is proud to be a part of this first-ever transaction under the Nevada Conservation Credit System.” 

## Bundy Would Have Received BLM Permit. 

E&E Publishing (11/16, Yachnin) reports that “even after Nevada rancher Cliven Bundy had defied court orders and grazed his cattle illegally for nearly 15 years, the government would have given him a new grazing permit if he had only responded to repeated entreaties,” a Bureau of Land Management official testified Wednesday. Mary Jo Rugwell, “who served as BLM’s Southern Nevada District office manager from 2008 to 2011, said the agency tried to reach Bundy via local law enforcement, his spouse and letters to his home, all of which he ignored.” As their first witness, “federal prosecutors called Rugwell, who is now BLM’s Wyoming state director, to testify about her tenure in the office, including her decision in 2011 to initiate impoundment proceedings against Bundy’s cattle.” 

## BLM Plans To Reseed Wildfire Affected Areas. 

The Nevada Appeal (11/16, Ranson) reports that the Bureau of Land Management gave “an overview to Churchill County Commissioners on Wednesday to reseed areas burned by several big fires in Churchill County during the summer.” Ken Collum, field manager for the Stillwater Field Office, Carson City District, “said the agency will rehabilitate the land through both drill and aerial seeding.” According to Collum, “drill seeding will occur on about 8,088 acres, and the aerial seeding over another 6,364 acres.” 

## 3 Injured In Plane Crash Near Wyoming Airport. 

The AP (11/16) reports that “three people suffered minor injuries in a plane crash near a Wyoming airport.” Bureau of Land Management Wyoming spokeswoman Kristen Lenhardt “says the people on board included a United States Geological Survey staff member, a member of the Rock Springs Grazing Association and a Bureau of Land Management ‘range technician.’” Bureau Of Ocean Energy Management 

## House Energy Bill Promotes Offshore Wind Development. 

North American Windpower (11/16, Lillian) reports that the House Committee on Natural Resources recently “passed H.R.4239, the ‘Strengthening the Economy with Critical Untapped Resources to Expand American Energy Act,’ which promotes the further development of offshore wind power but also the exploration and production of oil and gas.” The legislation “reforms existing regulatory frameworks for energy development on the Outer Continental Shelf and the onshore acreage under federal ownership.” The article notes that “for offshore wind, the bill requires the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management (BOEM) to conduct feasbility studies for offshore wind lease sales off the coasts of California, Hawaii, Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands.” 

# Bureau Of Reclamation 

## Arizonan Confirmed As First Woman To Lead U.S. Bureau Of Reclamation. 

The Arizona Republic (11/16, Baietto) reports that Brenda Burman has been confirmed as the new commissioner of the U.S. Bureau of Reclamation. She is the first female to lead the agency. Burman, “who was nominated for the post in June by President Donald Trump, was confirmed on a unanimous voice vote by the U.S. Senate on Thursday, according to the Senate record.” 

## Spring Runoff, Late Rains Boost Reservoirs In New Mexico. 

The AP (11/17) reports that “federal water managers say good spring runoff and heavy rains in the fall helped to boost reservoir levels in New Mexico this year.” The Bureau of Reclamation “announced this week that the Rio Grande in 2017 marked its highest spring runoff since 2008.” According to officials, “the good flows allowed for the first time in four years a full allocation of water to those who depend on the San Juan-Chama project.” 

# Bureau Of Safety And Environmental Enforcement 

## Chemical Safety Board Scraps Recommendation On Offshore Safety. 

The Houston Chronicle (11/16, Blum) reports that the U.S. Chemical Safety and Hazard Investigation Board has “opted to withdraw recommendations made in the aftermath of the 2010 Deepwater Horizon tragedy in the Gulf of Mexico” after the Bureau of Safety and Environmental Enforcement refused to enact the protections. The recommendations, put forth in 2016, “would have allowed oil rig employees to stop work in the event of safety concerns and provide them legal whistleblower protections against retaliation.” The head of the BSEE’s offshore regulatory program, Douglas Morris, “told the chemical safety board that it should instead work with industry groups such as the American Petroleum Institute and International Association of Drilling Contractors to develop voluntary guidelines for protecting offshore workers and whistleblower.” 

# Fish And Wildlife Service 

## Alabama Getting Additional $33 Million In BP Oil Spill Settlement Funds. 

WTVY-TV Dothan, AL (11/16) reports that Alabama is “getting another $33 million related to the BP oil spill settlement.” The funds will be “used for land acquisition, habitat restoration and preservation of coastal resources.” Among the new projects is the acquisition by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service of “251 acres to be included within the ‘Bon Secour National Wildlife Refuge.’” 

## Endangered Alabama Fish Expands Its Range After Dam Removal. 

Alabama Live (11/16, Pillion) reports that “populations of the endangered vermilion darter have been found in new areas of Turkey Creek, near Pinson, upstream of where a dam was removed four years ago in an effort to expand the fish’s range.” The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service “partnered with the Freshwater Land Trust to remove the nearly 100-year-old Shadow Lake dam in 2013, and this month confirmed the darters have expanded their range upstream of the old dam site.” 

# National Park Service 

## Wounded Veterans Dive For History, Healing In Waters. 

The AP (11/17, Brean) reports that on WAVES, “short for Wounded American Veterans Experience Scuba, a California-based nonprofit that provides dive training to vets with service-connected injuries or disabilities.” According to the article, “seven members of the group spent the week at Lake Mead National Recreation Area, diving down to historic sites alongside a team from the National Park Service’s Submerged Resources Center.” The article notes that “it was the first outing in a new partnership between WAVES and the park service that will train wounded warriors to become scuba stewards for underwater resources at the nation’s parks.” 

## In A U.S. First, Muir Woods To Require Reservations For All Cars. 

The San Jose (CA) Mercury News (11/16, Rogers) reports that in an effort “to reduce traffic jams and overcrowding, Muir Woods National Monument will become the first national park unit in the United States to require reservations for all vehicles to enter the park year-round.” Park managers of “announced Thursday that starting Jan. 16 everybody who plans to bring a car to Muir Woods will need to book a reservation online or by phone.” Darren Brown, a transportation planner with the Golden Gate National Recreation Area, which manages Muir Woods, said, “Visitation has continued to increase. The problem is too many cars. It’s extremely crowded and we can’t handle as many cars that end up going there.” 

## National Park Service Seeks Ways To Manage Non-Native Fish. 

The AP (11/17) reports that the National Park Service is “looking for ways to manage non-native aquatic species in the Colorado River system below Glen Canyon Dam.” The park service is “holding webinars and open houses over the next few weeks to solicit input from the public.” 

## Acadia To Take Over Lighthouse. 

The Mount Desert (ME) Islander (11/16, Good) reports that Acadia National Park Superintendent Kevin Schneider and Management Assistant John Kelly “met with Tremont selectmen Monday to discuss the transfer” of the Bass Harbor Head Light “to the park from the current owner, the U.S. Coast Guard.” According to the article, “the Coast Guard’s need for the property has been diminished, and the General Services Administration has been considering how to dispose of the lighthouse.” The National Historic Lighthouse Preservation Act allows the transfer of the lighthouse to the National Park Service. 

## Park Service To Create New Fish Plan For Grand Canyon And Glen Canyon. 

The Arizona Daily Sun (11/16, Cowan) reports that the National Park Service is seeking “public input as it creates a plan for managing nonnative aquatic species in Glen Canyon National Recreation Area and Grand Canyon National Park.” The plan looks “to address increases in potentially harmful non-native fish like brown trout and green sunfish that have been documented since 2013.” 

## Yellowstone Sees Fewer Visitors In Snowy October. 

The AP (11/16) reports that Yellowstone National Park “recorded nearly 212,000 visits in October, down 12.4 percent from October 2016.” The park “noted that snowy weather during the month may have contributed to the decline.” 

## Land Trust Conserves 127 Acres Bordering Smokies. 

The Asheville (NC) Citizen-Times (11/16, Chávez) reports that the Southern Appalachian Highlands Conservancy has “purchased 147 acres bordering the Great Smoky Mountains National Park that will serve as prime habitat for elk and other wildlife.” The land, “known as Stevens Creek, is a bowl-shaped pocket just outside the Cataloochee Valley area on the park’s eastern edge.” Carl Silverstein, the organization’s executive director, “said the land trust hopes to partner with other land management agencies and reserves the right to transfer the land to another state or federal land management agencies such as the state wildlife commission.” 

# Office Of Insular Affairs 

## Robotics Kits Arrive In Yap. 

The Saipan (MNP) Tribune (11/17) reports that “robotics clubs at five high schools in Yap received VEX Classroom and Competition kits earlier this month, kicking off expansion of the popular Yap Robo League.” Yap’s Robo League was established in 2011 by the Unonprofit Habele, and “itt is now expanding across that state through a pilot grant award by the Office of Insular Affairs.” OIA director Nik Pula said, “We were inspired by the students from Yap who represented the Federated States of Micronesia this summer at the 2017 FIRST Global Challenge international robotics competition for high school students here in Washington, D.C. Through robotics, the Habele Outer Island Education Fund has been promoting the broadening of students’ experience in applying basic Science, Technology, Engineering, and Math skills in a positive, competitive, and hands-on way, and we are pleased to support expansion of this opportunity for more students in Yap.” 

## Echols Named Acting Superintendent As VINP Undergoes Changes. 

The St. Croix Source (11/16, Roberts) reports that when Hurricane Irma struck on Sept. 6, “much of the employee housing within Virgin Island National Park was severely damaged by either storm surge or high winds.” According to the article, “within a matter of a few days, park rangers, resource managers, and even the deputy superintendent – the highest-ranking official in the VINP – received notice of mandatory evacuation and reassignment to other parks.” However, “some regular maintenance and administrative employees remained on the job, as did three law enforcement rangers, including Chief Ranger Rick Gupman who was named acting deputy superintendent.” Also, Darrell Echols “arrived on St. John Nov. 5 to serve as acting superintendent of the VINP.” 

# US Geological Survey 

## New Map Of Worldwide Croplands Supports Food And Water Security. 

The High Plains and Midwest AG (KS) Journal (11/16) reports that “a map released Nov. 14 details croplands worldwide in the highest resolution yet, helping to ensure global food and water security in a sustainable way.” The study was “led by the USGS and is part of the Global Food Security-Support Analysis Data @ 30-m Project.” Prasad Thenkabail, USGS research geographer and Principal Investigator for the GFSAD30 Project Team, said, “The map clearly shows individual farm fields, big or small, at any location in the world. Given the high resolution of 30 meters and 0.09 hectares per pixel, a big advantage is the ability to see croplands in any country and sub-national regions, including states, provinces, districts, counties and villages.” 

## Additional Coverage: USGS: 40 Million Pounds Of Uranium In Southern High Plains. 

Additional coverage that the U.S. Geological Survey “in a new report estimates 40 million pounds of uranium remains undiscovered in the Southern High Plains of Texas, New Mexico and Oklahoma” was provided by Kallanish Energy News (UK) (11/16) and the Laredo (TX) Morning Times (11/16, Hawes). 

# Opinion Pieces 

## National Monuments Have A Military Defense Mission, Too. 

In an op-ed for The Hill (11/16, Dowdy), Ian Dowdy, AICP, a program director for the non-partisan research-oriented Sonoran Institute, highlights “the important role that national monuments and public lands play for our country – particularly for national defense.” Dowdy argues that “national monuments serve as irreplaceable buffers on lands that are critical for military readiness,” as shown in a report “analyzing the role public lands in the West play in protecting the military mission” released by Sonoran Institute. The report showed “that the open and undeveloped landscape in the West is well suited for training activities.” Dowdy asks the Trump Administration to “recognize the often-overlooked benefits that national monuments and other protect lands provide to military training and readiness, among the many other considerations, before moving forward with boundary adjustments or other reductions to the effectiveness and scale of our nation’s protected lands.” 

## America’s Statue Wars Are A Family Feud. 

Author Sarah Vowell opines in a 1223 word op-ed in the New York Times (11/16, Vowell) that the debate over which statutes to dismantle and which to keep could become increasingly more complex as time passes. Vowell recounts stories of American Indians who fought with the Confederacy and their own decisions regarding statutes of people from that era to put the debate in a new perspective. Vowell also mentions that controversial statues of Christopher Columbus may not have been erected with hateful intentions, but as symbols of civic pride for oppressed Italian-Americans. 

## The World’s Strongest Conservation Law Is Under Attack. It Needs To Be Fixed Instead. 

Peter Alagona, “an associate professor of history, geography and environmental studies at the University of California at Santa Barbara,” and James Salzman, the Donald Bren Distinguished Professor of Environmental Law at the UCLA School of Law and UCSB’s Bren School of the Environment, assert in an op-ed in the Washington Post (11/16, Alagona, Salzman)that five bills currently in Congress that seek to weaken the Endangered Species Act would not “make the law more efficient or effective.” The two academics opine that “the fundamental political problem with the act is that its incentives don’t match its ethics,” and they propose shifting funds or providing “deductions for landowners who successfully enhance and maintain their habitat for endangered species.” The two conclude by declaring that “reform is not a binary choice between weakening the law or keeping the status quo. There is a better path.” 

## Feds Must Bolster Resources To Eradicate Invasive Snakes: Our View. 

In an editorial, the Pacific (GUM) Daily News (11/15) urges the federal government “to significantly ratchet up its efforts and its funding to eradicate the brown tree snake on Guam.” The paper says that “more money and resources need to be channeled into finding ways to eliminate the snake entirely from Guam, as well as the coconut rhinoceros beetle, little red fire ant and other pests.” It notes that the Office of Insular Affairs will “spend about $2.8 million for brown tree snake eradication and control projects” this year, but “given the damage done by the snakes, that’s just not enough.” 

## Worst Engineering Failure In U.S. History Made Us Safer. 

In an op-ed for The Hill (11/16, Weste, Spragens), Santa Clarita mayor pro tem Laurene Weste and Association of State Dam Safety Officials executive director Lori Cannon Spragens discuss the Saint Francis Dam Disaster National Memorial Act, explaining how the rupture of the St. Francis Dam in 1928 “brought about a new era of engineering oversight and methods for dam building across the nation.” Weste and Spragens mention that, “When the dam burst, Native Americans, agricultural farmworkers and Southern California Edison work crews were among those who perished in the path of destruction.” 

## Additional Reading. 

A Barrier To Recovery From War. Moab (UT) Sun News (11/16, Bricker). 

Zinke Is A Clown Pretending To Be A Cowboy. Bozeman (MT) Daily Chronicle (11/16, Heinlein). 

Administration Shrugs Off Public Process For Public Lands. Aspen (CO) Daily News (11/16, Newman). 

Park Service Budget Woes. Jamestown (ND) Sun (11/16, Kuntz). 

A National Park Fee Increase: The $70 Land Grab. Boulder (CO) Weekly (11/16, Malotky). 

Honor Veterans By Maintaining National Parks. Bend (OR) Bulletin (11/17, Perry). 

Resume Health Study On Mining. Wheeling (WV) Intelligencer (11/17). 

# Top National News 

## Media Analyses: House Passes Sweeping Tax Reform Bill In Win For Trump, Ryan. 

Media analyses cast yesterday’s tax reform vote in the House as a significant win for both the President and Speaker Ryan, though nearly all reports warn that the measure faces a challenging path before it gets to Trump’s desk. The Washington Times (11/16, Dinan) says Republicans acted “with spines stiffened by a presidential pep talk,” as Trump met with the GOP caucus ahead of the 227-205 vote. According to the Washington Post (11/16, A1, Debonis, Paletta), his “parting words to Republicans” were: “I love you. Now go vote.” USA Today (11/16, Jackson) notes Rep. Tom Cole later said, however, that “Trump didn’t try to twist arms.” Said Cole, “There’s not a lot of people left to persuade. ... You’ve got a bunch of happy Republicans around here.” In fact, The Hill (11/16, Jagoda, Marcos) recounted, “once the bill reached the magic number for passage, Republicans in the chamber erupted into applause.” Democrats “mockingly joined in, with some singing ‘na na na na, hey hey, goodbye,’ like they did when the chamber passed an ObamaCare repeal bill earlier this year.” All three major network newscasts reported the story. ABC World News Tonight (11/16, story 3, 2:35, Vega) offered a decidedly grim view of the legislation, calling the vote a “small victory” for Trump “on a bill that would add $1.4 trillion to the deficit over ten years.” Also markedly unfavorable was the report on NBC Nightly News (11/16, story 3, 2:00, Welker), which said that “according to an NBC News analysis based on Mr. Trump’s leaked 2005 tax return, the House bill...would save the President more than $20 million and his heirs could potentially save $1.1 billion.” John Heilemann, “NBC News National Affairs Analyst,” was shown saying, “What they got to try to do is convince most Americans that this is not going to be just a sop to the wealthy, but it will help the middle class. That will be a hard sell given what’s in this bill.” The CBS Evening News (11/16, story 3, 2:25, Cordes), meanwhile, said “the ‘Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017’ shrinks the number of brackets from seven to four, lowering rates and eliminating some deductions,” and added that “the independent Tax Policy Center estimates that Americans who make between $50,000 and $90,000 a year would get an average tax cut next year of about $800.” Politico (11/16, Bade, Bresnahan, Lorenzo) says the vote provided “a sorely needed legislative victory for...Trump,” as well as “for Ways and Means Chairman Kevin Brady and Ryan, who GOP sources joke has been dreaming of this moment since he was in diapers.” Bloomberg News (11/16, Edgerton) refers to “a key milestone in...Trump’s quest to cut taxes for businesses and individuals,” the New York Times (11/16, A1, Kaplan, Rappeport) to “a significant leap forward as Republicans seek to...deliver the first major legislative achievement of...Trump’s tenure,” the Washington Post (11/16, A1, Debonis, Paletta) to “a key win for...Trump and....Ryan,” and USA Today (11/16, Jackson) to “a victory for...Ryan,” who “predicted a tax bill would pass before Thanksgiving and needed to show his party could deliver on a major campaign promise.” Another Politico (11/16, Bresnahan) analysis concludes “Trump got a boost,” but “the biggest winner may be...Ryan,” a figure “loathed by the Breitbart wing of the Republican Party.” Reuters (11/16, Morgan, Becker) calls the vote “an important step toward the biggest tax code overhaul since the 1980s,” but warns “the tax debate now moves to the US Senate, where that chamber’s separate plan has already encountered resistance from some Republicans.” The AP (11/16, Fram, Gordon) similarly cautions that “the mostly party-line...vote masked more ominous problems in the Senate,” and adds that “even so, Republicans are hoping to send a compromise bill for Trump to sign by Christmas.” Breitbart (11/16, Moran) also indicates that “Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell will face more dire circumstances to pass the upper chamber’s version,” Roll Call (11/16, McPherson) warns that “the road ahead...won’t be an easy one.” The Wall Street Journal (11/16, A1, Rubin, Hughes) runs a similar story on the vote, and the Washington Free Beacon (11/16, Meyer) titles its favorable assessment of the day’s events “House Passes Tax Cuts and Jobs Act, Giving Americans a Tax Cut Not Seen in 31 Years.” The Los Angeles Times (11/16, Mascaro, Puzzanghera) reports “Democrats were unified against the plan, and the only GOP defections in the House came mostly from lawmakers in the Northeast and California, who were concerned about the plan’s limits on deductions for state and local income taxes important to their districts.” The Daily Caller (11/16, Crowe) lists the Republicans who oppose the measure: California Reps. Tom McClintock, Dana Rohrabacher and Darrell Issa, New Jersey’s Frank LoBiondo, Chris Smith, Leonard Lance and Rodney Frelinghuysen, and New York’s Lee Zeldin, Pete King, Daniel Donovan, John Faso, Elise Stefanik and Walter Jones. Ryan said on Fox News’ Fox & Friends (11/16), “We actually added back a $10,000 property tax deduction in addition to the tax cuts that are already in the bill that everybody gets. So we’ve actually run numbers on these districts and shown that taxpayers in those districts, in those states still get tax cuts – itemizers and nonitemizers. Most people won’t have to itemize. So, what we’ve done is added a $10,000 property tax deduction for these people in those high tax states. Everybody gets it, but it’s really the high-tax state people that would feel it the most – that deduction.” Rep. Tom Cole was asked on MSNBC’s Morning Joe (11/16) about the opposition of Rep. Peter King and others to the elimination of the SALT deduction. Cole said, “I think we’ve made a reasonable compromise in the House bill. Look, I respect Peter King as much as any member we have, and I respect all members who are fighting for their constituents. But at the end of the day, you know, personally, if you make $250,000 in Oklahoma City or $250,000 in New York City, you ought to be paying the same amount of federal taxes. Now, again, the tax code is skewed to the advantage of people in high-tax states. That’s fair enough. People need to look after their constituents. I think we’ve tried to accommodate that in the House bill. I think we’ll be able to sustain that accommodation in a final bill.” 

NYTimes: GOP Taking Money Way “From Working Families” To “Give It” To The Wealthy. 

Under the headline “A Tax-Cut Bill To Make Scrooge McDuck Proud,” the New York Times (11/16) editorializes, “Let that sink in. This tax bill would take money from working families and give it to the wealthiest people in the world. ... Republicans have made clear where their values lie. Well-heeled campaign funders matter. Middle-class families don’t.” Along similar lines, a New York Times (11/16, Tankersley) analysis says “there are tough choices at the heart of the Republican tax bills speeding through Congress, and they make clear what the party values most in economic policy right now: deep and lasting tax cuts for corporations.” The Times adds that “the bill that sailed through the House on Thursday chooses to take from high-tax Democratic states, particularly California and New York, and give to lower-tax Republican states that...Trump carried in 2016, particularly Florida and Texas.” It also “allows for tax increases on millions of families several years from now, if a future Congress does not intervene, but not for similar increases on corporations.” 

## Senate Panel To Investigate Franken After Sexual Harassment Accusations. 

The sexual harassment accusations against Sen. Al Franken dominated the news cycle, with the major network newscasts devoting nearly nine minutes of airtime to the story. 

NBC Nightly News (11/16, lead story, 2:50, Holt) opened its broadcast reporting that “the eye-opening list of powerful men outed for sexual misconduct now includes a sitting US senator,” and ABC World News Tonight (11/16, lead story, 3:05, Muir) also led with the “explosive charge” against Franken, “accused by a woman of forcibly kissing her during a USO tour.” The New York Times (11/16, Fandos) indicates Franken had “been mentioned as a possible presidential candidate,” and the Minneapolis Star Tribune (11/12, Brooks, Spencer, Rao) that “in recent weeks,” he “had repeatedly cheered the accounts of other women in the #metoo movement.” For example, notes the Washington Post (11/16, Wang, Lee, Bever), “in a Facebook post last month...Franken applauded the bravery of the women who shared their stories,” writing, “As we hear more and more about Mr. Weinstein, it’s important to remember that while his behavior was appalling, it’s far too common.” Leeann Tweeden recounted her experiences with Franken on the website of KABC-AM Los Angeles Los Angeles (11/16), where she is news anchor on the “McIntyre in the Morning” show. In her account, she says the now-US senator “put his hand on the back of my head, mashed his lips against mine and aggressively stuck his tongue in my mouth. ... I walked away. All I could think about was getting to a bathroom as fast as possible to rinse the taste of him out of my mouth. I felt disgusted and violated. ... I tried to let it go, but I was angry.” The St. Paul (MN) Pioneer Press (11/16, Orrick) reports that Tweeden, “a California radio host,” also presented “a photo that shows Franken grinning at the camera with his hands hovering over the clothed breasts of the sleeping woman.” Tweeden initially “provided the picture with a tweet saying: ‘I’ve decided it’s time to tell my story. #MeToo.’” USA Today (11/16, Przybyla, Estepa) notes Tweeden later said of the picture, “I couldn’t believe it. He groped me, without my consent, while I was asleep. ... I felt violated all over again. Embarrassed. Belittled. Humiliated. How dare anyone grab my breasts like this and think it’s funny?” The CBS Evening News (11/16, lead story, 2:20, Goldman) also showed the picture that “Tweeden says...shows...Franken groping her while she was sleeping,” but closed the segment reporting that it had “reached out to 16 women who used to work for Franken in the Senate. Six got back to us. They all said they never witnessed or experienced anything inappropriate.” Tweeden also described the incident with Franken on CNN’s The Lead (11/16) and said, “I’ve been angry about it for over ten years, and...my circle of friends and my husband have known how I felt about it for so long. ... I wanted to come out with it ten years ago, and, you know, it wasn’t the right time and, you know, I don’t want anything. I didn’t come out for it to destroy anybody. I came out because I want, you know, if he did this to somebody else or if somebody else has been sexually assaulted or if they’ve been, you know, abused in any way, that maybe somebody else can come out in real time because they find strength in numbers.” The Wall Street Journal (11/16, Andrews) similarly surveys Tweeden’s recollections of the 2006 incident, while Breitbart (11/16, Nolte) reports that “Franken, who has been married since 1975, was elected to the United States Senate in 2008.” The New York Times (11/16, Fandos) notes Tweeden also “wrote that she had been compelled to share the story after an on-air conversation with Representative Jackie Speier, Democrat of California, who has been a leading voice sounding alarms about sexual harassment on Capitol Hill in recent weeks.” Asked about the allegations, Speier told the Washington Examiner (11/16, Ferrechio), “I think it’s disgusting. ... Here is the issue. It’s about whether you have the approval to come on to someone and unwelcome sexual advances are prohibited. ... And I don’t care what initial you have next to your name. It should apply to everybody.” The AP (11/16, Daly, Potter) reports Franken “initially released a brief statement in which he apologized but questioned Tweeden’s recollection of his behavior.” Then, “in a longer statement Thursday afternoon, he again apologized while maintaining that he remembered the rehearsal differently.” Reuters (11/16) says it “was unable to independently verify Tweeden or Franken’s accounts.” The Minneapolis Star Tribune (11/12, Brooks, Spencer, Rao) focuses on Franken’s “extended apology” and call “for a Senate ethics investigation into his behavior.” Said Franken, “The first thing I want to do is apologize: to Leeann, to everyone else who was part of that tour, to everyone who has worked for me, to everyone I represent, and to everyone who counts on me to be an ally and supporter and champion of women. There’s more I want to say, but the first and most important thing – and if it’s the only thing you care to hear, that’s fine – is: I’m sorry.” Added Franken, “While I don’t remember the rehearsal for the skit as Leeann does, I understand why we need to listen to and believe women’s experiences.” Congress, says USA Today (11/16, Przybyla), “may be gridlocked when it comes to policy battles – but the condemnation from lawmakers after allegations” against Franken “was incredibly swift on both sides of the aisle.” The Washington Post (11/16, Phillips) also reports Franken “faced swift and bipartisan condemnation,” and the Los Angeles Times (11/16, Decker) that for Democrats, such “expressions of disappointment...and calls for Ethics Committee action” were “necessary to avoid the suggestion of hypocrisy, since most of them have condemned Roy Moore.” McClatchy (11/16, Magness) reports Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell “said in a statement...that ‘with all credible allegations of sexual harassment or assault, I believe the Ethics Committee should review the matter.’” McConnell “added that he hoped Democratic leader Chuck Schumer would join him on the issue.” Politico (11/16, Schor) quotes McConnell as saying, “Regardless of party, harassment and assault are completely unacceptable – in the workplace or anywhere else.” Schumer quickly agreed, calling for a Senate Ethics Committee investigation. The Boston Globe (11/16, Andersen) reports Sen. Elizabeth Warren also “condemned...her liberal colleague,” saying, “The behavior reported today is unacceptable and deeply disappointing. ... I am glad Senator Franken has acknowledged as much and has agreed to cooperate with an ethics investigation.” To Bloomberg News (11/16, John, Litvan), “Republicans sought to capitalize on the accusations against a Democrat.” The National Republican Senatorial Committee “sent a series of press releases calling on Democrats on the ballot in 2018 to return campaign contributions from Franken’s leadership political action committee.” Bloomberg adds that “senators targeted included Heidi Heitkamp of North Dakota, of Bob Casey of Pennsylvania, Debbie Stabenow in Michigan and Jon Tester of Montana.” Roll Call (11/16) reported that “Republican Party of Minnesota Chairwoman Jennifer Carnahan called for Franken to resign his Senate seat,” while the NRSC communications director “questioned whether Florida Democratic Sen. Bill Nelson would still hold his fundraising date with Franken.” Meanwhile, “Iowa Democratic candidate Abby Finkenaur, who’s challenging Rod Blum, quickly announced she would donate Franken’s contribution to her campaign to a nonprofit for survivors of sexual assault.” The New York Post (11/16, Brown), meanwhile, notes “Sen. Claire McCaskill’s campaign sad she will donate $30,000 from...Franken’s political action committee to a ‘Missouri-based charity,’ while Sen. Kirsten Gillibrand will give $12,500 she’s received to Protect our Defenders, which fights rape and sexual assault in the military.” Sen. Richard Blumenthal said on CNN’s Situation Room (11/16), “Unwanted groping and sexual advances are never funny or acceptable.” Asked if he believes Tweeden Blumenthal said, “I believe the photograph of Al Franken, in effect groping her, cannot be denied.” Blumenthal added, “We need the truth about all of what happened and if there are other facts that we should know about this incident, about other incidents, about other people, they have to be known as well. And then the ethics investigation is going to have to determine whether any sanctions or penalties are appropriate. I also believe, as a prosecutor and someone who really trusts the rule of law and impartial decision makers that this investigation ought to be allowed to proceed without any of us interfering in it.” The Washington Post (11/16) editorializes that as the Senate Ethics panel “looks into Mr. Franken’s behavior, it will have to consider what comes next. What level of misconduct merits a lawmaker’s departure from Congress? Should the legislature have a zero-tolerance policy, or can gradations of offense be recognized? If a member’s wrongdoing took place entirely before his time on the Hill, should that affect continued service?” The Post adds that “members of the House of Representatives should be asking these same questions,” and that “both Democrats and Republicans should support measures to hold predators to account, provide victims with support and make clear that all people deserve to be treated with respect.” Political commentator Amanda Carpenter said on CNN’s The Lead (11/16), “I think...Franken needs to do a lot more than issue a public apology via press release. She has a lot of class. She said she believed his apology. I think he needs to try to make it in person. She may not to want see him. He needs to make a much bigger gesture than a press release because she has gone through a lot over the last ten years.” Mollie Hemingway of The Federalist said on Fox News’ Special Report (11/16), “There is absolutely no question that by the standard recently set by the political and media establishment that...Franken should be expelled. They have been saying for days that conduct 40 years ago should lead to expulsion from the Senate. There is no question this is a credible allegation. This is behavior that was just before he was a senator, and that’s the standard that was being used for the last few days. But I do kind of wonder if maybe what should happen here is a little bit of everybody taking a deep breath, thinking through how to properly handle credible allegations of sexual assault and sexual impropriety, how to balance the allegations with the defense and whether we should institute better systems for handling this.” A.B. Stoddard of Real Clear Politics said on Fox News’ Special Report (11/16), “I just feel, like a lot of people do, that this is the beginning of a big cascading event. I don’t believe Senator Franken is the last lawmaker in the House or senator in the Senate e to have done something like this. Women are coming together...in solidarity with each other, but also just try to stop it from happening again. It’s going to really be a very difficult time on Capitol Hill.” Sean Hannity said on Fox News’ Hannity (11/16) that Franken “has a long history of making all kinds of vicious, vile, completely out of line comments. He is also a massive hypocrite for sexual harassment.” Hannity added, “We have to ask again, given this information, everything we now know, now considering everyone is raising questions who is fit for this office and who is fit for that office, is Sen. Franken fit for office? Sen. Franken clearly is a pretty sick, twisted individual with a warped sense of humor in his own mind that really isn’t funny, but his actions do need to be evaluated. At the end of the day it will be the people of his home state that decide.” The USO, the Washington Examiner (11/16, Quinn) reports, “said Thursday the allegations...are ‘deeply disturbing’ and don’t reflect the organization’s values.” Ashley McLellan, a spokeswoman for the USO, “told the Washington Examiner in an email the USO didn’t have any knowledge of the incident.” 

Two “Prominent” Minnesota Democrats, NYTimes’ Goldberg Call On Franken To Resign. 

The Washington Examiner (11/16, Nelson) reports, “Two prominent members of Minnesota’s Democratic–Farmer–Labor Party,” state auditor Rebecca Otto and Megan Thomas, “president of the party’s official Feminist Caucus,” are “calling on...Franken to resign his Senate seat following allegations of sexual misconduct.” Otto, who is “a candidate for governor in Minnesota, said in a statement that ‘I believe it’s in the best interest of Minnesotans and of women everywhere for Senator Franken to resign, and to set an example to powerful men across America that sexual harassment will not be tolerated.’” Thomas, meanwhile, “told the Washington Examiner that Franken’s misconduct was ‘every woman’s nightmare on a bus.’” She also said in a Facebook post, “No one should fear their elected representatives, so, sadly, for me, I think the Senator should resign.” Michelle Goldberg, in a New York Times (11/16) column, writes she had “hoped Franken would run for president in 2020,” but though she “would mourn Franken’s departure from the Senate...he should go, and the governor should appoint a woman to fill his seat. The message to men in power about sexual degradation has to be clear: We will replace you.” 

Franken Photographed Groping Another Woman In 2000. The Federalist (11/16, Payton) reports that “Tweeden isn’t the only woman Franken has been photographed groping. At a roast hosted by Comedy Central in 2000, Franken was photographed groping Joy Behar’s breast.” 

Another Woman Accuses Franken Of Harassing Phone Calls Until She Threatened To Call Police. The San Jose (CA) Mercury News (11/16, Ross) reports “Melanie Morgan, a longtime Bay Area conservative radio anchor, claimed Thursday that she was harassed with phone calls by...Franken...in 2000, following a contentious debate on Bill Maher’s ABC late-night show ‘Politically Incorrect.’” Morgan “made the allegations on Media Equalizer, a blog she co-founded,” saying “the harassment consisted of Franken aggressively trying to continue the argument off air and repeatedly calling her personal phone number to ‘badger’ her.” Wrote Morgan, “He wouldn’t leave me alone, he kept following me. As a woman, his presence and proximity to me felt very threatening and intimidating.” She also “said he later approached the show’s producer to get her phone number, ‘which was a clear violation of network protocol,’” but “Franken got the phone number and ‘shocked’ her by calling her home at least three times.” Adds Morgan, “By the third phone call I was outraged and terrified, as he is really disturbed.” Morgan also “said he finally left her alone after she threatened to call the police and report him.” 

White House: Senate Investigation “Appropriate.” Politico (11/16, Lima) reports “White House press secretary Sarah Huckabee Sanders said Thursday it would be ‘appropriate’ for the Senate to investigate allegations” against Franken. Said Sanders, “On Sen. Franken, it appears that the Senate is looking into that, which they should, and we feel that that’s an appropriate action.” 

Trump Weighs In On Allegations Against “Frankenstien” On Twitter. The President commented on the accusations against Franken last night, tweeting, “The Al Frankenstien picture is really bad, speaks a thousand words. Where do his hands go in pictures 2, 3, 4, 5 & 6 while she sleeps?” Trump added, “And to think that just last week he was lecturing anyone who would listen about sexual harassment and respect for women. Lesley Stahl tape?” Politico (11/16, East) says “Trump’s acknowledgment of the accusations against Franken comes at the same time that he has distanced himself from...Moore, who has been accused of pursuing and harassing teenage girls when he was in his 30s.” Axios (11/16, Lawler) similarly indicates that “Trump weighed in quickly on Franken, but has declined to address the child sexual abuse allegations against...Moore.” 

## White House: Trump Finds Moore Allegations “Troubling,” But Fate Up To Alabama Voters. 

The White House on Thursday weighed in on the controversy engulfing Alabama Senate candidate Roy Moore, though President Trump, himself, didn’t comment on the situation. The CBS Evening News (11/16, story 2, 2:30, Mason), in a report that covered several aspects of the Moore controversy, showed a clip of White House press secretary Sarah Sanders saying, “The President believes that these allegations are very troubling and should be taken seriously, and he thinks that the people of Alabama should make the decision on who their next Senator should be.” Bloomberg News (11/16, Wayne, Olorunnipa) reports that Sanders “said Trump continues to believe that ‘if any of these allegations are true’ Moore should withdraw from the race. That led to a series of questions from reporters about how the allegations might be substantiated. Sanders said ‘that should be determined, possibly, by a court of law’ but that it is ‘a decision the people of Alabama should make, not the president.’” USA Today (11/16, Korte, Berry) reports that Sanders’ remarks “ended days of silence from the White House, since the allegations first arose last week while Trump was on a 12-day Asia trip. But Sanders stopped short of calling for Moore to drop out of the race, as a chorus of other Republican senators – including Majority Leader Mitch McConnell – have done.” The Washington Times (11/16, Miller) reports that Sanders “did not say whether Mr. Trump believed the women” who’ve accused Moore “of pursuing them or making inappropriate sexual contact. Most of the women were teens, although of legal age in Alabama, when the incidents occurred in the 1970s.” Asked “why Mr. Trump had not called for Mr. Moore...to quit the race, Mrs. Sanders repeatedly said that it was up to Alabama voters. ‘The president has been clear that if any of these allegations are true...then he should do the right thing and step aside,’ Mrs. Sanders said.” Under the headline “Trump Stops Short Of Saying US Senate Candidate Moore Should Leave Race,” Reuters (11/16, Mason, Alexander) quotes Sanders as saying, “The president said in his statement earlier this week that if the allegations are true, then Roy Moore should step aside. He still firmly believes that.” However, Politico (11/16, Nelson) reported that Sanders “refused to outline what it would take for Trump to become convinced of the accusations’ veracity. Sanders also declined to say whether or not Trump would vote for Moore if he were an Alabama voter and would not commit to following up with reporters on the issue.” Under the headline “Trump Ducks Moore Scandal,” Politico (11/16, Johnson, Isenstadt) reported that “Trump has steered conspicuously clear of the” Moore controversy. His “absence from the race has compounded GOP worries the party is about to lose a seat it has no business relinquishing to Democrats. Republicans say a denunciation of Moore from Trump, a beloved figure in Alabama despite his problems elsewhere, offers the only hope of keeping the seat in the party’s hands. But Trump sees nothing but negatives in getting involved, according to three White House aides, who say they consider the options laid out by McConnell and his team far-fetched.” Asked to comment on Moore, Counselor to the President Kellyanne Conway said on Fox News’ Fox & Friends (11/16) “that I was the first person in the Administration last Thursday when this news broke...at the time to come out against the conduct as it was described, and I went a step further. I said – because I tried to make this an issue over a year ago on October 9, 2016, when I talked about maybe, when I was younger and prettier, folks on Capitol Hill behaving in such a way that we should take a look at. ... Nobody wanted to listen to me, because of the campaign I was managing. This is an important topic but in terms of this particular issue and this particular Senate race, I will not get ahead of the President and anything he wishes to add.” Sen. Richard Blumenthal (D-CT) said on CNN’s Situation Room (11/16), “Roy Moore is unfit to be a United States senator on various grounds and those grounds include the kinds of sexual advances he made to children.” 

Alabama GOP Steering Committee Backs Moore. Meanwhile, the New York Times (11/16, Blinder) reports that the Alabama GOP on Thursday said “that it would stand behind...Moore, most likely leaving Republicans with a nominee facing numerous allegations of sexual misconduct and unwanted overtures to women. The decision, which a committee of 21 party leaders reached Wednesday evening but did not formally announce until Thursday, placed the state’s Republicans at bitter and public odds with national party leaders, who had demanded that Mr. Moore leave the race.” The Washington Times (11/16, McLaughlin) reports that in a statement, the Alabama GOP said, “The ALGOP Steering Committee supports Judge Roy Moore as our nominee and trusts the voters as they make the ultimate decision in this crucial race.” The statement added, “Judge Moore has vehemently denied the allegations made against him. He deserves to be presumed innocent of the accusations unless proven otherwise. He will continue to take his case straight to the people of Alabama.” 

Gov. Ivey Won’t Change Date Of Dec. 12 Special Election. On its website, CNN (11/16, Bradner) reported that Gov. Kay Ivey (R-AL) on Thursday said “that the state’s Senate special election date will not change, despite national Republican leaders’ efforts to get...Moore off the ballot. ... Asked if there are any circumstances in which the date of the election or the candidates included could change, Ivey” said, “The election’s going to be December the 12th.” The Hill (11/16, Kamisar) reported that Ivey torpedoed “the idea that Sen. Luther Strange (R-Ala.) could resign and delay next month’s special election.” The Hill added that a “long-shot option that’s been mulled” by Washington Republicans “is that Strange, who was appointed to fill the seat temporarily after Jeff Sessions left it to become attorney general, could step down before the election and reset the clock.” However, “Ivey shot that prospect down.” 

Moore: Allegations “Not Only Untrue, But They Have No Evidence To Support Them.” 

The Montgomery (AL) Advertiser (11/16, Lyman) reports, “Speaking at the end of an event” yesterday in Birmingham, “where ‘pro-family’ speakers expressed support for” Moore, the candidate “declined to answer questions about accusations that he pursued relationships with teenagers in the late 1970s and early 1980s, and that he engaged in sexual misconduct with them. Moore and his wife left the event without answering questions.” However, CNN (11/16, Watkins) reported on its website that Moore on Thursday “continued to deny the allegations against him as more women continue to come forward. ‘They’re not only untrue, but they have no evidence to support them,’ Moore said in Birmingham.” And referring to the Washington Post story that first detailed the accusations against him, Moore said, “The Washington Post is certainly not evidence.” 

NBC News Interviews Moore Accuser. On NBC Nightly News (11/16, story 2, 2:45, Holt), Gabe Gutierrez reported that Moore on Thursday “vowed to stay in the race,” even “as more women are coming forward to accuse Moore of unwanted advances ranging from flirting to sexual assault.” NBC News interviewed Tina Johnson, who, according to Gutierrez, “says Moore groped her at his law office in 1991 when she was 28 and trying to settle a child custody case.” Johnson was shown saying, “I was in shock. And I was so humiliated and sickening. ... When I got up and went out, he grabbed my behind. He had power over me. He had me in a position where I couldn’t do nothing.” 

ABC News Highlights WPost Report On New Accuser’s Claims. On ABC World News Tonight (11/16, story 2, 3:20, Muir), Tom Llamas reported that “Moore has tried to push past the allegations, but new ones pop up nearly every day. The latest, from the Washington Post. Gena Richardson says she was a teenage girl, around 18 years old, when Roy Moore approached her at the local mall where she was working. ... A few days later, Richardson says she was sitting in trigonometry class when she was called to the principal’s office. She tells the Post she was startled, and thought maybe her dad was calling. Instead, she says, the man on the phone was Roy Moore. ‘He said ‘what are you doing? I said, ‘I’m in trig class.’ Richardson says Moore asked her out, but she told him she couldn’t talk. A few days later, at the mall, she says he asked her out again, and that night, they went to the movies. After, Richardson says Moore offered her a ride, and in his car gave her what she calls a ‘forceful’ kiss. ‘I’d never been kissed like that,’ she says, ‘and the minute that happened, got scared, and so I said I’ve got to go, because my curfew is now.’” 

Moore Seizes On Franken Allegations To Hammer McConnell. Alabama Live (11/16, Gattis) reports that in the wake of Sen. Al Franken (D-MN) on Thursday being accused of groping a woman and forcing a kiss on her, Moore “suggested that there was a double standard for how he is being treated.” In a tweet targeting Senate Majority Leader McConnell, Moore said, “Al Franken admits guilt after photographic evidence of his abuse surfaces. Mitch: ‘Let’s investigate.’ In Alabama, ZERO evidence, allegations 100% rejected. Mitch: ‘Moore must quit immediately or be expelled.’” McConnell, who has repeatedly called on Moore to drop his bid, on Thursday “called on the Senate Ethics Committee to review the allegations against Franken.” The Washington Times (11/16, Morton) offers a similar report. 

NRCC Chief: Moore Should “Step Aside.” The Hill (11/16, Manchester) reported that during a Thursday appearance on CNN, National Republican Congressional Committee chief Steve Stivers “called on...Moore to step aside.” Said Stivers, “I think that Roy Moore should step aside,” adding, “I do believe these women.” Stivers, “who had previously donated to Moore’s campaign,” also said, “I’ve subsequently asked for my money back.” The Washington Times (11/16, Persons) also reports on Stivers’ remarks. 

Fox News Poll: Democrat Jones Leads Moore 50%-42%. On its website, Fox News (11/16, Blanton) reported that a Fox News poll of 649 Alabama likely voters, taken Nov. 13-15, shows ex-US Attorney Doug Jones (D) leading Moore 50%-42% in the Dec. 12 special election. Fox News said, “Support from women is the key to the Democrat’s” edge, “as Jones is their choice by 26 points (58-32 percent). The gap grows to 49 points among women under age 45 (69-20 percent), and he’s up by 11 among women ages 45 and over (51-40 percent). Jones even receives 19 percent support from Republican women (to Moore’s 68 percent).” The Hill (11/16, Anapol) also reported on the poll results. Politico (11/16, Debenedetti, Strauss) reported that while Jones “remains an underdog in a state” Trump carried by 28 points, “he does have a path. Here’s how it looks, according to interviews with nearly a dozen Democrats within and near Jones’ team since Moore was hit with accusations of pursuing – and in two cases abusing – teenage girls. First, create a permission structure for alienated Republicans who are skeptical of Moore...to cross the aisle. At the same time invigorate the base, especially African-Americans.” Lastly, “keep the national Democratic Party and its despised brand as far out of the picture as possible, while still benefiting from its money.” Under the headline “Democrat Doug Jones, Roy Moore’s Rival, Gains Traction In Alabama Senate Race,” the Wall Street Journal (11/16, Jamerson, Hook) reports that Jones is picking up momentum as Moore continues to battle allegations of sexual misconduct. Jones, according to the Journal, is largely focusing on issues such as healthcare and jobs 

Alabama Evangelicals Divided Over Whether To Support Moore. Under the headline “For Some Evangelicals, A Choice Between Moore And Morality,” the Washington Post (11/16, Fisher) reports on the debate among Alabama Christians over whether to support Moore, saying, “What’s happening in the churches of Alabama – a state where half the residents consider themselves evangelical Christians, double the national average, according to a Pew Research study – is nothing less than a battle for the meaning of evangelism, some church leaders say. It is a titanic struggle between those who believe there must be one clear, unalterable moral standard and those who argue that to win the war for the nation’s soul, Christians must accept morally flawed leaders.” 

## US Strikes “More Conciliatory” Tone At Climate Talks. 

The New York Times (11/16, Friedman) reports State Department acting undersecretary Judith G. Garber, in the “first official American remarks to the United Nations climate body” since President Trump announced the US would abandon the Paris climate accord, offered “a far more conciliatory message than a presentation earlier in the week by White House officials promoting fossil fuels, which drew catcalls and a walkout.” Garber said, “We remain open to the possibility of rejoining [the accord] at a later date under terms more favorable to the American people.” She also promised to help other countries “adapt to the impacts of climate change.” Environmentalists at the event “found Ms. Garber’s message confusing, and a sign of the awkward tightrope that America’s diplomats are walking as they work on a deal Mr. Trump has disavowed.” The AP (11/16, Frank Jordans) reports Garber added that the US “will continue to be a leader in clean energy and innovation, and we understand the need for transforming energy systems.” Garber stated, “We remain collectively committed to mitigating greenhouse gas emissions through, among other things, increased innovation on sustainable energy and energy efficiency, and working towards low greenhouse gas emissions energy systems.” The Washington Examiner (11/16, Siegel) reports, “Garber never used the word ‘coal’ in her Bonn address, although she reaffirmed the White House position that transitioning to renewable energy sources such as solar and wind must coincide with economic prosperity and energy security.” However, the Washington Times (11/16, Hill) reports, that also on Thursday, “U.S. government officials said Washington will push for a change to World Bank rules blocking funding for coal-related projects, while seeking to build ‘a clean-coal alliance’ of like-minded nations across six continents.” The top US representative at the conference George David Banks “said it was vital that developing countries be able to generate electricity and that the structures of the Paris deal work against poorer countries trying to meet their emissions targets.” The position by the US “was announced even as Canada and Britain were unveiling their own Global Alliance to Power Past Coal to phase out the use of coal.” Several US states have signed on to the alliance to phase out coal. The Hill (11/16, Henry, Cama) highlights the “dueling US delegations” at the conference “the official team and a competing one made up of Democratic officials opposed to President Trump’s decision to remove the U.S. from the Paris climate accord.” Sen. Brian Schatz said, “Whatever the president may say about climate, he cannot stop clean energy. ... He’s a powerful man, but he’s not a monarch, and we are going to continue the clean energy revolution.” California Gov. Jerry Brown added, “The rest of the world’s got to carry the ball while we’re temporarily in America off to the sidelines. ... But there’s still California, there’s still New York, Washington, Oregon, all these other places, and there’s still corporations.” 

Supporters Stick By Trump On Leaving Paris, Rolling Back Regulations. Bloomberg News (11/16, Natter) reports that while the conference goes on in Germany, “the president’s backers in the industrial heartland are cheering him on. Whether it’s ditching Paris, moving to slash funding for the Environmental Protection Agency or rescinding a series of environmental regulations, interviews in the industrial area of Lordstown, Ohio, show those moves are popular among factory workers. They see them as Trump making good on his pledges to restore factory jobs.” CNBC (11/16, DiChristopher) reports that last week at the Heartland Institute’s America First Energy Conference, Trump supporters “gathered to celebrate and take stock of Trump’s progress rolling back Obama-era regulations and his blueprint for achieving U.S. ‘energy dominance.’” The conference “offered a glimpse into an organized and highly dedicated corner of conservatism that is committed to shrinking the EPA, demolishing the foundations of greenhouse gas regulations and minimizing the government’s efforts to combat climate change wherever possible.” 

Pope Francis Calls Climate Denial A “Perverse” Attitude. The AP (11/16, Nicole Winfield) reports Pope Francis yesterday “rebuked those who deny the science behind global warming and urged negotiators at climate talks in Germany to avoid falling prey to such ‘perverse attitudes’ and instead accelerate efforts to curb greenhouse gas emissions.” In his message to the conference, Francis said climate change is “one of the most worrisome phenomena that humanity is facing.” Reuters (11/16, Pullella) reports Francis said, “We have to avoid falling into these four perverse attitudes, which certainly do not help honest research and sincere and productive dialogue on building the future of our planet: negation, indifference, resignation and trust in inadequate solutions.” The Daily Caller (11/16, Bastasch) also provides coverage of this story. 

## Keystone Pipeline Leaks Oil In South Dakota. 

The AP (11/16, Dexter) reports that “TransCanada Corp.’s Keystone pipeline leaked an estimated 210,000 gallons of oil onto agricultural land in northeastern South Dakota,” although officials in South Dakota “don’t believe the leak polluted any surface water bodies or drinking water systems.” Regulators in Nebraska “are scheduled to announce their decision Monday whether to approve the proposed Keystone XL oil pipeline, an expansion that would boost the amount of oil TransCanada is now shipping through the existing line.” TransCanada indicated “in its statement that it expected the pipeline to remain shut down as the company responds to the leak.” ABC World News Tonight (11/16, story 4, 0:15, Muir) reported that “officials say the cleanup could take some time.” The New York Times (11/16, Smith, Bosman) reports that Kim McIntosh, an environmental scientist for the South Dakota Department of Environment and Natural Resources, said, “This is not a little spill from any perspective.” The Washington Post (11/16, Mufson, Mooney) reports that Jane Kleeb, an activist who opposed Keystone XL and is also head of Nebraska’s Democratic Party, said, “TransCanada cannot be trusted. ... I have full confidence that the Nebraska Public Service Commission is going to side with Nebraskans, not a foreign oil company.” 

# Editorial Wrap-Up 

## New York Times. 

“A Tax Cut Bill To Make Scrooge McDuck Proud.” The New York Times (11/16) editorializes, “Let that sink in. This tax bill would take money from working families and give it to the wealthiest people in the world. ... Republicans have made clear where their values lie. Well-heeled campaign funders matter. Middle-class families don’t.” 

“The Da Vinci Lode.” A New York Times (11/16) editorial. 

## Washington Post. 

“The Destructive Part Of The Republican Tax Bill You’re Not Paying Attention To.” A Washington Post (11/16) editorial says the “assault on higher education” in the House tax bill “is one of the less- examined unwise provisions in a tax bill full of unwise provisions.” The bill would require graduate students to “treat tuition waivers as taxable income.” While that “bad idea” is not int he Senate bill, it “contains other provisions that would undermine the nation’s colleges and universities.” For example, both plans “would slap a 1.4 percent excise tax on investment income that universities earn on endowments that Republicans deem to be too large,” a provision which “would mainly hit elite institutions,” that are “generally the ones that offer the most tuition aid to students from needy – and even securely middle-class – families.” 

“Al Franken Is Just The Start Of Congress’s Reckoning With Sexual Harassment.” The Washington Post (11/16) editorializes that as the Senate Ethics panel “looks into [Sen. Al] Franken’s behavior, it will have to consider what comes next. What level of misconduct merits a lawmaker’s departure from Congress? Should the legislature have a zero-tolerance policy, or can gradations of offense be recognized? If a member’s wrongdoing took place entirely before his time on the Hill, should that affect continued service?” The Post adds that “members of the House of Representatives should be asking these same questions,” and that “both Democrats and Republicans should support measures to hold predators to account, provide victims with support and make clear that all people deserve to be treated with respect.” 

“The Pentagon Has Detained A US Citizen For More Than Two Months – And Said Little.” 

The Washington Post (11/16, Board) editorializes that the US government must provide an American citizen, who has been detained in Iraq for over two months on suspicion of aiding the Islamic State, “with legal counsel and access to the justice system if he wishes it.” The Post also calls on the Pentagon to make basic information about the case public “in the spirit of accountability and transparency.” The Post asserts that “it can’t be the case that the government is effectively allowed to block the courts from reviewing a person’s detention by keeping the prisoner anonymous and incommunicado.” 

## Wall Street Journal. 

“A Solution For Ron Johnson.” Citing Sen. Ron Johnson’s concern over the bill’s treatment of large corporations versus “pass through” business, which are taxed at the individual rate, a Wall Street Journal (11/16) editorial says President Trump’s call to reduce the top rate to 35% could be the solution to win Johnson’s support because a 35% rate would provide a more powerful incentive for growth against the Senate bill’s 17.4% pass-through deduction than the Senate bill’s current 38.5% top rate. 

“No Republicans Need Apply.” In an editorial, the Wall Street Journal (11/16, Board) criticizes the Congressional Hispanic Caucus’ decision to reject Republican Rep. Carlos Curbelo’s bid for membership, saying that while the group can set its own rules, Curbelo’s rejection confirms criticisms that the group has less to do with promoting Hispanic interests than pushing a liberal Democratic agenda. 

“Trump’s South China Sea Message.” In an editorial, the Wall Street Journal (11/16) praises President Trump for his challenging China on its territorial aspirations in the South China Sea. The Journal focuses on China’s conflicts in the are with Vietnam and Philippines, and concludes by lauding Trump for seeking to keep shipping lanes open and deter Chinese territorial expansion. 

# Big Picture 

## Headlines From Today’s Front Pages. 

Wall Street Journal: 

Comcast Approached 21st Century Fox About An Acquisition House Backs GOP Tax-Overhaul Bill Google Has Picked an Answer For You—Too Bad It’s Often Wrong Wal-Mart Posts Strongest US Sales In Nearly A Decade 

New York Times: 

House And Senate Panel Pass Tax Bill In Major Step Toward Overhaul Al Franken Issues Apology After Accusation Of Forcible Kissing And Groping Alabama GOP Says It Stands Behind Roy Moore Bill Signals GOP Prioritizes Corporate Tax Cuts Corruption Case Against Senator Menendez Ends In Mistrial Downing North Korean Missiles Is Hard. So The US Is Experimenting. 

Washington Post: 

The Rapid Cycle Of Gun Violence CEO Nightmare: Dreaded Endorsement Of The Alt-Right House Passes Tax Bill, Upping Heat On Senate Al Franken Accused Of Groping Woman In 2006 Mistrial Declared In Menendez Case 

Financial Times: 

Norway Wealth Fund Proposes End To Oil And Gas Investment Saudi Authorities Offer Freedom Deals To Princes And Businessmen Volkswagen Commits €10bn To Build Electric Cars In China 

Washington Times: 

Republicans Rally For A ‘Comeback,’ Push $1.4 Trillion Tax Cut Through House Franken To Face Ethics Investigation, Outraged Colleagues From Both Parties NFL Steps Into Politics, Fights Tax Cut Bill With No Stadium Bond Breaks Researchers Confirm First Living CTE Diagnosis, Look For Early Detection And Treatment U.S. Defends Coal Use In Developing Countries, Proposes International Alliance At Climate Summit In Odinga Strongholds, Kenyans Grapple With Frustrating Election Loss 

Story Lineup From Last Night’s Network News: 

ABC: Al Franken Sexual Misconduct Allegation; Roy Moore Sexual Misconduct Allegations; Tax Reform Plan; Keystone Pipeline Oil Leak; Russia Meddling Investigation-Kushner; Robert Menendez Trial; Starwood Waypoint-Complaints; Black Friday Shopping; Baltimore-Police Officer Shot; California House Explosion; Weather Forecast; Da Vinci Painting Auction. 

CBS: Al Franken Sexual Misconduct Allegation; Roy Moore Sexual Misconduct Allegations; Tax Reform Plan; Robert Menendez Trial; Russia Meddling Investigation-Kushner; Russia-Crimea Occupation; Distracted Drivers; Baltimore-Police Officer Shot; Elephant Trophies Ban Reversed; Amazon Key-Security Concerns; Da Vinci Painting Auction; Bike Riding Benefits. 

NBC: Al Franken Sexual Misconduct Allegation; Roy Moore Sexual Misconduct Allegations; Tax Reform Plan; Russia Meddling Investigation-Kushner; Robert Menendez Trial; Baltimore-Police Officer Shot; Congress-Gun Control; Russia Meddling Investigation-Russian Troll Farm; DC Bible Museum Opening; Elephant Trophies Ban Reversed; California House Explosion; Da Vinci Painting Auction; Kansas Town Revival. 

Network TV At A Glance: 

Roy Moore Sexual Misconduct Allegations – 8 minutes, 35 seconds Al Franken Sexual Misconduct Allegation – 8 minutes, 15 seconds Tax Reform Plan – 7 minutes Russia Meddling Investigation – 5 minutes, 30 seconds Robert Menendez Trial – 2 minutes, 35 seconds 

Story Lineup From This Morning’s Radio News Broadcasts: 

ABC: Ohio State Univ-Hazing; Tax Reform Plan; Roy Moore Sexual Misconduct Allegations; Al Franken Sexual Misconduct Allegation. 

CBS: Tax Reform Plan; Al Franken Sexual Misconduct Allegation; Roy Moore Sexual Misconduct Allegations; VA-PTSD Waiting List; Keystone Pipeline Oil Leak; Latin Grammy Award. 

FOX: Roy Moore Sexual Misconduct Allegations; Al Franken Sexual Misconduct Allegation; Tax Reform Plan. 

NPR: Tax Reform Plan; Robert Menendez Trial; Al Franken Sexual Misconduct Allegation; FCC-Media Ownership. 

# Washington Schedule 

## Today’s Events In Washington. 

White House: 

PRESIDENT TRUMP — Receives his daily intelligence briefing; hosts NCAA National Championship teams; has lunch with Vice President Mike Pence; meets with Secretary of State Rex Tillerson. VICE PRESIDENT PENCE — Participates in a meeting with Governor Kenneth Mapp of the U.S. Virgin Islands; participates in a meeting with Chief Executive Dr. Abdullah Abdullah of Afghanistan; participates in a meeting with Vice President Oscar Naranjo of Colombia; has lunch with the President. 

US Senate: Congress breaks for Thanksgiving recess until Nov. 27. 

US House: 2:00 PM House Veterans’ Affairs subcommittee oversight field hearing and education and transition – Economic Opportunity Subcommittee oversight field hearing on ‘Best Practices in Veterans Education and Transition to Civilian Life’, with testimony from Texas Tech University student vet Kai Iuta, Director of Military and Veterans Programs Col. (Ret.) Lou Ortiz, and Health Sciences Center President Dr Tedd Mitchell and School of Nursing Veteran Liaison Aaron Kyle Chapman; Angelo State University student vet Nicole Meyer; and StarCare Specialty Health System Director of Veterans Services Col. (Ret.) David Lewis Location: Texas Tech University System, 1508 Knoxville Ave, Lubbock, TX Lubbock http://veterans.house.gov/ https://twitter.com/HouseVetAffairs Congress breaks for Thanksgiving recess until Nov. 27. 

Other: 9:30 AM Museum of the Bible opens in Washington, DC – The Museum of the Bible opens, using cutting-edge technology to bring ‘The Bible’ to life. The museum invites everyone to engage with ‘The Bible’ through three permanent sections: History of the Bible, Narrative of the Bible and Impact of the Bible, alongside a space for temporary exhibits. Highlights include a 140-by-15-foot digital arcade ceiling, and the World Stage Theater with 3-D digital mapping Location: Museum of the Bible, 409 3rd St SW, Washington, DC www.museumofthebible.org https://twitter.com/museumofbible 10:00 AM Dem Rep. Robin Kelly speaks at CAP on ‘Women of Color and Mental Health’ – ‘Women of Color and Mental Health: From the Shadows of Silence to Solutions for Leadership’ Center for American Progress discussion on how racism, cultural stereotypes, economic insecurity, gender discrimination, stigma, and shame all impact the mental health of women of color, preventing them from getting the support and treatment they deserve. Speakers include Democratic Rep. Robin Kelly, A Mother’s Sanctuary Founder and Director LaShonta Edwards, Black Women’s Health Health Policy and Legislative Affairs Director Christy Gamble, University of Wisconsin–Madison Department of Counseling Psychology Associate Professor Carmen Valdez, and Center for American Progress Senior Fellow Jamila Taylor Location: Center for American Progress, 1333 H St NW, Washington, DC www.americanprogress.org https://twitter.com/amprog 

# Last Laughs 

## Late Night Political Humor. 

Jimmy Kimmel: “Meanwhile, here on Earth, the House passed the GOP-backed tax plan today, which is very good news for billionaires and also just your average run-of-the-millionaires too. The bill would shift the tax burden from the wealthy to people who really should be paying more, like college students. Time for those little punks to start eating bottom ramen for a while.” 

Jimmy Kimmel: “The President is also about to reverse a law that made it illegal to import elephant parts from African trophy hunts. That’s right, struggling families of America, you asked for it, and the President delivered. We can finally bring our elephant tusks back home from Zimbabwe.” 

Jimmy Kimmel: “Roy Moore has been accused of sexual misconduct and worse by nine women, seven of whom were teenagers when the events allegedly happened. But when Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell called for him to step aside, this is how he responded on Twitter. He wrote, ‘Dear Mitch McConnell, bring it on.’ Now I’m not an expert in PR, but when you’re accused of putting moves on high school girls, maybe don’t reference the title of a movie about high school cheerleaders.” 

Jimmy Kimmel: “There are a bunch of new accusations made today against a wide variety of people, including Sylvester Stallone, the first PBS, and Senator Al Franken, whose story was amplified because it had a visual aid.” 

Jimmy Kimmel: “There is so much of this [sexual harassment news]. I mean, at this point I know it sounds extreme, but it might be time for guys, I think, we might all need to hand our penises over to the police for a few months.” 

Stephen Colbert: “Every day, it seems like we find out about another high-profile sexual harasser. And today is no exception. Brace yourself, because it is Sen. Al Franken. He’s been accused of kissing and groping a woman without her consent. Come on, Franken! I guess there are no good people left, so let’s just get it over with. Just tell us whatever you did, Jimmy Carter, Barack Obama, Tom Hanks.” 

Stephen Colbert: “Moore isn’t afraid of the Washington Republicans, tweeting, ‘Dear Mitch McConnell, bring it on.’ A strong sentiment, leading the head of the National Republican Senatorial Committee to tweet, ‘“Bring It On” is a movie about high school cheerleaders.’” 

James Corden: “Have you guys been following this story about the UCLA basketball players who were arrested in China for shoplifting? Well, President Trump helped get them released, and yesterday they publicly thanked him. So today, Donald Trump tweeted, ‘To the three UCLA basketball players I say, You’re welcome.’ He also tweeted, ‘Have a great life be careful, there are many pitfalls on the long and winding road of life!’ There are many pitfalls on the long and winding road of life? The guy goes on one presidential trip to Asia, and now he’s writing Chinese proverbs.” 

James Corden: “[Donald Trump] is right, though. There are so many pitfalls on the long and winding road of life. For example, there’s bankruptcy, and there are lawsuits against a scam business you started. Then there’s bankruptcy a second time. Then there’s the FBI investigating you about Russia. And then bankruptcy again.” 

James Corden: “A piece of wedding cake from Donald and Melania Trump’s wedding is currently up for auction. The 12-year-old piece of cake is being marketed as a rare collector’s item. I can’t believe it lasted this long. Not the cake, the marriage.” 

Trevor Noah: [Referring to sexual misconduct allegations of Sen. Al Franken and Senate candidate Roy Moore] “Al Franken is going with the whole ‘I’m sorry, I’m going to look at myself. I understand this disgusting.’ That’s so boring. This guy is like, ‘You know who needs to step down for what I did? Someone else!’” 

Jimmy Fallon: “Radio host Leeann Tweeden came forward and said Sen. Al Franken groped her without her consent. And she posted a photo as evidence. In fact, it’s so bad that Franken is already a front-runner for President in 2020.” 

Jimmy Fallon: “Meanwhile, it’s been reported Alabama Senate candidate Roy Moore would hang out in the mall in the ‘80s and try to get teenagers’ phone numbers. He got a lot of numbers, but they were all for ‘Jenny at 867-5309.’” 

Jimmy Fallon: “It’s crazy, though, two more women have come forward accusing Roy Moore of making unwanted advances at the mall, which explains that new slogan, ‘Amazon, so you don’t run into Roy Moore at the mall.’”  

> Copyright 2017 by Bulletin Intelligence LLC Reproduction or redistribution without permission prohibited. Content is drawn from thousands of newspapers, national magazines, national and local television programs, radio broadcasts, social-media platforms and additional forms of open-source data. Sources for Bulletin Intelligence audience-size estimates include Scarborough, GfK MRI, comScore, Nielsen, and the Audit Bureau of Circulation. Data from and access to third party social media platforms, including but not limited to Facebook, Twitter, Instagram and others, is subject to the respective platform’s terms of use. Services that include Factiva content are governed by Factiva’s terms of use. Services including embedded Tweets are also subject to Twitter for Website's information and privacy policies. The Department of the Interior News Briefing is published five days a week by Bulletin Intelligence, which creates custom briefings for government and corporate leaders. We can be found on the Web at BulletinIntelligence.com, or called at (703) 483-6100.

# Conversation Contents 

## DOI Daily Report 

# "Hinson, Alex" <alex_hinson@ios.doi.gov> 

## From: "Hinson, Alex" <alex_hinson@ios.doi.gov> 

## Sent: Thu Nov 16 2017 09:03:51 GMT-0700 (MST) 

## To: undisclosed-recipients:; 

## BCC: ws.gov 

## Subject: DOI Daily Report 

# INTERIOR DAILY COMMUNICATIONS REPORT 

# NEWS TO SHARE: 

## Reuters: U.S. Senate panel advances quest for oil in Arctic refuge 

## “Oil drilling in a vast Alaskan wildlife refuge moved a step closer to reality on Wednesday after the U.S. Senate energy and natural resources panel voted 13-10 to open part of the reserve coveted by conservationists. Republicans, who control Congress and the White House, have long wanted to prise open a portion of the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge on the north coast known as the 1002 area. Senator Lisa Murkowski, an Alaska Republican and the head of the Senate energy committee, says drilling in the refuge is needed to provide jobs and boost the country’s resource base." 

## THE HILL- Opinion: We’re not paying our fair share to visit national parks 

## “When the Interior Department recently announced that it wanted to raise peak-season entry fees at 17 popular national parks to $70 per vehicle, some took it as an affront to the democratic notion that public lands are for everyone. The Outdoor Industry Association noted its concern that the “move could leave some visitors priced out of the parks.” It also took the opportunity to call for Congress to simply set aside more money for “outdoor recreation infrastructure like our parks and other public lands.” So far that strategy hasn’t worked. Overdue maintenance projects facing federal land agencies amount to more than $11 billion for national parks and $5 billion for national forests. Yet legislators continue to allocate enough funds to cover only a mere fraction of that maintenance. It's time for hikers and other outdoor enthusiasts to leave more than footprints when they recreate on public lands. If our parks, forests, and wilderness areas are truly national treasures, then outdoor recreationists should have no qualms paying to enjoy — and support — them.” 

## Washington Post: Trophies from elephant hunts in Zimbabwe were banned in the U.S. Trump just reversed that. 

## “The Trump administration announced Wednesday that the remains of elephants legally hunted in Zimbabwe and Zambia can now be imported to the United States as trophies, reversing a ban under former president Barack Obama. African elephants are listed as threatened under the Endangered Species Act, but the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service has determined that large sums paid for permits to (b) (6) hunt the animals could actually help them “by putting much-needed revenue back into conservation,” according to an agency statement. Under the Obama administration, elephant-hunting trophies were allowed in countries such as South Africa but not in Zimbabwe because Fish and Wildlife decided in 2015 that the nation had failed to prove that its management of elephants enhanced the population. Zimbabwe could not confirm its elephant population in a way that was acceptable to U.S. officials, and did not demonstrate an ability to implement laws to protect it.” 

# CORRECTING THE RECORD: 

## Magic Valley (Twin Falls, ID): New outdoor advisory panel draws mixed reviews 

## “Representatives of outdoor recreation and conservation groups see both potential and peril in a new advisory committee being created by U.S. Secretary of the Interior Ryan Zinke. The former Navy SEAL and congressman from Montana, who was appointed by President Donald Trump to lead the department that oversees agencies like the Bureau of Land Management and the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, is creating a “Made in America” recreation advisory committee. According to a news release, the goal of the committee is to expand access and improve infrastructure on public land and waterways by harnessing innovation of the private sector.” 

## Secretary Zinke’s Statement: “The spirit of American innovation and ingenuity is what built our country, and the Interior Department wants that same spirit and energy to resonate within the realm of outdoor recreation on our public lands. By forming this committee, I look forward to hearing from the best and the brightest in our private sector on how to improve the public experience on our federal lands and waters by expanding access for all Americans. We already have thousands of private partners who operate on federal lands. Whether it’s the iconic Jammers in Glacier National Park, the historic El Tovar lodge at the Grand Canyon, or the kayaks that you can rent on the Potomac River, American workers are at the heart of helping American families experience our great outdoors.” 

## ### 

## --

> Alex Hinson

## Deputy Press Secretary Department of the Interior Conversation Contents 

## Elephants-- No not in PA 

# "Arway, John" <jarway@pa.gov> 

## From: "Arway, John" <jarway@pa.gov> 

## Sent: Thu Nov 16 2017 07:13:35 GMT-0700 (MST) 

## To: "'Ron Regan'" <RRegan@fishwildlife.org>, Virgil Moore <virgil.moore@idfg.idaho.gov> 

## CC: "Sheehan, Greg" < @fws.gov> 

## Subject: Elephants-- No not in PA 

Picked this up from a PA legislative reporting service. 

# TROPHIES... 

News from the Trump Administration, and it has people talking. The Administration lifted a ban implemented during the Obama Administration to allow for African elephant trophies to be imported to the United States. Essentially, says the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Americans will be permitted to hunt the endangered game and provide “much-needed revenue back into conservation.” The restrictions date back to 2014 when the population for the species was at a critical level and remain on the U.S. Endangered Species Act list, which requires the United States to protect the species even in other countries. Americans will be permitted to hunt African elephants in Zimbabwe and Zambia. Hopefully, such a policy considers the logic of a species survival plan, lest the next generation have to read about these great animals from books… 

# ><(John{(°>  

> Do Your Duty and Fear No One..... R. W. Abele

# Ron Regan <RRegan@fishwildlife.org> 

## From: Ron Regan <RRegan@fishwildlife.org> 

## Sent: Thu Nov 16 2017 07:21:53 GMT-0700 (MST) 

## To: John Arway <jarway@pa.gov> 

## CC: Virgil Moore <virgil.moore@idfg.idaho.gov>, "Sheehan, Greg" < @fws.gov> 

## Subject: Re: Elephants-- No not in PA Thanks, John. Yes, I saw news about this last evening. Ron Sent from my iPhone On Nov 16, 2017, at 7:13 AM, Arway, John <jarway@pa.gov> wrote: (b) (6) (b) (6) Picked this up from a PA legislative reporting service. 

# TROPHIES... 

News from the Trump Administration, and it has people talking. The Administration lifted a ban implemented during the Obama Administration to allow for African elephant trophies to be imported to the United States. Essentially, says the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Americans will be permitted to hunt the endangered game and provide “much-needed revenue back into conservation.” The restrictions date back to 2014 when the population for the species was at a critical level and remain on the U.S. Endangered Species Act list, which requires the United States to protect the species even in other countries. Americans will be permitted to hunt African elephants in Zimbabwe and Zambia. Hopefully, such a policy considers the logic of a species survival plan, lest the next generation have to read about these great animals from books… 

# ><(John{(°>  

> Do Your Duty and Fear No One..... R. W. Abele

# Conversation Contents 

## U.S. Department of the Interior News Briefing for Thursday, November 16, 2017 

# Bulletin Intelligence <Interior@bulletinintelligence.com> 

## From: Bulletin Intelligence <Interior@bulletinintelligence.com> 

## Sent: Thu Nov 16 2017 03:59:55 GMT-0700 (MST) 

## To: <Interior@bulletinintelligence.com> 

## Subject: U.S. Department of the Interior News Briefing for Thursday, November 16, 2017  

> Mobile version and searchable archives available here. Please click here to subscribe.
> DATE: THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 16, 2017 6:00 AM EST

# Today's Table Of Contents 

DOI In The News 

• Reuters: U.S. Senate Panel Advances Quest For Oil In Arctic Refuge. • Washington Post: Trophies From Elephant Hunts In Zimbabwe Were Banned In The U.S. Trump Just Reversed That. • Washington Post: This Group Thinks Trump Hasn’t Done Enough To Unravel Environmental Rules. • Twin Falls (ID) Times-News: New Outdoor Advisory Panel Draws Mixed Reviews. • Newsy: Secretary Zinke Questions His Department’s Loyalty (VIDEO). 

Bureau Of Indian Affairs 

• Gaming Panel Approves Tribe’s Plan For Casino Near Omaha. • Blackfeet Tribal Members In Federal Court Over Water Rights. • Leech Lake Band Seeks To Recover 11,000 Acres Of “Allotted Lands” In The Chip. • Nooksack Can’t Get Second Look At Toss Of Funding Suit. • Enviros Urge 9th Circ. To Revive Wind Farm Challenge. 

Bureau Of Indian Education 

• Oregon Lawmakers Demand Answers From Interior On Chemawa. 

Bureau Of Land Management 

• Washington Post: Three Years After Nevada Ranch Standoff, Bundy Federal Trial Begins In Las Vegas. • San Bernardino (CA) Sun: Here’s Why Cadiz Company Says It’s Taking ‘a Little Pause’ From Its Desert Water Project. • KSTU-TV Salt Lake City: BLM Seeking Public Feedback On Proposal To Expand Research Into Cosmic Rays. 

Bureau Of Reclamation 

• Walden Hydro Bill Would Lower Farmers’ Power Costs. • Timeline Moved Up On Irrigation Pipeline Project; Southwest Bend Piping Project To Begin Around The End Of The Year. 

Bureau Of Safety And Environmental Enforcement 

• BSEE Director Discusses Gulf Of Mexico E&P Opportunities At Deepwater Operations. • About 75,000 Barrels Per Day Of Gulf Oil Output Still Shut After Shell Fire. 

Fish And Wildlife Service 

• Bozeman (MT) Daily Chronicle: New Medicine Lake Blind Wheelchair Accessible. 

National Park Service 

• KPAX-TV Missoula (MT): Public Comment Period On Raising Fees At 17 National Parks Closing Soon. • WSB-TV Atlanta: Why You May Not Have That Lifetime National Parks Pass You Ordered Yet. • Cronkite News: Backers Hope Route 66 ‘Historic Trail’ Designation Can Drive Tourism. • Chicago Tribune: U.S. Steel Dumps More Toxic Chromium Near Lake Michigan, Faces Lawsuit. • Flathead (MT) Beacon: Glacier Park Visitation Up In October. • Las Vegas Review-Journal: Graffiti In Active Volcano At Death Valley Erased By Park Service. 

Office Of Insular Affairs 

• Houston Chronicle: Wildlife Agencies Meet On Guam To Discuss Brown Tree Snakes. 

Office Of Surface Mining 

• Omar’s Pine Creek 2 Mine Receives Award. 

US Geological Survey 

• Midland (TX) Reporter-Telegram: USGS: Uranium Has Been Found Near Big Spring. • Reuters: Aviat Networks Awarded $3.0 Million Project With USGS. • Associated Press: Former Oklahoma Seismologist Testifies In Earthquake Lawsuit. 

Opinion Pieces 

• Has Congress Already Forgotten Our Last Oil Spill Disaster? • We’re Not Paying Our Fair Share To Visit National Parks. • Additional Reading. 

Top National News 

• NBC: Trump Touts Success Of His Asia Trip, Says It Shows “America Is Back.” • CBS: As House Prepares To Vote On Tax Bill, Johnson Says He Opposes Senate Version. • Associated Press: Democrats Introduce Articles Of Impeachment Against Trump. • New York Times: Bonn Conference Trying To Make Headway Despite US Stance On Paris Deal. 

Editorial Wrap-Up 

• New York Times. - “Mr. Trump Casts A Shadow Over The AT&amp;T-Time Warner Deal.” - “The Senate Questions The President’s Power To Launch Nukes.” • Washington Post. - “Republicans Turn Their Irresponsible Tax Bill Into Monumentally Unwise Social Policy.” - “What Happens In Zimbabwe Without Mugabe In Power?” - “Don’t Be Relieved Only Five People Died In California. Be Enraged.” • Wall Street Journal. - “The Appeal Of Mandate Repeal.” - “Zimbabwe’s Coup By Any Other Name.” - “Adios, Richard Cordray.” 

Big Picture 

> • Headlines From Today’s Front Pages.

Washington Schedule 

> • Today’s Events In Washington.

Last Laughs 

> • Late Night Political Humor.

# DOI In The News 

## U.S. Senate Panel Advances Quest For Oil In Arctic Refuge. 

Reuters (11/15, Gardiner) reports that oil drilling in the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge “moved a step closer to reality on Wednesday after the US Senate energy and natural resources panel voted 13-10 to open part of the reserve coveted by conservationists.” Alaska Sen. Lisa Murkowski (R), a supporter of the measure and Chair of the Senate Energy and Natural Resources Committee, which has jurisdiction on the issue, “says drilling in the refuge is needed to provide jobs and boost the country’s resource base,” adding that drilling on the reserve will be done “the right way.” The AP (11/15, Daly) reports that “opening the remote refuge to oil and gas drilling is a longtime Republican priority.” It quotes Murkowski saying that allowing drilling on the refuge “will help keep energy affordable, saving families and businesses money every time they pay for fuel — essentially an energy tax cut.” Bloomberg News (11/15, Dlouhy) reports that “the estimated $1.1 billion in federal revenue it will generate over the next decade offsets proposed tax cuts, binding it to the Republicans’ high-priority overhaul effort and setting it up to pass the Senate on a simple majority vote.” The Houston Chronicle (11/15, Dlouhy) reports drilling could provide a new source of oil for the Trans Alaska Pipeline System, helping to sustain its economic viability as production on the North Slope declines. However, it is not clear if energy companies are eager to move into the Arctic. The high cost of operations in the remote region discourage drilling as cheap shale projects in Texas and North Dakota provide a surge of oil. The Alaska Dispatch News (11/15, Herz) reports Alaska would get half the proceeds from the federal leasing program, which the CBO esstimates could total $1.1 billion over the next decade. The Washington Examiner (11/15, Siegel) reports a number of Democratic amendments to the bill failed, as Sen. Maria Cantwell challenged the purpose and process of the legislation. Cantwell said, “It really does turn regular order on its head. ... We are being asked to consider legislation that is different than previous bills [that tried to allow drilling in ANWR], and has not been subject to single hearing. At its core, the [bill] would change current law and turn the refuge into a petroleum reserve.” However, Murkowski said, “When [the refuge] was created, it specifically said this area right here [the 1002 area] is recognized for its potential and if Congress authorizes it, the coastal plane can be developed for oil and gas. We don’t change the purpose for which ANWR itself was created.” The Huffington Post (11/15, D'Angelo) reports Sen. Bernie Sanders said future generations will look at the hearings and say “what world was the United States Senate living in” as it pushed for fossil fuel development “at a time of devastating damage done by climate change.” Sanders said, “You’re talking about raising a billion dollars here. ... I’m talking about the United States government spending hundreds of billions of dollars repairing damage, which, to a significant degree, not totally, had to do with climate change. And the scientists tell us the worst is yet to come.” E&E Publishing (11/15), E&E Publishing (11/15), E&E Publishing (11/15), Natural Gas Intelligence (11/15, Passut), Courthouse News (11/15, Buchman), and KTUU-TV Anchorage (AK) Anchorage, AK (11/15, Polk) also provided coverage. 

## Trophies From Elephant Hunts In Zimbabwe Were Banned In The U.S. Trump Just Reversed That. 

The Washington Post (11/15, Fears, Eilperin) reports the Trump Administration reversed an import ban on the remains of elephants legally hunted in Zimbabwe and Zambia. The Post adds that African elephants are listed as threatened under the Endangered Species Act. The US Fish and Wildlife Service previously determined that Zimbabwe “had failed to prove that its management of elephants enhanced the population.” In its new statement, the agency “did not specify what had changed in that country.” The move follows Interior Secretary Zinke’s establishment of an International Wildlife Conservation Council to advise him on how to increase Americans’ public awareness of conservation, wildlife enforcement and the “economic benefits that result from U.S. citizens traveling abroad to hunt.” The Hill (11/15, Cama) reports that the FWS “said it has determined that hunting African elephants in Zimbabwe and Zambia ‘will enhance the survival of the species in the wild,’ which is the standard by which officials judge whether to allow imports of parts – known as trophies – of the animals.” An FWS spokesman said in a statement late Wednesday, “Legal, well-regulated sport hunting as part of a sound management program can benefit the conservation of certain species by providing incentives to local communities to conserve the species and by putting much-needed revenue back into conservation.” Also reporting are the Washington Examiner (11/15, Siciliano), CNN International (11/15, Wallace), Newsweek (11/15, Meza), the Huffington Post (11/15, D'Angelo), ABC News (11/15, Ebbs), WIMS-AM South Shore (IN) South Shore, IN (11/15), UPI (11/16, Downs), and Gizmodo (11/15, McKay). 

## This Group Thinks Trump Hasn’t Done Enough To Unravel Environmental Rules. 

Here’s Its Wish List. The Washington Post (11/15, Eilperin, Dennis) reports that at a private meeting last week sponsored by the Heartland Institute, activists were “giddy” about “much of what the Trump administration had done to roll back Obama-era environmental regulations,” but also “grumpy” that “it wasn’t nearly enough.” The article notes that while Interior Deputy Secretary David Bernhardt could not “make the meeting in person,” Interior energy policy counselor Vincent DeVito did speak to the gathering. Asked this week why DeVito had chosen to address the group, Interior spokeswoman Heather Swift said in an email, “The summit was an opportunity to communicate the progress the department has made on energy and restoring multiple-use and access to federal lands, as well as share ideas and perspectives on how to achieve energy dominance.” The Post continues that “the institute’s scorecard on energy issues, Swift added, reflected that Interior ‘is making incredible progress on restoring traditional multiple uses and access to public lands and toward cutting costly and job-killing regulations on responsible energy development.’” 

## New Outdoor Advisory Panel Draws Mixed Reviews. 

The Twin Falls (ID) Times-News (11/15, Barker) reports that “representatives of outdoor recreation and conservation groups see both potential and peril” in Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke’s new “Made in America” recreation advisory committee. For instance, Sandra Mitchell of the Idaho Recreation Council “embraced the idea and said the committee could help ensure all user groups, both motorized and non-motorized, are treated equally.” On the other hand, “Paul Sanford, national director of recreation policy for the Wilderness Society at Washington, D.C., said he doesn’t object to the committee, but doesn’t want it to be overpopulated with people who represent recreational vehicles and motorized recreation.” 

## Secretary Zinke Questions His Department’s Loyalty (VIDEO). 

Newsy (11/15, Miller) reports that Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke is “at odds with his own department about loyalty to the Trump administration.” According to the article, “since taking over the department, Zinke has restructured many of the senior positions,” and “a handful of career officials have resigned over these changes.” Bureau Of Indian Affairs 

## Gaming Panel Approves Tribe’s Plan For Casino Near Omaha. 

The AP (11/15, Funk, Press) reports that the National Indian Gaming Commission has “again approved the Ponca Tribe of Nebraska’s plan to build a casino near Omaha, but after a decade of court hearings, the project’s future remains uncertain.” The commission’s decision “this week came nearly 10 years after it first approved the proposed casino in Carter Lake, Iowa.” Ponca Tribal Chairman Larry Wright Jr. lauded “the latest decision because building the casino would give the tribe significant new resources to help its members.” Additional coverage was provided by the Omaha (NE) World-Herald (11/16, Duggan, Moring). 

## Blackfeet Tribal Members In Federal Court Over Water Rights. 

KRTV-TV Great Falls, MT (11/15, DeMarco) reports that “members of the Blackfeet tribe were in federal court in Great Falls on Tuesday requesting legal ownership of tribal natural resources.” In October 2015, “enrolled members of the Blackfeet Tribe filed a complaint against the Bureau of Indian Affairs and the Secretary of the Interior.” Judge John Johnston has “granted an extension in the case so the enrolled members of the Blackfeet Tribe can find a lawyer to help represent them on the complaint.” 

## Leech Lake Band Seeks To Recover 11,000 Acres Of “Allotted Lands” In The Chip. 

The Walker (MN) Pilot-Independent (11/15, DeBoer) reports that “an error by the Bureau of Indian Affairs back in the 1940s or 1950s resulted in about 11,000 acres of ‘allotted lands’ that rightly belonged to the Leech Lake Band of Ojibwe, being wrongly transferred to the Chippewa National Forest.” For the last “two to three years, the Leech Lake Band has been working to get the allotted acres transferred back to Band ownership through ‘secretarial transfers.’” 

## Nooksack Can’t Get Second Look At Toss Of Funding Suit. 

Law360 (11/15, Westney) reports that “a Washington federal judge rejected a bid Tuesday to reconsider his dismissal of a lawsuit by the Nooksack Indian Tribe’s purported council that claimed the Bureau of Indian Affairs wrongly refused funding to the tribe, saying the dismissal appropriately deferred to the agency’s finding that the council wasn’t allowed to bring the case.” 

## Enviros Urge 9th Circ. To Revive Wind Farm Challenge. 

Law360 (11/15, Westney) reports that “a conservation group has asked the Ninth Circuit to overturn a lower court decision tossing claims that the Bureau of Indian Affairs violated environmental law in approving a lease between a wind farm developer and a California tribe, saying the agency failed to do enough to protect golden eagles and other birds.” 

# Bureau Of Indian Education 

## Oregon Lawmakers Demand Answers From Interior On Chemawa. 

KUOW-FM Seattle (11/15, Manning) reports that “the six Democrats in Oregon’s congressional delegation released a letter Wednesday pressing a top official in the Interior Department to answer questions about the Chemawa Indian School in Salem.” The letter “comes in response to a series of stories from OPB that found health, safety and academic problems at the school. Staff have also complained to OPB that administrators would retaliate against anyone who raised concerns about how the school was managed.” The letter specifies four “areas it wants Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary for Indian Affairs John Tahsuda to look into: student safety and health, academic failings and high enrollment fluctuations, whistleblower protections, and overall transparency in decision making.” 

# Bureau Of Land Management 

## Three Years After Nevada Ranch Standoff, Bundy Federal Trial Begins In Las Vegas. 

The Washington Post (11/15, Sottile) reports that “more than three years after Nevada rancher Cliven Bundy and hundreds of militiamen faced off with federal law enforcement officers who had repossessed Bundy’s cattle, the 71-year-old is finally seeing his battle reach a courtroom.” Bundy; “two of his sons, Ryan and Ammon; and militia leader Ryan Payne are facing federal trial here on charges of conspiracy to commit an offense against the United States, conspiracy to impede and injure a federal officer, and extortion, among other charges that, if they result in convictions, could lead to life sentences.” According to the article, “prosecutors argued in opening statements this week that the standoff was an attack on the government; attorneys representing the Bundys say the gathering was an exercise of the family’s right to protest.” The AP (11/15, Ritter) reports that Ryan Bundy “told a federal jury on Wednesday he believes protesters and self-styled militia members saved his life when they arrived in April 2014 after government agents used dogs and stun guns against his family members ahead of a gunpoint showdown that ended a cattle roundup.” Bundy, “who is serving as his own lawyer in the trial in Las Vegas, spent more than an hour speaking with a projected image of his wife and eight children on the courtroom screen.” Bundy”told his family history, declared his belief in states’ rights over limited federal government, and professed his love of family, the land, God, Americans, liberty and freedom.” Also reporting are the AP (11/15, Ritter), Reuters (11/15, Smith), and the Daily Mail (11/15, Miller)/ 

## Here’s Why Cadiz Company Says It’s Taking ‘a Little Pause’ From Its Desert Water Project. 

The San Bernardino (CA) Sun (11/15, Steinberg) reports that after recently receiving “the long-sought federal approval for its massive desert water project, Scott Slater, Cadiz president and CEO, said it’s time for the project to ‘slow down’ a bit.” Slater explained, “We are going to take a little pause…and double our effort to allow people to understand this project. We believe people should support an innovative project like ours.” However, “one environmentalist who has studied and followed the project for years, said pausing at this point strikes an odd note.” David Lamfrom, California Desert and National Wildlife Programs director with the National Parks Conservation Association, “said he believes the pause is really because the California Lands Commission has recently surfaced as a possible stumbling block to the project.” But “Cadiz downplays that notion.” 

## BLM Seeking Public Feedback On Proposal To Expand Research Into Cosmic Rays. 

KSTU-TV Salt Lake City (11/15, Steinbrecher) reports that the Bureau of Land Management seeks input “from the public on a proposal that would quadruple the size of an international scientific study happening near Delta.” According to the article, “using clusters of telescopes and surface detectors on the ground, researchers from the University of Utah and around the world are studying cosmic rays, particularly a phenomenon called the ‘Oh-My-God Particle.’” Researchers propose “to quadruple the size of the project to 750,000 acres, which would allow them to place more detectors on the ground.” The article says that “many of the detectors would go on BLM land, and the Millard County Commission is concerned that will mean less public land is available for other uses like grazing, recreation or economic development.” 

# Bureau Of Reclamation Walden Hydro Bill Would Lower Farmers’ Power Costs. 

The Ripon Advance (11/15) reports that Rep. Greg Walden “on Friday introduced the Klamath Infrastructure Improvement Act, legislation that would serve Klamath County irrigators needing affordable water rates.” H.R. 4329 would “amend the Klamath Basin Water Supply Enhancement Act of 2000 and would bring Klamath Basin hydropower costs in line with those for Bureau of Reclamation projects in other Pacific Northwest areas.” Walden said, “We have 1,000 farms in Klamath County. We have 650,000 acres of farmland in the county. Combined crop and livestock sales annually reach approximately $200 million. Agriculture is essential not only to the lifeblood of Klamath County, and frankly to our entire district.” 

## Timeline Moved Up On Irrigation Pipeline Project; Southwest Bend Piping Project To Begin Around The End Of The Year. 

The Bend (OR) Bulletin (11/16, Hamway) reports that “after talk of major delays last week, a project that would replace a section of canal near the southern edge of Bend with a 3,000-foot irrigation pipeline is back on track to begin around the end of the year.” Craig Horrell, general manager of Central Oregon Irrigation District, “said a $5 million piping project is expected to break ground in December or January, pending the results of a federal environmental analysis.” Edna Rey-Vizgirdas, spokeswoman for the Bureau of Reclamation, said, “We’re trying to accommodate their timeline.” 

# Bureau Of Safety And Environmental Enforcement 

## BSEE Director Discusses Gulf Of Mexico E&P Opportunities At Deepwater Operations. 

Offshore Magazine (11/15) reports that at the Deepwater Operations Conference & Exhibition, BSEE director Scott Angelle emphasized the importance of deepwater Gulf of Mexico E&P. During his keynote presentation, Angelle said, “The offshore oil and gas industry has demonstrated that when faced with challenges in deepwater whether market-based or technology, it continues to innovate and accelerate. ... BSEE must work to ensure that the outer continental shelf is attractive for investment and that all operations are conducted safely and are environmentally sustainable.” World Oil (11/15) reports conference director David Paganie said, “Director Angelle’s remarks at Deepwater Operations were an encouraging reminder that offshore oil and gas has advocates in Washington that seek to galvanize the industry in this challenging market.” 

## About 75,000 Barrels Per Day Of Gulf Oil Output Still Shut After Shell Fire. 

Reuters (11/15, Sims) reports a combined 75,206 bpd of oil and 215,122 mcfd of natural gas production remain offline at four platforms in the Gulf of Mexico in the wake of a fire on Shell’s Enchilada platform. The BSEE said production has been shut in fro Shell’s Enchilada, Salsa and Augers platforms, along with Hess’ Baldpate platform and Conger field. Shell said a plan to repair the damage caused by the fire is underway, while Hess is helping the oil major determine when production can resume. 

# Fish And Wildlife Service 

## New Medicine Lake Blind Wheelchair Accessible. 

The Bozeman (MT) Daily Chronicle (11/14) reports that a new accessible blind was dedicated in Ducks Unlimited volunteer Pat Nolan’s honor in Medicine Lake National Wildlife Refuge. According to the article, “construction of the blind was led by DU volunteer Steve Cunningham, and completed by two sons and five grandsons of Nolan’s, with assistance from refuge staff.” Sean Lofgren, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service project leader at Medicine Lake, “said the blind will be used for hunting, wildlife observation and wildlife photography.” National Park Service 

## Public Comment Period On Raising Fees At 17 National Parks Closing Soon. 

KPAX-TV Missoula, MT (11/15, Miller) reports that the comment period for a proposal to raise fees at 17 popular national parks “will be closing in just about a week.” Due to concerns that the 30-day comment period is not enough time, Sen. Steve Daines on Wednesday “sent a letter to the acting director of the National Park Service asking for an extension of the public comment period.” A spokesman with the National Park Service “says the 30-day comment period isn’t unusual.” 

## Why You May Not Have That Lifetime National Parks Pass You Ordered Yet. 

WSB-TV Atlanta (11/15, Johnson) reports that senior citizens can expect their lifetime passes to national parks to be mailed out “sometime in the next 30 days, according to the AARP.” The National Park Service had “said that seniors rushing to beat a steep price increase on lifetime passes created a logjam so severe that it delayed the processing of the requests.” 

## Backers Hope Route 66 ‘Historic Trail’ Designation Can Drive Tourism. 

Cronkite News (11/15, Windes) reports that lawmakers are considering “a bill that would put Route 66 on the road to becoming a National Historic Trail.” The bill, “heard Wednesday by a House Natural Resources subcommittee, would put the more-than-2,400-mile road under the care of the National Park Service, returning signage to the road and letting it appear on maps as a historic road, among other changes.” 

## U.S. Steel Dumps More Toxic Chromium Near Lake Michigan, Faces Lawsuit. 

The Chicago Tribune (11/14, Hawthorne) reports that “six months after U.S. Steel dumped a plume of toxic metal into a Lake Michigan tributary, the company quietly reported another spill at the same northwest Indiana plant and asked state environmental regulators to keep it secret, according to newly released documents.” According to the article, “the 56.7 pounds of chromium released in late October by the company’s Midwest Plant was 89 percent higher than its water pollution permit allows over 24 hours, U.S. Steel revealed in a letter sent to the Indiana Department of Environmental Management.” The Northwest Indiana Post-Tribune (11/16, Lavalley) reports that officials with the Indiana Dunes National Lakeshore and Indiana American Water Company said they weren’t told about the October leak. Bruce Rowe, public information officer and supervisory ranger in charge at the national lakeshore, said, “Our chief of resource management contacted IDEM (Wednesday) morning to learn more about this, and is going to contact other agencies. We obviously want to protect our resources and our visitors just like that spill six months ago, so we’re taking this very seriously and looking into it.” 

## Glacier Park Visitation Up In October. 

The Flathead (MT) Beacon (11/15) reports that “monthly visitation in Glacier National Park grew once again in October after a dip due to wildfires.” According to the National Park Service, “an estimated 84,000 people visited the park last month, roughly 9,000 more people than a year ago.” 

## Graffiti In Active Volcano At Death Valley Erased By Park Service. 

The Las Vegas Review-Journal (11/15, Brean) reports that “National Park Service employees had to roll out about 600 feet of hose to erase the latest graffiti at Death Valley.” In late October, unidentified “vandals scratched large letters and symbols into the mud bottom of Ubehebe Crater, at the northern end of the national park about 180 miles northwest of Las Vegas.” After receiving “complaints from visitors about the graffiti, the park dispatched a water tanker and team of seven park employees to the crater Nov. 7.” 

# Office Of Insular Affairs 

## Wildlife Agencies Meet On Guam To Discuss Brown Tree Snakes. 

The AP (11/15) reports that “wildlife agencies are meeting this week on Guam to provide updates on numerous projects targeting the invasive brown tree snake, which has proved detrimental to Guam’s native bird population.” The meetings will focus on “increased inspections, awareness programs and effective baiting methods.” The article notes that “approximately $2.8 million from the Office of Insular Affairs is anticipated to carry out the brown tree snake eradication and control projects for the fiscal year.” 

# Office Of Surface Mining 

## Omar’s Pine Creek 2 Mine Receives Award. 

The Williamson (WV) Daily News (11/15) reports that “Arch Coal’s Coal-Mac LLC Pine Creek 2 Surface Mine, located in Omar, received the Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement 2017 Excellence in Surface Coal Mining Reclamation Award.” The award was presented at the National Mining Association’s awards ceremony in Washington, D.C. on Nov. 6. The mine was recognized for “the development and use of multiple techniques to control threats to water quality, such as selenium pollution, total dissolved solids and conductivity.” 

# US Geological Survey 

## USGS: Uranium Has Been Found Near Big Spring. 

The Midland (TX) Reporter-Telegram (11/16, Hawes) reports that the U.S. Geological Survey announced the discovery of uranium in West Texas this week. The USGS “released preliminary information about the discovery northwest of Big Spring.” According to the article, “the uranium itself is part of a new mineral called finchite, named after longtime USGS uranium scientist Warren Finch.” 

## Aviat Networks Awarded $3.0 Million Project With USGS. 

Reuters (11/15) reports that Aviat Networks Inc. has been awarded a $3.0 million project with the U.S. Geological Survey. The new system is “to be used by earthquake science center to transport geophysical, seismographic data, security video to/from various sites.” 

## Former Oklahoma Seismologist Testifies In Earthquake Lawsuit. 

The AP (11/15) reports that former Oklahoma seismologist Austin Holland, who said he was “pressured by an official at the University of Oklahoma to not link the state’s surge in earthquakes to oil and gas production” gave sworn testimony in a lawsuit filed by residents against oil companies for a 2011 earthquake. Accord to the lawsuit, the earthquake that affected Kansas, Arkansas, Tennessee allegedly caused the residents to sustain damages. Holland testified that he was reprimanded for assisting in publishing a journal article on how to handle man-made earthquakes. 

# Opinion Pieces 

## Has Congress Already Forgotten Our Last Oil Spill Disaster? 

In an op-ed for The Hill (11/15, Super), David A. Super, a professor of law at Georgetown Law, criticizes the proposed SECURE American Energy Act (H.R. 4239). The legislation “would transfer to states the authority to authorize oil and gas drilling on public lands,” but it would not “provide states with any resources to perform this work, which currently costs the Bureau of Land Management well over $100 million a year.” Super claims that “the legislation’s only real effect would be to tie the hands of future Congresses that might wish to reassert the balance between extractive, other economic, recreational, and environmental interests that historically has guided our natural resources policy.” 

## We’re Not Paying Our Fair Share To Visit National Parks. 

In an op-ed for The Hill (11/15, WatkinsOpinion Contributor —), Tate Watkins, a research fellow at the Property and Environment Research Center, defends the Interior Department’s proposal to raise fees at 17 popular national parks. Watkins argues that “if our parks, forests, and wilderness areas are truly national treasures, then outdoor recreationists should have no qualms paying to enjoy — and support — them.” But Watkins also suggests that “managers should have flexibility to set pricing structures that work best for each site—whether that includes peak-season fees, annual passes, day rates, or surcharges for visitors from abroad.” 

## Additional Reading. 

Park Fee Increase Prices Out Families. Jackson Hole (WY) News & Guide (11/15, Iobst). 

Fees Just Part Of Park Solution. Jackson Hole (WY) News & Guide (11/15). 

Accessing Our National Parks Should Not Be A Privilege Afforded Only To The Privileged. 

Bend (OR) Source (11/15). 

Wrong Path On National Park Fees. Concord (NH) Monitor (11/15). 

Veterans Service & Conservation Corps: Career Pathways Through Continued Service. 

Huffington Post (11/15). 

We Need Responsible Energy Development On Public Lands. Montana Standard (11/15, Nyman, Rogers). 

Guest Commentary: Trump Administration Shuns Voices Behind Local Groundwork. 

Aspen (CO) Times (11/15, Newman). 

Thomas Mitchell: Constitution Stretched To The Breaking Point. Elko (NV) Daily Free Press (11/15, Mitchell). 

A Ray Of Hope For American Shad. Narrowsburg (NY) River Reporter. 

Progress In The World’s Fight To Save Elephants, Rhinos, Pangolins And Sharks . . . Backsliding In The Fight To End Trophy Hunting By Americans. Huffington Post (11/15, Greene). 

# Top National News 

## Trump Touts Success Of His Asia Trip, Says It Shows “America Is Back.” 

To widespread media skepticism, the President yesterday celebrated his accomplishments in Asia, claiming credit for crafting a unified front against North Korea and for trade deals worth billions of dollars. Two major network newscasts reported Trump’s remarks. In its story about “what he sees as” the trip’s “accomplishments,” NBC Nightly News (11/15, story 3, 1:30, Welker) said Trump “took a victory lap,” and described him as “clearly frustrated by headlines that suggested he didn’t secure any concrete results.” The CBS Evening News (11/15, story 8, 0:45, Mason), meanwhile, quipped that it “appeared for a time” that Trump’s “account of his Asia trip...might run as long as the 12-day journey itself.” In his speech, USA Today (11/15, Jackson, Korte) reports, “Trump outlined his efforts in a country-by-country rundown,” and “some commentators on Twitter likened” his “methodical recitation to someone showing slides of their summer vacation.” More favorable toward Trump was the Washington Times (11/15, Miller) account, which quotes him as saying, “My fellow citizens, America is back and the future has never looked brighter. ... I swore that in every decision and with every action I would put the best interest of the American people first. ... That is exactly what I have done.” Politico (11/15, Lima), however, says Trump touted the success of his trip “despite a dearth of marquee victories for the White House,” which “seemingly did not draw any major diplomatic concessions from the nations it visited on major issues like North Korea’s nuclear efforts, new trade pacts or human rights.” Townhall (11/15, O'Brien) reported that “trade and commerce” were the issues Trump “spent the most time discussing, clearly enthused by his recent meetings.” But Bloomberg News (11/15, Wayne, Pettypiece) says the trade deals touted by Trump “aren’t contracts and might not be fulfilled. And while the president railed against what he regards as systemic flaws in US trade relationships, he neither publicly requested or received specific assurances by foreign leaders to reduce imbalances or address issues such as market access by US companies and intellectual property theft.” The Washington Post (11/15, Gearan) casts Trump as chafing “at criticism that he did not notch any major accomplishments,” and USA Today (11/15, Jackson, Korte) says he “gave the speech at the White House in the wake of criticism of the trip by some analysts and political foes.” The Los Angeles Times (11/15, Bennett) similarly indicates Trump’s “message was undermined by the lack of significant accomplishments he could point to from the trip,” and the New York Times (11/15, Qiu) runs a “Fact Check” analysis under the headline “Trump’s ‘Tremendous Success’ Abroad Is Overstated.” Another New York Times (11/15, Shear) story similarly describes the trip as having brought “few concrete achievements,” and adds “Trump made no significant announcements in a speech that he had hyped on Twitter as ‘a major statement’ to be delivered upon his return.” The Times goes on to report that “critics say Mr. Trump has abandoned the United States’ status as a global superpower by retreating from trade agreements and backing out of the Paris climate accord.” Trump’s “political rivals accuse him of straining relationships with allies in NATO and elsewhere while embracing despots.” The Wall Street Journal (11/15, Ballhaus) runs a similar story this morning. Jonah Goldberg of National Review said on Fox News’ Special Report 

(11/15),”This was no major announcement. He had teased this as a major announcement – tune in for major announcement. There was no major announcement. At the same time, I’m not sure it matters. The press was mad about it. I’m not sure that matters.” Goldberg added that “it sounded like a successful trip. It looked like a successful trip. He came back and talked about it like a successful trip and just because the reporters in the room didn’t like it, well, welcome to the era of Trump. Reporters in the room often don’t like what he does, but he was reaching out to his audience beyond that and I thought it was probably going to be effective for him.” 

Trump’s Search For Water Bottle Featured Across News Coverage. A significant topic across the coverage of the President’s remarks were the two occasions in which he paused to drink water. The Hill (11/15, Fabian), for example, said “the speech might be remembered for Trump’s two awkward-looking water breaks,” and the New York Times (11/15, Qiu) that the President was “deterred only by a struggle to quench his thirst.” While the subject is mentioned in virtually every story on Trump’s remarks, the CBS Evening News (11/15, story 8, 0:45, Mason) devoted all but one sentence of its 45-second report to explain that the President’s “mouth got so dry he had to stop and search for a bottle of water to quench his thirst. A few minutes later, it happened again.” Added CBS, “You’ll recall Mr. Trump, on the campaign trail, mocked then-rival Marco Rubio for taking a water break as he delivered the GOP response to a state of the union address.” Rubio weighed in on Twitter, writing, “Needs work on his form. Has to be done in one single motion, and eyes should never leave the camera, but not bad for his first time.” The AP (11/15, Thomas) also indicates that “during the 2016 campaign, Trump frequently skewered Rubio...for needing to quench his thirst during speeches,” and USA Today (11/15, Estepa) reports, “Sometimes, you really just need a drink of water. Sen. Marco Rubio knows this.” 

Trump: Xi Agrees “Freeze-For-Freeze” Is Unacceptable. The AP (11/15, Pennington) reports Trump said “the US and China agree that North Korea cannot just freeze its nuclear weapons program in exchange for concessions and that it must eliminate its arsenal.” Trump “was restating a long-standing US position but suggested that China now concurred with Washington that a ‘freeze-for-freeze’ agreement was unacceptable.” Said Trump, “President Xi recognizes that a nuclear North Korea is a grave threat to China, and we agreed that we would not accept a so-called freeze for freeze agreement, like those that have consistently failed in the past.” 

Following Trump Visit, China To Send High-Level Envoy To North Korea. The AP (11/14, Bodeen) reports that “following...Trump’s visit to Beijing, China said Wednesday that it would send a high-level special envoy to North Korea amid an extended chill in relations between the neighbors over Pyongyang’s nuclear weapons and missile programs.” Song Tao, “the head of China’s ruling Communist Party’s International Department, will travel to Pyongyang on Friday to report on outcomes of the party’s national congress held last month, the official Xinhua News Agency said.” The Washington Post (11/15, Denyer) says “it is not clear whether this trip has anything to do with” Trump’s visit, as “Beijing routinely undertakes such trips to fellow Communist states.” 

North Korean Editorial: Trump Should Be Sentenced To Death For Kim Insults. The Washington Post (11/15, Erickson) reports “the ever-escalating war of words between the United States and North Korea got dialed up to 11 on Wednesday, when an editorial in a state-run newspaper called...Trump a coward who deserved the death penalty.” The Post adds that “Rodong Sinmun, a mouthpiece for Kim’s ruling Workers’ Party of Korea, took aim at Trump,” writing, “The worst crime for which he can never be pardoned is that he dared [to] malignantly hurt the dignity of the supreme leadership. ... He should know that he is just a hideous criminal sentenced to death by the Korean people.” 

Murphy: Restraining Trump’s Nuclear Authority Won’t Signal Weakness To North Korea. 

Sen. Chris Murphy, a member of the Foreign Relations Committee, said on CNN’s Situation Room (11/15) that he’s not “alone” in being concerned about President Trump’s ability to pre-emptively launch nuclear weapons at North Korea, arguing that “it’s not a coincidence that the first major hearing that we’ve had on the decision-making process regarding the launch of a nuclear weapon happens at the exact same moment that President Trump is suggesting through his Twitter feed that he might use a nuclear weapon against North Korea without consulting with Congress.” When asked if restraining the President’s nuclear authority signals a “weakness to regimes like North Korea,” Murphy said that’s “nonsense,” adding that no president can engage in a pre-emptive military strike without authorization from Congress. Murphy said he’s “introduced legislation that would clarify that.” In an editorial headlined “The President’s Power To Launch Nukes,” the New York Times (11/15) says “Trump and North Korea have prompted Congress to do something it hasn’t done in more than four decades: formally consider changes to the law that gives American presidents the sole authority to launch nuclear weapons.” The US President “is engaged in a dangerous game of chicken with Kim Jong-un,” and while “the Republican-led Congress, which has shown few signs of pushing back against presidential powers, may end up taking no action...there are hard questions to be addressed, especially now that the American people have been alerted to the scope and potential peril of Mr. Trump’s powers.” Sen. Jeanne Shaheen said on CNN’s The Lead (11/15), “I thought this was a great opportunity to try and further engage Russia in what’s going on with North Korea. One of the things we need to do with North Korea, which is a rogue nation, is to get the international community in support of further sanctions, of keeping pressure on the North Korean regime and Russia is a key player there and he missed that opportunity to engage Putin on that issue.” Shaheen added, “We need to build an international coalition as President Obama did on Iran to get people united in working and keeping the pressure on North Korea. What we don’t need is inconsistent messages on Twitter that...are open to interpretation by Kim Jong-un, who is a very irrational and radical leader. So I think that’s the kind of consistent, stable diplomacy that we need to continue and I think, unfortunately, this administration has fallen short in that score.” UCLA Basketball Players Thank Trump For Intervening With China To Win Their Release. 

NBC Nightly News (11/15, story 5, 1:50, Holt) reported three UCLA men’s basketball players are back in the US “after being caught up in a legal drama in China which led...Trump to intervene when they were caught shoplifting and faced up to a decade in prison.” Trump was shown saying, “What they did was unfortunate, and you know you’re talking about very long prison sentences. They do not play games.” The White House says Trump’s words with Chinese President Xi Jinping, “along with diplomatic efforts by the State Department, led to a reduction in charges.” On Wednesday morning, Trump tweeted, “Do you think the three UCLA basketball players will say, ‘thank you, President Trump’ they were headed for ten years in jail.” The CBS Evening News (11/15, story 7, 0:35, Mason) reported the three players apologized on Wednesday for shoplifting, and ABC World News Tonight (11/15, story 8, 1:15, Muir) that the three thanked Trump for his efforts. Fox News’ Special Report (11/15) showed footage of the players thanking the President and the US government. USA Today (11/15, Peter), Reuters (11/15, Carroll), the Washington Post (11/15, Bontemps), Politico (11/15, Lima, Nelson) and the Los Angeles Times (11/15, Bolch), among other news outlets, also report the story. 

In Japan, Bannon Warns Against China’s Plans To “Dominate” World Economy. The Washington Times (11/15, Taylor) reports that Steve Bannon “railed against China’s ‘hegemonic’ ambitions Wednesday, telling a crowd in Tokyo that the West and its Asian allies must wake up to communist Beijing’s plan to ‘dominate’ the world economy.” Bannon said “American ‘elites’ have long believed a ‘false premise’ that China would become more of a liberal democracy and a free market economy as its economy grew,” yet “the exact opposite has happened. ... The Chinese leadership had no intention ever of joining the rules-based international order. They had their own plan, and they executed that plan very rigorously.” 

Trump Takes To Twitter To Blast “Naïve (Or Dumb)” NYTimes, CNN. The Washington Times (11/15, Miller) reports that earlier Wednesday, Trump “took to Twitter with a vengeance...to blast his critics in the news media.” Trump “labeled CNN as ‘Loser!’ and skewered the ‘failing’ New York Times for being ‘naive (or dumb)’ on foreign policy.” Trump said of the Times, “The failing @nytimes hates the fact that I have developed a great relationship with World leaders like Xi Jinping, President of China. ... They should realize that these relationships are a good thing, not a bad thing. The U.S. is being respected again. Watch Trade!” Politico (11/15, Lima) says “it was unclear what specific Times article the president was responding to,” though “earlier Wednesday Times foreign affairs columnist Thomas Friedman penned a piece criticizing” him “for allowing himself to be manipulated by Xi on trade, an issue the president has made a priority in his overseas diplomatic talks.” Under the headline “China Could Sell Trump the Brooklyn Bridge,” Friedman writes in the New York Times (11/14, Friedman) that “Xi has been brilliant at playing Trump, plying him with flattery and short-term trade concessions and deflecting him from the real structural trade imbalances with China.” 

## As House Prepares To Vote On Tax Bill, Johnson Says He Opposes Senate Version. 

With the House set to vote on its tax cut plan Thursday, President Trump tweeted Wednesday evening, “Big vote tomorrow in the House. Tax cuts are getting close!” However, coverage on the network news broadcasts and in print this morning focuses on the Senate bill, suggesting the measure could be in trouble after Sen. Ron Johnson said he will not support it and Sen. Susan Collins said the decision to include a repeal of the ACA’s individual mandate was a mistake. Anthony Mason reported on The CBS Evening News (11/15, story 2, 2:40, Mason) that House Republicans “are set to pass a massive package of corporate and individual tax cuts” Thursday. Chief congressional correspondent Nancy Cordes added that the House plan would “eliminate the deduction for state and local taxes,” which “has angered a handful of GOP House members from high-tax states, but there probably aren’t enough of them to prevent passage in the House.” However, much of the media coverage highlights Johnson’s opposition to the Senate bill as well as the inclusion of the individual mandate repeal and Collins’ criticism of that decision. Johnson told the Wall Street Journal (11/15, Hughes) Wednesday that he opposes the Senate Republican tax bill, arguing that the measure benefits corporations more than other businesses. Johnson told the Journal, “If they can pass it without me, let them. ... I’m not going to vote for this tax package.” The Washington Times (11/15, Sherfinski) reports that in a statement Johnson “said...that it’s important to strike a proper competitive balance between larger corporations and smaller ‘pass-through’ companies that file their taxes as individuals and are often taxed at levels higher than the 35 percent corporate rate.” Said Johnson, “These businesses truly are the engines of innovation and job creation throughout our economy, and they should not be left behind. ... Unfortunately, neither the House nor Senate bill provide fair treatment, so I do not support either in their current versions.” The Washington Examiner (11/15, Lawler) says Johnson is “the first Republican senator to express opposition to the GOP tax bill,” and the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (11/15, Glauber) says his opposition “could prove important since Republicans have only 52 seats in the Senate.” 

Rove: Differences Between House, Senate Bills Can Be Used To Craft A Better Final Version. Karl Rove writes in the Wall Street Journal (11/15) that while much has been made of the differences between the House and Senate bills, their goals are similar, and the areas where they differ can be used to craft a better final bill. Rove adds that Republicans, and President Trump in particular, need to persuade Americans that the corporate tax changes will create jobs and raise incomes, which will help the economy grow. 

## Democrats Introduce Articles Of Impeachment Against Trump. 

In what the AP (11/15, Freking) describes as “a long-shot effort that stands little chance in the Republican-led House,” six House Democrats have introduced articles of impeachment against President Trump, “accusing him of obstruction of justice and other offenses.” The AP adds that “the large majority of Democrats seem intent on having nothing to do with the effort either as lawmakers await the results of special counsel Robert Mueller’s investigation,” and “Democratic leaders have argued that the impeachment campaign riles up Trump’s GOP base, a critical bloc in next year’s midterm elections.” The Washington Times (11/15, Dinan) reports that the Democrats, led by Rep. Steve Cohen, say Trump “has obstructed justice in his dealings with then-FBI Director James Comey, and his businesses are taking money that is illegal under two separate parts of the Constitution.” In addition they say Trump “has undermined the judiciary by using his pardon powers on former Sheriff Joe Arpaio, and that he’s undermined the press corps covering him by berating news outlets or calling them ‘fake.’” 

Podesta: Trump Wants To Run The Justice System “Like A Banana Republic.” In an op-ed for the Washington Post (11/15), John Podesta, who served as chair of Hillary Clinton’s 2016 presidential campaign, writes that reports that “Sessions — in an apparent effort to appease Trump — is considering appointing a special counsel to investigate Clinton’s role in approving the purchase of Uranium One” is proof that Trump “wants to upend 230 years of constitutional history and principle to run the U.S. justice system like a banana republic, or perhaps more aptly like what now passes for the rule of law in the country he aspires to emulate, the Russian Federation.” Podesta argues that “authoritarians and tyrants” use “the instruments of state power, particularly the wrath of the prosecutor, to rain opprobrium down upon citizens with whom they disagree.” 

Sessions To Be Interviewed By House Intelligence Committee. Reuters (11/15) reports a DOJ spokesman said Wednesday that Attorney General Sessions will be interviewed in a closed door session with the House intelligence committee on Nov. 30. The committee is one of several, “along with the Department of Justice’s special counsel Robert Mueller, investigating alleged Russian interference in the 2016 presidential campaign and potential collusion by President Donald Trump’s campaign.” 

Firm Mentioned In Trump Dossier Linked To Internet Pirates. McClatchy (11/15, Hall) reports that the co-called Trump Dossier “got a lot right,” but “the accusation that a company called XBT and its US subsidiary Webzilla hacked the emails of Democratic Party leaders” is “still vexing investigators.” XBT and Webzilla “have long been the targets of lawyers who fight Internet piracy.” McClatchy adds that is review of “more than 1,000 pages of court documents” found that “Webzilla employees were linked through litigation and regulatory filings to two companies accused of large-scale copyright violations involving Hollywood movies and subscription pornography.” The Daily Caller (11/15, Ross) cites “a source familiar” with Glenn Simpson’s testimony to the House Intelligence Committee who said the Fusion GPS founder “acknowledged...that he did not verify information in the uncorroborated and salacious dossier before briefing reporters on its contents during the campaign.” Bloomberg News (11/15, House) reports that “people familiar with his testimony” say Simpson “defended [the dossier’s] credibility” during his testimony. 

Judge Calls For Greater Transparency In Legal Fight Over Fusion Bank Records. 

Politico (11/15, Gerstein) reports that following “a brief hearing in US District Court in Washington, Judge Richard Leon” told lawyers involved in the legal fight between the House Intelligence Committee and Fusion GPS that the dispute over the committee’s demands for Fusion’s bank records “is of major public significance and needs to be handled with greater transparency.” Leon said, “If there were ever a case where [public access] is in the best interest of all concerned, this is one. ... This is not the kind of case, in my judgment, where there should be much if any time behind the [closed] door, unless it’s necessary. … I think the arguments can be made in open court on the nonconfidential, discrete legal questions.” 

Schiff: Parts Of Trump Dossier Have Turned Out To Be True. In an interview with the Wall Street Journal (11/15, Tau) Wednesday, Rep. Adam Schiff, the ranking Democrat on the house intelligence Committee rejected attempts by Republicans to discredit the Dossier, arguing that its claims that Russia sought to help elect Trump proved to be true. 

## Bonn Conference Trying To Make Headway Despite US Stance On Paris Deal. 

The New York Times (11/15, Friedman, Plumer) reports that “few at United Nations climate talks” in Bonn, Germany “are openly showing” any anger they feel at the United States for rejecting the Paris climate change agreement. In private negotiating sessions, career State Department staffers are “making headway on technical issues to strengthen the Paris accord”; many of them “are familiar players in these negotiations and are continuing to pursue longstanding objectives, like greater transparency on emissions cuts from developing countries.” George David Banks, a senior energy adviser to President Trump, said that because the US has “the best negotiating team in the world,” the “other delegations are very supportive of making sure the US delegation is as involved as possible.” However, the State Department official originally leading the talks, Thomas A. Shannon Jr., canceled at the last minute, “leaving the negotiations largely in the hands of lower-ranking colleagues,” and Banks “refers most questions to the State Department.” In contrast, Fox News’ Special Report (11/15) reported that at the conference, “the US is taking heavy criticism over President Trump’s decision to withdraw from the Paris Climate Accord.” One American energy executive “infuriated participants when he said it’s naïve to suggest poor countries can escape poverty through wind and solar when fossil fuel remains a cheaper...alternative.” That remark came as scientists at the conference say they’re anticipating a 2 percent rise in global CO2 emissions for 2017, with Corinne Le Quere of the University of East Anglia shown saying that the CO2 increase is “driven primarily by what’s happening in China with the renewed use of coal.” Meanwhile, a separate American delegation expressed support for the Accord. Washington Gov. Jay Inslee was shown saying, “Donald Trump cannot stop us. This is the most important thing we wanted the world to know.” 

# Editorial Wrap-Up New York Times. 

“Mr. Trump Casts A Shadow Over The AT&T-Time Warner Deal.” The New York Times (11/15) editorializes that “President Trump’s hostility toward the news media, and CNN in particular, has been so extreme that it is calling into doubt whether his appointees at the Department of Justice can fairly evaluate a merger involving the cable news channel’s parent company, Time Warner, and AT&T.” The Justice Department’s Antitrust Division “has reportedly asked AT&T to sell the Turner Broadcasting division of Time Warner, a unit that includes CNN, or sell its DirecTV unit to gain approval for the deal.” While the Times notes that “on its face, this is not an unreasonable request,” it argues that “given Mr. Trump’s repeated attacks on CNN, there’s ample cause to suspect that the Justice Department scheme is a ploy to force a sale of the news organization to owners that will strip away its editorial independence and turn it into a house organ of the Trump administration.” 

“The Senate Questions The President’s Power To Launch Nukes.” In an editorial, the New York Times (11/15) says President Trump and North Korea “have prompted Congress to do something it hasn’t done in more than four decades: formally consider changes to the law that gives American presidents the sole authority to launch nuclear weapons.” The US President “us engaged in a dangerous game of chicken with Kim Jong-un,” and while “the Republican-led Congress, which has shown few signs of pushing back against presidential powers, may end up taking no action...there are hard questions to be addressed, especially now that the American people have been alerted to the scope and potential peril of Mr. Trump’s powers.” 

## Washington Post. 

“Republicans Turn Their Irresponsible Tax Bill Into Monumentally Unwise Social Policy.” A Washington Post (11/15) editorial says by including a provision to repeal the ACA’s individual mandate in their tax bill, Senate Republicans “remade their tax bill into an Obamacare repeal bill.” The provision, the Post argues, “turned a fiscally irresponsible tax plan into a monumentally unwise piece of social policy that would do much more than widen the deficit.” The Post argues that if Republicans believe repealing the mandate “is good health-care policy, they should seek to pass it on its own, with hearings, markups and debate.” 

“What Happens In Zimbabwe Without Mugabe In Power?” In an editorial, the Washington Post (11/15) writes that the “prospects don’t look good” for Zimbabwe. President Mugabe’s “horrific record” did not inspire the coup and Mnangagwa has “a history of brutal behavior” and could lose a fair vote to the opposition leader. However, the Post warns that “a genuine popular mandate” is needed for reforms to revive the economy. The Post calls on the US and other Western governments to “insist on a prompt restoration of constitutional order and a firm commitment by the military to holding internationally supervised elections next year.” The Post concludes this is “a fragile opportunity to rescue” Zimbabwe, should the situation “not lead to the installation of another strongman.” 

“Don’t Be Relieved Only Five People Died In California. Be Enraged.” The Washington Post (11/15) editorializes that observers should not be comforted by the fact that “only” five people died in Tuesday’s shooting at an elementary school. The Post asserts that “what ought to be foremost is rage at the refusal of lawmakers to take action that might prevent these needless tragedies — and a renewed demand for sensible gun-control regulations, including a ban on assault weapons and comprehensive background checks with better enforcement.” 

## Wall Street Journal. 

“The Appeal Of Mandate Repeal.” A Wall Street Journal (11/15) editorial praises Senate Republicans’ decision to include a repeal of the ACA’s individual mandate in their tax bill and argues that Democrats should explain, why, if ACA insurance provides quality coverage at affordable prices, do people have to be coerced into buying it. 

“Zimbabwe’s Coup By Any Other Name.” The Wall Street Journal (11/15) warns in an editorial that Zimbabwe’s coup is motivated by a political power struggle within the ruling Zanu-PF party and not the suffering of the country’s people. The Journal predicts the coup will not lead to improvements, which would require a total overhaul of its governance. 

“Adios, Richard Cordray.” In an editorial, the Wall Street Journal (11/15, Journal) expresses pleasure at Consumer Financial Protection Bureau director Richard Cordray’s exit, writing that he overstepped the mandate of CFPB and went after industries unpopular with progressives. 

# Big Picture 

## Headlines From Today’s Front Pages. 

Wall Street Journal: 

Activist Peltz Narrowly Wins P&G Board Seat, New Count Shows Republican Sen. Ron Johnson Opposes GOP Senate Tax Package Zimbabwe Army’s Power Grab Could Mark End Of Mugabe’s Reign A Specter Is Haunting Europe’s Recovery: Zombie Companies 

New York Times: 

Tax Bill Thrown Into Uncertainty As First GOP Senator Comes Out Against It Four More Women Describe Advances By Roy Moore As Campaign Pushes Back With Mugabe’s Era Ending In Zimbabwe, A Warning Echoes In Africa A Growing Call To Limit Lawyers’ Donations To Prosecutors Deception And Ruses Fill The Toolkit Of Investigators Used By Weinstein Leonardo Da Vinci Painting Sells For $450.3 Million, Shattering Auction Highs 

Washington Post: 

Two More Women Accuse Moore Of Pursuing Them Senate Tax Bill Hits New Snags Zimbabwe Awaits Fate Of Detained Mugabe Crack Of Gunfire Led To School’s Lockdown Museum Of The Bible Is Strictly By The Book 

Financial Times: 

Zimbabwe Army Seizes Power And Holds Mugabe Africa’s Richest Woman Removed As Head Of Angola State Oil Group Russia And Venezuela Agree $3bn Debt Restructuring 

Washington Times: 

Catch-And-Release Of Illegals Restarted In Texas, Border Patrol Agents Say Democrats Introduce Articles Of Impeachment Against Trump Newest Museum In Nation’s Capital Will ‘Tell The Biography Of The Bible’ Zimbabweans Stunned, Uncertain After Military’s ‘Soft Coup’ Of Mugabe Liberals Finally Hold Bill Clinton Accountable For Sexual Misconduct Kurds Seek More Help From Trump Administration To Keep Peace With Iraq 

Story Lineup From Last Night’s Network News: 

ABC: Roy Moore Sexual Misconduct Allegations; Tax Reform Plan-Obamacare Repeal; California Shooting; Tampa-Possible Serial Killer; Congress-Sexual Harassment Policy; Weather Forecast; Zimbabwe-Military Coup; US College Basketball Players Return; Loose Mental Patient Captured; Pilot-Carrying Gun On Board; St. Louis-Car Crash; New Planet Discovery; Adopted Sibling Discovery. 

CBS: Roy Moore Sexual Misconduct Allegations; Tax Reform Plan-Obamacare Repeal; California Shooting; Texas Church Shooting-Gunman; Loose Mental Patient Captured; Zimbabwe-Military Coup; US College Basketball Players Return; Trump-Asia Tour Wrap Up; Ford-SUV Carbon Monoxide Leak; Wilbert Jones Freed; NBA News; Pope-Lamborghini Donation; Da Vinci Painting Auction. 

NBC: Roy Moore Sexual Misconduct Allegations; California Shooting; Trump-Asia Tour Wrap Up; Tax Reform Plan-Obamacare Repeal; US College Basketball Players Return; Tampa-Possible Serial Killer; Schools-Cyber Security; St. Louis-Fire; Amazon-Grocery Business; Treasury Secretary-Dollar Bills Signature; Meteor Sighting; Pope-Lamborghini Donation; Charity Turned Hobby. 

Network TV At A Glance: 

Roy Moore Sexual Misconduct Allegations – 9 minutes, 30 seconds California Shooting – 7 minutes Tax Reform Plan-Obamacare Repeal – 6 minutes, 5 seconds US College Basketball Players Return – 3 minutes, 40 seconds 

Story Lineup From This Morning’s Radio News Broadcasts: 

ABC: Roy Moore Sexual Misconduct Allegations; Trump-Asia Tour Wrap Up; Baltimore Police Officer Shot; California Shooting. 

CBS: Roy Moore Sexual Misconduct Allegations; Tax Reform Plan-Obamacare Repeal; Trump-Asia Tour Wrap Up; Loose Mental Patient Captured; US College Basketball Players Return; Da Vinci Painting Auction. 

FOX: Roy Moore Sexual Misconduct Allegations; Trump-Asia Tour Wrap Up; Baltimore Police Officer Shot; Charles Manson Ill. 

NPR: Roy Moore Sexual Misconduct Allegations; Obamacare Enrollment Rate; Trump Administration-Immigration Policies; Zimbabwe-Military Coup. 

# Washington Schedule 

## Today’s Events In Washington. 

White House: 

PRESIDENT TRUMP — Gives remarks to the House Republican Conference. VICE PRESIDENT PENCE — No public schedule announced. 

US Senate: 10:00 AM Senate Foreign Relations Committee top secret briefing on new counterterrorism guidance – Closed / Top Secret / Sensitive Compartmented Information briefing on ‘New Counterterrorism Guidance’, given by State Department Coordinator for Counterterrorism Nathan Sales, and Assistant Legal Advisor Steven Fabry; and Joint Staff Deputy Director for Special Operations and Counterterrorism Maj. Gen. Albert Elton II Location: U.S. Capitol Visitor Center, SVC-217, Washington, DC http://foreign.senate.gov/ 10:00 AM Senate Judiciary Committee Executive Business Meeting – Executive Business Meeting, with agenda including the nominations of Leonard Steven Grasz to be U.S. Circuit Judge for the Eighth Circuit; Terry Doughty to be U.S. District Judge for the Western District of Louisiana; Terry Fitzgerald Moorer to be U.S. District Judge for the Southern District of Alabama; Mark Saalfield Norris Sr. to be U.S. District Judge for the Western District of Tennessee; Scott Brady to be U.S. Attorney for the Western District of Pennsylvania; and Andrew Lelling to be U.S. Attorney for the District of Massachusetts; as well as ‘S. 2070, Kevin and Avonte’s Law’ Location: Rm 226, Dirksen Senate Office Bldg, Washington, DC http://judiciary.senate.gov/ 10:00 AM Senate Transportation subcommittee hearing on USCG readiness – Oceans, Atmosphere, Fisheries, and Coast Guard Subcommittee hearing on ‘Coast Guard Readiness: How Far Can We Stretch Our Nation’s Only Multi-Mission, Military Force?’, with testimony from U.S. Coast Guard Commandant Adm. Paul Zukunft; Etta Kuzakin of King Cove, AK; Michigan Technological University’s Dr Guy Meadows; and Mississippi Emergency Management Agency’s Lee Smithson Location: Russell Senate Office Building, Rm 253, Washington, DC http://commerce.senate.gov https://twitter.com/SenateCommerce 10:00 AM Senate Armed Services Committee nominations hearing – Nominations hearing considers John Rood to be Under Secretary of Defense for Policy; and Randall Schriver to be Assistant Secretary of Defense for Asian and Pacific Affairs Location: Dirksen Senate Office Building, Rm G50, Washington, DC http://armed-services.senate.gov/ 11:30 AM MomsRising and other groups visit Capitol Hill to talk about how they are ‘thankful for the immigrants in their lives’ – MomsRising, SEIU, Herd on the Hill, Mormon Women for Ethical Governance, UndocuBlack, and allies visit Capitol Hill to ‘tell Members of Congress why they’re thankful for the immigrants in their lives’ and ‘remind them that the diversity of our nation is what makes us strong, innovative and prosperous – and we’re thankful to live in the United States of America together’. MomsRising’s Donna Norton, SEIU’s Jaime Contreras, Mormon Women for Ethical Governance’s Sharlee Glenn, and DACA recipient and UndocuBlack member Cindy Kolade hold press conference with Democratic Sen. Chris Van Hollen, before advocates deliver Thanksgiving-themed cookies shaped like turkeys to dozens of senators and representatives along with petitions signed by 25,000 people in support of the DREAM Act and protecting Temporary Protected Status recipients Location: U.S. Capitol, S-115, Washington, DC momsrising.org https://twitter.com/MomsRising 2:00 PM Closed Briefing: Intelligence Matters Location: Rm 219, Hart Senate Office Bldg, Washington, DC http://intelligence.senate.gov 

US House: 9:00 AM House expected to vote on Tax Cuts and Jobs Act – House of Representatives meets for legislative business, with agenda expected to include completion of consideration of ‘H.R. 1, The Tax Cuts and Jobs Act’ * The Tax Cuts and Jobs Act would reduce the number of different tax bands, increase the standard deduction, eliminate the Alternative Minimum Tax, largely eliminate the State and Local Tax Deduction, convert corporate tax into a flat rate, and increase the estate tax exemption Location: Washington, DC http://www.house.gov/ 10:00 AM House Commerce subcommittee hearing on 5G – Communications and Technology Subcommittee hearing on ‘The Race to 5G and its Potential to Revolutionize American Competitiveness’, with testimony from Wireless Infrastructure Association President and CEO Jonathan Adelstein; The Brattle Group Principal Dr Coleman Bazelon; Indiana Biosciences Research Institute CEO David Broecker; 5G Americas President Chris Pearson; and City of San Jose Chief Innovation Officer Shireen Santosham Location: Rayburn House Office Building, Rm 2123, Washington, DC http://energycommerce.house.gov/ https://twitter.com/HouseCommerce 1:30 PM Dem Rep. Earl Blumenauer hosts forum on ‘A Call for Reform: Fix the Farm Bill’ – Democratic Rep. Earl Blumenauer hosts forum on ‘A Call for Reform: Fix the Farm Bill’, focusing on ‘the need to create a more visionary, equitable, and cost-effective Farm Bill’. ‘The Omnivore’s Dilemma’ and ‘In Defense of Food’ author Michael Pollan keynotes, followed by a panel discussion featuring ASPCA Farm Animal Campaign Content Director Suzanne McMillan, Environmental Working Group Vice President of Government Affairs Scott Faber, Food Policy Action Executive Director Monica Mills, Humane Society of the United States CEO and President Wayne Pacelle, Taxpayers for Common Sense President Ryan Alexander, and U.S. PIRG Food and Farming Program Director Bill Wenzel * Ahead of the forum, Rep. Blumenauer holds a press conference with Pollan, Mills, Pacelle, Alexander, Democratic Reps. Don Beyer, Rosa DeLauro, Chellie Pingree, and Peter Welch, and Union of Concerned Scientists Food & Environment Program Director Ricardo Salvador Location: U.S. Capitol, Washington, DC blumenauer.house.gov https://twitter.com/repblumenauer 

Other: 

# Last Laughs 

## Late Night Political Humor. 

Jimmy Kimmel: “The President hasn’t weighed in on the biggest story of the week, Roy Moore. Donald Trump’s in a real bind. On one hand, he doesn’t want to support an accused pedophile for Senate. His other hand is grabbing a woman by the...you know what I’m saying.” James Corden: “Trump said he accomplished a lot of things on his trip, but North Korea seems to have a different opinion, because yesterday, North Korea state media published a scathing review of President Trump’s trip to Asia. They said Trump displayed his ‘true colors as an old lunatic, mean trickster, and human reject.’ Now you listen here, North Korea, we may not like him either, but that is the President of the United States you’re accurately describing.” 

James Corden: “I can’t believe Trump and Kim Jong-Un are still going back and forth like this. Like the two of them have literally become the characters in every rom-com you have ever seen. They’ve written insulting each other so much you just know they’ll actually end up together. You know what I mean? They’re like, ‘You are an old trickster.’ ‘You a crazy rocket man.’ ‘Yeah, well you, you’re the love of my life.’” 

Trevor Noah: [Referring to the military coup in Zimbabwe] “I think the news is being dramatic here, all right. You don’t overthrow a 93-year-old man, okay? You just don’t wake him up. The generals are probably in the room like, ‘We’re now in power, we rule.’ ‘Shhhh!’ You know how it’s funny how back in the day, Americans would have seen this news and been like, ‘Man, I’m glad that doesn’t happen here.’ And now people are like, ‘Man, wish that happened here.’” 

Trevor Noah: “Oh, and speaking of African dictators, President Trump is back from Asia.” 

Trevor Noah: “Let’s move on to Congress, because people say that Congress never gets anything done. But yesterday, they got more nothing done than I have ever seen before. First, Attorney General Jeff Sessions flew in from the North Pole to explain to the House Judiciary Committee why his memory is perfect. Except when it comes to remembering Russians, he couldn’t remember them at all.” 

Trevor Noah: “Out of nowhere, it came out that the Senate Republican tax plan will now include repealing Obamacare’s individual mandate, which would mean 13 million fewer Americans having health insurance. You’ve got to admit, this is super sneaky. Like, they couldn’t repeal Obamacare outright, so now they’re just going to try to Bill Cosby it. You know, they just slip it into something else so America wakes up the next day like, ‘Wait, what the hell happened to our healthcare?’ ‘What healthcare? You don’t have a plan, and now you’re going to die.’” 

Jimmy Fallon: “I read that Congress is debating if President Trump should have the power to order a nuclear strike. I guess right now, it’s an even split between ‘no’ and ‘hell no.’ ... They have a good plan, though. They’re going to replace the red button on his desk with the one that orders office supplies from Staples.” 

Seth Meyers: “Former White House Communications Director Anthony Scaramucci is reportedly in talks with publishers about a book chronicling his tenure in the White House. A book? You were there for ten days. At best, you could release a fortune cookie.” 

Seth Meyers: “North Korean state media today called President Trump a coward for canceling his visit to the Demilitarized Zone during his trip to Asia. Listen, President Trump is a lot of things, but a coward is just one of those things.” 

Seth Meyers: “Republicans are reportedly hoping that President Trump will pressure Alabama senator candidate Roy Moore to drop out of the race. Roy Moore still might not drop out, but at least he’ll know what it’s like to be pressured by an older man.”  

> Copyright 2017 by Bulletin Intelligence LLC Reproduction or redistribution without permission prohibited. Content is drawn from thousands of newspapers, national magazines, national and local

television programs, radio broadcasts, social-media platforms and additional forms of open-source data. Sources for Bulletin Intelligence audience-size estimates include Scarborough, GfK MRI, comScore, Nielsen, and the Audit Bureau of Circulation. Data from and access to third party social media platforms, including but not limited to Facebook, Twitter, Instagram and others, is subject to the respective platform’s terms of use. Services that include Factiva content are governed by Factiva’s terms of use. Services including embedded Tweets are also subject to Twitter for Website's information and privacy policies. The Department of the Interior News Briefing is published five days a week by Bulletin Intelligence, which creates custom briefings for government and corporate leaders. We can be found on the Web at BulletinIntelligence.com, or called at (703) 483-6100. The Fish and Wildlife Service announced that elephants legally hunted in Zimbabwe and Zambia between 2016 and 2018 can be imported into the United States. Pxhere 

Elephants legally killed in Zimbabwe and Zambia between 2016 and 2018 now can be imported into the United States, under a new Fish and Wildlife Service ruling that pleases hunters but could alarm some wildlife conservation advocates. Revisiting a policy that's already sparked one court battle, the agency announced the new open door to certain imports at an African Wildlife Consultative Forum co-hosted by Tanzania and Safari Club International Foundation. "Legal, well-regulated sport hunting as part of a sound management program can benefit the conservation of certain species by providing incentives to local communities to conserve the species and by putting much-needed revenue back into conservation," said FWS in a statement today. The policy covers elephants hunted in Zimbabwe between Jan. 21, 2016, and Dec. 31, 2018, as well as elephants hunted in Zambia in calendar years 2016, 2017 and 2018. "These positive findings for Zimbabwe and Zambia demonstrate that the Fish and Wildlife Service recognizes that hunting is beneficial to wildlife and that these range countries know how to manage their elephant populations," SCI Foundation President Paul Babaz said in a statement. FWS's decision comes as the Interior Department is reaching out to the hunting community in a number of ways ( Greenwire , Nov. 8). Last week, Interior announced the establishment of the International Wildlife Conservation Council. The advisory group is supposed to raise public awareness of the "benefits that result from U.S. citizens traveling to foreign nations to engage in hunting," according to Interior. The panel must include U.S. hunters actively engaged in "hunting conservation," as well as senior representatives of the "firearms or ammunition manufacturing industry" and the "archery and/or hunting sports industry," according to Interior's guidance. Elephants in Zimbabwe are listed as threatened under the Endangered Species Act. The Obama administration's FWS banned elephant importation from Zimbabwe in 2014. Zambia's elephants are listed as threatened. WILDLIFE 

# Elephant trophy imports get green light again 

> Michael Doyle, E&E News reporter
> Published: Wednesday, November 15, 2017

AN E&E NEWS PUBLICATION 

## 202-676-7675 cell On Nov 15, 2017, at 10:20 PM, Wainman, Barbara <barbara wainman@fws.gov> wrote: Barbara W. Wainman Assistant Director, External Affairs US Fish and Wildlife Service (202) 208-5256 (office) (571) 471-4159 (cell) 

## ---------- Forwarded message ----------From: Parramore, Laury <laury parramore@fws.gov> Date: Wed, Nov 15, 2017 at 1:59 PM Subject: From Greenwire -- WILDLIFE: Elephant trophy imports get green light again To: Barbara Wainman <barbara wainman@fws.gov>, Matthew Huggler <matthew huggler@fws.gov>, Gavin Shire <gavin shire@fws.gov>, "Hoover, Craig" <Craig Hoover@fws.gov>, Tim Vannorman <tim vannorman@fws.gov>, Danielle Kessler <danielle kessler@fws.gov> Cc: Amy Jonach <amy jonach@fws.gov>, Christina Meister <christina meister@fws.gov>, Lisa Jones <lisa m jones@fws.gov> The Fish and Wildlife Service announced that elephants legally hunted in Zimbabwe and Zambia between 2016 and 2018 can be imported into the United States. Pxhere 

Elephants legally killed in Zimbabwe and Zambia between 2016 and 2018 now can be imported into the United States, under a new Fish and Wildlife Service ruling that pleases hunters but could alarm some wildlife conservation advocates. Revisiting a policy that's already sparked one court battle, the agency announced the new open door to certain imports at an African Wildlife Consultative Forum co-hosted by Tanzania and Safari Club International Foundation. "Legal, well-regulated sport hunting as part of a sound management program can benefit the conservation of certain species by providing incentives to local communities to conserve the species and by putting much-needed revenue back into conservation," said FWS in a statement today. The policy covers elephants hunted in Zimbabwe between Jan. 21, 2016, and Dec. 31, 2018, as well as elephants hunted in Zambia in calendar years 2016, 2017 and 2018. "These positive findings for Zimbabwe and Zambia demonstrate that the Fish and Wildlife Service recognizes that hunting is beneficial to wildlife and that these range countries know how to manage their elephant populations," SCI Foundation President Paul Babaz said in a statement. FWS's decision comes as the Interior Department is reaching out to the hunting community in a number of ways ( Greenwire , Nov. 8). Last week, Interior announced the establishment of the International Wildlife Conservation Council. The advisory group is supposed to raise public awareness of the "benefits that result from U.S. citizens traveling to foreign nations to engage in hunting," according to Interior. The panel must include U.S. hunters actively engaged in "hunting conservation," as well as senior representatives of the "firearms or ammunition manufacturing industry" and the "archery and/or hunting sports industry," according to Interior's guidance. Elephants in Zimbabwe are listed as threatened under the Endangered Species Act. The Obama administration's FWS banned elephant importation from Zimbabwe in 2014. Zambia's elephants are listed as threatened. The agency said in 2014 it could not make the finding that the sport-killing of the Zimbabwe elephants "would enhance survival of the species," as the law requires. Officials stated, in part, that the population of Zimbabwe elephants fell to 47,366 in 2013, down from 84,416 in 2007. Safari Club International and the National Rifle Association filed suit to challenge the Zimbabwe ban. The groups contended FWS failed to support its ban with necessary findings and also challenged the agency's data on population and poaching. A trial judge largely sided with FWS. "The agency rationally determined that the status of the elephant population and Zimbabwe's management of the population did not warrant" a finding to allow imports, U.S. District Judge Royce Lamberth ruled last year. A three-judge panel of the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit heard oral arguments in the case last month ( Greenwire , Oct. 13). 

Want to read more stories like this? 

Click here to start a free trial to E&E -- the best way to track policy and markets. 

ABOUT GREENWIRE – THE LEADER IN ENERGY AND ENVIRONMENT NEWS 

Greenwire is written and produced by the staff of E&E News. The one-stop source for those who need to stay on top of all of today's major energy and environmental action with an average of more than 20 stories a day, Greenwire covers the complete spectrum, from electricity industry restructuring to Clean Air Act litigation to public lands management. Greenwire publishes daily at 1 p.m. 

E&E News 122 C Street NW 7th Floor Washington, DC 20001 Phone: 202-628-6500 Fax: 202-737-5299 www.eenews.net 

> All content is copyrighted and may not be reproduced or retransmitted without the express consent of Environment & Energy Publishing, LLC. Click here to view our privacy policy.

# Conversation Contents 

## U.S. Department of the Interior News Briefing for Thursday, October 26, 2017 

# Bulletin Intelligence <Interior@bulletinintelligence.com> 

## From: Bulletin Intelligence <Interior@bulletinintelligence.com> 

## Sent: Thu Oct 26 2017 04:00:23 GMT-0600 (MDT) 

## To: <Interior@bulletinintelligence.com> 

## Subject: U.S. Department of the Interior News Briefing for Thursday, October 26, 2017  

> Mobile version and searchable archives available here. Please click here to subscribe.
> DATE: THURSDAY, OCTOBER 26, 2017 6:00 AM EDT

# Today's Table Of Contents 

DOI In The News 

• Casper (WY) Star-Tribune: Feds Outline Ways Policy Hampers Energy Development, A Longstanding Gripe In Wyoming. • Reuters: U.S. Offers Record Lease Sale In Alaska Reserve To Oil, Gas Drillers. • The Hill: No Mention Of Climate Change In Interior’s Draft Strategic Plan. • Washington Examiner: Nancy Pelosi Demands Probe Into Montana Firm’s ‘Highly Suspect’ Contract To Repair Puerto Rico. • Bloomberg News: Interior Department Proposes Doubling The Cost Of Visiting National Parks. • Los Angeles Times: Interior Department Clarifies, Says It Will Continue To Work On Delta Tunnels Project. • KSL-TV Salt Lake City: States Urge Revamp On Sage Grouse Management. • Alaska Journal of Commerce: Campaigns Continue To Remind Alaskan Ivory Products Are Legal. • Lafayette (LA) Daily Advertiser: New Attitude, New Hope For Struggling Energy Industry. • New York Post: Trump Asked About Changing Denali’s Name Back To Mt. McKinley. • Huffington Post: Ryan Zinke’s Silly Flag-Flying Ritual Violates Agency Rules. • U.S. News & World Report: Navajo Nation Lawmaker Implores Trump To Protect Monuments. • Law360: Enviros Sue DOI For Emails From Oil, Hunting Groups. • Reuters: U.S. Marine Sanctuary Oil Drilling Report Sent To Trump, Not Public. • Bloomberg News: This Land Is No Longer Your Land. • Grand Junction (CO) Daily Sentinel: Release Final Monuments Report Now. 

Bureau Of Indian Affairs • Navajo, Other Tribes Call Land-Use Bill A Step In The Right Direction. • 10th Circ. Wrongly Put Wind Farm Ruling On Hold, Tribe Says. • BIA Fatally Shoots Suspect On Standing Rock Reservation. 

Bureau Of Land Management 

• Loveland (CO) Reporter-Herald: Pawnee National Grassland Looking At Gas Well Plan. • Denver Post: Conservation Groups Challenge BLM Approval Of Drilling Plan In North Fork Valley. • Elko (NV) Daily Free Press: NV Geothermal Lease Auctions Total $78,444. • Salt Lake (UT) Tribune: Rebuild Planned For Utah’s Historic — And Hellish — Hole-in-the-Rock Road. 

Bureau Of Ocean Energy Management 

• Anglers’ NY Wind Farm Challenge Is Premature, Agency Says. 

Bureau Of Safety And Environmental Enforcement 

• Now Leading Offshore Safety Bureau, Angelle Promises To Be Industry ‘Partner’ On Federal Level. 

Fish And Wildlife Service 

• Kenai (AK) Peninsula Clarion: Fish And Wildlife To Reconsider Kenai Refuge Rules. • U.S. News & World Report: Reward Offered For Info On Wolf-Killing Poacher In Oregon. • KTVK-TV Phoenix: Chiricahua Leopard Frogs Released Into The Wild. • Alaska Public Radio Network: USFWS Designates Tuntutuliak Elder James Charles A “Conservation Hero”. • Washington Times: Head Of Ivory, Rhino Horn Smuggling Scheme Pleads Guilty. • New York Times: For An Endangered Animal, A Fire Or Hurricane Can Mean The End. 

National Park Service 

• WLUC-TV Marquette (MI): David Horne Selected As Superintendent Of Pictured Rocks National Lakeshore. • Waynesville (NC) Smoky Mountain News: EBCI And Smokies Work Toward Agreement For Plant Gathering In Park Boundaries. 

Office Of Insular Affairs 

• St. Thomas Source: Two Fed Supplemental Appropriations Are Good News For USVI. • Caribbean News Now!: Power Restoration Moves Forward In US Virgin Islands. • Seattle Times: Maryland Governor Sends National Guard To US Virgin Islands. • Seatrade Cruise News (UK): St. Thomas Expects 25 Cruise Calls In November. • WKNO-FM Memphis (TN): St. John Could Get Electricity Turned Back On, 6 Weeks After Hurricane Irma. • Japan Times: Abe And President Of Micronesia Affirm Importance Of Open Pacific. • Utne Reader: Too Sick To Go Home Too Poor To Get Better. • Honolulu Civil Beat (HI): The Story Of Micronesians Fighting America’s Wars. 

US Geological Survey 

• Associated Press: Study Offers More Evidence Linking Earthquakes To Wastewater Injection Wells. • U.S. News & World Report: USGS Reports 3 Small Earthquakes Recorded In Oklahoma. • Additional Reading. 

Top National News 

• NBC: Trump: Democrats’ Role In Russia Dossier Creation “A Disgrace.” • Corpus Christi (TX) Caller-Times: Trump Attends Harvey Recovery Briefing Before Dallas GOP Fundraising Event. • Fox Business: Trump: Tax Cuts Will Create “So Many Jobs.” • Reuters: Senate Panel Approves EPA Nominees Over Democrats’ Objections. • Wall Street Journal: WSJournal Analysis: Trump Team Seeks To Foster Economic Growth By Removing Regulations. • Daily Caller: EPA Prepares To Place Two-Year Delay On Methane Regulations. • E&E Publishing: Clean Power Plan Repeal Includes Plan To Alter Social Cost Of Carbon. • Reuters: EPA To Review Whether Clean Air, Water Laws Affect Energy Sector Jobs Losses. • Bloomberg News: EPA Chief Says He’s No Ally To Polluters. • Wall Street Journal: Author Likens Climate Change Debate To Acid Rain Scare Of 1970s-80s. 

Editorial Wrap-Up 

• New York Times. - “The Real Reason For Republicans’ Silence On Donald Trump.” - “The Last Thing Australia And Our Planet Need.” - “Scrapping MetroCards Isn’t Vital, But Any Subway Fix Will Do.” • Washington Post. - “Finally, A Healthcare Proposal That Actually Pays Off.” - “The Catalonian Crisis Is All Thanks To Two Inflexible Leaders.” - “Trump Crosses Another Line.” • Wall Street Journal. - “Democrats, Russians, And The FBI.” - “McConnell 1, Cordray 0.” - “Jeff Flake’s Public Service.” 

Big Picture 

• Headlines From Today’s Front Pages. 

Washington Schedule 

• Today’s Events In Washington. 

Last Laughs 

• Late Night Political Humor. 

# DOI In The News 

## Feds Outline Ways Policy Hampers Energy Development, A Longstanding Gripe In Wyoming. 

The Casper (WY) Star-Tribune (10/25, Richards) reports that in a report released Wednesday, the Interior Department identified “federal policies that impede energy development.” Some “key western issues its officers say may need reform” include “sage grouse management, the permitting of oil and gas wells by the BLM and a proposed end or limitation on self-bonding for coal companies from the Office of Surface Mining, Reclamation and Enforcement.” Kathleen Sgamma of the Western Energy Alliance “said the Interior report was a positive sign of what the agencies are doing to ease bureaucratic hurdles to energy exploration and production.” KATC-TV Lafayette, LA (10/25) reports that Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke said, “Developing our energy resources to grow our economy and protecting the environment are not mutually exclusive. However, while conducting the review outlined in the Executive Order, we found that several costly and burdensome regulations from the past threaten that balance by hampering the production or transmission of our domestic energy. Our public lands are meant to be managed for the benefit of the people. That means a multiple-use approach where appropriate and making sure that multiple-use includes energy development under reasonable regulations. Following President Trump’s leadership, Interior is fostering domestic energy production by streamlining permitting and revising and repealing Obama-era job killing regulations – all while doing so in an environmentally responsible way.” Additional coverage was provided by Law360 (10/25, Daniels). 

## U.S. Offers Record Lease Sale In Alaska Reserve To Oil, Gas Drillers. 

Reuters (10/25, Gardner) reports the Interior Department is planning to hold a lease sale on December 6 for 900 tracts in the National Petroleum Reserve-Alaska. The Alaska Dispatch News (10/25, DeMarban) reports the tracts contain 10.3 million acres, about half of the total reserve. The BLM said the size of the offering is the largest ever. Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke said, “(The) unprecedented sale in Alaska will help achieve our goal of American energy dominance.” Also reporting are the AP (10/26), the Alaska Native News (10/25, Ellis-Wouters), the Alaska Public Radio Network (10/25, Harball), KTUU-TV Anchorage (AK) Anchorage, AK (10/25, Sullivan), and KTOO-FM Juneau (AK) Juneau, AK (10/25, Harball). 

## No Mention Of Climate Change In Interior’s Draft Strategic Plan. 

The Hill (10/25, Cama) reports a “draft version” of the five-year strategic plan for the Interior Department “does not mention anything about climate change, including whether the agency plans to fight it or how it will adapt.” The draft “focuses heavily on plans to produce more fossil fuels and other forms of energy on public lands and the nation’s outer continental shelf.” Additional coverage was provided by the Washington Examiner (10/25, Siciliano, Seigel), the New York Daily News (10/25, Brennan) and the Union of Concerned Scientists (10/25). 

## Nancy Pelosi Demands Probe Into Montana Firm’s ‘Highly Suspect’ Contract To Repair Puerto Rico. 

The Washington Examiner (10/25, Siegel) reports House Democratic Leader Nancy Pelosi yesterday “demanded an investigation into how a small Montana-based firm with ties to Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke struck a $300 million deal to repair Puerto Rico’s shattered electricity grid.” Whitefish Energy agreed to a $300 million contract with PREPA “to rebuild 100 miles of power infrastructure across the island.” In a statement Pelosi said, “All Americans should be concerned about the highly suspect Whitefish contract and the circumstances under which it was negotiated. ... Democrats demand Congress and the appropriate Inspectors General exercise their oversight role to get to the bottom of this suspicious agreement and hold this administration accountable for its dangerous lack of transparency in spending taxpayer money.” The Washington Examiner (10/25, Siciliano) reports the Sierra Club also is “calling for probes of the contract in both the Senate and the House.” The Daily Caller (10/25, Bastasch) reports “Utah Republican Rep. Rob Bishop, chairman of the House Committee on Natural Resources, is heading to Puerto Rico this week to personally survey the desperate situation on the island.” Committee spokesman Parish Braden said, “The size and unknown details of this contract raises numerous questions.” 

San Juan Mayor Calls To ‘Void’ Contract Awarded To Tiny Montana Company. The Hill (10/25, Henry) reports San Juan Mayor Carmen Yulín Cruz said the contract is “alarming.” She told Yahoo News, “The contract should be voided right away and a proper process which is clear, transparent, legal, moral and ethical should take place.” 

## Interior Department Proposes Doubling The Cost Of Visiting National Parks. 

Bloomberg News (10/25, Traywick) reports that Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke “wants to more than double the cost of visiting 17 of the most popular U.S. national parks when demand for them is the highest.” Under the proposal, “visitors to the Grand Canyon, Zion, Yosemite, and 14 other national parks could be paying $70 during peak seasons instead of $30.” Zinke “said his plan will raise $70 million in much-needed revenue for the National Park Service, which already suffers from a multibillion-dollar maintenance backlog.” He sad in a statement, “The infrastructure of our national parks is aging and in need of renovation and restoration. Targeted fee increases at some of our most-visited parks will help ensure that they are protected and preserved in perpetuity.” U.S. News & World Report (10/25, Trimble) reports that the National Park Service “said a park-specific annual pass for any of the 17 parks would be available for $75, while the cost of the annual yearlong pass, which provides entrance to all federal lands, would remain $80.” However, “motorcycles and per person entrance fees could also see increases.” The San Francisco Chronicle (10/25, Alexander) reports that the plan is “meeting resistance from a number of Democrats, conservationists and social-justice advocates.” Opponents argue the proposal will “price out visitors and deny many the opportunity to experience the nation’s most coveted landmarks, from the Grand Canyon to Mount Denali to Old Faithful.” Critics also claimed that “the proposal would hit minority groups particularly hard.” Also reporting are Fox News (10/25), CNN (10/25, Park), NBC News (10/25), NPR (10/25, Wamsley), Fortune (10/25, Morris), USA Today (10/25), USA Today (10/25), CNN International (10/25), Newsweek (10/25, Dupuy), Money (10/25, Ducharme), Fortune (10/25), the Missoula Current (MT) (10/25, Kidston), the Bangor (ME) Daily News (10/25, Sambides), the Portland (ME) Press Herald (10/25, Miller), the Boston Globe (10/25, Fonseca), The Guardian (UK) (10/25, Press), the Independent (UK) (10/25, York), the Daily Mail (10/24), and The Week (10/25, Weber). 

ABC World News Tonight (10/25, story 12, 0:25, Muir) and NBC Nightly News (10/25, story 9, 0:30, Holt) also provided reports. 

## Interior Department Clarifies, Says It Will Continue To Work On Delta Tunnels Project. 

The Los Angeles Times (10/25, Boxall) reports that “after several hours of confusion over the Trump administration’s position on a massive water delivery project, the Interior Department said Wednesday it would continue to work with the state on California WaterFix.” California officials were “scratching their heads over a department statement that the Trump administration does not support the project, which the federal government has helped plan.” Russell Newell, the department’s deputy communications director, told the AP (10/25, Knickmeyer): “The Trump administration did not fund the project and chose to not move forward with it.” According to the article, “it was initially unclear whether Newell was reiterating the reclamation agency’s previous funding position or making a broader statement that the administration was withdrawing any participation in planning and environmental reviews.” In a statement released Wednesday afternoon, Interior said its position had not changed. The department said, “While the Department of the Interior shares the goals of the state of California to deliver water with more certainty, eliminating risks to the California water supply, and improving the environment, at this time, the Department under the current state proposal does not expect to participate in the construction or funding of the CA WaterFix. The Department and Reclamation will continue to work with the state and stakeholders as the project is further developed.” The San Francisco Chronicle (10/25, Lochhead) reports that Lisa Lien-Mager, a spokewoman for the tunnel project, said the late-Wednesday statement “confirms what the state and its water project partners already knew; while the federal government does not intend to fund the construction costs of the project they will continue working with the state and stakeholders to facilitate and permit WaterFix.” Also reporting are the Sacramento (CA) Bee (10/25, Kasler), the Vallejo (CA) Times Herald (10/25, Knickmeyer), the Ventura County (CA) Star (10/26, Kasler), and the Central Valley (CA) Business Times (10/25). 

## States Urge Revamp On Sage Grouse Management. 

KSL-TV Salt Lake City (10/25, O'Donoghue) reports that “leaders in Western states pressed their case in a congressional hearing Wednesday that management of the greater sage grouse is best carried out without federal interference.” Speakers “testified before the U.S. House Committee on Natural Resources, chaired by Rep. Rob Bishop, R-Utah, during an oversight hearing on ‘state-based management solutions’ to protect and restore the birds’ number.” 

Scientists Question Proposed Plans To Manage Sage Grouse. The Idaho Mountain Express (10/25, Moore) reports that “seventeen scientists involved in revisions of federal sage grouse-management plans throughout the West two years ago are warning Secretary of the Interior Ryan Zinke of potential harm to the species if the BLM follows through on a proposal to change those plans.” In a letter to Zinke, the scientists worte, “We are concerned that following many of the Reports’ recommendations will lead to an overall loss of sage-grouse habitat quantity and quality which in turn may result in additional population declines. We are concerned that the current focus on amending the [land-use plans] will detract from the critical task of building from those plans to realize enhanced conditions in currently designated priority and general habitats and stabilized or increasing sage-grouse populations.” 

Western Voices Are Ignored In Zinke’s Interior Department. In an op-ed for The Hill (10/25, O'Neill), Jayson O’Neill, deputy director of the Western Values Project, warns against “undoing BLM’s sage-grouse plans.” O’Neill writes that “instead of working to appease corporate donors and putting forth solutions that would benefit a few wealthy people, politicians in Washington should instead be working with folks on the ground to implement and build on the success of the 2015 sage-grouse plans.” He says that “Westerners are sick and tired of having Washington meddling in their business.” O’Neill urges Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke and Rep. Rob Bishop to “support their efforts to make sure the sagebrush landscape works for everyone out West.” 

## Campaigns Continue To Remind Alaskan Ivory Products Are Legal. 

The Alaska Journal of Commerce (10/25, Klouda) reports that “fossilized ivory and walrus ivory carvings created by Alaska Natives are the focus of a renewed public relations campaign to stress to other states that there is no ban on legally obtained Alaska ivory artifacts and art pieces.” The article says that “at the Alaska Federation of Natives convention in Anchorage in a recorded message played Oct. 19, Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke used part of his address to reassure delegates.” Zinke said, “On the policy side, we are protecting your right to sell walrus ivory. It is different from banned elephant ivory and it’s important to make that distinction.” 

## New Attitude, New Hope For Struggling Energy Industry. 

The Lafayette (LA) Daily Advertiser (10/25, Stickney) reports that Randal Luthi, president of the National Ocean Industries Association, “told a 2017 Louisiana Gulf Coast Oil and Gas Exposition audience Wednesday that the Trump administration has made important appointments and taken decisive, needed steps to reverse the perceived bias in Washington against fossil fuels.” According to Luthi, “Trump appointments like Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke and Bureau of Safety and Environment Enforcement Director Scott Angelle of Breaux Bridge, who spoke to LAGCOE on Tuesday, are working with the energy industry, not fighting it.” He said, “Personnel is policy.” 

## Trump Asked About Changing Denali’s Name Back To Mt. McKinley. 

The New York Post (10/25, Fredericks) reports that according to a story in Tuesday’s Alaska Dispatch News, President Trump “was so determined to reverse his predecessor’s legacy that he asked Alaska’s two senators,” Lisa Murkowski and Dan Sullivan, “if he should change the name of the US’ largest mountain back to Mt. McKinley from the Native American name it had been called for 10,000 years.” The Obama Administration “had changed the name to Denali – its name in the indigenous Athabascan language – in recognition of Native Americans’ heritage as the original residents of North America.” Sullivan said he and Murkowski “jumped over the desk, we said, ‘No! No! Don’t want to reverse that.’” 

## Ryan Zinke’s Silly Flag-Flying Ritual Violates Agency Rules. The Huffington Post (10/25, D'Angelo) reports that “a military tradition” Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke has “revived at Interior Department headquarters in Washington appears to violate the agency’s policy for displaying and flying flags.” The problem, according to the article, is the flag that is flown for deputy secretary David Bernhardt when Zinke isn’t in office. The article notes that “the Interior Department’s manual — specifically Part 310, Chapter 5 — spells out which flags are allowed to be flown outdoors.” That is, “At the Secretary’s direction, [the secretary’s flag] may be flown over DOI-controlled buildings in which the Secretary is present.” The deputy secretary’s ceremonial flag, however, “is for indoor display only, in the immediate office of the Deputy Secretary, and at official functions and ceremonies at which the Deputy Secretary is the principal speaker.” 

## Navajo Nation Lawmaker Implores Trump To Protect Monuments. 

The AP (10/26) reports that “in a television advertisement airing Thursday, a Navajo Nation lawmaker implores President Donald Trump to protect national monuments.” The 30-second spot “shows Davis Filfred walking in Bears Ears National Monument in southern Utah.” As the ad closes, Filfred says: “Mr. President. Not all monuments divide us. Some bring us together.” Filfred “tells The Associated Press the ad is his way of trying to get attention from officials he says haven’t listened to tribal concerns.” 

## Enviros Sue DOI For Emails From Oil, Hunting Groups. 

Law360 (10/25, Macagnone) reports that “an environmental group has alleged the Interior Department unlawfully held back communications it has had with oil and natural gas lobbying groups, suing the agency Monday to have it release emails and other documents related to its communications with the energy and hunting industries.” The Western Values Project, “which describes itself as advocating balanced energy development on public lands, claims the Interior Department has for months delayed complying with a Freedom of Information Act request for emails.” 

## U.S. Marine Sanctuary Oil Drilling Report Sent To Trump, Not Public. 

Reuters (10/25, Volcovici) reports Commerce Secretary Wilbur Ross sent a report to the White House on Wednesday including recommendations on whether to change the boundaries of 11 marine sanctuaries to allow for more oil and gas drilling. Commerce reviewed the sanctuaries, with more than 425 million acres of coral reefs, habitats and beaches, as part of the Administration’s move to open more areas to oil and gas drilling. The report was not made public, and oil industry executives say there is little desire for more drilling in the marine sanctuaries because of costs and public opposition. 

## This Land Is No Longer Your Land. 

Bloomberg News (10/25, Reel) reports that while the fight over national monuments is grabbing the most attention, the “disputed trails leading into the Crazy Mountains represent another front in the escalating battle over control of federal territory, and the fighting here is just as contentious as over the monuments.” 

## Release Final Monuments Report Now. 

In an op-ed for the Grand Junction (CO) Daily Sentinel (10/25, Gangloff), Deborah Gangloff, the president and CEO of Crow Canyon Archaeological Center in Cortez, raises concerns about the future of the national monuments as recommended in Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke’s report to President Trump. Gangloff argues that “opening these areas up to what the administration refers to as ‘traditional uses’ (i.e., mining, timbering, and grazing) would actually threaten the long-term economic well-being of surrounding communities.” From Gangloff’s point of view, “not to protect this rich and valuable connection to our shared American history that doubles as an economic engine is not only selfish and short-sighted, but robs people forever of their heritage.” 

# Bureau Of Indian Affairs Navajo, Other Tribes Call Land-Use Bill A Step In The Right Direction. 

Cronkite News (10/25, Windes) reports that “tribal leaders backed a House bill Wednesday that would give tribes the ability to control more of their land, instead of having to get federal approval for virtually any use.” The American Indian Empowerment Act would allow “tribes shift federally controlled trust land to ‘restricted fee land,’ a move that could save millions of dollars that tribes now spend on ‘burdensome regulation,’ while restoring a level of tribal sovereignty.” The article adds that “while they called the bill a step in the right direction, however, witnesses said they are concerned about ambiguities in the thin, three-page bill that ‘could allow state or local governments to implement property taxes on tribal land,’ among other issues.” However, “with slight changes, witnesses said at a hearing of House Natural Resources subcommittee, the bill would greatly benefit Indian Country.” 

## 10th Circ. Wrongly Put Wind Farm Ruling On Hold, Tribe Says. 

Law360 (10/25, Lidgett) reports that “the Osage Minerals Council told the Tenth Circuit Tuesday that it shouldn’t have stayed the mandate of a panel decision that said wind farm developers should have obtained a mineral lease from the Osage Nation and Bureau of Indian Affairs approval before starting surface construction for an Oklahoma wind farm.” 

## BIA Fatally Shoots Suspect On Standing Rock Reservation. 

The AP (10/25) reports that “the FBI says a suspect was shot dead after a confrontation with officers of the Bureau of Indian Affairs on the Standing Rock Indian Reservation.” The FBI’s Minneapolis Division, “BIA officers assigned to the reservation responded to a call of shots fired at a gas station Monday,” and “after a short vehicle chase, BIA officers tried to take the suspect into custody.” The article says that “during the incident, the BIA shot and killed the suspect.” 

# Bureau Of Land Management 

## Pawnee National Grassland Looking At Gas Well Plan. 

The Loveland (CO) Reporter-Herald (10/25) reports the Pawnee National Grassland “is analyzing the proposed Wildwood Federal No. 1 Oil and Gas Well Project, located approximately 4.5 miles north of Briggsdale.” US Forest Service spokeswoman Reghan Cloudman said in a press release that the public can comment on the proposal to build and maintain an oil and gas well and production facility on Pawnee National Grassland. “The Forest Service and Bureau of Land Management are working together to analyze the proposed action,” she said. The Sterling (CO) Journal-Advocate (10/25, Rice) reports that Cloudman said, “We’ll be going through the environmental analysis where specialists will look at possible impacts on resources we have out on the grasslands. The BLM is the one to ultimately give permission for the lease to drill.” 

## Conservation Groups Challenge BLM Approval Of Drilling Plan In North Fork Valley. 

The Denver Post (10/25, Svaldi) reports Colorado and national conservation groups “have filed a legal challenge to force the Bureau of Land Management to reconsider an oil and gas development plan approved this month in the North Fork Valley near Paonia.” The complaint “seeks to have the BLM reconsider its approval of the Bull Mountain Unit Master Development Plan sought by Houston-based SG Interests.” According to the Post, the BLM approval, “issued Oct. 4, allows for the construction of 33 well pads, 146 natural gas wells and four wastewater disposal wells across 19,670 acres of mineral estate.” 

## NV Geothermal Lease Auctions Total $78,444. The Elko (NV) Daily Free Press (10/25) reports that the Bureau of Land Management “received bids on geothermal leases in Nevada that brought in $78,444 in total receipts during an online auction held Oct. 23.” According to the article, “twenty parcels totaling 38,308.46 acres were offered during the lease sale,” and “all parcels sold for $2 an acre.” Marci Todd, Acting BLM Nevada State Director, said, “By providing opportunities for energy development, the BLM is supporting job creation and the economy of local communities.” 

## Rebuild Planned For Utah’s Historic — And Hellish — Hole-in-the-Rock Road. 

The Salt Lake (UT) Tribune (10/25, Maffly) reports that Utah’s Hole in the Rock road is Grand Staircase-Escalante National Monument’s most traveled road, but “‘many visitors aren’t pleased with the famous road’s sorry, channel-like condition that turns the drive from Escalante to Glen Canyon into a three-hour ordeal, on a good day.” Now, Garfield County “has the money to rebuild Garfield’s 16-mile stretch of the road and is seeking the Bureau of Land Management’s permission to proceed.” County officials “say they plan to repair past flood damage, narrow the roadway, shore up culverts and make it easier to maintain and drive on.” 

# Bureau Of Ocean Energy Management 

## Anglers’ NY Wind Farm Challenge Is Premature, Agency Says. 

Law360 (10/25, Goldberg) reports that the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management “on Tuesday told a D.C. federal judge that seafood industry groups, companies and several towns can’t seek to block a $42.5 million lease awarded to Statoil Wind for a wind farm off the coast of New York because the company hasn’t even proposed a project yet.” 

# Bureau Of Safety And Environmental Enforcement 

## Now Leading Offshore Safety Bureau, Angelle Promises To Be Industry ‘Partner’ On Federal Level. 

KATC-TV Lafayette, LA (10/25) reports that Bureau of Safety and Environmental Enforcement director Scott Angelle on Tuesday said his agency is “focused on undoing or amending three Obama administration policies.” In a keynote address at an industry event in Lafayette, Angelle “said his mandate within the Trump administration is to eliminate ‘unnecessary regulatory burdens’ that discourage capital investment in the Gulf, while also remaining mindful of safety requirements and environmental safeguards.” Angelle also “told industry professionals gathered at the Cajundome for the Louisiana Gulf Coast Oil Exposition they will enjoy warmer relations with the Trump administration than they did with the previous one.” 

# Fish And Wildlife Service 

## Fish And Wildlife To Reconsider Kenai Refuge Rules. 

The Kenai (AK) Peninsula Clarion (10/25, Earl) reports that the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service is “planning to revise some of the rules on the Kenai National Wildlife Refuge, including some controversial hunting restrictions.” The agency “published a notice of intent in the federal register on Oct. 2 to start a process to reconsider rules finalized on the refuge in May 2016.” The rules, “which took more than a year to finalize after a lengthy public process, include provisions about plane, boat and motorized vehicle access, camping, firearm use and personal-use gathering of edible plants and shed antlers as well as a number of hunting provisions.” 

## Reward Offered For Info On Wolf-Killing Poacher In Oregon. 

The AP (10/25) reports that the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service and “five conservation groups have teamed up to offer $15,500 for information about the illegal poaching of a federally protected gray wolf that was shot dead in a national forest in southern Oregon.” The wolf, “known as OR-33, was being tracked by authorities and is one of at least eight that have been poached or died under mysterious circumstances in the state since 2015, the conservation groups said.” The FWS is “offering $5,000 for information about the poaching and the conservation groups are offering an additional $10,500 combined.” Also reporting are NPR (10/25, Kennedy) and the Medford (OR) Mail Tribune (10/25, Freeman). 

## Chiricahua Leopard Frogs Released Into The Wild. 

KTVK-TV Phoenix (10/25, Mudge) reports that over 500 Chiricahua leopard frogs were recently released into the Apache-Sitgreaves National Forest. Partners in the effort “transported egg masses from the leopard frogs to a rearing facility in Las Cruces, New Mexico.” According to the article, “by raising the tadpoles in a controlled environment, scientists were able to raise the survival rate from less than 5% to over 90%.” 

## USFWS Designates Tuntutuliak Elder James Charles A “Conservation Hero”. 

The Alaska Public Radio Network (10/25, MacArthur) reports that the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service “recognized Tuntutuliak elder James Charles as a ‘Conservation Hero’ at the 2017 Alaska Federation of Natives Convention for his more than 50 years of partnership with the federal service.” Charles has “served on the Federal Subsistence Regional Advisory Council, the Fish and Game Advisory Council, the Kuskokwim River Salmon Management Working Group and the Kuskokwim River Intertribal Fisheries Commission.” 

## Head Of Ivory, Rhino Horn Smuggling Scheme Pleads Guilty. 

The AP (10/25) reports that “an Australian citizen who masterminded a scheme to smuggle items made of rhinoceros horn, elephant ivory and coral to China pleaded guilty Tuesday in a U.S. court.” According to federal prosecutors, “Guan Zong Chen, who also goes by Graham Chen, and two co-defendants smuggled $700,000 worth of carvings in violation of federal law and despite the fact that their export was barred under a 1976 international treaty meant to protect endangered species.” Chen “faces 15 years in prison when he’s sentenced.” 

## For An Endangered Animal, A Fire Or Hurricane Can Mean The End. 

The New York Times (10/25, Ripka) highlights the “more than a dozen rare or threatened species who either perished or suffered habitat loss during recent hurricanes and wildfires across the United States.” 

# National Park Service 

## David Horne Selected As Superintendent Of Pictured Rocks National Lakeshore. 

WLUC-TV Marquette, MI (10/25) reports that “David Horne has been selected as the next Superintendent of Pictured Rocks National Lakeshore in Michigan. Horne, “a 23-year veteran of the National Park Service, is currently the Chief Ranger for the Southeast Region of the National Park Service. Regional Director Cam Sholly said, “We are very pleased to welcome Dave as the new Superintendent of Pictured Rocks National Lakeshore. He has a proven track record of successfully managing complex operations, building strong teams, and collaborating closely with communities and partners.” Horne will begin his new assignment in January 2018. 

## EBCI And Smokies Work Toward Agreement For Plant Gathering In Park Boundaries. 

The Waynesville (NC) Smoky Mountain News (10/25) reports that “Cherokee tribal members could be gathering sochan plants from the Great Smoky Mountains National Park as early as next spring after Tribal Council’s vote last week to fund the $68,100 needed to complete the regulatory process.” Clay Jordan, the park’s acting superintendent, said, “We appreciate the commitment that Principal Chief Sneed and the tribe are making to help us complete the required environmental assessment to better understand potential effects associated with traditional gathering. Through the assessment, managers will be able to determine whether traditional gathering can be done without significantly impacting the park sochan population.” 

# Office Of Insular Affairs 

## Two Fed Supplemental Appropriations Are Good News For USVI. 

The St. Thomas Source (10/25, Kossler) reports that “the U.S. Senate overwhelmingly approved a $36.5 billion supplemental appropriation for disaster relief Tuesday, including potentially hundreds of millions of dollars or more to aid the U.S. Virgin Islands recovery from Hurricanes Irma and Maria.” The measure, passed by the U.S. House of Representatives earlier this month, now goes to President Trump to be signed. In addition, “another supplemental appropriation with Medicaid funding that is crucial for the territory is also working its way through Congress, Delegate Stacey Plaskett told the Source Tuesday.” The Virgin Islands Consortium (VIR) (10/25) reports that in a statement, Gov. Kenneth Mapp “said the territory would not receive less than $800 million in low-interest loans from the $4.9 billion allocated for Puerto Rico and the USVI.” Mapp said, “The $4.9 billion dollars has been set aside for revenue losses for the United States Virgin Islands and Puerto Rico. Of that amount, the Virgin Islands will receive not less than $800 million.” 

## Power Restoration Moves Forward In US Virgin Islands. 

Caribbean News Now! (10/24) reports that “about a third of the power on the island of St Thomas has been restored, US Virgin Islands Governor Kenneth Mapp said on Monday.” Mapp told reporters “that the Virgin Islands Water and Power Authority (WAPA) reports that St Thomas had 32 percent of its power restored while 15 percent of electricity has been restored in St Croix.” Mapp “expects Cruz Bay, St John to be energized by Wednesday, which will bring power restoration on that island up to 25 percent.” 

## Maryland Governor Sends National Guard To US Virgin Islands. 

The AP (10/23) reports that Maryland Gov. Larry Hogan is “sending 100 soldiers from the Maryland National Guard to the U.S. Virgin Islands.” Hogan “said Monday they will help with ongoing recovery efforts from Hurricane Irma at the request” of U.S. Virgin Islands. Gov. Kenneth Mapp. According to the article, “members of the 200th Military Police Company from Catonsville will be deployed for up to 30 days to help with local law enforcement and to guard infrastructure.” 

## St. Thomas Expects 25 Cruise Calls In November. 

Seatrade Cruise News (UK) (10/22) reports that “as hurricane recovery continues in the US Virgin Islands, Gov. Kenneth Mapp on Friday said 25 cruise ship calls are expected at St. Thomas in November.” Royal Caribbean International has also recently announced “that it would return on Nov. 10 with Adventure of the Seas, for the first time since September.” Mapp added that “St. Croix expects approximately 90 cruise calls this season, an uptick for that island.” 

## St. John Could Get Electricity Turned Back On, 6 Weeks After Hurricane Irma. 

WKNO-FM Memphis, TN (10/20, Chappell) reports that “if all goes well, people on St. John in the U.S. Virgin Islands could have power restored next week for the first time since a pair of devastating Category 5 hurricanes struck in September, the local electric utility says.” Jean P. Greaux, Jr., communications director for Virgin Islands Water and Power Authority says, “Portions of St. John are scheduled to be restored by the middle of next week.” 

## Abe And President Of Micronesia Affirm Importance Of Open Pacific. 

The Japan Times (10/25) reports that Japan’s Prime Minister Shinzo Abe and Micronesian President Peter Christian “reaffirmed their commitment to a free and open Asia-Pacific region during summit talks Wednesday in Tokyo, Japanese officials said.” According to the article, “Japan is keen to cooperate with Pacific island nations in trade and investment and maintain a shared stance on maritime security to counter China’s rising influence in the region.” The article adds that “Abe and Christian also affirmed the importance of making sure U.N. sanctions on North Korea are fully enforced, including those that pertain to North Korean-flagged ships at sea, the officials said.” 

## Too Sick To Go Home Too Poor To Get Better. 

The Utne Reader (10/23, Langlois) reports that many citizens from the Republic of the Marshall Islands, who have emigrated to the American Midwest, “are too sick to return home, and too poor to get better.” The article says that if Marshallese and other Compact of Free Association migrants “were to receive access to Medicaid, it would increase federal spending by about $200 million over a 10-year-period.” It adds “that’s $20 million a year—a tenth of the $183 million that the U.S. Department of Defense spends annually to maintain its military base in the Marshall Islands.” 

## The Story Of Micronesians Fighting America’s Wars. 

In his column for the Honolulu Civil Beat (HI) (10/24, Blair), Chad Blair shines a spotlights on the Micronesians who serve in the U.S. military. He notes that Nathan Fitch, a producer, cinematographer and director, produced a short video, called “Island Soldier,” which “tells the stories of Micronesians serving in the U.S. military, primarily the infantry, as they deploy to Afghanistan in 2013.” 

# US Geological Survey 

## Study Offers More Evidence Linking Earthquakes To Wastewater Injection Wells. 

The AP (10/25, Elliott) reports a study published last week by University of Colorado researchers linked the increase of earthquakes on the Colorado-New Mexico border since 2001 to wastewater injection wells, “similar to human-caused quakes in Oklahoma and other states.” The study “concluded that the wastewater caused a big enough increase in underground pressure to make rock formations slip along fault lines.” According to the US Geological Service, earthquakes in the Raton Basin of northern New Mexico and southern California started to increase in 2001, “about two years after large-scale wastewater injection began.” A 2014 paper by the USGS “blamed injection wells for the area’s quakes,” but the new UC study “went further, using computer models and records of wastewater injection to conclude that enough pressure built up to cause the quakes.” 

## USGS Reports 3 Small Earthquakes Recorded In Oklahoma. 

The AP (10/25) reports that “the U.S Geological Survey reports three small earthquakes in Oklahoma.” The two largest quakes each have a preliminary magnitude of 3.1. The third was a preliminary magnitude 2.5 quake. 

## Additional Reading. 

50 Ways The Next Big Earthquake Could Shatter Seattle. National Geographic (10/25, Folger). 

As California’s Population Grows, People Are Moving Into More Fire-Prone Areas. WMEA-FM Portland, ME (10/25). 

Simulated Flood Injected Life Into Thirsty Colorado River Delta, New Data Shows. KUNC-FM Greeley, CO (10/25, Runyon). Top National News 

## Trump: Democrats’ Role In Russia Dossier Creation “A Disgrace.” 

Coverage of the news that elements of the Democratic Party helped to fund the Fusion GPS dossier on then-candidate Donald Trump focuses mainly on negative aspects for the Democrats. The President’s comments on the news get some attention, but much more is given to how much Hillary Clinton and her campaign knew, and who authorized the payments. Also at issue – particularly in conservative media – is the FBI’s role in the affair. NBC Nightly News (10/25, story 3, 2:10, Holt) reported that Trump “[tore] into Democrats and former rival Hillary Clinton over reports that the Clinton campaign and the Democratic National Committee helped fund opposition research that wound up in a dossier, containing salacious and unverified allegations about him.” Trump: “They were embarrassed by it. I think it’s a disgrace. It’s just really, it’s a very sad, it’s a very sad commentary on politics in this country.” The AP (10/25, Tucker) reports, “Trump and fellow Republicans latched onto revelations tying” the Clinton campaign to the dossier, and Politico (10/25, Cheney) reports that Republicans “mounted a counterattack this week against the drumbeat from multiple investigations into Moscow’s meddling...in a dizzying 24 hours.” Trump said on Fox Business’ Lou Dobbs Tonight (10/25), “Don’t forget Hillary Clinton totally denied this. She didn’t know anything. She knew nothing all of a sudden they found out. What I was amazed at it’s almost $6 million that they paid and it’s totally discredited. It’s a total phony. I call it fake news. It’s disgraceful.” The New York Post (10/25, Moore) reports that the President also tweeted, “‘ Clinton campaign & DNC paid for research that led to the anti-Trump Fake News Dossier. The victim here is the President. ’ @FoxNews”. Politico (10/25, McCaskill) reports that when asked by reporters about which Republican might have initially funded it, Trump said, “If I were to guess, I have one name in mind. It’ll probably be revealed. I’d rather not say, but you’ll be surprised. You’ll be surprised.” Breitbart (10/25, Spiering) also runs that quote from the President in a brief item. The Washington Times (10/25, Boyer) reports that Trump also told reporters that “given the revelations about the dossier and fresh investigations into a uranium deal with a Russian firm approved by the Obama administration, the Russia controversy has ‘turned around’ on the Democrats.” Trump said, “This was the Democrats coming up with an excuse for losing an election. They lost it very badly. They didn’t know what to say, so they made up the whole Russia hoax. Now it’s turning out that the whole hoax is turned around.” However, in Politico Magazine (10/25), Jack Shafer calls that “a valiant stab at magical thinking by Baby Donald, but the dossier is only a slice of the evidentiary pie being thrown at him. As the anti-Trump Republican operative Rick Wilson tweeted, even if the dossier was ‘a farrago of utter fantasy,’ other US government and foreign intelligence findings point to Trump’s Kremlin entanglements.” Rep. Marsha Blackburn (R-TN) tweeted, “Crooked Hillary has been behind Russian collusion allegations all along! Shame on her for wasting officials’ time!” Rep. Ken Calvert (R-CA) tweeted, “Hillary Clinton & the DNC lied to Americans about paying for the development of the false Trump dossier.” Rep. Pete Olson (R-TX) tweeted, “The corrupt DNC and Clinton camp paid for a fake Russian dossier about our president! Democrats can’t be trusted.” Conservative commentators are weighing in. David French of National Review (10/25) writes, “We don’t know what role the Russia dossier has played or is playing in the Russia investigation. ... But we did learn a bit more last night, and what we learned undermines the dossier, indicts the Clinton campaign, and helps Donald Trump.” Mollie Hemingway of The Federalist (10/25) writes, “Here we have the realization that the Clinton campaign, the DNC, and the FBI all worked wittingly or unwittingly with Russians to affect the results of the 2016 election. ... These efforts perverted our justice system by forcing the attorney general to recuse himself for the crime of having attended meetings with Russian diplomats and spawning a massive, sprawling, limitless probe over Russia.” Matt Vespa of Townhall (10/25) writes, “My, oh my – how the tables have turned.” The Hill (10/25, Fabian, Easley) also reports on the President’s remarks. 

Clinton Camp “Largely Silent”; Current DNC Leadership Says It Was Not Involved. On ABC World News Tonight (10/25, story 3, 2:20, Muir), Brian Ross reported, “Until now, Hillary Clinton and her campaign team would not admit any connection to the Trump dossier,” which “was produced for a Washington-based firm called Fusion GPS, which had actually started digging up dirt on Trump for an unknown Republican during the primaries. After several Republican candidates dropped out, the Clinton campaign and the Democrats secretly paid Fusion GPS to continue their research efforts. ... Former Clinton campaign spokesperson Brian Fallon said the Democrats did nothing wrong.” Fallon: “I think it’s important to remember that opposition research happens all the time in campaigns.” On the CBS Evening News (10/25, story 6, 2:00, Mason), Jeff Pegues reported, “The 35-page dossier details some of the most explosive allegations now under investigation by special counsel Robert Mueller. ... Until now, some top Clinton campaign officials have denied knowing who was behind the effort to dig up dirt.” Fallon: “I’m sure that there’s a small group of folks that were aware of the nature of the decision the hire Fusion back in the spring of 2016. But it was kept for reasons that I understand to a very select group, given the sensitive nature of who they hired.” The Washington Post (10/25, Hamburger, Helderman) reports that “Clinton and top officials of her presidential campaign were largely silent” on Wednesday “in response to the revelation that the campaign and the Democratic National Committee had paid for research that resulted” in the dossier. Fallon “said he didn’t know about the research at the time but called it ‘money well spent’ if it provided information useful to the special counsel now investigating Russia’s involvement.” The Daily Mail (10/25, Earle) reports that Fallon told CNN that Clinton “‘may have’ known about her campaign’s funding of the infamous dossier.” He told CNN, “I haven’t spoken to her, no. ... She may have known. The degree of exactly what she knew is beyond my knowledge.” Becket Adams of the Washington Examiner (10/25) writes that either Clinton “knew nothing about her campaign’s role in financing the dossier” and “is guilty of nothing worse than ignorance” but was deceived by her staff, or that she “has known about the dossier this entire time, and she has been misrepresenting what she knows. Any way you cut it, it doesn’t reflect well on Clinton or her team.” The Hill (10/25, Easley) reports that Democratic National Committee representatives said that Chairman Tom Perez, “who only became the Democratic leader in April, had nothing to do with the arrangement,” and Rep. Keith Ellison (D-MN), the DNC’s deputy chairman, “emphasized that both he and Perez came to the DNC long after the contract with Fusion GPS had ended.” Ellison said, “Tom and me, we weren’t even there at the time. I know as much about it as you guys who have reported it.” A spokesman for Rep. Debbie Wasserman Schultz (D-FL), who was DNC chair at the time, said, “She was not aware of anything related to this research arrangement.” The Daily Caller (10/25, Hasson) reports that the DNC “released a carefully-worded statement meant to distance current party leader from the dossier.” The Wall Street Journal (10/25) editorializes that it appears that the Democrats paid for Russian operatives to compile the dossier, which is a form of collusion in itself. Rep. Elijah Cummings (D-MD), ranking member on the House Oversight Committee, said on MSNBC’s Morning Joe (10/25), “All of this, to me, is unfortunately a distraction from the things that we need to be doing. ... But I think the American people need to understand the whole role that Russia is now playing in our elections and will continue to play and they need to keep in mind that the highest ranking law enforcement person in the country has said basically – and that is Attorney General Sessions – that there is no investigation from his office’s standpoint.” The Washington Times (10/25, Boyer) reports that the Campaign Legal Center has filed a complaint with the Federal Election Commission alleging that Clinton’s campaign and the DNC violated campaign finance law by failing to disclose payments for the dossier. 

FBI’s Role Now Under Scrutiny. Byron York of the Washington Examiner (10/25) writes, “Knowing that the Clinton campaign [and] the DNC...supported the dossier is not the end of the story. The most important next step is the FBI.” According to the Washington Post, dossier compiler Christopher Steele “‘reached an agreement with the FBI a few weeks before the election for the bureau to pay him to continue his work.’ It was an astonishing turn: the nation’s top federal law enforcement agency agreeing to fund an ongoing opposition research project being conducted by one of the candidates in the midst of a presidential election.” House Intelligence Chairman Devin Nunes said on Fox News’ Tucker Carlson Tonight (10/25), “I think the next focus is going to be on whether or not did the FBI use this dossier to get any warrants, did they use it to open a counter intelligence investigation. And if they did, if they’re using unverified information to open up inquiries into American citizens, I think we have a big problem.” David Harsanyi of The Federalist (10/25) asks, “How often did the FBI use the dossier as a pretext for FISA warrants? Seems like a reasonable question.” Newsday (NY) (10/25, Goldschlag) reports that though “the question of who paid for the ‘Russia dossier’ on Trump is now partly answered, still open is the question of who might pay, in the form of legal jeopardy, if some of its more explosive but unverified contents are found credible” by Mueller. Max Boot of the Council on Foreign Relations tweeted, “And before that it was paid for by anti-Trump GOPer. So what? Doesn’t affect whether it’s true. And it’s not reason for Mueller probe.” ABC political analyst Matthew Dowd tweeted, “Mueller’s investigation has little to do with dossier. Much bigger issues.” Washington Post conservative blogger Jennifer Rubin tweeted that the news is “a nothing burger just to give Fox something to cover all day.” 

Judge Gives Fusion GPS Until Thursday To Answer Congressional Subpoena. Reuters (10/25, Hosenball) reports that US District Court Judge Tanya Chutkan has given Fusion GPS “until Thursday to reach an agreement with Congress over a subpoena for the firm’s bank records.” The House Intelligence Committee has “subpoenaed an unidentified bank for the last two years of records of the accounts of Fusion GPS.” 

Trump: Uranium One Deal Is Modern-Day “Watergate.” The Hill (10/25, Beavers) reports Senate Judiciary Chairman Charles Grassley tweeted that he is seeking the appointment of a special counsel “to investigate the Uranium One deal that gave a Russian-owned company partial control of US atomic energy resources in 2010” – a deal that the President compared to Watergate on Wednesday. The Washington Times (10/25, Boyer) reports that Trump told reporters, “I think the uranium sale to Russia and the way it was done so underhanded, with tremendous amounts of money being passed, I actually think that’s ‘Watergate,’ modern age.” USA Today (10/25, Johnson) reports that the DOJ has “lifted a gag order on an FBI informant to provide testimony to Congress” about the Uranium One deal. The Hill (10/25, Solomon) reports, “Multiple congressional committees have been seeking to interview the informant, whose name has not been released publicly.” 

Assange Says He Rejected Help Offer From Cambridge Analytica. The New York Times (10/25, Confessore) reports that WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange said on Wednesday “that he had rebuffed a request for help last year” from the head of Cambridge Analytica, a data firm that worked for Trump. Assange “did not disclose what kind of help [was] sought, only that he had declined the request.” Assange tweeted, “I can confirm an approach by Cambridge Analytica [prior to November last year] and can confirm that it was rejected by WikiLeaks.” The Hill (10/25, Chalfant) reports that the Trump campaign “appeared to distance itself” from Cambridge Analytica on Wednesday after it was reported that CEO Alexander Nix sought contact with Assange over Clinton’s emails. The Daily Beast (10/25) reports that Assange told Nix “that he didn’t want his help, and preferred to do the work on his own.” In related news, Politico (10/25, Gerstein) reports that the Trump campaign argued in a court filing that WikiLeaks’ publication of hacked DNC emails “was legal and specifically protected by federal law.” 

Rove: Impeachment Push Could Hurt Democrats. Karl Rove writes in his Wall Street Journal (10/25) column that billionaire Tom Steyer’s injection of $10 million into a push to impeach the President moves the matter beyond the back benches of the House, but could ultimately hurt the Democratic Party by resulting in a focus on Trump rather than on an electoral strategy. 

## Trump Attends Harvey Recovery Briefing Before Dallas GOP Fundraising Event. 

Coverage of President Trump’s visit to Texas for a briefing on hurricane recovery efforts and a Republican fundraiser is negative, with reports saying that the briefing was added to justify the cost of a political trip, and that Trump praised his own efforts at the briefing. The Corpus Christi (TX) Caller-Times (10/25, Moritz) reports that the President “arrived in Dallas on Wednesday to a cheering welcome, and later by sign-carrying protesters assailing his truthfulness, where he met with Texas Gov. Greg Abbott for an update on the Hurricane Harvey recovery effort as a prelude to an afternoon of politicking.” During remarks at the briefing, Trump “said he looked forward to seeing plans to address flooding in Houston ‘on a more permanent basis.’” The Washington Post (10/25, Phillips) reports that Trump also “praise[d]...himself and his government...then suggested that Houston recovery officials take a look at a special kind of sheet rock that could prevent another Harvey.” Trump said, “They use it in bathtubs and showers, and water has no impact on it.” The Hill (10/25, Greenwood) reports that Trump said that it “is the same material used around bathtubs and other areas exposed to moisture. Greenboard is a water-resistant drywall.” The Dallas Morning News (10/25, Gillman) reports that though “adoring fans cheered him at Love Field and 200 well-heeled donors rubbed elbows with him downtown,” if Trump “was hoping for a respite from the venomous atmosphere in Washington, his day trip to Dallas offered little. Catcalls from hundreds of protesters filtered into the swank fund-raiser. ‘Go home Cheeto!’ they yelled, holding signs that read ‘Liar liar’ and ‘shame.’” The Los Angeles Times (10/25, Bennett) reports that Trump was in Dallas “for a Republican fundraiser and political reception,” and had “added a brief meeting about hurricane recovery efforts continuing on the Gulf Coast about 250 miles away.” Newsweek (10/25) reports that the briefing was added in “an apparent effort to have the political visit subsidized by taxpayer dollars.” The event “cost attendees $2,700 a ticket and an extra $35,000 to take a photo with Trump.” The AP (10/25) reports that the event was “expected to raise $4 million.” Politico’s Alex Isenstadt tweeted, “Trump raised $4.5 mil for 2020 reelection tonight in Dallas. Big donors present included Andy Beale, Harold Hamm, Tom Hicks Sr.” Mark Knoller of CBS News tweeted that “tickets range[d] from $2700 to $100,000 per person.” The Washington Times (10/25, Boyer) and the WFAA-TV Dallas (10/25) website also have brief reports. 

## Trump: Tax Cuts Will Create “So Many Jobs.” 

Asked about tax reform on Fox Business’ Lou Dobbs Tonight (10/25), President Trump said, “I think we’re going to get [tax cuts]. I think the senators are going to come together. I think the House is looking really good.” Trump also said that “we’re bringing the corporate rate down to 20 percent from 35 percent. This will be is the biggest tax cut in history in the history of our country and that’s great and we need it because right now our country is about the highest taxed or certainly one of the highest taxed in the world and we can’t have that.” Trump added, “We are going to have so many jobs created by what we’re doing and you know we’re going to have companies that aren’t leaving our country any more.” 

## Senate Panel Approves EPA Nominees Over Democrats’ Objections. 

Reuters (10/25) reports the Senate Environment and Public Works Committee yesterday “approved four nominees to key posts at the Environmental Protection Agency, including one appointee with ties to the chemical industry who will head the agency’s office of chemical safety.” Sen. Tom Carper “said two of the nominees were of ‘grave concern’: Bill Wehrum, nominated for assistant administrator for the Office of Air and Radiation, and Michael Dourson to head up the Office of Chemical Safety and Pollution Prevention.” Carper “called Dourson ‘one of the most troubling nominees I have ever considered during my time on this committee.’” The Cleveland Plain Dealer (10/25, Eaton) indicates “the 11-10 vote to advance Dourson’s nomination was approved along party lines.” Likewise, says Automotive News (10/25, Kulisch), “all 10 Democrats opposed Wehrum’s nomination because of concern that he is too close to industry and taking a lax approach to regulating emissions while at EPA under the Bush administration.” The Washington Examiner (10/25, Siegel) notes the committee also “advanced the nominations of Matthew Leopold, President Trump’s nominee to be assistant administrator for the Office of General Counsel; and David Ross, chosen to be assistant administrator for the Office of Water.” After the votes, “Democrats gave lengthy speeches denouncing Dourson and Wehrum.” Sen. Ed Markey “called the committee’s approval of Dourson and Wehrum ‘one of the low points of my entire career,’” and Sen. Tammy Duckworth “called Dourson the ‘absolute worst person I can think of to be in charge of chemical safety in this country.’” The Intercept (10/25, Lerner) reports “powerless Democrats watched in anger as their Republican colleagues...voted along party lines to advance” Dourson’s nomination, and USA Today (10/25, Shesgreen) that Dourson “has sparked intense opposition from Senate Democrats and environmental groups, who have blasted him for engaging in ‘fake pseudo-science,’ referring to his research funded in part by the chemical industry.” Dourson’s “findings have generally endorsed high levels of chemicals and pesticides in drinking water and other consumer products.” The AP (10/25, Smith) notes that it “reported last month that Dourson, a toxicologist, has for years accepted payments from chemical companies to write papers pushing back against peer-reviewed studies raising health concerns about his clients’ products.” The AP adds that “past corporate clients include Dow Chemical Co., Koch Industries Inc. and Chevron Corp.” On the other hand, the AP (10/25, Biesecker) reports, “committee Chairman John Barrasso called Trump’s nominees well-qualified and experienced.” The Washington Examiner (10/25, Siegel) notes that EPA Administrator Pruitt “commended Republicans for advancing the nominations,” saying, “These top leaders in their fields will bring positive change to EPA’s mission to protect human health and the environment. We look forward to a full Senate vote on these highly-qualified leaders.” The Washington Times (10/25, Wolfgang), among other news outlets, runs a similar report this morning. 

## WSJournal Analysis: Trump Team Seeks To Foster Economic Growth By Removing Regulations. 

The Wall Street Journal (10/25, Ip) reports the Trump Administration is trying to spur economic growth by removing regulations that stop innovation. 

## EPA Prepares To Place Two-Year Delay On Methane Regulations. 

The Daily Caller (10/25, White) reports that the EPA is expected to place a two-year delay on Obama-era regulations on methane emissions from oil and gas operations as a means to “buy time for a plan replacing the rule.” The oil and gas industry claims the rule is “unnecessary and duplicative of already existing laws,” and critics claimed that the rule “was a regulation in search of a problem, pointing to research showing that methane emissions from oil and gas drilling have plummeted, despite a huge increase drilling operations.” 

## Clean Power Plan Repeal Includes Plan To Alter Social Cost Of Carbon. 

E&E Publishing (10/25) reports that the Trump administration’s plans to repeal the Clean Power Plan also includes a proposal to dramatically alter the social cost of carbon used under the Obama administration, which was placed at about $42 per ton by 2020. The new EPA document “significantly lowers that estimate, placing it between $1 and $6 per ton.” The current proposal also “considers only the domestic social cost of carbon, rather than its cost at a global scale.” The controversial shift requires a deep consideration of “our values as a society,” warned Frances Moore, a professor at the University of California, Davis. 

## EPA To Review Whether Clean Air, Water Laws Affect Energy Sector Jobs Losses. 

Reuters (10/25, Volcovici) reports that the EPA said Wednesday it will examine how “bedrock laws like the Clean Air Act and Clean Water Act affect energy industry job losses” as part of President Trump’s executive order to “reduce unnecessary regulatory burdens” on businesses. EPA Administrator Scott Pruitt, Energy Secretary Rick Perry and Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke have all outlined separate lists of measures for review under the order. The Hill (10/25, Henry) reports that one of the EPA’s new initiatives will create a task force to review the permitting process for new sources of air pollution under the Clean Air Act, called the New Source Review (NSR.) The EPA argued in a 15-page report on its regulations, “In some circumstances, the NSR process discourages the construction of new facilities or modifications of existing ones that could result in greater environmental improvements.” 

DOE Releases Report Highlighting Programs For Repeal, Reform. E&E Publishing (10/25) reports the Energy Department yesterday “released its long-awaited report” on “policies that are ripe for repeal or reform because they hinder energy production.” Energy Secretary Perry in the report “calls for reviewing National Environmental Policy Act guidelines, streamlining liquefied natural gas exports and reassessing national laboratory policies.” The document “is the first sign of the agency’s response to a high-profile executive order the White House issued earlier this year to scrap red tape and promote ‘energy independence.’” The Daily Caller (10/25, Bastasch) reports in a statement on the release of the report, Perry said, “Through our ongoing efforts, we will promote job creation and economic growth, unleash American energy dominance, and advance the energy security of our international trading partners.” 

## EPA Chief Says He’s No Ally To Polluters. 

Bloomberg News (10/25, Dlouhy, Jacobs) reports that EPA Administrator Scott Pruitt dismissed critics who say is he has been too cozy with the industries he is in charge of regulation, and vowed to “do enforcement, to go after bad actors and go after polluters.” The watchdog group Environmental Integrity Project reported in August that in the first six months of the Trump administration, “civil penalties paid for environmental violations were 60 percent smaller on average than for comparable periods” in the past three administrations. 

## Author Likens Climate Change Debate To Acid Rain Scare Of 1970s-80s. 

In an op-ed for the Wall Street Journal (10/25, Darwall), Rupert Darwall, author of “Green Tyranny: Exposing the Totalitarian Roots of the Climate Industrial Complex,” likens the current debate over climate change to the acid-ran scare of the 1970s and 80s, citing the acid-rain alarm, which was proved to be based on faulty science as evidence that the scientific consensus is not a guarantee that the consensus is correct. 

# Editorial Wrap-Up 

## New York Times. 

“The Real Reason For Republicans’ Silence On Donald Trump.” In an editorial, the New York Times (10/25) says, “It’s less striking that a few Republican congressmen have publicly denounced” President Trump’s “conduct than that most of their colleagues have not. Their fellow legislators have silently accepted his outrages in exchange for policies they’ve always wanted,” such as “transferring power to Wall Street, fossil fuel companies, the chemical industry and other special interests,” while “stoking an anti-populist bonfire to incinerate protections for consumers and workers.” 

“The Last Thing Australia And Our Planet Need.” The New York Times (10/25, Board) editorializes that “while global demand for coal is falling as the nations of the world have committed themselves to slashing carbon emissions,” Australian Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull “wants to help a powerful Indian conglomerate build an enormous system of coal mines in a remote stretch of Queensland.” The Times argues that “burning the estimated 66 million tons of coal a year that the Adani Group aims to produce” from the mine “can only make it harder for the world to meet its aspirations under the Paris climate agreement.” 

“Scrapping MetroCards Isn’t Vital, But Any Subway Fix Will Do.” A New York Times (10/25) editorial. 

## Washington Post. 

“Finally, A Healthcare Proposal That Actually Pays Off.” In an editorial, the Washington Post (10/25) argues that in light of a CBO study which found that the Alexander-Murray healthcare bill would reduce federal budget deficits and not impact the number of people without coverage, the measure “now officially falls into the category of ‘so obvious it should pass immediately.’” 

“The Catalonian Crisis Is All Thanks To Two Inflexible Leaders.” A Washington Post (10/25) editorial says Spain is facing “its worst political crisis since its return to democracy 40 years ago, thanks to the inflexibility of two key leaders” – Catalonian President Carles Puigdemont and Prime Minister Mariano Rajoy. The Post says Puigdemont and his followers “badly overestimated their ability to mobilize support for their separatist cause,” while Rajoy’s “hard-line actions risk driving more voters into the separatist camp. He should refrain from more repression and push for a political solution.” 

“Trump Crosses Another Line.” The Washington Post (10/25) editorializes that President Trump’s “disdain for the integrity of the Justice Department may no longer surprise a weary public,” but “it is nevertheless shocking to learn that Mr. Trump has breached tradition to personally interview two candidates for U.S. attorney – both of whom would have the power to investigate him in the future.” Politico and CNN reported that Trump “met with Geoffrey Berman and Ed McNally, whom the administration is considering for the roles of U.S. attorney for the Southern District of New York and the Eastern District of New York, respectively.” The Post argues that “any presidential interview of a U.S. attorney candidate would cross the line,” but “it is particularly concerning that Mr. Trump chose to speak with the men and women who could lead investigations into his business in New York.” The Post concludes that “this threat to the impartial administration of justice cannot go unchallenged.” 

## Wall Street Journal. 

“Democrats, Russians, And The FBI.” The Wall Street Journal (10/25) editorializes that it appears that the Democrats paid for Russian operatives to compile the dossier on then-candidate Trump, which is a form of collusion in itself. 

“McConnell 1, Cordray 0.” A Wall Street Journal (10/25) editorial calls Tuesday’s Senate vote to overturn the CFPB’s arbitration rule a victory for the economy and the leadership of Senate Majority Leader McConnell. 

“Jeff Flake’s Public Service.” In an editorial, the Wall Street Journal (10/25, Board) says that Sen. Jeff Flake’s decision not to seek reelection improves the GOP’s odds of retaining his seat in 2018. The Journal adds that Flake was correct in charging that a great deal of Trump’s rhetoric lacks dignity and is untrue. 

# Big Picture 

## Headlines From Today’s Front Pages. Wall Street Journal: 

FCC To Ease Limits On Local Media Ownership House Republicans Are Still Considering 401(k) Changes in Tax Overhaul The Morningstar Mirage Abadi Wants US-Iran Rivalry Out Of Iraq 

New York Times: 

As G.O.P. Bends Toward Trump, Critics Either Give In Or Give Up Interactive Feature: Boko Haram Strapped Suicide Bombs To Them. Somehow These Teenage Girls Survived. Tax Cuts Are The Glue Holding A Fractured Republican Party Together Pitched As Calming Force, John Kelly Instead Mirrors Boss’s Priorities Fats Domino, Early Rock ‘N’ Roller With A Boogie-Woogie Piano, Is Dead At 89 

Washington Post: 

Republicans Target Bannon In California, A Developing-World Virus First Niger Reports Had Several Missing Gillespie’s Strategy For His Own Race? Caution. Thriving Prison Firm Ties Itself To President 

Financial Times: 

Xi Breaks With China Tradition To Cement His Huge Power Carlyle Names Executives To Succeed Its Co-Founders Putin Steers Clear Of 1917 Revolution Celebrations US Expats Given Hope Of Lower Tax Bills 

Washington Times: 

Clinton Campaign Accused Of FEC Violation Over Anti-Trump Dossier Trump Administration Officially Apologizes For IRS Tea Party Targeting Trump’s Energized Base Exposes Republican Divisions, Upheaval Of Party Establishment Pro-Life Groups Struggle Against Planned Parenthood Funding In Virginia Politics Kenya Tries Another Presidential Vote, But Uncertainty And Instability Still Rule 

Story Lineup From Last Night’s Network News: 

ABC: Trump-GOP Senate; White House-Fallen Soldier Call; Trump-Russian Dossier Investigation; Las Vegas Shooting Investigation; Kidnapped US Soldier Trial; US Flights-Tougher Security Check; Louisiana-University Student Murder; California-Mystery Abduction; Africa-Saving Rhinos; Miami Airport-Takedown; Florida-Sheriff Stealing Money; National Park Price Hike; Fats Domino Dies. 

CBS: Puerto Rico Recovery-Controversy; Puerto Rico Recovery-Medical Supply Shortage; Trump-GOP Senate; Trump-Public Opinion; Niger-US Casualty Investigation; Trump-Russian Dossier Investigation; Amazon-New Delivery Program; Chinese Wood Flooring Import Fined; New CBS Anchor Named; Fats Domino Dies. 

NBC: US Flights-Tougher Security Check; Trump-GOP Senate; Trump-Russian Dossier Investigation; Health-New Vaccine Guideline; Niger-US Casualty Investigation; South Sudan-Demonstration; Florida Juvenile Center-Mismanagement; Amazon-New Delivery Program; National Park Price Hike; Massachusetts-Daylight Savings Policy; Zoo Visiting Couple; Fats Domino Dies. 

Network TV At A Glance: 

Trump-GOP Senate – 7 minutes, 35 seconds Trump-Russian Dossier Investigation – 6 minutes, 30 seconds Niger-US Casualty Investigation – 4 minutes, 10 seconds Amazon-New Delivery Program – 4 minutes US Flights-Tougher Security Check – 3 minutes, 30 seconds 

Story Lineup From This Morning’s Radio News Broadcasts: 

ABC: White House-UN Funding; Tax Reform Bill; Kidnapped US Soldier Trial; Las Vegas Shooting Investigation. 

CBS: US Flights-Tougher Security Check; JFK Files Release; Obamacare-Executive Order; Baseball World Series; Trump-GOP Senate; Wall Street News. 

FOX: Tax Reform Bill; Obamacare-Executive Order; Trump Approval Rating; Trump-Texas Visit. 

NPR: Obamacare-Executive Order; Puerto Rico Recovery-Controversy; South Sudan-Political Stability; Brazilian President-Corruption Scandal. 

# Washington Schedule 

## Today’s Events In Washington. 

White House: 

PRESIDENT TRUMP — Delivers remarks on combatting drug demand and the opioid crisis; meets with Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency Scott Pruitt. VICE PRESIDENT PENCE — Participates in a phone call with Foreign Minister Sebastian Kurz of Austria; tours Lockheed Martin Waterton Canyon Facility; delivers remarks at a Colorado Republican Party event. 

US Senate: 9:30 AM Senate Foreign Relations Committee Business Meeting – Business Meeting, with agenda including nominations including of Kenneth Ian Juster to be U.S. Ambassador to India, Daniel Kritenbrink to be U.S. Ambassador to Vietnam, Richard Duke Buchan III to be U.S. Ambassador to Spain, and to serve concurrently and without additional compensation as U.S. Ambassador to Andorra, Richard Grenell to be U.S. Ambassador to Germany, Jamie McCourt to be U.S. Ambassador to France, and to serve concurrently and without additional compensation as U.S. Ambassador to Monaco, Edward McMullen Jr. to be U.S. Ambassador to Switzerland, and to serve concurrently and without additional compensation as U.S. Ambassador to Liechtenstein, Michael James Dodman to be U.S. Ambassador to Mauritania, Nina Maria Fite to be U.S. Ambassador to Angola, Daniel Foote to be U.S. Ambassador to Zambia, David Dale Reimer to be U.S. Ambassador to Mauritius, and to serve concurrently and without additional compensation as U.S. Ambassador to the Seychelles, and Eric Whitaker to be U.S. Ambassador to Niger Location: U.S. Capitol, S-116, Washington, DC http://foreign.senate.gov/ 9:45 AM Senate Energy Committee hearing on cyber technology and energy infrastructure – ‘Hearing to Examine Cyber Technology and Energy Infrastructure’, with testimony from Pacific Northwest National Laboratory Electricity Market Sector Director Carl Imhoff; Oak Ridge National Laboratory Electrical and Electronics Systems Research Division Director Dr Richard Raines; Idaho National Laboratory Associate Director for National and Homeland Security Zachary Tudor; Qubitekk President and CTO Dr Duncan Earl; and New Context Services CEO Daniel Riedel Location: Rm 366, Dirksen Senate Office Bldg, Washington, DC www.energy.senate.gov 10:00 AM Senate Governmental Affairs subcommittee hearing on the regulatory process – Regulatory Affairs and Federal Management Subcommittee hearing on ‘Improving Oversight of the Regulatory Process: Lessons from State Legislatures’, with testimony from Idaho House Speaker Scott Bedke; North Dakota House member Joshua Boschee; and Connecticut House member Arthur O’Neill Location: Dirksen Senate Office Building, Rm 342, Washington, DC http://hsgac.senate.gov/ https://twitter.com/SenateHSGAC 10:00 AM Senate Urban Affairs Committee nominations hearing – Nominations hearing considers Brian Montgomery to be Assistant Secretary of Housing and Urban Development for Housing (Federal Housing Commissioner), Robert Hunter Kurtz to be Assistant Secretary for Public and Indian Housing, and Suzanne Israel Tufts to be Assistant Secretary for Administration Location: Rm 538, Dirksen Senate Office Bldg, Washington, DC http://banking.senate.gov/ 10:00 AM Senate Judiciary Committee Executive Business Meeting – Executive Business Meeting, with agenda including nominations of Allison Eid to be U.S. Circuit Judge for the Tenth Circuit; Stephanos Bibas to be U.S. Circuit Judge for the Third Circuit; Liles Clifton Burke to be U.S. District Judge for the Northern District of Alabama; Walter David Counts III to be U.S. District Judge for the Western District of Texas; Michael Joseph Juneau to be U.S. District Judge for the Western District of Louisiana; A. Marvin Quattlebaum, Jr. to be U.S. District Judge for the District of South Carolina; Karen Gren Scholer to be U.S. District Judge for the Northern District of Texas; Tilman Eugene Self III to be U.S. District Judge for the Middle District of Georgia; John Bash to be U.S. Attorney for the Western District of Texas; Erin Angela Nealy Cox to be U.S. Attorney for the Northern District of Texas; and R. Andrew Murray to be U.S. Attorney for the Western District of North Carolina, as well as ‘S. 807, Criminal Antitrust Anti-Retaliation Act of 2017’ Location: Rm 226, Dirksen Senate Office Bldg, Washington, DC http://judiciary.senate.gov/ 10:00 AM Senate HELP Committee hearing on free speech on college campuses – Hearing on ‘Exploring Free Speech on College Campuses’, with testimony from University of Chicago President Dr Robert Zimmer; New York Law School Professor Nadine Strossen; Southern Poverty Law Center President J. Richard Cohen; and Middlebury College Professor of International Politics and Economics Dr Allison Stanger * White nationalist Richard Spencer last week spoke on the campus of the University of Florida, after it said it had to allow ‘free expression of speech’ as it is a state entity. It paid an estimated $500,000 in security costs, and made counselors available for students, faculty, and staff Location: Dirksen Senate Office Building, Rm 430, Washington, DC http://help.senate.gov/ 10:00 AM Senate Armed Services subcommittee closed briefing on Niger – Seapower Subcommittee closed briefing on ‘Niger’, given by Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs Robert Karem; and Joint Staff Deputy Director for Special Operations and Counterterrorism Maj. Gen. Albert Elton II * Four U.S. soldiers were killed in an ambush in Niger earlier this month, with details of their mission there – as part of a joint U.S.-Nigerien team – and of the attack only leaking out over the last few weeks * The deaths have led to controversy after President Donald Trump was accused of offending the widow of one of the four, Sgt. La David Johnson, by allegedly struggling to remember the soldier’s name and of telling her that he had known what he had signed up for when joining the military. President Trump denied the accusations, attacked Democratic Rep. Frederica Wilson for her account of the president’s phone call with the Johnson family, and claimed that previous presidents had not made as much effort to contact the families of fallen service members as he has Location: U.S. Capitol Visitor Center, SVC-217, Washington, DC http://armed-services.senate.gov/ 11:00 AM Senate Entrepreneurship Committee hearing on strengthening the ‘ecosystem’ for women – Hearing on ‘Strengthening the Entrepreneurial Ecosystem for Women’, with testimony from Great Lakes Women’s Business Council Executive Director Michelle Richards; 1843 Capital Founding Partner Tracy Chadwell; and Dell Entrepreneur-in-Residence Elizabeth Gore Location: Russell Senate Office Building, Rm 428A, Washington, DC http://sbc.senate.gov/ 2:00 PM Closed Briefing: Intelligence Matters Location: Rm 219, Hart Senate Office Bldg, Washington, DC http://intelligence.senate.gov 2:00 PM Helsinki Commission briefing on countering radicalization – ‘Countering Radicalization: International Best Practices and the Role of the OSCE’ Helsinki Commission briefing, with Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe Chairperson-in-Office’s Special Representative on Countering Radicalization and Violent Extremism Peter Neumann present the findings from his recent expert report on OSCE activities to prevent violent extremism and radicalization that lead to terrorism, plus George Washington University Program on Extremism Deputy Director Seamus Hughes and The Washington Institute Stein Program on Counterterrorism and Intelligence Director Matthew Levitt discussing his conclusions and providing their own views on the way ahead for U.S. efforts and international cooperation Location: Russell Senate Office Building, Rm 385, Washington, DC http://www.csce.gov https://twitter.com/HelsinkiComm 

US House: 9:00 AM House Judiciary subcommittee hearing on the U.S. Refugee Admissions Program – Immigration and Border Security Subcommittee hearing on ‘Oversight of the United States Refugee Admissions Program’, with testimony from Acting Assistant Secretary of State for Population, Refugees, and Migration Simon Henshaw; U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services Director L. Francis Cissna; Department of Health and Human Services Office of Refugee Resettlement Director Scott Lloyd; and Government and Accountability Office Director of Homeland Security and Justice Rebecca Gambler Location: Rm 2141, Rayburn House Office Bldg, Washington, DC http://judiciary.house.gov/ https://twitter.com/HouseJudiciary 9:00 AM House votes on Senate-passed FY’18 budget bill – House of Representatives meets for legislative business, with agenda including completion of consideration of the Senate Amendment to ‘H.Con.Res. 71, Establishing the congressional budget for the United States Government for fiscal year 2018 and setting forth the appropriate budgetary levels for fiscal years 2019 through 2027’ Location: Washington, DC http://www.house.gov/ 9:00 AM House Dems announce introduction of Port Drivers’ Bill of Rights Act and Clean Ports Act – Democratic Reps. Grace Napolitano and Jerrold Nadler announce the introduction of the ‘Port Drivers’ Bill of Rights Act’ (to ‘begin to address the growing problem of low wages and poor working conditions for the nation’s port truckers’) and the Clean Ports Act of 2017 (to ‘improve the quality of air for an estimated 87 million Americans who live and work in port regions’) via press conference with six port truck drivers from the Ports of Los Angeles, Long Beach, and New Jersey, along with International Brotherhood of Teamsters representatives Location: House Triangle, Washington, DC napolitano.house.gov https://twitter.com/gracenapolitano 10:00 AM Energy Markup of Subcommittee Vote on H.R. 1733 – To direct the Secretary of Energy to review and update a report on the energy and environmental benefits of the re-refining of used lubricating oil; H.R. 2872 – Promoting Hydropower Development at Existing Nonpowered Dams Act; ; and H.R. 2880 – Promoting Closed-Loop Pumped Storage Hydropower Act. Location: Rayburn House Office Building, Rm 2123, Washington, DC http://energycommerce.house.gov/ https://twitter.com/HouseCommerce 10:00 AM Congressional Women’s Working Group on Immigration Reform forum on immigrant women in detention – Congressional Women’s Working Group on Immigration Reform hold forum to discuss the experiences of immigrant women in detention under the Trump administration. Speakers include Working Group Co-Chairs Lucille Roybal-Allard and Pramila Jayapal and fellow Democratic Rep. Sheila Jackson Lee, with panelists including Casa de Esperanza Senior Director of Public Policy Rosie Hidalgo, Women’s Refugee Commission Migrant Rights and Justice Program Senior Program Officer Katharina Obser, Las Americas Immigrant Advocacy Center Managing Attorney Linda Rivas, former Secretary of Homeland Security’s Special Advisor Dora Schriro, and an individual directly impacted by the govt’s immigration detention policies Location: U.S. Capitol Visitor Center, HVC-210, Washington, DC http://roybal-allard.house.gov/ https://twitter.com/RepRoybalAllard 10:00 AM Tom Lantos Human Rights Commission briefing on the Uighurs – Tom Lantos Human Rights Commission briefing on ‘Uyghur Human Rights in China and Abroad’, with a panel of Human Rights Watch China Director Sophie Richardson, World Uyghur Congress President Rebiya Kadeer, Radio Free Asia Uyghur Service Director Alim Seytoff, and Foreign Policy contributing writer Bethany Allen-Ebrahimian discussing China’s efforts to control the primarily-Muslim ethnic minority group, and offering recommendations on how the U.S. and the international community can responsibly protect Uighur human rights Location: Rayburn House Office Building, Rm 2255, Washington, DC http://tlhrc.house.gov/ https://twitter.com/TLHRCommission 10:00 AM House Small Business subcommittee hearing on fintech – Economic Growth, Tax, and Capital Access Subcommittee hearing on ‘Financing through Fintech: Online Lending’s Role in Improving Small Business Capital Access’, with testimony from PayNet President and co-founder William Phelan; Hudson Cook partner Katherine Fisher; and Mirador CEO Trevor Dryer Location: Rayburn House Office Building, Rm 2360, Washington, DC http://smallbusiness.house.gov/ https://twitter.com/SmallBizGOP 12:00 PM Congressional Internet Caucus Advisory Committee briefing on data analytics and AI – Advisory Committee to the Congressional Internet Caucus Advisory Committee hosts ‘Blending Data Analytics and AI: Policy Implications’ educational briefing, featuring Federal Trade Commission Acting Chief Technologist Neil Chilson, Center for Democracy and Technology Vice President for Policy Chris Calabrese, Workday Chief Strategy Officer Leighanne Levensaler, and Information Technology Industry Council President and CEO Dean Garfield Location: Rayburn House Office Building, Rm 2237, Washington, DC www.netcaucus.org https://twitter.com/NetCaucusAC #BigDataAI 12:30 PM Democratic Members of Congress, Nurses to Call for Additional Puerto Rico Aid – key Democratic Members of Congress will join with nurses who recently returned from volunteering in Puerto Rico to underscore the need for additional federal assistance. Participants: Democratic Leader Nancy Pelosi (D-CA); Rep. Nydia M. Velázquez (D-NY); Rep. José E. Serrano (D-NY); Rep. Rep. Luis V. Gutiérrez (D-IL); Bonnie Castillo, RN, Associate Executive Director, National Nurses United; Cathy Kennedy, RN Vice-President, National Nurses United; Olivia Lynch, RN from Merced California; Christine Grant, RN from Washington DC. Location: HVC-215 pelosi.house.gov 12:30 PM ‘Legal Aid’s Role in Responding to Domestic Violence’ Congressional briefing – ‘Legal Aid’s Role in Responding to Domestic Violence’ Legal Services Corporation briefing, held in cooperation with Access to Civil Legal Services Caucus co-founders bipartisan Reps. Susan Brooks and Joe Kennedy III. Former Neighborhood Legal Services Association client ‘Brenda B’, Putnam County Sheriff’s Office (WV) Corporal Tony Craigo, former Indiana Assistant Attorney General Abigail Kuzma, and Legal Aid of West Virginia Executive Director Adrienne Worthy discuss ‘the importance of civil legal aid to survivors’ Location: Rayburn House Office Building, Rm 2226, Washington, DC www.lsc.gov https://twitter.com/lsctweets 2:00 PM Helsinki Commission briefing on countering radicalization – ‘Countering Radicalization: International Best Practices and the Role of the OSCE’ Helsinki Commission briefing, with Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe Chairperson-in-Office’s Special Representative on Countering Radicalization and Violent Extremism Peter Neumann present the findings from his recent expert report on OSCE activities to prevent violent extremism and radicalization that lead to terrorism, plus George Washington University Program on Extremism Deputy Director Seamus Hughes and The Washington Institute Stein Program on Counterterrorism and Intelligence Director Matthew Levitt discussing his conclusions and providing their own views on the way ahead for U.S. efforts and international cooperation Location: Russell Senate Office Building, Rm 385, Washington, DC http://www.csce.gov https://twitter.com/HelsinkiComm In Defense of Christians annual Summit for Middle East Christians concludes – In Defense of Christians fourth annual Summit for Middle East Christians, entitled ‘American Leadership and Securing the Future of Christians in the Middle East’. Final day agenda includes ‘Advocacy Day Briefing: Policy and Education on Capitol Hill’, with participants including bipartisan Reps. Robert Aderholt and Ro Khanna Location: Washington, DC www.indefenseofchristians.org https://twitter.com/indefchristians 

Other: 8:00 AM Axios discussion on ‘the potential for bipartisan solutions in a hyper-polarized Washington’ – Axios hosts ‘Party Wars: Is Progress Still Possible?’ conversation on the ‘potential for bipartisan solutions in a hyper-polarized Washington’, with Democrats Sen. Joe Manchin and Rep. Josh Gottheimer, Republican Rep. Carlos Curbelo, and NBC News Capitol Hill Correspondent Kasie Hunt Location: AJAX, 1011 4th St NW, Washington, DC www.axios.com https://twitter.com/axios #Axios360 8:10 AM Charles Koch Institute Advancing Justice 2017 Summit – Charles Koch Institute Advancing Justice 2017 Summit: An Agenda for Human Dignity and Public Safety, to identify the next set of criminal justice reform priorities. Speakers include Republican Sens. Chuck Grassley and Mike Lee, former Sen. Jim DeMint, Fordham University Professor of Law and Economics John Pfaff, Ohio State University Professor of Law Doug Berman, New York University School of Law Professor of Practice Anne Milgram, former Baltimore Ravens player Eugene Monroe, former Acting Attorney General George Tewilliger III, and criminal justice reform advocate Sharanda Jones Location: Marriott Marquis Washington, DC, 901 Massachusetts Ave NW, Washington, DC www.charleskochinstitute.org https://twitter.com/ckinstitute 9:30 AM ‘North Korea’s ‘An-jeon’bu’ Prison Camps’ discussed at NPC news conference – ‘The Parallel Gulag: North Korea’s ‘An-jeon’bu’ Prison Camps’ NPC News Conference, hosted by The Committee for Human Rights in North Korea (HRNK), with CSIS Korea Chair Victor Cha, author David Hawk, Korea Society Senior Director Stephen Noerper and HNRK’s Amanda Mortwedt Oh, Roberta Cohen Location: National Press Club, 529 14th St NW, Washington, DC www.hrnk.org 12:15 PM AG Sessions discusses Constitutional principles and the rule of law at the Heritage Foundation – Attorney General Jeff Sessions delivers remarks on Constitutional principles and the rule of law at the Heritage Foundation Legal Strategy Forum Location: Heritage Foundation, 214 Massachusetts Ave NE, Washington, DC www.justice.gov https://twitter.com/TheJusticeDept 4:00 PM Liberty Korea Party chairman speaks at NPC on redeploying U.S. nuclear weapons to South Korea – ‘Redeploying U.S. Nuclear Weapons to South Korea’ NPC News Conference, with Liberty Korea Party Chairman Joon-Pyo Hong discussing recent North Korean actions and missile launches, and the ‘necessity of necessity of redeploying U.S. nuclear weapons to South Korea as a method to solve the crisis on the Korean peninsula Location: National Press Club, 529 14th St NW, Washington, DC http://press.org/ https://twitter.com/PressClubDC 6:00 PM Oxi Day Foundation Annual Gala – Oxi Day Foundation Annual Gala. This year’s keynote is Secretary of Defense James Mattis, with honorees including North Korean human rights activist Ji Seong-ho, activist against Islamic extremism Ayaan Hirsi Ali, and Bruce Mosler Location: U.S. Institute of Peace, 2301 Constitution Ave NW, Washington, DC www.oxidayfoundation.org White House Fellows Foundation and Association Annual Leadership Conference – White House Fellows Foundation and Association 52nd Annual Leadership Conference, this year themed Leadership in a Changing World’. Speakers include Secretary of the Treasury Steven Mnuchin, Secretary of Housing and Urban Development Ben Carson, and NSC Director Gen. H.R. McMaster (Thursday), and U.S. Supreme Court Justice Neil Gorsuch and EPA Administrator Scott Pruitt (Friday) Location: U.S. Chamber of Commerce, 1615 H St NW, Washington, DC www.whff.org https://twitter.com/WHFellows 

# Last Laughs 

## Late Night Political Humor. 

Jimmy Kimmel: “Of course, there’s a reason why Jeff Flake and Bob Corker are able to criticize the President so openly, because neither one of them is trying to get re-elected. Like when you and your girlfriend break up, on the way out the door she tells me, ‘None of my orgasms were real!’” 

Stephen Colbert: “A reporter overheard a member of Trump’s Secret Service saying that Trump ate rice and two pieces of cherry pie, took a few sips of his drink, and that, quote, ‘He loves rice.’ Well, of course he loves rice. It’s the same reason he loves Mike Pence – bland and white.” 

James Corden: “Trump said his meeting with senators was a love fest, to which Mike Pence said, ‘That is a sin. Repent.’” 

James Corden: “Two slices of cherry pie and rice. Trump managed to show how to eat like a spoiled toddler and a death-row inmate at the same time.” 

Trevor Noah: “A senator trolling the President of the United States is not normal. It’s funny, but it’s not normal. It’s like Trump is dragging the entire federal government into trash social media. You know, you realize there going to be emojis in history books now. Like in three years, there won’t even be a Capitol Building. Senators will just vote on Instagram stories.” Trevor Noah: “You see, [Steve] Bannon wants all Republicans who go against Trump to quit, so that he can replace them with Trump loyalists. That is really what he wants. Bannon even said he plans to challenge every single Republican politician except Ted Cruz, which is so sad for Ted Cruz. He even gets left out of threats.” 

Jimmy Fallon: “Trump was tweeting again today. He said that his big meeting with Republican senators was a love fest with multiple standing ovations. Yep, they were mostly people getting up to leave, but still, that counts as standing ovation.” 

Jimmy Fallon: “Trump sent three tweets about how the senators gave him a standing ovation. It’s a big deal for Trump. He hasn’t seen 50 people cheering him on since his inauguration.” 

Seth Meyers: “Housing Secretary Ben Carson said today that rebuilding Puerto Rico after Hurricane Maria could take anywhere between one and 100 years. And that’s just the kind of precision you expect from a brain surgeon.” 

Seth Meyers: “A new poll has found that 51 percent of Democrats now have a favorable view of former President George W. Bush, and that makes sense. I’d also have a favorable view of the flu if I suddenly found myself with the plague.” 

Seth Meyers: “Trump is an old billionaire with a young, beautiful wife who just became President. Why would he ever think, ‘I’ve got to change my ways?’ That would be like Larry King going, ‘You know what, I’m going to start wearing belts.’” 

Conan O’Brien: “Joe Biden made an announcement today. When asked about the 2020 election, Joe Biden said, ‘I haven’t decided to run, but I’ve decided I’m not going to decide not to run.’” 

Conan O’Brien: “In a late-night vote yesterday, the Senate made it illegal to sue a bank, which is why today Harvey Weinstein petitioned to become a bank.” 

Conan O’Brien: “In the past week, several prominent men have been fired for sexual harassment. It’s called the Harvey effect. Of course, none of them will see any jail time. That’s being called the Cosby effect.”  

> Copyright 2017 by Bulletin Intelligence LLC Reproduction or redistribution without permission prohibited. Content is drawn from thousands of newspapers, national magazines, national and local television programs, radio broadcasts, social-media platforms and additional forms of open-source data. Sources for Bulletin Intelligence audience-size estimates include Scarborough, GfK MRI, comScore, Nielsen, and the Audit Bureau of Circulation. Data from and access to third party social media platforms, including but not limited to Facebook, Twitter, Instagram and others, is subject to the respective platform’s terms of use. Services that include Factiva content are governed by Factiva’s terms of use. Services including embedded Tweets are also subject to Twitter for Website's information and privacy policies. The Department of the Interior News Briefing is published five days a week by Bulletin Intelligence, which creates custom briefings for government and corporate leaders. We can be found on the Web at BulletinIntelligence.com, or called at (703) 483-6100.

# Conversation Contents 

## U.S. Department of the Interior News Briefing for Tuesday, October 3, 2017 

# Bulletin Intelligence <Interior@bulletinintelligence.com> 

## From: Bulletin Intelligence <Interior@bulletinintelligence.com> 

## Sent: Tue Oct 03 2017 05:01:12 GMT-0600 (MDT) 

## To: <Interior@bulletinintelligence.com> 

## Subject: U.S. Department of the Interior News Briefing for Tuesday, October 3, 2017  

> Mobile version and searchable archives available here. Please click here to subscribe.
> DATE: TUESDAY, OCTOBER 3, 2017 7:00 AM EDT

# Today's Table Of Contents 

DOI In The News 

• Los Angeles Times: Zinke Under Investigation For Taxpayer-Funded Flights. • E&E Publishing: Zinke Champions Oil And Gas During Clean Energy Week. • Federal News Radio (DC): How Interior, NGA, DHS Provided A Common Picture For Hurricane First Responders. • Knoxville (TN) News Sentinel: Secretary Of Agriculture Wants Firefighting Funding Restructured. • Law360: Statoil Loses Challenge To DOI Royalty Reports Penalty. • Daily Beast: The Inside Story Of How Palmer Luckey Scored A Meeting With The Interior Secretary. • Forbes: With His National Monument Proposal, Zinke Proves He Is No Teddy Roosevelt. • Washington Post: Disloyalty Slur Latest In Series Showing Trump Administration’s Mistrust Of Feds. 

Bureau Of Indian Affairs 

• Auditors Say Montana Tribe Can’t Account For $3.5 Million. 

Bureau Of Land Management 

• Daily Yonder: BLM Backs Out Of Sage-Grouse Pact, Possibly Prompting Litigation And Lost Revenue. • Associated Press: New Mexico Oil Producers Concerned About Permit Backlog. • Bismarck (ND) Tribune: BLM Recommends Including Minerals Near Theodore Roosevelt National Park In Lease Sale. • Daily Caller: Anti-Frackers Go For Broke Against Trump. • Southwest Colorado Journal: Proposed Hovenweep Drilling Criticized For Harm To Views, Night Sky. • U.S. News & World Report: Supreme Court Won’t Weigh In On Cliven Bundy Lawyer Issue. 

Bureau Of Ocean Energy Management 

• Drillers Decline Trump’s Marine Sanctuary Offer. • New York To BOEM: Here’s Where We Can Build Offshore Wind. 

Bureau Of Reclamation 

• Delta Tunnels Money Fight Wrapped Up In Water History. 

Fish And Wildlife Service 

• Plattsburgh (NY) Press Republican: Gillibrand Proposes Bill To Combat Invasive Beetle. • Hilton Head Island (SC) Packet: Savannah Wildlife Refuge Closed 3 Weeks After Irma. Here’s Why. • Salem (OR) Capital Press: Tests Verify Western Washington Has A Wolf. • VTDigger (VT): Margolis: Scott Appeals To His Base With Conte Refuge Stance. 

National Park Service 

• U.S. News & World Report: Court Backs Hovercraft Ban In Alaska’s National Preserves. • New York Times: Nude Sculpture Four Stories Tall Planned For National Mall. • Cody (WY) Enterprise: County, State Miss Out On Revenue From Park. • Sacramento (CA) Bee: Proposed Fence Faces Opposition At Former Tule Lake Internment Camp. • U.S. News & World Report: Yellowstone National Park Bison Numbers Down From Last Year. • Delmarva (MD) Daily Times: 100 Sea Turtles Hatch At Assateague, Head Out To Sea. • Idaho State Journal: On Mountain Goats And Burros. 

Office Of Insular Affairs 

• USA Today: Trump To Visit Puerto Rico Tuesday. 

US Geological Survey 

• San Jose (CA) Mercury News: Can Scientists Predict Yosemite Rock Falls? • KSJR-FM Collegeville (MN): Study: Chemicals Affecting Fish In Great Lakes Rivers. 

Top National News 

• ABC: Media Analyses: “Somber” Trump Delivers “Measured” Remarks On Las Vegas Shooting. • New York Times: “Top Officials”: GOP Can’t Rule Out Tax Increase For Some Middle Class Taxpayers. • Politico: Trump Considers Executive Order On Welfare. • The Hill: Poll Finds Most Americans Want Federal Government To Address Climate Change. 

Editorial Wrap-Up 

• New York Times. - “Chaos In Catalonia.” • Washington Post. - “Catalonia Held A Referendum. Russia Won.” - “Trump Could Help Refugees. Instead He Shrugs.” - “The Worst Kind Of American Exceptionalism.” • Wall Street Journal. - “‘An Act Of Pure Evil.’” - “Of Judges And Gerrymanders.” - “Fruit Flies And Your Insomnia.” 

Big Picture 

• Headlines From Today’s Front Pages. Washington Schedule 

> • Today’s Events In Washington.

Last Laughs 

> • Late Night Political Humor.

# DOI In The News 

## Zinke Under Investigation For Taxpayer-Funded Flights. 

The Los Angeles Times (10/2, Halpe) reports that the Interior Department’s Office of Inspector General has launched an investigation into whether Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke’s “taxpayer-funded flights on private planes...were a legitimate government expense.” The investigation comes in the wake of “news reports late last week that revealed a $12,375 flight Zinke chartered from Las Vegas to an airport near his home in Montana, where he spent the night.” The AP (10/2) says the investigation came at the request of Rep. Raul Grijalva, the senior Democrat on the House Natural Resources Committee, and Rep. Donald McEachin, the “top Democrat on the panel’s subcommittee on oversight and investigations.” Politico (10/2, Lefebvre) quotes Nancy K. DiPaolo, spokeswoman for Interior’s Office of the Inspector General, as saying the IG has “received numerous complaints.” In a speech to the Heritage Foundation on Friday, Zinke “denied any inappropriate travel” and “said his travels were approved by ‘career employees,’” Reuters (10/2) reports. Zinke “called reports about his recent use of chartered private flights ‘a little B.S.’” Also reporting are the Washington Examiner (10/2, Siciliano), the Washington Post (10/2, Rein), CNN (10/2, Marsh), the Huffington Post (10/2, D'Angelo), MarketWatch (10/2, Schroeder), the Richmond (VA) Times-Dispatch (10/2), the New York Post (10/2, Fredericks), Federal Computer Week (10/2, Gunter), Vice (10/2), the Daily Beast (10/2), and the Daily Beast (10/2, Markay). 

## Zinke Champions Oil And Gas During Clean Energy Week. 

E&E Publishing (10/2, King) reports that Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke opened and closed the National Clean Energy Week with a promotion for developing fossil fuels on public lands. Secretary Zinke “touted oil and gas operators’ progress on hydraulic fracturing.” Secretary Zinke noted that “progress is being made” in renewable energy sources, yet without a breakthrough on storing the energy with batteries, the US must rely on traditional energy sources. 

## How Interior, NGA, DHS Provided A Common Picture For Hurricane First Responders. 

Federal News Radio (DC) (10/2, Miller) reports that at the request of FEMA, an interagency team – made up of officials from DHS, the NGA, and the Department of Interior – launched the Homeland Infrastructure Foundation Level Data (HIFLD) to serve “as a hub to aggregate and disseminate open data to support the mapping activities for hurricane response and recovery.” Tod Dabolt, the geospatial information officer in the Office of the CIO at Interior, “said this geospatial effort is making information sharing easier, better and faster than ever before.” He added that while the initial platform was for first responders and others with knowledge of geospatial information, Interior and its agency partners hope to see how HIFLD, as it matures, “can use search and other forms of technology to improve the navigation for non-GIS users.” 

## Secretary Of Agriculture Wants Firefighting Funding Restructured. 

The Knoxville (TN) News Sentinel (10/2, Ahillen) reports that Secretary of Agriculture Sonny Perdue “spent the weekend in the East Tennessee area, visiting the several departments at the University of Tennessee in Knoxville on Saturday then heading to the Tellico Plains area Sunday for a round table with U.S. Forest Service personnel and local forest partners in the morning before touring the Quarry Creek fire site just south of Tellico Plains in the afternoon.” The U.S. Forest Service has “spent more than $2 billion on fire suppression this year, and that is a situation that doesn’t please Perdue.” The article notes that “during a visit to the Great Smoky Mountains National Park in August, Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke advocated a campaign to clear away undergrowth in national forests and parks as a way to prevent massive wildfires.” Perdue said Sunday, “I agree wholeheartedly. We are doing a better job in the southeast with undergrowth and prescribed burning than we are doing out west. That is one of the real challenges we have.” 

## Statoil Loses Challenge To DOI Royalty Reports Penalty. 

Law360 (10/2, Lidgett) reports that “a Texas federal judge tossed as premature Friday a Statoil unit’s claims that by issuing the harshest penalties for inadvertent reporting errors, the U.S. Department of the Interior subverted the congressionally approved civil penalty structure for companies that fail their federal oil and gas royalty obligations.” U.S. District Judge Vanessa D. Gilmore “granted the DOI summary judgment against Statoil USA E&P Inc.” 

## The Inside Story Of How Palmer Luckey Scored A Meeting With The Interior Secretary. 

The Daily Beast (10/2, Resnick) reports that obtained from a Freedom of Information Act request detail how technology entrepreneur Palmer Luckey was able to set up a meeting with Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke in April. The article says that “cash was indeed a factor...but the extent of it is not clear.” The meeting was “officially labelled as a discussion of ‘border wall building plans.’” 

## With His National Monument Proposal, Zinke Proves He Is No Teddy Roosevelt. 

In a piece for Forbes (10/2, Burke), Monte Burke writes that Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke can’t call himself “a Teddy Roosevelt guy” after his recommendation to “shrink four National Monuments and modify at least six others.” Burke argues that “this potential action by the Trump administration should be seen for what it is: An effort to undermine existing National Monument protections, and a favor to the oil and gas industries that comes at the expense of the American public, in general, and American sportsmen, in specific.” Burke says that if Zinke “really is a Teddy Roosevelt guy, he should start” listening to sportsmen “now before it’s too late.” 

## Disloyalty Slur Latest In Series Showing Trump Administration’s Mistrust Of Feds. 

In his column for the Washington Post (10/2, Davidson), Joe Davidson writes that “while Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke’s accusation about the loyalty of his workforce is the Trump administration’s most outrageous statement about federal employees, it fits a deplorable pattern of verbal aggression against them.” Davidson says that “Zinke’s declaration that ‘I got 30 percent of the crew that’s not loyal to the flag’ is an escalation that demands denunciation.” According to Davidson, “Zinke’s comments leaves his staff dismayed, on edge and offended.” 

# Bureau Of Indian Affairs 

## Auditors Say Montana Tribe Can’t Account For $3.5 Million. 

The AP (10/2, Brown) reports that a Montana Indian tribe and the Bureau of Indian Affairs “can’t fully account for $3.5 million primarily in federal funds, including money for a corruption-plagued water project that’s resulted in numerous convictions, according to government audits and federal officials.” The audits by the Office of Inspector General of the Interior Department “examined $3.7 million for Chippewa Cree Tribe transportation programs and a $2 million contract for repairs and maintenance of the tribal water system.” According to the article, “in both cases, tribal leaders were unable to fully document how they spent the money or provided inadequate records to justify the spending, federal officials said. “ 

# Bureau Of Land Management 

## BLM Backs Out Of Sage-Grouse Pact, Possibly Prompting Litigation And Lost Revenue. 

The Daily Yonder (10/2, Oates) reports that as the Bureau of Land Management decided to back out of a sage-grouse habitat agreement in September, the federal Treasury added another $15,000 in public-land leases. However, the government may now have to spend much more in legal fees over legal actions relating to the agreement’s dissolution. According to Department of the Interior officials, other sage grouse habitats may be leased across the West. 

Wyoming Governor Concerned By Anticipated Sage Grouse Changes. The Casper (WY) Star-Tribune (10/2, Richards) reports that Wyoming Gov. Matt Mead expressed his concerns Friday regarding the potential sage grouse management plan changes. Gov. Mead reiterated that the western states of the US should be consulted regarding any changes. Gov. Mead commented on the topic “after the New York Times leaked information Thursday about the Trump Administration’s plans to make significant changes to sage grouse management in the coming days.” 

## New Mexico Oil Producers Concerned About Permit Backlog. 

The AP (10/2, Bryan) reports that oil producers in New Mexico are concerned about the US Bureau of Land Management’s permit processing backlog. Oil and gas fees have recently increased for operations on public and trial land, yet permitting delays have cost both the federal government and New Mexico money in the form of taxes and royalties. The New Mexico Oil and Gas Association “estimates nearly $1.5 million in federal royalties and another $831,000 in state severance taxes are deferred daily due to administrative issues.” 

## BLM Recommends Including Minerals Near Theodore Roosevelt National Park In Lease Sale. 

The Bismarck (ND) Tribune (10/2, Dalrymple) reports that the Bureau of Land Management “recommends including a 120-acre parcel in McKenzie County bordering the North Unit” of the Theodore Roosevelt National Park “in a lease sale scheduled for March 2018.” The BLM has “published an environmental assessment of leasing the federal minerals and is accepting public comments through Oct. 30.” The BLM “said in a news release its recommendation of including the parcel in the lease sale is consistent with the ‘administration’s goals of promoting America’s energy independence’ and also follows approved resources management plans.” 

## Anti-Frackers Go For Broke Against Trump. 

The Daily Caller (10/2, White) reports that an environmental group said Monday protests are planned for later in the year against the Trump Administration’s move in allowing hydraulic fracking on public lands in Utah. The group will protest against “the Bureau of Land Management’s (BLM) failure to address how fracking will worsen pollution and public health in a sparsely populated portion of Utah.” Center for Biological Diversity Senior Attorney Diana Dascalu-Joffe said, “this leasing plan disregards grave risks to public health and endangered species in favor of short-term profits for fossil fuel companies.” 

## Proposed Hovenweep Drilling Criticized For Harm To Views, Night Sky. 

The Southwest Colorado Journal (10/2, Mimiaga) reports that the Utah office of the Bureau of Land Management released an environmental analysis on a proposal “to lease 51,400 acres of federal minerals in southeastern Utah for possible oil and gas development.” The proposal includes “Parcels 50 and 51, totaling 2,665 acres, located on the eastern Utah border, north and west of Hovenweep National Monument archaeological sites in Colorado and Utah.” Environmental groups have criticized the lease sale proposal. 

## Supreme Court Won’t Weigh In On Cliven Bundy Lawyer Issue. 

The AP (10/2) reports that the Supreme Court is “declining to weigh in on conservative activist Larry Klayman’s efforts to represent state’s rights figure Cliven Bundy during a trial over the 2014 standoff near Bundy’s Nevada ranch.” The high court “said Monday that it won’t address a dispute in which Klayman claims he was improperly prevented from joining Bundy’s defense team. Bundy, two sons and four other defendants are scheduled to go on trial Oct. 10.” Meanwhile, the High Country (CO) News (10/2) reports that Roger Stone, “an on-and-off adviser of President Donald Trump, has become a public supporter of Nevada rancher Cliven Bundy and his co-defendants, who are currently awaiting federal trial.” Stone “made public appearances in July in Nevada to urge Trump to officially pardon the Bundys, and name-dropped them at a conservative leadership conference in Las Vegas in mid-September.” The article says that “Stone is an odd bedfellow for the Bundys, since he is a longtime Washington, D.C., insider with no obvious connection to ranching or public-lands issues.” 

# Bureau Of Ocean Energy Management 

## Drillers Decline Trump’s Marine Sanctuary Offer. 

Oil Price (10/3, Slav) reports that the Trump administration has begun a review that could culminate in the opening of 11 marine sanctuaries for oil and gas drilling. While the American Petroleum Institute has “only had praise for the new administration’s initiatives so far, this time reactions are more lukewarm.” Oil Price reasons that “it’s not too difficult for Big Oil to imagine the public and shareholder backlash against any oil company bold enough to drill in a previously protected offshore area,” as well as the “public relations nightmare that would undoubtedly ensue.” 

## New York To BOEM: Here’s Where We Can Build Offshore Wind. 

North American Windpower (10/2, Lillian) reports that “New York State has asked the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management (BOEM) to consider identifying and leasing at least four new Wind Energy Areas off New York’s Atlantic Coast.” The proposal asks “that BOEM use the Area of Consideration for an Area Identification process, through which BOEM would delineate specific Wind Energy Areas for future leasing through engagement with stakeholders and local communities, as well as the completion of federal and state regulatory reviews.” 

# Bureau Of Reclamation 

## Delta Tunnels Money Fight Wrapped Up In Water History. 

The Sacramento (CA) Bee (10/2, Kasler, Sabalow) reports that a deal made in 1939 that “paved the way for much of the Central Valley Project” has “formed the basis, nearly 80 years later, of a major funding impasse that threatens to unravel California WaterFix.” The article says that “the issue came to a head when the board of Westlands Water District, the largest of all the water agencies served by the Central Valley Project, voted Sept. 19 against paying for its share of the expected $17.1 billion cost of the tunnels.” Westlands’ decision was “rooted in a cost-allocation formula imposed by the U.S. Bureau of Reclamation – a formula that has its origins in the 1939 deal and serves as a reminder of the convoluted nature of water distribution in California.” 

# Fish And Wildlife Service Gillibrand Proposes Bill To Combat Invasive Beetle. 

The Plattsburgh (NY) Press Republican (10/2, Raymo) reports that Sen.. Kirsten Gillibrand is “introducing legislation to add the emerald ash borer to the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service’s list of injurious wildlife so importers bringing the invasive species into the United States can be held accountable.” Her legislation “would strengthen federal regulations that have not been updated in 117 years.” Gillibrand said, “We need to pass this law to keep species like the emerald ash borer from coming here in the first place.” 

## Savannah Wildlife Refuge Closed 3 Weeks After Irma. Here’s Why. 

The Hilton Head Island (SC) Packet (10/2, Wilson) reports that “most of the Savannah National Wildlife Refuge remains closed three weeks after Tropical Storm Irma swept across the Lowcountry.” Citing “a news release posted on the website of the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service and information posted on the refuge’s Facebook page,” the article says that “the storm surge paired with high ‘king tides’ topped the levees at the refuge in Jasper County by nearly 2 feet, making roads unstable and breaching dikes.” 

## Tests Verify Western Washington Has A Wolf. 

The Salem (OR) Capital Press (10/2, Jenkins) reports that the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service has “confirmed that an animal in eastern Skagit County is not a hybrid and is Western Washington’s first known gray wolf in decades.” The Spokane (WA) Spokesman-Review (10/2, Landers) reports that the FWS “says a GPS collar placed on the wolf captured in June shows the 100-pound black male has remained in Skagit County.” According to FWS spokeswoman Ann Froschauer, “it’s not clear where the gray wolf came from because DNA samples don’t find a connection with known wolf packs in Eastern Washington, Idaho or British Columbia.” 

## Margolis: Scott Appeals To His Base With Conte Refuge Stance. 

In his column for VTDigger (VT) (10/2, Margolis), Jon Margolis analyzes Gov. Phil Scott’s stance on the proposal to expand the Silvio O. Conte Wildlife Refuge. To Margolis, it seems Scott is trying to cater to both conservationists and loggers. That is why “the governor of Vermont feels he has to write a letter addressed to the secretary of the Interior but also aimed at Vermont loggers and foresters, letting them know he appreciates them,” while also saying that he’s not “against expanding the Conte refuge.” 

# National Park Service 

## Court Backs Hovercraft Ban In Alaska’s National Preserves. 

The AP (10/2, Joling) reports that “the National Park Service can ban hovercraft operating on Alaska rivers that flow through national preserves, a federal Appeals Court ruled Monday, in a case that has implications for who will manage state waterways.” A three-judge panel of the 9th Circuit Court of Appeals “concluded said the Park Service has regulatory authority over a river in a preserve even as Alaska since statehood has owned the riverbed.” The panel wrote, “On remand from the Supreme Court, we again conclude that the federal government properly exercised it authority to regulate hovercraft use on the rivers within conservation system units in Alaska.” 

## Nude Sculpture Four Stories Tall Planned For National Mall. 

The New York Times (10/2, Caron) reports that “activists are working to bring a steel sculpture of a 45-foot-tall nude woman to Washington, where she will temporarily face the White House from a perch on the National Mall.” The sculpture was “created for the Burning Man festival in 2015 but is being repurposed for Catharsis on the Mall, a gathering in Washington that seeks to bring about social change.” Catharsis on the Mall is “scheduled for Veterans Day weekend, Nov. 10-12, but the sculpture would remain in place for up to four months to raise awareness about the Equal Rights Amendment, organizers said.” The National Park Service is “still reviewing the group’s proposal, Russell Newell, a spokesman for the Department of the Interior, said in an email.” 

## County, State Miss Out On Revenue From Park. 

In the first part of a two-park series about taxes in Yellowstone National Park, the Cody (WY) Enterprise (10/2, Miller) reports that “a jurisdictional peculiarity linked to Yellowstone’s founding allows outside concessionaires to sidestep paying state and local taxes when they make multi-million dollar improvements to private property within the Park’s confines.” According to the article, “like his predecessor Douglas Brandt, under whom he served as a deputy, Park County assessor Pat Meyer said he believes concessionaires in Yellowstone aren’t paying their fair share in taxes.” Yellowstone is one of the only national parks to be granted “exclusive federal jurisdiction.” According to public information officer Jonathan Shafer, “Yellowstone owes its special tax status partially to the fact that it was created prior to Wyoming statehood.” 

## Proposed Fence Faces Opposition At Former Tule Lake Internment Camp. 

The Sacramento (CA) Bee (10/2, Magagnini) reports that “a three-mile, 8-foot-high barbed-wire fence planned around a rural airport on the site of the old Tule Lake War Relocation Center has spawned a national protest by hundreds of Japanese Americans who say it would taint the place where many of their families were locked up during World War II.” Barbara Takei, CFO of the Tule Lake Committee, which is leading the protest, said, “The fence is a desecration of a site we feel is spiritual, a site where people go to mourn, a site that is for remembrance. With the fence, we will be shut out from where our families lived and permanently reminded of the racism and hostility that put us there in the first place.” However, “both the county and airport operator Nick Macy say the fence – which would be partially paid for with federal funds after an environmental impact report is completed – is needed to keep animals off the single runway.” 

## Yellowstone National Park Bison Numbers Down From Last Year. 

The AP (10/2) reports that Yellowstone National Park biologists “say bison numbers are down from last year after its largest cull in nearly a decade.” According to parks spokesman Jonathan Shafer, “biologists’ surveys counted about 4,800 bison that live in the park, 700 less than last year.” State, federal and tribal government agencies are “working to lower to the bison population at the park down to 3,000.” 

## 100 Sea Turtles Hatch At Assateague, Head Out To Sea. 

The Delmarva (MD) Daily Times (10/2) reports that “nearly 100 tiny sea turtle hatchlings from one nest at Assateague Island National Seashore successfully made their way out to sea, the National Park Service announced.” the agency “said a loggerhead sea turtle nest successfully hatched at the National Seashore with about 100 hatchlings emerging from one nest site in the Maryland Over Sand Vehicle zone.” According to the NPS, “although multiple sea turtle nesting attempts have been documented within the National Seashore in past years, this is the first confirmed hatch and the largest number of hatchlings ever recorded.” Additional coverage was provided by the AP (10/3). 

## On Mountain Goats And Burros. 

In his column for the Idaho State Journal (10/2, Carlson), Chris Carlson writes that the National Park Service’s plan to address the overpopulation of mountain goats in Olympic National Park by “shooting them” is likely to bring negative public scrutiny. Carlson wouldn’t be surprised if the Fund for Animals, “founded by Cleveland Amory in the early 1970s, doesn’t file suit and seek a temporary restraining order (TRO) that will suspend the program pending a hearing and possible trial.” 

# Office Of Insular Affairs Trump To Visit Puerto Rico Tuesday. 

While the mass shooting in Las Vegas prompted speculation that President Trump might cancel his scheduled visit to Puerto Rico on Tuesday, Trump has confirmed that “he still plans to visit and defend his administration’s efforts to supply Puerto Rico with sufficient power, food, and potable water,” USA Today (10/2, Jackson) reports. USA Today adds that “the visit may prove a critical test of Trump’s leadership,” in the wake of criticism of the Administration response to Hurricane Maria. John Roberts reported on Fox News’ Special Report (10/2) that while he is in Puerto Rico, the President is expected to meet with San Juan Mayor Carmen Yulin Cruz, who he “accused...on Twitter of ‘poor leadership,’ lumped her in with ‘politically motivated ingrates’ and claimed she has ‘now been told the Democrats you must be nasty to Trump.’ Cruz said she would be happy to meet with the President and seemed to have shifted her opinion of the federal response.” Cruz: “I have been quite complimentary of the people from HHS and FEMA. Their heart is in the right place, but we have to cut the red tape.” Business Insider (10/2, Lockie) reports that Homeland Security Adviser Bossert sent a memo to the White House that “urged a cheery media narrative that starkly clashed with Trump’s own comments on the situation.” Bossert “laid out a plan to ‘pivot hopefully to a theme of stabilizing’ the situation with temporary housing and increasing the reach of power and commodities on Monday and Tuesday and then to ‘start a theme of recovery planning for the bright future that lies ahead for Puerto Rico.’” However, “While Bossert’s memo reflects a carefully coordinated and genial recovery effort with Puerto Rico, Trump used Twitter to attack” Cruz. Alex Perez reported on ABC World News Tonight (10/2, story 15, 2:10, Muir) that FEMA Administrator Long was in Puerto Rico Monday “telling reporters he didn’t see anyone in a life-threatening situation. This, after President Trump slammed the recovery response by local officials in a series of tweets this weekend, writing, ‘They want everything to be done for them when it should be a community effort.’” According to Bloomberg News (10/2, Litvan), Bossert said only 45 percent of Puerto Ricans have access to drinkable water, and the New York Post (10/2, Golding) reports that on the eve of the President’s visit, “nearly all of Puerto Rico remained blacked out” and “the US Energy Department offered a grim forecast for the restoration of electricity.” According to officials, “little more than 5 percent of electrical customers had service on the storm-ravaged island” and the head of its power utility said “that number would rise to just 15 percent over the next two weeks.” The New York Times (10/2, Fausset) reports on recovery efforts in Puerto Rico, saying, “the response to the storm has reminded them of the strength of their culture, and its grace notes of solidarity, neighborliness and pride.” Meanwhile, many “are wondering just how much stress the island can take, given the social problems it was saddled with before the storm, including a 45 percent poverty rate, 10 percent unemployment and the second worst murder rate in the nation in 2016, behind Washington, D.C.” In an op-ed for the Wall Street Journal (10/2), Tevi Troy, a former deputy secretary of health and human services, writes that presidential leadership is about consistent efforts in the face of continuing challenges, and while the Administration received well-deserved good reviews for its response to the hurricanes in Texas and Florida, it will be remembered for the one in which it faltered. 

# US Geological Survey 

## Can Scientists Predict Yosemite Rock Falls? 

The San Jose (CA) Mercury News (10/2, Krieger) reports that “as the giant granite El Capitan briefly slumbers, scientists are racing to identify any areas of dangerous new instability on a popular but restless climbing route that last week released enough rubble to fill 750 dump trucks.” U.S. Geological Survey civil engineer Brian Collins is currently in Yosemite with U.S. Park Service geologist Greg Stock studying the rockfalls. According to the article, “in addition to computer analyses, Collins and Stock have measured the influence of temperature swings by roping up, climbing a slab of unstable rock and installing a long thin wire that measures strain.” 

## Study: Chemicals Affecting Fish In Great Lakes Rivers. 

KSJR-FM Collegeville, MN (10/2, Marohn) reports that “chemical compounds from human activity are affecting fish in rivers that feed into the Great Lakes, a new study shows.” According to the article, “these compounds, known as contaminants of emerging concern, come from a variety of sources including pharmaceuticals, personal care products, flame retardants and pesticides.” The study was a joint project with the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, the U.S. Geological Survey and the Great Lakes Restoration Initiative. 

# Top National News 

## Media Analyses: “Somber” Trump Delivers “Measured” Remarks On Las Vegas Shooting. 

The mass shooting on the Las Vegas Strip early Monday morning, which is now the deadliest such incident in modern US history, dominates all forms of media. While the bulk of the coverage deals with the attack itself and emerging information about the shooter, President Trump’s comments, as well as the White House’s assertion that the moment is not right for a discussion of gun policy, are also covered. Reports call the President’s statement “measured” and “somber,” and some of the more critical assessments contrast it with Trump’s remarks following past shootings. ABC World News Tonight (10/2, story 7, 1:25, Muir) reported that “a somber President Trump...call[ed] the massacre in Las Vegas ‘an act of pure evil.’” ABC’s Cecilia Vega: “He never said the gunman’s name, instead focusing on the victims and survivors. ... But was this terrorism? The White House won’t say. Does the President believe that what happened amounts to an act of domestic terrorism?” White House press secretary Sarah Sanders: “We are still in a fact-finding mission. It would be premature to weigh in on something like that before we have any more facts.” ABC World News Tonight 

(10/2, story 10, 3:05, Muir) reported, “At this White House this afternoon, a moment of silence. The White House staff all there for the solemn ritual. The President will travel here to Las Vegas on Wednesday.” The New York Times (10/2, Landler, Sullivan) says that Trump delivered “a rigorously muted performance,” in contrast with his performance as a presidential candidate, when he “sometimes seized on mass shootings to warn of the threat of ‘radical Islamic terrorism’ and to justify banning people from predominantly Muslim countries. ... But Sunday’s shooting was fundamentally different from those in Orlando and San Bernardino: The assailant was an older white man, not a Muslim immigrant.” McClatchy (10/2, Irby) reports that Trump’s response to the killing of 49 in Orlando as president-elect “was widely criticized, by Democrats and Republicans alike.” The Washington Post (10/2, Scherer, Rucker) writes, “Trump appeared Monday at something of a loss for words.” He “somberly followed the practiced script of past presidents in times of crisis,” but “identified no clear villain. He issued no call to action. A president typically quick to make black-and-white declarations spoke instead in shades of gray.” The Post says that the “emerging facts prevented Trump from following his typical playbook – to rally his supporters against Islamic extremism while speaking and tweeting in a combative, even belligerent tone to try to project strength and resolve. Rather, Trump uttered just 574 words on Monday and tried to play the role of uniter.” His sole tweet of the day read, “My warmest condolences and sympathies to the victims and families of the terrible Las Vegas shooting. God bless you!” On the CBS Evening News (10/2, story 7, 2:05, Mason), Major Garrett reported, “President Trump spoke somberly of sadness and faith.” Trump: “Scripture teaches us the Lord is close to the broken-hearted and saves those who are crushed in spirit.” Garrett: “The President also spoke of togetherness...and the struggle to comprehend madness.” NBC Nightly News (10/2, story 6, 0:20, Holt) reported, “In honor of the victims, President Trump led a moment of silence at the White House this afternoon. He also condemned this attack as ‘an act of pure evil’ and ordered flags to fly at half-staff.” Breitbart (10/2, Spiering) reports that the President and First Lady led the moment of silence on the White House front lawn along with Vice President Pence and Karen Pence. The AP (10/2, Lemire, Lucey) reports, “Speaking slowly and somberly from the White House, Trump declared that the nation would rally together in the face of the latest act of senseless violence.” The AP says Trump delivered a “measured statement.” USA Today (10/2, Przybyla, Jackson) reports that Trump “called for national unity in the wake of the deadliest mass shooting in modern US history,” and “the first mass killing under Trump’s watch.” USA Today (10/2, Przybyla) writes in a second piece that Trump “made no mention of an epidemic of gun violence making the US unique among advanced industrial nations. While Trump once supported a ban on assault weapons, his views have changed significantly over the past decade, and it’s unlikely he’d support stricter US gun laws now.” Politico (10/2, Karni) reports that Trump’s “somber statement from the Diplomatic Room, a moment of silence on the South Lawn, and a dormant-for-a-day Twitter feed didn’t make a tragic situation worse.” His “words and actions, Democrats and Republicans said, were in line with what any other National Rifle Association-backed president would do.” But Trump will soon “be forced to navigate a thorny political situation as he reacts to the first mass shooting to unfold on his watch.” On the CBS Evening News (10/2, story 16, 2:15, Mason), Jim Axelrod said, “The President condemned the shooting...but he didn’t call it terrorism.” As the nation “absorbs the worst mass shooting in US history.” Richard Cohen, Southern Poverty Law Center: “The label does matter and it’s important that we get it right, because it tells us what type of response we as a country need to have in order to address these incidents.” Axelrod: “Strictly speaking, there is narrow legal definition for terrorism: ‘violence designed to intimidate a civilian population or influence the policy of a government.’” The Washington Times (10/2, Boyer), the Washington Examiner (10/2, Westwood), The Hill (10/2, Fabian), and Roll Call (10/2, Bennett) also cover the President’s remarks. 

Sanders: Now Is Not Time For Gun Policy Debate. The Washington Times (10/2, Miller) reports, “President Trump is not reopening a political debate on gun control in the immediate aftermath of the shooting massacre in Las Vegas, the White House said Monday.” Sanders said, “There is a time and place for a political debate but now is the time to unite as a country.” Politico (10/2, Lima) reports that Sanders also “warned against drafting ‘laws that won’t create or stop these type of [shootings] from happening.’” Jeff Zeleny said on CNN’s Situation Room (10/2) that Sanders “did leave the door open to the possibility of some kind of discussion in the future bipartisan legislation.” NBC Nightly News (10/2, story 12, 2:00, Holt) reported, “As the shock of yet another mass shooting reverberates across the country, in Washington, the debate over gun control is raging once again. Some saying the immediate aftermath of a tragedy like this, there’s no time for this sort of debate, while others say it’s precisely the appropriate time.” The CBS Evening News (10/2, story 14, 2:25, Glor) reported, “Supporters of tighter gun control laws were quick to push for new laws. Hillary Clinton tweeted, ‘Our grief isn’t enough. We can and must put politics aside to stand up to the [National Rife Association], and try to stop this from happening again.’” CBS’ Nancy Cordes: “Until 13 years ago, the federal assault weapons ban would likely have outlawed so some of the firearms and high-capacity magazines used by the Las Vegas gunman, but the ban lapsed in 2004, and attempts to reinstate it or pass other restrictions have failed.” USA Today (10/2) editorializes, “In America, the Second Amendment protects gun ownership, but it allows for reasonable regulation. After every mass shooting, the refrain from the gun lobby is the same: Whatever measures are proposed would not have stopped that particular shooting. ... But solutions don’t have to match a particular shooting. They simply need to limit future carnage while balancing constitutional rights.” The Washington Post (10/2) editorializes, “Opponents of gun control say there is no easy fix. True. They say no law will stop every person who is intent on doing harm. True again. But America has no monopoly on evil or sick people, yet it loses far more people to gun violence.” Other countries “have demonstrated the possibility of bans on assault weapons and other common-sense restrictions. What makes America unique is the absence of political will and leadership.” In its editorial, the Wall Street Journal (10/2) focuses on the first responders and others who were selfless and courageous in getting people to safety. 

Democrats Press For Action On Gun Control. Kayla Tausche said on CNBC’s Closing Bell (10/2), “Democrats in Congress are already calling for action. Congressman Seth Moulton of Massachusetts boycotted the moment of silence on Capitol Hill today because he said he wants real action to actually come out of this.” The Washington Times (10/2, Chasmar) reports that Moulton, who “made a similar move last summer after the deadly terror attack at Pulse nightclub in Orlando,” said in a statement, “I will not be standing with my colleagues in a moment of silence that just becomes an excuse for inaction in the House of Representatives today. I will work to do something about this problem so that it doesn’t happen again.” USA Today (10/2, Theobald) reports that Sen. Chris Murphy “castigated his congressional colleagues for failing to challenge the gun industry.” He said in a statement, “It is positively infuriating that my colleagues in Congress are so afraid of the gun industry that they pretend there aren’t public policy responses to this epidemic.” Murphy “has been vocal on gun control after the 2012 shooting at Sandy Hook Elementary School, in his home state, which claimed the lives of 20 children and six faculty and staff.” The Washington Times (10/2, Dinan) reports that House Minority Leader Pelosi “called for a new special select congressional committee to combat gun violence.” Rep. Steve Israel (D-NY) writes in the New York Times (10/2), “In the wake of one the deadliest mass shooting in our nation’s history, perhaps the most asked question by Americans is, ‘Will anything change?’ The simple answer is no. The more vital question is, ‘Why not?’” The NRA, “once a supporter of sensible gun-safety measures, is now forced to oppose them because of competing organizations. More moderation means less market share.” And congressional redistricting “has pulled Republicans so far to the right that anything less than total subservience to the gun lobby is viewed as supporting gun confiscation.” Rep. Eric Swalwell (D-CA) said on Fox News’ Tucker Carlson Tonight (10/2), “I think when you watch so many people who are helpless and running you think that our lawmakers under the Capitol dome, we are not helpless. Before the trigger is squeezed you are actually able to do something. Whether it’s universal background checks, whether its ammunition restrictions, whether its making sure we don’t have silencers or of course making sure that a weapon of war is only in the hand of a warrior.” Swalwell tweeted, “#ThoughtsAndPrayers aren’t enough. #LasVegas is about all of us. It’s long past time to act.” Rep. Suzan DelBene (D-WA) tweeted, “This morning’s news from #LasVegas is shocking and a devastating tragedy. We must stand united against this senseless loss of life.” Rep. Jared Huffman (D-CA) tweeted, “This is a time for mourning & for action – Congress can offer thoughts, prayers, AND policy to prevent gun violence.” Rep. Alan Lowenthal (D-CA) tweeted, “The US cannot tolerate slaughter on this scale or with this frequency. Violence has many causes but we MUST address free availability of the most powerful weapons.” Rep. Stephen Lynch (D-MA) tweeted, “Congress must work together to pass common-sense gun laws. We cannot continue to stand by as Americans are killed.” Rep. Nydia Velazquez (D-NY) tweeted, “Let us honor the innocent lives lost in #LasVegas by complementing our words with action. We need a Select Committee on Gun Violence.” 

Pence Still Scheduled For Arizona Fundraiser On Tuesday. CNBC’s Christina Wilkie 

tweeted, “Pence will travel to Phoenix to headline a GOP fundraiser tomorrow, per WH. Optics just a day after #LasVegas could be dicey.” 

Budget Proposal Under Increased Critical Scrutiny Following Shooting. CNN (10/2, Kopan) reports on its website that an Administration proposal to sharply cut funding for programs which “seek to prevent domestic terrorism and prepare localities to respond...has come under increased scrutiny by critics in the wake of the deadliest mass shooting in modern US history.” Among other things, the proposal would eliminate FEMA budget funding for two grant programs, Countering Violent Extremism and Complex Coordinated Terrorist Attacks, although Administration “budget documents say the program goals can be achieved” by awarding grants through the State Homeland Security Program and the Urban Area Security Initiative Program. Administration officials, however, have proposed large budget reductions for both programs. 

At Least 59 Dead; Shooter’s Motive Not Yet Known. Extended broadcast network newscasts and heavy reporting in national newspapers detailed the shooting and profiled the emerging facts about the perpetrator. ABC World News Tonight (10/2, lead story, 4:40, Muir) opened from “the scene of the worst mass shooting in American history – a lone gunman from a 32nd floor hotel window, shooting at thousands of helpless concert-goers below. ... At least 59 now killed, more than 500 injured.” The CBS Evening News 

(10/2, lead story, 4:15, Mason) reported, “Police say the gunman, 64-year-old Stephen Paddock, of Mesquite, Nevada killed himself before they arrived. They have not determined a motive, but they say they have found no links to terrorism.” Lester Holt said in opening NBC Nightly News (10/2, lead story, 4:00), “The hearts of our nation ache tonight with a sickening familiarity: another mass murder, another taking of innocent lives on an unimaginable scale.” The AP (10/2, Ho, Cano) reports, “Country music star Jason Aldean was performing at the Route 91 Harvest Festival when the gunman apparently used a hammer-like device to smash out windows in his room and opened fire. ... The crowd, funneled tightly into a wide-open space, had little cover and no easy way to escape.” The CBS Evening News (10/2, story 3, 1:35, Mason) and NBC Nightly News (10/2, story 3, 2:40, Holt) carried some eyewitness accounts, while the CBS Evening News (10/2, story 6, 2:10, Mason) also reported on how members of the crowd helped one another. The Las Vegas Sun (10/1) reports that Clark County Sheriff Joseph Lombardo “said police believed the shooting was a ‘lone wolf’ attack but were looking for a roommate of Paddock for questioning. Police subsequently said they had located the woman, 62-year-old Marilou Danley, and did not believe she was involved in the incident.” The Las Vegas Review-Journal (10/2, Hill) reports that a law enforcement source said that Danley “has been out of the country for the past two weeks. Investigators were trying to arrange for her to come to Las Vegas so they can talk to her further.” USA Today (10/2, Onyanga-Omara) reports that Lombardo “described Paddock, the son of a 1960s bank robber who was on the FBI’s most-wanted list after escaping from prison, as ‘a distraught person intent on causing mass casualties.’” The New York Times (10/2, Times) reports, “At least 23 firearms, including a handgun, were found in Mr. Paddock’s hotel suite,” according Las Vegas police, and a federal law enforcement official “said there were at least 20 rifles in the suite, along with hundreds of rounds of ammunition, including two rifles outfitted with scopes and set up on tripods in front of two big windows. Another official said that among the weapons were AR-15-style assault rifles.” The Washington Post (10/2, Bui, Zapotosky, Barrett, Berman) reports, “Gun purchase records indicate Paddock legally bought more than two dozen firearms across a period of years, according to a person close to the investigation.” The Washington Post (10/2, Rosenwald, Barrett, Horton) further reports, “One of the weapons Paddock apparently used...was an AK-47-type rifle, with a stand to steady it for firing,” and “video from the attack suggests Paddock may have used at least one fully automatic rifle, marking the first time such a weapon has been wielded by a public mass shooter in the United States.” On ABC World News Tonight (10/2, story 6, 2:00, Muir), Pierre Thomas said, “The shooting from the 32nd floor coming from at least one rifle functioning like an automatic machine gun.” NBC Nightly News (10/2, story 7, 2:10, Holt) also reported that “law enforcement sources” say that Paddock “may have been using semiautomatic weapons converted to fire in a full automatic mode.” The Washington Times (10/2, Boyer, Persons) writes that “fully automatic weapons cannot be obtained in the US as easily as other firearms, and none of the major US mass shootings in recent decades involved one.” On ABC World News Tonight (10/2, story 3, 3:00, Muir), Brian Ross reported that Paddock’s motive “remains a mystery. ... His family remembers him as a man who grew up without convictions...and the FBI says no connection either to any overseas terror group. ... Adding to the mystery, federal officials tell ABC News, Paddock sent tens of thousands of dollars in the last few weeks to the Philippines. Paddock’s only real passion appears to have been gambling. His brother Eric says Paddock recently won a $40,000 jackpot, and was a multimillionaire.” ABC World News Tonight (10/2, story 8, 3:20, Muir) showed a clip of Eric Paddock saying, “There’s absolutely no way I can even conceive that my brother would shoot a bunch of people. ... He doesn’t even have parking tickets. He has no criminal record, he has no record of any affiliations, he has nothing.” On the CBS Evening News (10/2, story 4, 2:20, Mason), Jeff Pegues reported, “Until last night’s mass shooting, Stephen Paddock’s only run-in with law enforcement was this 2009 parking ticket.” ABC World News Tonight (10/2, story 9, 2:30, Muir) reported that Paddock’s niece Nicole Paddock wrote on Facebook, “I want to express my deepest sympathies to everyone affected by this massacre. I’m as shocked and appalled as anyone. I cannot speak to what would motivate someone to do something like this, nor what his specific motivations may have been. He never came across as religious or political. My family and I are still in shock by this news, and my heart goes out to all of those who lost or had loved ones injured in this tragedy.” The Washington Post (10/2) reports that Eric Paddock “knew his brother owned a couple of handguns but was shocked at the rapid-fire weapon apparently used.”ABC World News Tonight (10/2, story 4, 2:20, Muir) and NBC Nightly News (10/2, story 4, 2:35, Holt) profiled some of the victims. Reuters (10/2, Kumar, Sage) and the Los Angeles Times (10/2, Tchekmedyian, Pearce, Branson-Potts) also have reports. 

Terror Experts Puzzled By ISIS Claim Of Responsibility. The Hill (10/2, Williams) reports that ISIS took credit for the mass shooting in “a statement that puzzled terror experts. ... So far, there is no evidence that ISIS was involved beyond the group’s own assurance that Paddock was ‘a soldier of the Caliphate.’” ISIS has traditionally “not been arbitrary in the attacks it claims have been carried out by its supporters. Experts who track the group closely say that when it comes to attacks in the West, if ISIS is claiming responsibility, there typically was some kind of connection between the perpetrator and the group.” 

Las Vegas Hospital Trauma Center Faced “Controlled Chaos.” The New York Times (10/2, Fink) reports on the “controlled chaos” at University Medical Center in Las Vegas, “the only level-one trauma center in Nevada and one of only a few free-standing trauma units in the nation. ... But even with 11 trauma bays, three operating rooms, a CT scanner, a trauma intensive care unit and a pediatric intensive care unit all under one roof, the trauma center had never faced a torrent like this.” On the CBS Evening News (10/2, story 2, 2:35, Mason), Carter Evans reported, “More than 100 gunshot victims poured into University Medical Center.” Trauma surgeon Jay Coates: “With so many people coming in so fast, we did damage control, which is stopping the process of dying.” Evans: “Move on to the next one?” Coates: “Get next one in. We did that all night.” 

NRA Delays Virginia Campaign Ad Buy. Politico (10/2, Robillard) reports that the NRA “has delayed a week’s worth of television advertising in Virginia’s 2017 elections” that were set to begin airing on Tuesday. The NRA “has endorsed the entire statewide Republican ticket in Virginia,” as well as candidates for the state legislature. The ads will now begin on October 10. 

Gunmaker Shares Climbed On Monday. USA Today (10/2, Shell) reports, “Shares of gunmakers jumped more than 3% Monday after a deadly mass shooting in Las Vegas.” Sturm Ruger shares were up 3.5% and American Outdoor Brands shares were up 3.2%. USA Today says that it is “not uncommon for shares of gunmakers to rise after high-profile shootings, and oftentimes the initial price moves are sparked by computer-driven trades that buy on the news.” 

CBS Legal Executive Fired Over Facebook Comment About Victims. The Daily Caller (10/2) reports that Hayley Geftman-Gold, “a top legal executive at CBS,” was fired after writing on Facebook, “If they wouldn’t do anything when children were murdered I have no hope that Repugs will ever do the right thing. I’m actually not even sympathetic [because] country music fans often are Republican gun toters.” The Washington Times (10/2, Richardson) reports that CBS said in a statement, “This individual, who was with us for approximately one year, violated the standards of our company and is no longer an employee of CBS. Her views as expressed on social media are deeply unacceptable to all of us at CBS. Our hearts go out to the victims in Las Vegas and their families.” Townhall (10/2, Vespa) has a brief report. 

Las Vegas Native Kimmel Addresses Gun Control In Monologue. The Daily Beast (10/3, Wilstein) reports, “Jimmy Kimmel thought he might finally get to be silly again this week,” but the Las Vegas native’s “eyes were already welling up with tears by the time he opened his mouth to speak on Monday.” Kimmel said, “Of course there’s something we can do about it. There are a lot of things we could do about it. But we don’t. Which is interesting, because when someone with a beard attacks us, we tap phones, we invoke travel bans, we build walls, we take every possible precaution to make sure it doesn’t happen again. But when an American buys a gun and kills other Americans, then there’s nothing we can do about that.” The full segment on ABC’s Jimmy Kimmel Live (10/2) ran 10 minutes. 

## “Top Officials”: GOP Can’t Rule Out Tax Increase For Some Middle Class Taxpayers. 

The New York Times (10/2, Tankersley) reports that while the President and GOP leaders have pushed their tax plan as “a way to cut taxes on the middle class,” some “top officials are now saying the plan may not benefit everyone in that income group,” an acknowledgment that “could complicate the administration’s ability to sell the tax plan.” An analysis last week by the Tax Policy Center “found that nearly 30 percent of those in the middle class could see their taxes increase as a result of changes to the deductions and exemptions many middle-class Americans rely on to lower their tax bills.” The Times adds that “top officials acknowledged this weekend that a tax cut for everyone in the middle class may not be achievable.” 

## Trump Considers Executive Order On Welfare. 

Politico (10/2, Restuccia) cites “two administration officials” who say the Administration is considering “an executive order that would instruct federal agencies to review low-income assistance programs, part of a coming effort to make sweeping changes to the country’s welfare system.” The White House has begun circulating a draft order to federal agencies, which according to one official, “calls on agencies to review existing regulations and propose new rules that conform to a set of broad welfare principles, including tighter work requirements that encourage recipients to shift back into the labor force.” In addition, the order “calls for streamlining or eliminating duplicative services and establishing metrics for holding agencies accountable for program performance.” While one officials said supporters within the Administration hope the President will sign the order before Thanksgiving, another “cautioned that the conversations about the order are ‘very preliminary at this stage,’ adding that the final outcome is uncertain.” 

## Poll Finds Most Americans Want Federal Government To Address Climate Change. 

The Hill (10/2, Cama) reports that a poll by The Associated Press-NORC Center and the Energy Policy Institute at the University of Chicago has found “more than 6 in 10 Americans believe that climate change is a problem that the federal government needs to address.” The poll “found a large majority of Americans in both major parties believe that climate change is happening.” However, it is “less clear” what Americans believe should be done to address it. Around “51 percent of respondents were willing to pay $1 a month to combat global warming, a figure that dropped to 18 percent when the prospective monthly fee increased to $100.” The Hill adds that “opinions were not entirely clear on hot-button climate policy issues, either.” Just “17 percent of respondents said they support” hydraulic fracturing, but “if the pollster said it would save the respondent significantly on natural gas bill, support averaged 41 percent.” The AP (10/2, Borenstein, Swanson) reports that “forty-two percent of those surveyed said they oppose getting out of” the Paris climate pact, “while 28 percent favored the withdrawal and 28 percent had no strong opinion.” 

# Editorial Wrap-Up 

## New York Times. 

“Chaos In Catalonia.” The New York Times (10/2) says in an editorial that the actions of Spanish police during the Catalonian independence referendum “succeeded mostly in deepening a political crisis.” Prime Minister Mariano Rajoy “had the law largely on his side,” but Barcelona “now has the television images and the solidarity and sympathy they generate, leaving the prime minister looking like an intransigent bully and rendering any possible political resolution of the conflict more remote.” The Times argues that while “political solutions, probably involving greater autonomy for Catalonia,” exist, “so long as Mr. Rajoy and Mr. Puigdemont remain intransigent, these will remain out of reach.” 

## Washington Post. 

“Catalonia Held A Referendum. Russia Won.” A Washington Post (10/2, Board) editorial says that “the Catalan nationalists’ only backers are separatist-ruled Scotland, the pariah government of Venezuela and Russia’s intelligence and propaganda apparatus,” which “evidently perceives the Catalan movement as another vehicle for dividing and weakening the democratic West.” The Post calls for “negotiations between Barcelona and Madrid,” and says “the two sides could agree on a legal means for Catalonia to hold a fair, free and legitimate vote.” 

“Trump Could Help Refugees. Instead He Shrugs.” In an editorial, the Washington Post (10/2) writes that despite the “staggering scale” of the world’s refugee crisis, the ability of the United States to admit refugee such refugees, and the positive signal such admission would send to the world about US leadership, the Administration is failing to address the crisis. The Post argues that the message the US is sending to the world by failing to admit more refugees is dangerous and that “there is no suppressing the fact that the United States is turning its back on the world, and the world’s neediest, under the Trump administration.” 

“The Worst Kind Of American Exceptionalism.” The Washington Post (10/2) editorializes, “Opponents of gun control say there is no easy fix. True. They say no law will stop every person who is intent on doing harm. True again. But America has no monopoly on evil or sick people, yet it loses far more people to gun violence.” Other countries “have demonstrated the possibility of bans on assault weapons and other common-sense restrictions. What makes America unique is the absence of political will and leadership.” 

## Wall Street Journal. 

“‘An Act Of Pure Evil.’” In an editorial, the Wall Street Journal (10/2) focuses on the first responders and others who were selfless and courageous in getting people to safety during the Las Vegas shooting. 

“Of Judges And Gerrymanders.” The Wall Street Journal (10/2) editorializes about the case of Whitford v. Gill, scheduled for arguments before the Supreme Court today, which highlights a challenge to partisan gerrymandering in Wisconsin. After examining prior rulings on similar challenges, the Journal argues that the court should not intercede too much in partisan disputes, and should avoid making itself the arbiter of political redistricting efforts by states. “Fruit Flies And Your Insomnia.” A Wall Street Journal (10/2, Board) editorial. 

# Big Picture 

## Headlines From Today’s Front Pages. 

Wall Street Journal: 

Las Vegas Shooting Leaves At Least 59 Dead, More Than 520 Injured In Las Vegas, Concertgoers Faced Barrage Of Bullets, Confusion Goldman Sachs Weighs Trading Cryptocurrencies China, With Methodical Discipline, Conjures A Market For Electric Cars 

New York Times: 

A Burst Of Gunfire, A Pause, Then Carnage In Las Vegas That Would Not Stop Stephen Paddock, Las Vegas Suspect, Was A Gambler Who Drew Little Attention Gunman’s Vantage Point And Preparations Opened The Way For Mass Slaughter GM And Ford Lay Out Plans To Expand Electric Models 

Washington Post: 

Russia Exploited Ad Tool Tailored For Corporate America Confusion, Then A Tumble Into Chaos At Concert Arsenal And High Perch Made This Attack So Lethal Retiree With Money To Burn Was A Gambler And Always On The Move 

Financial Times: 

Weapons Cache Found At Vegas Shooting Suspect’s Home Brussels Wants Airbus-Style Consortium To Lead Battery Revolution US Scientists Win Nobel Medicine Prize For Body Clock Research 

Washington Times: 

FBI Says No Terror Ties In Las Vegas Shooting Despite ISIS Claim; At Least 59 Dead, 527 Wounded Authorities Fear Las Vegas Shooter Used Fully Automatic Machine Gun Las Vegas Hospitals Shift Into Full Gear For Unprecedented Medical Crisis As Abu Khattala Trial Opens, Agent Testifies About Losing Stevens And Smith In Benghazi Fire Adversaries Challenge America’s Drone Dominance 

Story Lineup From Last Night’s Network News: 

ABC: Las Vegas Shooting; Las Vegas Shooting-Enforcement Response; Las Vegas Shooting-Suspect; Las Vegas Shooting-Victims; Las Vegas Shooting-Medical Response; Las Vegas Shooting-Weapons; Las Vegas Shooting-White House Response; Las Vegas Shooting-Suspect Details; Las Vegas Shooting-Eyewitness Accounts; Las Vegas Shooting-Trump Visit; Las Vegas Shooting-NYC Security; Las Vegas Shooting-US Mass Shootings; Las Vegas Shooting-Congressman Comment; Las Vegas Shooting-Survival Comments; Hurricane Recovery-Trump Puerto Rico Visit; Navy Plane Crash; Cuba-US Embassy Sonic Attacks; Russia Meddling Investigation-Facebook; Tom Petty Hospitalized; Las Vegas Shooting-Citizen Response. 

CBS: Las Vegas Shooting; Las Vegas Shooting-Victims 1; Las Vegas Shooting-Eyewitness Accounts 1; Las Vegas Shooting-Suspect; Las Vegas Shooting-Suspect’s Neighbors; Las Vegas Shooting-Citizen Response; Las Vegas Shooting-White House Response; Las Vegas Shooting-Eyewitness Accounts 2; Las Vegas Shooting-Responses; Las Vegas Shooting-Recap 1; Las Vegas Shooting-Enforcement Response; Las Vegas Shooting-Victims 2; Las Vegas Shooting-Suspect’s Family; Las Vegas Shooting-Congress Response; Las Vegas Shooting-Expert Comments; Las Vegas Shooting-Terrorism Label; Hurricane Recovery-Trump Puerto Rico Visit; Tom Petty Hospitalized; Las Vegas Shooting-Recap 2. 

NBC: Las Vegas Shooting; Las Vegas Shooting-Suspect; Las Vegas Shooting-Eyewitness Accounts; Las Vegas Shooting-Victims; Las Vegas Shooting-Medical Response; Las Vegas Shooting-Weapons; Las Vegas Shooting-US Mass Shootings; Las Vegas Shooting-Recap; Las Vegas Shooting-Suspect Details; Las Vegas Shooting-Eyewitness Accounts 2; Las Vegas Shooting-Gun Control Debate; Las Vegas Shooting-Expert Comments; Las Vegas Shooting-Artist On Stage; Las Vegas Shooting-City; Las Vegas Shooting-Medical Response 2; Las Vegas Shooting-Recap 2. 

Network TV At A Glance: 

Las Vegas Shooting – 100 minutes, 40 seconds Las Vegas Shooting-White House Response – 6 minutes, 55 seconds Hurricane Recovery-Trump Puerto Rico Visit – 3 minutes, 15 seconds 

Story Lineup From This Morning’s Radio News Broadcasts: 

ABC: Las Vegas Shooting; Las Vegas Shooting-Suspect; Las Vegas Shooting-White House Response; Hurricane Recovery-Trump Puerto Rico Visit; Russia Meddling Investigation-Facebook. 

CBS: Las Vegas Shooting; Las Vegas Shooting-Responses; Las Vegas Shooting-Trump Visit; Cuba-US Embassy Sonic Attacks; New Orleans Flooding; Mexico Earthquake Casualty; Wall Street News. 

FOX: Las Vegas Shooting; Las Vegas Shooting-Responses; Equifax-Cyber Security Breach. 

NPR: Las Vegas Shooting; Las Vegas Shooting-Responses; Las Vegas Shooting-Gun Control Debate. 

# Washington Schedule 

## Today’s Events In Washington. 

White House: 

PRESIDENT TRUMP — Receives a briefing on Hurricane Maria relief efforts; receives a briefing on Hurricane Maria relief efforts; visits Cavalry Chapel; meets with the Governor Kenneth Mapp of the US Virgin Islands; participates in a briefing with senior military personnel, Governor Ricardo Rosselló of Puerto Rico, and Governor Kenneth Mapp of the US Virgin Islands; participates in a greeting with the Navy and Marine Corps. VICE PRESIDENT PENCE — Meets with local businesses, community leaders, and Arizona families to discuss the need for tax reform; participates in a Republican National Committee reception. 

US Senate: 9:30 AM Nominations hearing considers John Mitnick to be Department of Homeland Security General Counsel Location: Dirksen Senate Office Building, Rm 342, Washington, DC http://hsgac.senate.gov/ https://twitter.com/SenateHSGAC 10:00 AM Joint Economic Committee hearing on tax reform and entrepreneurship – Hearing on ‘The Startup Slump: Can Tax Reform Help Revive Entrepreneurship?’, with testimony from Center for American Entrepreneurship founder and President John Dearie; VentureOhio CEO Falon Donohue; Tax Foundation President Scott Hodge; and Small Business Majority CEO and founder John Arensmeyer Location: Longworth House Office Building, Rm 1100, Washington, DC www.jec.senate.gov https://twitter.com/JointEconCmte 10:00 AM Senate Finance Committee hearing on international tax reform – Hearing on ‘International Tax Reform’, with testimony from University of Houston Law Center Professor Bret Wells; Reed College Professor of Economics Dr Kimberly Clausing; Harvard University Law School Senior Lecturer Stephen Shay; and Georgetown University Law Center Professor Itai Grinberg Location: Rm 215, Dirksen Senate Office Bldg, Washington, DC http://finance.senate.gov 10:00 AM Senate Judiciary Committee hearing on administration decision to end DACA – Hearing on ‘Oversight of the Administration’s Decision to End Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals’, with testimony from Acting Assistant Attorney General for the Civil Division Chad Readler; Assistant Secretary of Homeland Security for Border Immigration and Trade Policy Michael Dougherty; and U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services Acting Director James McCament Location: Hart Senate Office Building, Rm 216, Washington, DC http://judiciary.senate.gov/ 10:00 AM Senate HELP Committee hearing on ESSA – Hearing on ‘The Every Student Succeeds Act: Unleashing State Innovation’, with testimony from Tennessee Department of Education Commissioner Dr Candice McQueen; Louisiana State Superintendent of Education John White; New Mexico Secretary of Education Christopher Ruszkowski; and Johns Hopkins Institute for Education Policy Executive Director Dr David Steiner Location: Dirksen Senate Office Building, Rm 430, Washington, DC http://help.senate.gov/ 10:00 AM Nominations hearing considers Kenneth Ian Juster to be U.S. Ambassador to India Location: Rm 419, Dirksen Senate Office Bldg, Washington, DC http://foreign.senate.gov/ 10:00 AM Hearing on ‘Wells Fargo: One Year Later’, with testimony from Wells Fargo & Company CEO and President Timothy Sloan Location: Dirksen Senate Office Building, Rm 538, Washington, DC http://banking.senate.gov/ 10:00 AM Defense Secretary Mattis briefs Senate Armed Services Committee on Afghanistan – Hearing on ‘Political and Security Situation in Afghanistan’, with testimony from Secretary of Defense James Mattis; and Joint Chiefs of Staff Chairman Gen. Joseph Dunford, Jr. Location: Dirksen Senate Office Building, SD-G50, Washington, DC http://armed-services.senate.gov/ 10:15 AM Senate Energy and Natural Resources Committee Business Meeting – Business meeting to consider nominations of Bruce Walker to be Assistant Secretary of the Department of Energy for Electricity Delivery and Energy Reliability; and Steven Winberg to be Assistant Secretary of the Department of Energy for Fossil Energy Location: Rm 366, Dirksen Senate Office Bldg, Washington, DC http://energy.senate.gov/public/ 10:30 AM Senate Committee on Energy and Natural Resources hearing on energy storage technologies – Senate Committee on Energy and Natural Resources hearing to examine energy storage technologies, with testimony from Pacific Northwest National Laboratory Electrochemical Materials & Systems Group Technical Group Manager Dr Vincent Sprenkle; AES Energy Storage Vice President Praveen Kathpal; Benchmark Mineral Intelligence Managing Director Simon Moores; and Voith Director of Engineering John Seifarth Location: Rm 366, Dirksen Senate Office Bldg, Washington, DC http://energy.senate.gov/public/ 11:30 AM Bicameral, bipartisan legislators announce legislation on retired miners’ pensions – United Mine Workers of America press conference with Democratic Sen. Joe Manchin and Rep. Peter Welch, and Republican Sen. Shelley Moore and Rep. David McKinley, who announce new legislation to address retired miners’ pensions. UMWA International President Cecil Roberts and retired miners also speak Location: U.S. Capitol, Rm S-120, East Capitol St, NE & First St SE, Washington, DC http://www.umwa.org/ 2:00 PM Senate Foreign Relations Committee nominations hearing – Nominations hearing considers Peter Henry Barlerin to be U.S. Ambassador to Cameroon; Eric Whitaker to be U.S. Ambassador to Niger; Michael James Dodman to be U.S. Ambassador to Mauritania; Nina Maria Fite to be U.S. Ambassador to Angola; Daniel Foote to be U.S. Ambassador to Zambia; and David Dale Reimer to be U.S. Ambassador to Mauritius, and to serve concurrently and without additional compensation as U.S. Ambassador to the Seychelles Location: Rm 419, Dirksen Senate Office Bldg, Washington, DC http://foreign.senate.gov/ 2:00 PM Female Dem senators speak at rally in support of the DREAM Act – Democratic Sens. Kamala Harris, Mazie Hirono, Tammy Duckworth and Amy Klobuchar speak at rally in support of the DREAM Act, focusing on women, families and the LGBTQ community. Other speakers include United We Dream Executive Director and Co-Founder Cristina Jimenez, Center for American Progress Action Fund Executive Vice President for External Affairs Winne Stachelberg, Human Rights Campaign Government Affairs Director David Stacy, National Latina Institute for Reproductive Health Executive Director Jessica Gonzalez-Rojas, and MomsRising Vice President Monifa Bandele Location: Capitol Lawn, Washington, DC www.americanprogressaction.org https://twitter.com/CAPaction 2:30 PM Helsinki Commission hearing on combating kleptocracy – Helsinki Commission hearing on ‘Combating Kleptocracy with Incorporation Transparency’, with witnesses – Hudson Institute Kleptocracy Initiative Executive Director Charles Davidson, Delegation of the European Union to the U.S. Deputy Head Caroline Vicini, and FACT Coalition Executive Director Gary Kalman – examining the development of the EU’s beneficial ownership transparency provisions and the success of their implementation as relates to corruption as a vector for authoritarian influence in Europe, and addressing transparency and anti-money laundering policies in the U.S. as they relate to U.S. foreign policy Location: Dirksen Senate Office Building, Rm 562, Washington, DC http://www.csce.gov https://twitter.com/HelsinkiComm 2:30 PM Senate Energy subcommittee legislative hearing – Energy Subcommittee legislative hearing on ‘S. 186, Fair Ratepayer Accountability, Transparency, and Efficiency Standards Act’, ‘S. 1059, Responsible Disposal Reauthorization Act’, ‘S. 1337, Capitalizing on American Storage Potential’, ‘S. 1457, Advanced Nuclear Technologies Act’, ‘S. 1799, Energy Technology Maturation Act’, ‘S. 1860, Parity Across Reviews Act’, and ‘H.R. 1109, To amend section 203 of the Federal Power Act’, with testimony from Federal Energy Regulatory Commission General Counsel James Danly; and Department of Energy Deputy General Counsel for Energy Policy Bernard McNamee Location: Rm 366, Dirksen Senate Office Bldg, Washington, DC http://energy.senate.gov/public/ 2:30 PM Closed Briefing: Intelligence Matters Location: Rm 219, Hart Senate Office Bldg, Washington, DC http://intelligence.senate.gov 3:15 PM VeteransAgainstAlzheimer’s Network launched at Congressional Reception – VeteransAgainstAlzheimer’s Network launched at Congressional Reception with Republican Sens. Shelley Moore Capito, Susan Collins, Thom Tillis, Pat Toomey and ROger Wicker, Democratic Sens. Ed Markey, Kirsten Gillibrand (invited) and Mark Warner (invited), and Veterans of Foreign Wars National Veterans Service Director Ryan Gallucci Location: Dirksen Senate Office Building, Rm 106, Washington, DC www.usagainstalzheimers.org https://twitter.com/usagainstalz Senate HELP Committee Executive Session – Executive Session, with agenda including nominations of Patrick Pizzella to be Deputy Secretary of Labor; Janet Dhillon and Dr Daniel Gade to be Equal Employment Opportunity Commission members (with Dhillon to be chair, upon confirmation); and Carlos Muniz to be Department of Education General Counsel Location: U.S. Capitol, Washington, DC http://help.senate.gov/ 

US House: 10:00 AM Natural Resources subcommittee hearing on ‘H.R. 3400, Recreation Not Red-Tape Act’ – Federal Lands Subcommittee legislative hearing on ‘H.R. 3400, Recreation Not Red-Tape Act’, with testimony from former Congressman Nick Joe Rahall; Outdoor Alliance Policy Director Louis Geltman, Western River Expeditions President Brian Merrill, and Southwest Conservation Corps Associate Director Kevin Heiner Location: Longworth House Office Building, Rm 1334, Washington, DC http://naturalresources.house.gov https://twitter.com/NatResources 10:00 AM House Homeland Security subcommittee hearing on the DHS’s cybersecurity mission – Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Protection Subcommittee hearing on ‘Examining DHS’s Cybersecurity Mission’, with testimony from Department of Homeland Security National Protection and Programs Directorate Senior Official Performing the Duties of the Under Secretary Christopher Krebs; DHS National Protection and Programs Directorate Assistant Secretary for Cybersecurity and Communications Jeanette Manfra; and Department of Energy Office of Electricity Delivery and Energy Reliability Acting Assistant Secretary Patricia Hoffman Location: U.S. Capitol Visitor Center, HVC-210, Washington, DC homeland.house.gov https://twitter.com/HouseHomeland 10:00 AM Joint Economic Committee hearing on tax reform and entrepreneurship – Hearing on ‘The Startup Slump: Can Tax Reform Help Revive Entrepreneurship?’, with testimony from Center for American Entrepreneurship founder and President John Dearie; VentureOhio CEO Falon Donohue; Tax Foundation President Scott Hodge; and Small Business Majority CEO and founder John Arensmeyer Location: Longworth House Office Building, Rm 1100, Washington, DC www.jec.senate.gov https://twitter.com/JointEconCmte 10:00 AM House Judiciary subcommittee hearing on online sex trafficking and the Communications Decency Act – Crime, Terrorism, Homeland Security, and Investigations Subcommittee hearing on ‘Online Sex Trafficking and the Communications Decency Act’, with testimony from U.S. Naval Academy Assistant Professor Jeff Kosseff; Catholic University Columbus School of Law Professor of Law Mary Leary; and Engine Executive Director Evan Engstrom Location: Rm 2141, Rayburn House Office Bldg, Washington, DC http://judiciary.house.gov/ https://twitter.com/HouseJudiciary 10:00 AM FHFA Director Watt testifies to House Financial Services Committee – Hearing on ‘Sustainable Housing Finance: An Update from the Director of the Federal Housing Finance Agency’, with testimony from FHFA Director Mel Watt Location: Rayburn House Office Building, Rm 2128, Washington, DC http://financialservices.house.gov https://twitter.com/FinancialCmte 10:00 AM House Technology Committee hearing on electric grid resiliency – Hearing on ‘Resiliency: The Electric Grid’s Only Hope’, with testimony from University of Illinois Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering head Dr William Sanders; Pacific Northwest National Laboratory Electricity Market Sector manager Carl Imhoff; Houston Advanced Research Center Clean Energy Policy Program director Dr Gavin Dillingham; and Texas Public Power Association executive director Walt Baum Location: Rm 2318, Rayburn House Office Bldg, Washington, DC http://science.house.gov https://twitter.com/HouseScience 10:00 AM House Infrastructure subcommittee hearing on USCG stakeholders’ perspectives – Coast Guard and Maritime Transportation Subcommittee hearing on ‘Building a 21st Century Infrastructure for America: Coast Guard Stakeholders’ Perspectives and Jones Act Fleet Capabilities’, with testimony from U.S. Coast Guard Assistant Commandant for Human Resources Rear Adm. William Kelly; Assistant Commandant for Engineering and Logistics Rear Adm. Melvin Bouboulis; American Maritime Partnership Chairman Thomas Allegretti; Seafarers International Union Executive Vice President Augustin Tellez; Tote President and CEO Anthony Chiarello; Crowley Senior Vice President Michael Roberts; and Shipbuilders Council of America President Matthew Paxton Location: Rm 2167, Rayburn House Office Bldg, Washington, DC http://transportation.house.gov/ https://twitter.com/Transport 10:00 AM Former Equifax CEO testifies to House Commerce subcommittee – Digital Commerce and Consumer Protection Subcommittee hearing on ‘Oversight of the Equifax Data Breach: Answers for Consumers’, with testimony from former Equifax CEO Richard Smith, who retired with immediate effect between the announcement of the hearing and today * Follows Equifax data breach that potentially exposed the personal information of 143 million Americans Location: Rayburn House Office Building, Rm 2123, Washington, DC http://energycommerce.house.gov/ https://twitter.com/HouseCommerce 10:15 AM House Democratic Leaders to Hold Post-Caucus Press Conference – Participants: Linda Sánchez (D-California), Vice Chair of the Democratic Caucus; Mike Thompson (D-California), Chair of the Gun Violence Prevention Task Force; Michelle Lujan Grisham (D-New Mexico), Chair of the Congressional Hispanic Caucus. Location: HVC Studio A — Capitol Visitor Center 10:15 AM House Energy and Commerce subcommittee hearing on patient access to investigational drugs – Health Subcommittee hearing on ‘Examining Patient Access to Investigational Drugs’, with testimony from Food and Drug Administration Commissioner Dr Scott Gottlieb; Republican Rep. Brian Fitzpatrick; Goldwater Institute Healthcare Policy Director Naomi Lopez-Bauman; Cognition Therapeutics President and CEO Kenneth Moch; and Friends of Cancer Research Chairperson and Founder Dr Ellen Sigal Location: Rayburn House Office Building, Rm 2322, Washington, DC http://energycommerce.house.gov/ https://twitter.com/HouseCommerce 11:00 AM House Minority Whip Steny Hoyer regular pen-and-pad briefing Location: H-144, U.S. Capitol, Washington, DC www.democraticwhip.gov/ https://twitter.com/WhipHoyer 11:00 AM GOP Rep. Walter Jones announces FOIA lawsuit regarding 2000 V-22 crash – Republican Rep. Walter Jones announces the filing of a Freedom of Information Act lawsuit seeking all records pertaining to the 2000 V-22 Osprey crash in Marana, AZ, that claimed the lives of 19 Marines. Rep. Jones is joined by attorney Mark Zaid and the widows and family of Marines Brooks Gruber and John Brow in his call for the release of documents ‘that may explain why they were unfairly and incorrectly blamed’ for the crash Location: U.S. Capitol, House Triangle, East Capitol St NE & First St SE, Washington, DC jones.house.gov https://twitter.com/repwalterjones 11:30 AM Bicameral, bipartisan legislators announce legislation on retired miners’ pensions – United Mine Workers of America press conference with Democratic Sen. Joe Manchin and Rep. Peter Welch, and Republican Sen. Shelley Moore and Rep. David McKinley, who announce new legislation to address retired miners’ pensions. UMWA International President Cecil Roberts and retired miners also speak Location: U.S. Capitol, Rm S-120, East Capitol St, NE & First St SE, Washington, DC http://www.umwa.org/ 12:00 PM House Foreign Affairs subcommittee hearing on Iraq and Syria – Africa, Global Health, Global Human Rights, and International Organizations Subcommittee hearing on ‘Iraq and Syria Genocide Emergency Relief and Accountability’, with testimony from former Rep. Frank Wolf; Yazidi survivor of the Islamic State group enslavement ‘Shireen’; and Chaldean Catholic Archdiocese of Erbil Director of Internationally Displaced Persons Assistance Stephen Rasche Location: Rayburn House Office Building, Rm 2172, Washington, DC http://www.hcfa.house.gov https://twitter.com/HouseForeign 12:00 PM House of Representatives meets for legislative business – House of Representatives meets for legislative business, with agenda including ‘S. 652 – Early Hearing Detection and Intervention Act of 2017’, ‘H.R. 2408 – Protecting Girls’ Access to Education in Vulnerable Settings Act’, ‘H.R. 1918 – Nicaraguan Investment Conditionality Act (NICA) of 2017’, ‘H.R. 1624 – Municipal Finance Support Act of 2017’, and ‘H.R. 36 – Pain-Capable Unborn Child Protection Act’ Location: Washington, DC http://www.house.gov/ 12:00 PM 45th March for Life theme announced at Capitol Hill briefing – March for Life Education and Defense Fund announce the theme for the 45th annual March for Life (19 Jan), via Capitol hill briefing hosted by Republican Rep. Diane Black and panel discussion with March for Life Education and Defense Fund President Jeanne Mancini, Northwest Center Executive Director Susan Gallucci, Charlotte Lozier Institute President Chuck Donovan, and Alliance Defending Freedom Director of Alliance Relations Alison Howard Centofante Location: U.S. Capitol Visitor Center, HVC-201, First St NE, Washington, DC www.marchforlife.org https://twitter.com/March_for_Life 1:00 PM House Armed Services Committee hearing on defense strategy in South Asia – House Armed Services Committee hearing on ‘U.S. Defense Strategy in South Asia’, with testimony from Secretary of Defense James Mattis and Joint Chiefs of Staff Chairman Gen. Joseph Dunford Location: Rayburn House Office Building, Rm 2118, Washington, DC armedservices.house.gov https://twitter.com/HASCRepublicans 2:00 PM House Energy subcommittee latest hearing on ‘Defining Reliability in a Transforming Electricity Industry’ – Energy Subcommittee hearing on ‘Part II: Powering America: Defining Reliability in a Transforming Electricity Industry’, with testimony from American Coalition for Clean Coal Electricity CEO Paul Bailey; American Petroleum Institute Executive Vice President and Chief Strategy Officer Marty Durbin; American Wind Energy Association CEO Tom Kiernan; Nuclear Energy Institute CEO Maria Korsnick; Natural Resources Defense Council Energy & Transportation Program Sustainable FERC Project Director John Moore; Solar Energy Industries Association President and CEO Abigail Ross Hopper; Energy Storage Association CEO Kelly Speakes-Backman; and Chelan County PUD General Manager Steve Wright (on behalf of National Hydropower Association) Location: Rayburn House Office Building, Rm 2123, Washington, DC http://energycommerce.house.gov/ https://twitter.com/HouseCommerce 2:00 PM House Oversight and Government Reform / Armed Services subcommittees joint hearing on use of canines in security – House Homeland Security Committee Subcommittee on Transportation and Protective and House Committee on Oversight and Government Reform Intergovernmental Affairs Subcommittee hold joint hearing on ‘Innovations in Security: Examining the Use of Canines’, with testimony from American Kennel Club Vice President of Government Relations Sheila Goffe; Orlando Police Department Lt. Scott Smith; and University of Pennsylvania School of Veterinary Medicine Penn Vet Working Dog Center Director Cynthia Otto Location: Rayburn House Office Building, Rm 2154, Washington, DC http://oversight.house.gov/ https://twitter.com/GOPoversight 2:00 PM House Oversight subcommittee hearing on ‘Cybersecurity of the Internet of Things’ – Information Technology Subcommittee hearing on ‘Cybersecurity of the Internet of Things’, with testimony from U.S. Chamber of Commerce Cybersecurity Policy Executive Director Matthew Eggers; Atlantic Council Cyber Statecraft Initiative Director Josh Corman; The Software Alliance Senior Director of Policy Tommy Ross; and VMWare Chief Technology Officer Ray O’Farrell Location: Rayburn House Office Building, Rm 2247, Washington, DC http://oversight.house.gov/ https://twitter.com/GOPoversight 2:30 PM Helsinki Commission hearing on combating kleptocracy – Helsinki Commission hearing on ‘Combating Kleptocracy with Incorporation Transparency’, with witnesses – Hudson Institute Kleptocracy Initiative Executive Director Charles Davidson, Delegation of the European Union to the U.S. Deputy Head Caroline Vicini, and FACT Coalition Executive Director Gary Kalman – examining the development of the EU’s beneficial ownership transparency provisions and the success of their implementation as relates to corruption as a vector for authoritarian influence in Europe, and addressing transparency and anti-money laundering policies in the U.S. as they relate to U.S. foreign policy Location: Dirksen Senate Office Building, Rm 562, Washington, DC http://www.csce.gov https://twitter.com/HelsinkiComm 3:00 PM House Rules Committee hearing – Hearing on ‘H. Con. Res. 71 – Establishing the congressional budget for the United States Government for fiscal year 2018 and setting forth the appropriate budgetary levels for fiscal years 2019 through 2027’ Location: U.S. Capitol, H-313, Washington, DC http://www.rules.house.gov/ https://twitter.com/RulesReps 3:30 PM House Armed Services subcommittee hearing on ‘securing the peace’ after the fall of the Islamic State group – Oversight and Investigations Subcommittee hearing on ‘Securing the Peace After the Fall of ISIL’, with testimony from Acting Deputy Assistant Secretary for Stability and Humanitarian Affairs Mark Swayne; Joint Staff J-5 Middle East Division Director USMC Brig. Gen. James Bierman; State Department Deputy Assistant Secretary for Iraq Joseph Pennington; State Department Global Coalition to Defeat ISIS Director Pamela Quanrud; former U.S. Ambassador to Iraq Ryan Crocker; American Enterprise Institute Resident Scholar Dr Kenneth Pollack; and George Washington University Professor of Political Science Dr Marc Lynch Location: Rayburn House Office Building, Rm 2212, Washington, DC www.armedservices.house.gov https://twitter.com/HASCRepublicans 4:00 PM House Natural Resources Committee markup hearing begins – Markup hearing begins on ‘H.R. 210, Native American Energy Act’, ‘H.R. 424, Gray Wolf State Management Act of 2017’, ‘H.R. 717, Listing Reform Act’, ‘H.R. 1274, State, Tribal and Local Species Transparency Act and Recovery Act’, ‘H.R. 1488, The Indiana Dunes National Park Act’, ‘H.R. 2600, To provide for the conveyance to the State of Iowa of the reversionary interest held by the United States in certain land in Pottawattamie County, Iowa, and for other purposes’, ‘H.R. 2603, Saving America’s Endangered Species Act’ (‘SAVES Act’), ‘H.R. 2897, To authorize the Mayor of the District of Columbia and the Director of the National Park Service to enter into cooperative management agreements for the operation, maintenance, and management of units of the National Park System in the District of Columbia, and for other purposes’, and ‘H.R. 3131, Endangered Species Litigation Reasonableness Act’ * Concludes tomorrow Location: Longworth House Office Building, Rm 1334, Washington, DC http://naturalresources.house.gov https://twitter.com/NatResources 5:30 PM ‘Syria’s Disappeared: The Case Against Assad’ TLHRC screening and panel discussion – Tom Lantos Human Rights Commission hosts ‘Syria’s Disappeared: The Case Against Assad’ film screening and panel discussion, with opening remarks from TLHRC Co-Chair Rep. James McGovern and panelists former U.S. Ambassador-at-Large for War Crimes Issues Stephen Rapp and Syrian survivor of torture Mazen Alhummada. The film tells the story of tens of thousands of men, women and children who disappeared at the hands of the Assad regime into a network of clandestine detention centers Location: Longworth House Office Building, Rm 1539, Washington, DC http://tlhrc.house.gov/ https://twitter.com/TLHRCommission 

Other: 8:45 AM Bipartisan Reps. Ed Royce and Eliot Engel at ‘Hezbollah’s Role in Iran’s Global Illicit Networks’ event – ‘Hezbollah’s Role in Iran’s Global Illicit Networks’ breakfast event, hosted by the Foundation for Defense of Democracies and its Center on Sanctions and Illicit Finance. Speakers include House Committee on Foreign Affairs Chairman Ed Royce and Ranking Member Eliot Engel, former Drug Enforcement Administration Special Operations Division Special Agent in Charge Derek Maltz, and FDD Senior Vice President Jonathan Schanzer and Center on Sanctions and Illicit Finance Director of Analysis Yaya Fanusie Location: Rayburn House Office Building, Rm 2200, Washington, DC www.defenddemocracy.org https://twitter.com/FollowFDD 9:00 AM Washington Post Live Cybersecurity Summit – Washington Post Live Cybersecurity Summit, convening govt leaders, business executives and security experts to discuss and debate top issues in cybersecurity. Speakers include Republican Rep. Will Hurd, former Special Adviser to the President on Cyber Security Richard Clarke, former National Security Agency Director and CIA Director Gen. (Ret.) Michael Hayden, White House Cybersecurity Coordinator Rob Joyce, Ridge Global President Christopher Furlow, Center for Democracy and Technology’s Freedom, Security, and Technology Project Deputy Director Michelle Richardson, and national security journalist Marcy Wheeler Location: The Washington Post, 1301 K St NW, Washington, DC http://www.washingtonpost.com/ https://twitter.com/washingtonpost 10:00 AM ‘Gill v. Whitford’ Rally – Schwarzenegger – Rally outside the Supreme Court to oppose partisan gerrymandering. Participants: Arnold Schwarzenegger, Actor, athlete, former Republican Governor of California; Gerry Hebert, Gill v. Whitford litigator, Senior Director, Voting Rights and Redistricting, Campaign Legal Center; Wendy Sue Johnson, Gill v. Whitford plaintiff, Wisconsin resident; Karen Hobert Flynn, President, Common Cause, filed amicus brief in the case; Rachel Brewer, Represent. Us, the nation’s largest grassroots anti-corruption campaign which filed amicus brief on the case; David Jolly, Republican former U.S. Representative for Florida’s 13th Congressional District; John C. Yang, Executive Director, Asian Americans Advancing Justice, signed on to civil rights’ groups amicus brief in support of fair maps; Wylecia Wiggs Harris, CEO, League of Women Voters; Will Fischer, VoteVets; Michele Jawando, Center for American Progress Action; Sachin Chheda, Fair Elections Project (Wisconsin), helped organize and launch the case; Kristen Cl Location: In front of the United States Supreme Court Building 1 First Street, NE. 12:00 PM Media Conference Call on Needed Safety Fixes to Senate AV Bil – Coalition of leading safety and consumer advocates, and families of victims of deadly vehicle defects, will call on the U.S. Senate Committee on Commerce, Science and Transportation to include “much needed changes” to a bill on autonomous vehicles (AV) which allows “hundreds of thousands of self-driving cars to get exemptions from federal motor vehicle safety standards”. Participants: U.S. Senator Richard Blumenthal (D-CT), Member of the Committee on Commerce, Science and Transportation; Senator Ed Markey (D-MA), Member of the Committee on Commerce, Science and Transportation; Laura Christian, mother of Amber Marie Rose, who was killed in a GM ignition switch defect crash in 2005; Angelina Sujata, victim of defective Takata airbag; Joan Claybrook, Former Administrator, National Highway Traffic Safety Administration; Steve Hargarten, emergency physician and Medical College of Wisconsin professor; Jackie Gillan, President, Advocates for Highway and Auto Safety; Jack Gillis, Director of Public Affairs, C Location: TBD 2:30 PM House Republican Study Committee members speak at Heritage Foundation on tax relief – Heritage Foundation hosts ‘Tax Relief for the American People’ conversation with members of the House Republican Study Committee, including Chairman Rep. Mark Walker and fellow GOP Reps. Jim Banks, Andy Barr, and Jeff Duncan Location: Heritage Foundation, 214 Massachusetts Ave NW, Washington, DC www.heritage.org https://twitter.com/Heritage Bureau of Industry and Security annual Update Conference – Update 2017: Department of Commerce Bureau of Industry and Security 30th Annual Conference on Export Controls and Policy, this year themed ‘Protecting American Technology – Growing American Industry’. Secretary of Commerce Wilbur Ross keynotes, with other speakers including Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisitions, Technology and Logistics Ellen Lord Location: Washington Hilton, 1919 Connecticut Ave NW, Washington, DC http://www.commerce.gov/ https://twitter.com/CommerceGov 

# Last Laughs 

## Late Night Political Humor. 

Jimmy Kimmel: “There are a lot of things we can do about it. But we don’t, which is interesting because when someone with a beard attacks us, we tap phones, we invoke travel bans, we build walls to take every possible precaution to make sure it doesn’t happen again. But when an American buys a gun and kills other Americans, then there’s nothing we can do about it. The Second Amendment, I guess, our forefathers wanted us to have AK-47s is the argument.” 

Jimmy Kimmel: “The White House Press Secretary Sara Sanderson said this morning it was not the time for political debate. I don’t know. We have 59 innocent people dead. It wasn’t their time either.” 

Stephen Colbert: “Last week, Rep. Steve Scalise returned to the floor and was greeted with a bipartisan, hero’s welcome. It was the kind of moment that gives hope that Congress might work together for the common good. And the bar is so low that Congress can be heroes by doing literally anything.” 

Stephen Colbert: “You know you work for the Trump administration when one of the worst disasters in history seems like a good news story to you.” 

Trevor Noah: “Every time there is a shooting, you got to look at something else. Is it Muslims? Is it their religion, is that what it is? Is it blacks? It is a black-on-black crime, it is mentally ill people, is it white nationalists? Every time, it’s a different question. And now, now after this incident in Las Vegas, we’re asking a new question. Is it hotels?” 

Trevor Noah: “Just to give you an idea of how far away America is from actual gun control, this week Congress is going to vote on deregulating gun silencers. Because I guess Congress is thinking gun violence is out of control, they were like, ‘How can we make it quieter?’” 

Trevor Noah: “Earlier this week, the Secretary of State revealed that he has a direct line of communication with North Korea, which is a big deal considering North Korea is threatening to launch a nuclear weapon at the US. Unfortunately for the rest of us, President Trump has a direct line of communication with Twitter.” 

Trevor Noah: “Wow, really? The hurricane-ravaged people of Puerto Rico are lazy. This coming from a man who spent 71 days of his presidency at a golf course, really? A sport where you are so lazy you need an assistant.” 

Seth Meyers: “In a new interview, House Speaker Paul Ryan said he thinks President Trump’s heart is in the right place on race relations. Oh, sorry, I misread that, his heart is in the white place.” 

Seth Meyers: “A new media study has found that only one in ten stories offered a positive assessment of the Trump Administration, while the other nine were true.” Seth Meyers: “Former California Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger will speak at a rally tomorrow against gerrymandering. Admission is free, but I would still pay $1,000 just to hear him say ‘gerrymandering.’” 

Seth Meyers: “After President Trump tweeted yesterday that Secretary of State Rex Tillerson is wasting his time trying to negotiate with North Korea, Politico published an article titled, ‘Should Rex Tillerson Resign?’ Replied Tillerson, ‘I resigned months ago, has nobody noticed?’” 

Copyright 2017 by Bulletin Intelligence LLC Reproduction or redistribution without permission prohibited. Content is drawn from thousands of newspapers, national magazines, national and local television programs, radio broadcasts, social-media platforms and additional forms of open-source data. Sources for Bulletin Intelligence audience-size estimates include Scarborough, GfK MRI, comScore, Nielsen, and the Audit Bureau of Circulation. Data from and access to third party social media platforms, including but not limited to Facebook, Twitter, Instagram and others, is subject to the respective platform’s terms of use. Services that include Factiva content are governed by Factiva’s terms of use. Services including embedded Tweets are also subject to Twitter for Website's information and privacy policies. The Department of the Interior News Briefing is published five days a week by Bulletin Intelligence, which creates custom briefings for government and corporate leaders. We can be found on the Web at BulletinIntelligence.com, or called at (703) 483-6100. Conversation Contents 

## U.S. Department of the Interior News Briefing for Wednesday, September 20, 2017 

# Bulletin Intelligence <Interior@bulletinintelligence.com> 

## From: Bulletin Intelligence <Interior@bulletinintelligence.com> 

## Sent: Wed Sep 20 2017 05:01:23 GMT-0600 (MDT) 

## To: <Interior@bulletinintelligence.com> 

## Subject: U.S. Department of the Interior News Briefing for Wednesday, September 20, 2017  

> Mobile version and searchable archives available here. Please click here to subscribe.
> DATE: WEDNESDAY, SEPTEMBER 20, 2017 7:00 AM EDT

# Today's Table Of Contents 

DOI In The News 

• The Hill: Zinke Puts ‘Big Buck Hunter’ In Interior Dept Cafeteria To Promote Hunting. • The Hill: Senate Panel Approves Trump Energy Nominees. • Farmington (NM) Daily Times: Company Named To Build Next Step Of Navajo-Gallup Water Supply Project. • Joplin (MO) Globe: Wonders Of Wildlife Prepares For Opening. • Cleveland Plain Dealer: Trump Promise To Restore Mount McKinley Name Is Up In The Air. • Portland (OR) Tribune: ODOT Gets $1 Million To Clean Up Wildfire Damage. • Black Hills (SD) Pioneer: SD Congressional Delegation Continues To Fight For DC Booth. • Federal News Radio (DC): Kevin Bogardus: Obama Appointees Negotiated Next Job While On The Job At Interior. • The Hill: Preserving An American Tradition: Maintaining Access And Increasing Opportunities On Our Public Lands. • Sacramento (CA) Bee: More Logging On Public Land Means More Wildfires. • Bend (OR) Bulletin: Editorial: Cascade-Siskiyou Should Be Shrunk. • Las Vegas Review-Journal: A Smaller Gold Butte No Big Deal. • The Guardian (UK): Bears Ears Is Sacred To Native Americans. • Concord (NH) Monitor: Don’t Mess With National Monuments. 

Bureau Of Indian Affairs 

• Hearing Scheduled For Act That Would Grant Lumbee Full Federal Recognition. • Island Near NE Tip Of Minnesota Returned To Chippewa Band. • Stink Over Acme Sewer. Bureau Of Land Management 

• Daily Caller: Obama Turned ‘A Blind Eye’ To Fired Interior Official’s Corruption, GOP Rep Says. • Grand Junction (CO) Daily Sentinel: BLM Rounds Up 86 Horses Near Rangely. • Las Cruces (NM) Sun-News: BLM And Partners Sponsor National Public Lands Day Events. 

Bureau Of Ocean Energy Management 

• Block Island Wind Farm Tracking Birds and Bats. • Fishing Industry Takes More Action Against New York Offshore Wind Lease. 

Bureau Of Reclamation 

• Westlands Water District Says It Won’t Help Pay For Delta Tunnels. 

Bureau Of Safety And Environmental Enforcement 

• Scott Angelle Says The Country Should Focus On ‘Energy Dominance’. 

Fish And Wildlife Service 

• Arizona Republic: The Wall — Eminent Domain May Claim Private Property For Trump Wall. • Associated Press: Federal Officials Designate Mississippi Fish As Threatened. • Big Island (HI) Now: ‘I’iwi Receives Protection Under Endangered Species Act. • Palm Beach (FL) Post: West Palm Sues US Agencies Over State Road 7 Extension Approval. • Watertown (NY) Daily Times: Ritchie Calls On Federal Government To Move Quickly On Cormorant Management. • Chinook (WA) Observer: Refuge Plans New ‘Gateway To The Outdoors’. • Daily Inter Lake (MT): DNRC Faces Tough Questions At Bottling-plant Hearing. • U.S. News & World Report: California Condor Takes Flight In Wild After Near Extinction. • Los Angeles Times: The Oil-Drunk Trump Administration Needs To Leave Alaska Refuge Alone. • San Jose (CA) Mercury News: Airbnb For Monarch Butterflies Can Prevent Demise. 

National Park Service 

• Washington Times: National Mall Faces Space Crunch For Global War On Terror Memorial. • Newsweek: Man Arrested For Using Penny To Deface Lincoln Memorial. • WAMU-FM Washington: D.C. Councilmember Says National Park Service Would Charge Him With Trespassing For Removing Confederate Statue. • Fox News: NAACP Pushes To Remove Battle Of Chickamauga Monument In Tennessee. • Baltimore Patch: Federal Grant To Send Baltimore Students On Field Trips To 3 Historical Sites. • U.S. News & World Report: Docks, Marinas Get Repaired After Microburst On Lake Powell. • WNEP-TV Scranton (PA): Fly Fishing On A Day Of Healing For Veterans. • KMPH-TV Fresno (CA): 49 Become U.S. Citizens At Yosemite National Park. • Napa Valley (CA) Register: New Muir Woods Reservation System Aims To Reduce Overcrowding, Traffic Congestion. 

Office Of Insular Affairs 

• ABC: Trump Declares Emergency As Hurricane Maria Heads Toward Puerto Rico. 

US Geological Survey 

• ABC: Earthquake Outside Mexico City Kills At Least 226. 

Top National News 

• ABC: Trump Slams “Rocket Man” At UN, Threatens To “Totally Destroy” North Korea. • ABC: Trump At UN: Iran Nuclear Deal An “Embarrassment.” • CBS: Trump Calls Out Venezuela, Cuba In UN Speech. • CBS: In UN Speech, Trump Vows To Always Put America First. • ABC: White House Joins Graham-Cassidy Push, But Bill’s Prospects Remain Uncertain. • Associated Press: Senate Republicans Tentatively Agree On $1.5 Trillion Tax Cut Plan. • Washington Free Beacon: Report: Cutting Wasteful Spending Would Balance Budget In Three Years. • Fox News: Pruitt Questions Whether Climate Change Is An “Existential Threat.” • E&E Publishing: Federal Report On Climate To Be Released In November. 

Editorial Wrap-Up 

> • New York Times. - “Warmongers And Peacemakers At The UN.” - “Even College Doesn’t Bridge The Racial Income Gap.” • Washington Post. - “Another Execrable Healthcare Bill Proves Bad Ideas Never Die.” - “Trump Undermines His Own Advocacy For Human Dignity.” - “Who Pays For The White House To Lawyer Up?” • Wall Street Journal. - “Trump Shock At Turtle Bay.” - “James Madison Weeps.” - “All Mr. Comey’s Wiretaps.”

Big Picture 

> • Headlines From Today’s Front Pages.

Washington Schedule 

> • Today’s Events In Washington.

Last Laughs 

> • Late Night Political Humor.

# DOI In The News 

## Zinke Puts ‘Big Buck Hunter’ In Interior Dept Cafeteria To Promote Hunting. 

In its “Blog Briefing Room” blog, The Hill (9/19, Delk) reports that Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke added the “Big Buck Hunter” arcade game to the Interior Department’s cafeteria this week. Zinke installed “the hunting themed arcade game in the cafeteria in an effort to promote hunting, announcing the addition in a tweet on Tuesday.” Zinke tweeted, “To highlight #sportsmen contributions 2 conservation I installed Big Buck Hunter in the employee cafeteria. Get excited for #hunting season!” Also reporting are the Washington Examiner (9/19, Siciliano), CNN International (9/19, Tatum), USA Today (9/19, King), the Shreveport (LA) Times (9/19, King), WENY-TV Elmira (NY) Elmira, NY (9/19, Tatum), and WZVN-TV Fort Myers (FL) Fort Myers, FL (9/19, Tatum). 

## Senate Panel Approves Trump Energy Nominees. 

The Hill (9/19, Cama) reports the Senate Energy and Natural Resources Committee on Tuesday “approved five of President Trump’s nominees for energy positions in the federal government.” The Hill says senators “easily approve[d]” Federal Energy Regulatory Commission nominees Kevin McIntyre and Richard Glick, “Ryan Nelson to be the Interior Department’s solicitor, Joseph Balash to be Interior’s assistant secretary for land and mineral management and David Jonas to be general counsel at the Energy Department.” The votes “send all of the nominees to the full Senate for a confirmation vote, which has not yet been scheduled.” DOE and Interior “currently have only two Senate-confirmed officials, making it difficult for the Trump administration to move on some of its major policy priorities at those departments.” Also reporting are the Washington Examiner (9/19, Siciliano, Seigel), Alaska Dispatch News (9/19, Martinson), the Grand Junction (CO) Daily Sentinel (9/20, Harmon), Law360, and Natural Gas Intelligence (9/19, Bradley). Company Named To Build Next Step Of Navajo-Gallup Water Supply Project. 

The Farmington (NM) Daily Times (9/19) reports that the Bureau of Reclamation has “awarded a $62 million construction contract to build a section of pipeline for the Navajo-Gallup Water Supply Project.” The Interior Department “announced on Sept. 15 that the contract was awarded to Oscar Renda Contracting Inc., a subsidiary of Southland Holdings in Roanoke, Texas.” Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke said in a release, “The project is critical to providing a much-needed, long-term, sustainable water supply for people on the Navajo and Jicarilla Apache reservations and the City of Gallup. It is also the cornerstone of our commitments under the Navajo Nation San Juan River Water Rights Settlement.” 

## Wonders Of Wildlife Prepares For Opening. 

The Joplin (MO) Globe (9/20, Goodwin) reports that the Wonders of Wildlife National Museum and Aquarium will “open to the public on Friday, but it was open Tuesday for a media preview at its adjoining location with Bass Pro Shops at East Sunshine and South Campbell avenues in Springfield.” A gala Wednesday is “expected to be attended by former Presidents George W. Bush and Jimmy Carter; U.S. Secretary of the Interior Ryan Zinke; Missouri Gov. Eric Greitens; conservation leaders; and celebrities.” 

## Trump Promise To Restore Mount McKinley Name Is Up In The Air. 

The Cleveland Plain Dealer (9/19, Eaton) reports that after promising to reverse the name change of Mount McKinley to Denali while campaigning, President Trump has “been silent on whether the mountain’s name should be changed.” The article notes that earlier this year, Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke “told Alaskan media the peak should keep the name Denali.” 

## ODOT Gets $1 Million To Clean Up Wildfire Damage. 

The Portland (OR) Tribune (9/19) reports the Oregon Department of Transportation will receive a $1 million emergency relief grant from the US Department of Transportation “to clean up roads and highways damaged or threatened by the summer’s wildfires.” The Tribune attributes the grant to the work of Oregon’s Congressional delegation, particularly Sens. Ron Wyden and Jeff Merkley. KATU-TV Portland, OR (9/19) and KPTV-TV Portland, OR (9/19) also reported on the grant. 

## SD Congressional Delegation Continues To Fight For DC Booth. 

The Black Hills (SD) Pioneer (9/19, Watson) reports that “South Dakota’s congressional delegation has requested vacant employee positions at the D.C. Booth Historic National Fish Hatchery and Archives be filled.” A letter sent Monday to Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke and the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service “outlined the importance of the hatchery as well as the staffing decline since officials at the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service began discussing the closure of the hatchery in June 2013.” The delegation of Sens. John Thune, and Mike Rounds, and Rep. Kristi Noem, wrote, “The D.C. Booth Fish Hatchery is critically important to the Spearfish community, its economy, and its residents, as more than 160,000 people visit the Hatchery each year. The Hatchery has provided jobs and volunteer opportunities in the community, and it exemplifies a successful federal public lands partnership.” 

## Kevin Bogardus: Obama Appointees Negotiated Next Job While On The Job At Interior. 

Federal News Radio (DC) (9/19) reports that “a half dozen Interior Department appointees were negotiating private sector jobs toward the end of the Obama administration.” According to the report, “they recused themselves from important policy deliberations.” 

## Preserving An American Tradition: Maintaining Access And Increasing Opportunities On Our Public Lands. For the “Congress” blog of The Hill (9/19, Bishop), Rep. Rob Bishop, chairman of the House Committee on Natural Resources, writes that “to ensure conservation and economic growth can be created by our federal lands, it is important to have access to outdoor activities on America’s public lands, and to have secure Second and Tenth Amendment rights.” Bishop urges Congress to pass the “Sportsmen’s Heritage and Recreational Enhancement (SHARE) Act.” According to Bishop, “maintaining access and increasing opportunities on our public lands will help ensure our natural resources are conserved in perpetuity, and helps sustain good, family supporting jobs for millions of Americans.” 

## More Logging On Public Land Means More Wildfires. 

In an op-ed for the Sacramento (CA) Bee (9/19, Ambrose, Baxter), Anthony Ambrose and Wendy Baxter, both with the Department of Integrative Biology at UC Berkeley, highlight “the remarkable differences in wildfires in unlogged areas versus clear-cut forestland.” They argue that “protecting Giant Sequoia National Monument doesn’t just make scientific sense, it reduces risk of mega-fires – a risk that is now amplified in Cascades-Siskiyou National Monument in Oregon, which has been recommended for significant cutbacks.” They are dismayed that “timber industry executives – and now the Trump administration – continue to pursue their logging agenda that will leave forests irreversibly damaged and open to fire.” The authors warn that “increased commercial logging in these forests will result in the removal of the largest, most ecologically important and fire-resistant trees.” 

## Editorial: Cascade-Siskiyou Should Be Shrunk. 

In an editorial, the Bend (OR) Bulletin (9/19) agrees with Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke’s recommendation that the Cascade-Siskiyou National Monument should be shrunk. The paper highlights that in his recommendation, “Zinke notes that the expanded monument contains more than 40,000 acres of Oregon and California Railroad Revested Lands (O&C Lands) that were set aside by Congress in 1937 to provide sustained timber harvest funds for Klamath County and every county west of the Cascade Mountains summit but Clatsop.” The paper concludes that “unlike his predecessors, Zinke clearly sees the value of keeping public land open to the public and assuring that earlier promises such as those given when the O&C Lands were set aside in 1937 be honored.” 

## A Smaller Gold Butte No Big Deal. 

In an editorial, the Las Vegas Review-Journal (9/20) supports downsizing the Gold Butte National Monument. The paper notes that “monuments designated under the Antiquities Act are supposed to be confined to the ‘smallest’ area necessary to protect the objects deserving of protection.” It concludes that “the idea that a slight reduction in Gold Butte’s size will result in environmental catastrophe — particularly in a state where some 85 percent of the land is already under the domain of distant Beltway bureaucrats — is patently ridiculous.” 

## Bears Ears Is Sacred To Native Americans. 

But Heritage Isn’t All Equal For Trump. In an op-ed for The Guardian (UK) (9/19, NoiseCat), Julian Brave NoiseCat, criticizes Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke’s recommendation to shrink the Bears Ears National Monument. According to NoiseCat, “Bears Ears is one of the most powerful and historic cultural and spiritual centers of the first peoples of the south-west.” 

## Don’t Mess With National Monuments. 

In an editorial, the Concord (NH) Monitor (9/20), credits Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke for visiting “most or all of the 27 monuments on Trump’s list before making his recommendations.” The paper notes that “the nation should keep the Katahdin Woods and Waters National Monument, he said, but he went on to suggest that the park allow ‘active timber management.’” The editorial says that “if Zinke means commercial logging, his plan should be opposed. If it’s instituted, lawsuits should be launched.” 

# Bureau Of Indian Affairs 

## Hearing Scheduled For Act That Would Grant Lumbee Full Federal Recognition. 

WBTW-TV Florence-Myrtle Beach, SC (9/19, McGee) reports that the House Natural Resources Subcommittee on Indian, Insular, and Alaska Native Affairs “announced Tuesday that a hearing has been scheduled for Congressman Robert Pittenger’s Lumbee Recognition Act.” Pittenger said, “This is the next step in bringing Lumbee recognition up for a vote. We are working closely with the Lumbee Tribe and other leaders to ensure a strong showing next Tuesday.” The hearing was scheduled for September 26. 

## Island Near NE Tip Of Minnesota Returned To Chippewa Band. 

The AP (9/19) reports that an island off the northeast tip of Minnesota has been returned to the Grand Portage Band of Lake Superior Chippewa. Grand Portage Chairman Norman Deschampe “says the band appreciates the role The Nature Conservancy played in restoring the island to tribal ownership.” The Bureau of Indian Affairs “agreed to place the island in trust on the band’s behalf.” Also reporting are the Duluth (MN) News Tribune (9/19, Myers) and WDIO-TV Duluth (MN) Duluth, MN (9/19). 

## Stink Over Acme Sewer. 

The Traverse City (MI) Record-Eagle (9/19, Troutman) reports that “an Acme Township development likely won’t be impacted by a letter from Gov. Rick Snyder’s office to a federal agency.” However, “the two-page note sent in June could delay Grand Traverse Band of Ottawa and Chippewa Indians officials’ bid to put 158 acres of land near Meijer into trust — an action that will make it effectively tax exempt.” According to the article, “the letter informs the federal Bureau of Indian Affairs of a long-standing sanitary sewer permit violation on the property.” 

# Bureau Of Land Management 

## Obama Turned ‘A Blind Eye’ To Fired Interior Official’s Corruption, GOP Rep Says. 

The Daily Caller (9/19, Pearce) reports that Rep. Rob Bishop “accused the Obama administration of ignoring the unethical and illegal behavior of a former Department of the Interior official Monday.” Bishop “made the charge after Bureau of Land Management (BLM) law enforcement official Dan Love was fired Friday.” Bishop said in a statement, “The previous administration turned a blind eye to corruption and promoted a culture of mismanagement at the Department of the Interior. I applaud Interior for taking a strong stand and reasserting the basic principle that there are consequences for federal employees who blatantly disregard the law and steamroll elected officials and public trust. Love’s exit is welcome.” 

## BLM Rounds Up 86 Horses Near Rangely. 

The Grand Junction (CO) Daily Sentinel (9/20, Webb) reports that the Bureau of Land Management has “wrapped up a wild-horse removal project south of Rangely after capturing 86 animals.” The BLM “ended the helicopter-based operation Monday.” According to the article, “eighty-five of the horses were shipped to the BLM’s Cañon City holding facility and will be made available for adoption or sale.” The article says that “one colt that was about 4 months old was euthanized based on an on-scene veterinarian’s recommendation because it had a pre-existing severe leg injury.” 

## BLM And Partners Sponsor National Public Lands Day Events. 

The Las Cruces (NM) Sun-News (9/19) reports that “the Bureau of Land Management, Friends of the Organ Mountains and Southern New Mexico Trail Alliance are sponsoring three events Saturday, Sept. 30, to celebrate National Public Lands Day.” The events will be held at the Dripping Springs Natural Area. 

# Bureau Of Ocean Energy Management 

## Block Island Wind Farm Tracking Birds and Bats. 

Offshore Wind (9/19) reports that Deepwater Wind has “installed a wildlife tracking station on the easternmost foundation platform at the Block Island wind farm, America’s first offshore wind farm, to assist researchers in their studies of bird and bat activity off the Atlantic Coast.” The project, funded by the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management, will “provide researchers from the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, the University of Rhode Island (URI) and the University of Massachusetts (UMass) Amherst with data on offshore movement of high priority species to inform conservation efforts.” Additional coverage was provided by North American Windpower (9/19, Lillian) and Power Engineering (9/19). 

## Fishing Industry Takes More Action Against New York Offshore Wind Lease. 

North American Windpower (9/19, Lillian) reports that “agroup of fishing organizations, businesses and communities, led by the Fisheries Survival Fund (FSF), has taken more action to halt the lease of Statoil’s planned wind farm off the coast of New York.” The suit, filed against the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management, is “seeking summary judgment and requesting the court to invalidate the lease, which was awarded to Norwegian firm Statoil to develop the New York Wind Energy Area (NY WEA) late last year.” The groups claim “BOEM’s process for awarding the lease failed to properly consider the planned wind farm’s impact on area fish populations and habitats, shoreside communities, safety, and navigation.” 

# Bureau Of Reclamation 

## Westlands Water District Says It Won’t Help Pay For Delta Tunnels. 

The Sacramento (CA) Bee (9/19, Kasler, Sabalow) reports that “an influential group of San Joaquin Valley farmers Tuesday voted against helping to pay for the Delta tunnels, denying Gov. Jerry Brown crucial financial support for the $17.1 billion project.” Westlands Water District’s board of directors “voted 7-1 against participating in the project, known officially as California WaterFix.” Westlands is “the first major water agency to vote on the project, and other big districts are expected to make their decisions in the coming weeks.” In an editorial, the Stockton (CA) Record (9/19) says that the audit that showed the Interior Department, “secretly, and improperly, contributed nearly $85 million” toward the Delta tunnels erodes the public’s trust. The paper questions why people should believe proponents who “say the project will not have a detrimental impact on the Delta.” The editorial concludes that “state officials should realize these tunnels are not the way to solve California’s water woes and that underhanded dealings will only continue to erode any efforts to solve this problem.” Additional coverage was provided by the AP (9/19, Smith) and the Ventura County (CA) Star (9/19). 

# Bureau Of Safety And Environmental Enforcement 

## Scott Angelle Says The Country Should Focus On ‘Energy Dominance’. 

The Lafayette (LA) Daily Advertiser (9/19, Stickney) reports that Bureau of Safety and Environmental Enforcement director Scott Angelle spoke Tuesday to the Louisiana Oil & Gas Association autumn meeting He said, “The country can find its energy vision by not settling for the 1980s goal of energy independence. We’re seeking energy dominance.” Angelle asserted that the Trump Administration can promote energy development without “relaxing environmental protections.” He said, “One-hundred percent of the people in this room enjoy the beach, clean air, a morning hunt or walking in the park. I refuse to believe this group cares less about the environment than others.” 

# Fish And Wildlife Service 

## The Wall — Eminent Domain May Claim Private Property For Trump Wall. 

In a series of comprehensive pieces, the Arizona Republic examines various issues with the border, including the proposed border wall, the danger faced by border crossers, and the work of Border Patrol agents, among other issues. In a 3,000-word piece, the Arizona Republic (9/19) reports on the potential use of eminent domain to claim private property for the border wall. In another piece, the Arizona Republic (9/19) reports on the death of Border Patrol agent Brian Terry, and his family’s quest to ensure more security along the border. The Arizona Republic (9/19) separately reports in a 9,000-word piece about a “mission...to film the border, evaluate the existing fences, document this invisible line as it exists in 2017 – before any construction begins on what President Donald Trump has repeatedly called ‘a big, beautiful wall.’” The Arizona Republic (9/19) also reports on commerce along the border and the possibility that a tax on Mexican imports may be used to pay for the border wall. The Arizona Republic (9/19) also features an examination of the endangered species in the border area and how a border wall could affect the species. The Arizona Republic (9/19) reports on the dangers faced by border crossers in a separate piece, including environmental and dealing with human smuggling organizations tied to the cartels. The Arizona Republic (9/19) separately reports on deaths of migrant crossers who take “risky” paths to avoid Border Patrol agents. The Arizona Republic (9/19) also reports on US ranchers along the border and their “run-ins with border crossers and drug mules.” The Arizona Republic (9/19) reports on the presence of vigilantes who patrol the border looking for “smugglers or drug traffickers,” specifically the Arizona Border Recon Group who “volunteer to patrol border land” and are “armed with rifles and guns.” In a separate piece, the Arizona Republic (9/19) reports on the Tohono O’odham people and the effect a border wall may have in dividing the tribe. Finally, the Arizona Republic (9/19) reports on the work and risks faced by the Border Patrol, who are often alone and can “go without seeing another living being” during patrol shifts. 

## Federal Officials Designate Mississippi Fish As Threatened. 

The AP (9/19, Amy) reports that the pearl darter will “soon be designated as threatened, federal authorities said Tuesday.” The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service “proposed the listing last year and will make it official on October 20.” According to FWS spokeswoman Connie Dickard, “the listing will have little impact on private property owners.” 

## ‘I’iwi Receives Protection Under Endangered Species Act. 

Big Island (HI) Now (9/19) reports that “the ‘i’iwi, also known as the scarlet honeycreeper, will be protected as a threatened species under the Endangered Species Act, the US Fish and Wildlife Service announced.” The FWS “determined that listing was warranted based on a review of the best information available for the ‘i’iwi, gained through exhaustive research, public comments and independent scientific peer reviews.” Mary Abrams, project leader for the Service’s Pacific Islands Fish and Wildlife Office, said, “In recent years, the ‘i’iwi population has been in sharp decline, due to threats from habitat loss, invasive species and avian diseases, particularly avian malaria. These threats have affected all forest birds, not just the ‘i’iwi. Conservation that benefits the ‘i’iwi will undoubtedly benefit other Hawaiian forest birds.” Also reporting is the Maui (HI) Time Weekly (9/19, Pignataro). 

## West Palm Sues US Agencies Over State Road 7 Extension Approval. 

The Palm Beach (FL) Post (9/19, Kennedy) reports that the city of West Palm Beach, Florida “filed in U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia on Sept. 12, against the Army Corps of Engineers, Fish and Wildlife Service, Department of the Interior, Federal Highway Administration and Environmental Protection Agency” for approvals made on the State Road 7 project. The city sued the agencies for approving the “unnecessary and environmentally harmful roadway project in violation of multiple environmental laws.” Also reporting is WPEC-TV West Palm Beach (FL) West Palm Beach, FL (9/19, Maradiaga). 

## Ritchie Calls On Federal Government To Move Quickly On Cormorant Management. 

The Watertown (NY) Daily Times (9/20, Block) reports that state Sen. Patricia A. Ritchie is “calling on the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service to move more quickly to give states the ability to manage double-crested cormorants.” Ritchie said, “This is something that needs to be dealt with now. The data is out there, I don’t think any more data is needed to confirm the cormorant population was out of control and affecting the fishing industry.” Meanwhile, the FWS is “planning to release a draft environmental assessment “within weeks” that could give some authority for local residents to kill the birds in select circumstances.” 

## Refuge Plans New ‘Gateway To The Outdoors’. 

The Chinook (WA) Observer (9/19, Nile) reports that the Willapa National Wildlife Refuge has “rough designs for a new headquarters and visitor center that could be built at either one of the two sites being considered on the federal preserve.” Manager Jackie Ferrier “said the staff has long outgrown its offices in a cramped 1940s building at 3888 U.S. Highway 101.” According to the article, “although the project has yet to be funded, officials have been taking in design and site ideas at public meetings.” 

## DNRC Faces Tough Questions At Bottling-plant Hearing. 

The Daily Inter Lake (MT) (9/19, Reilly) reports that “the Montana Artesian Water Company’s plan to bottle Creston’s groundwater drew fresh scrutiny Tuesday morning.” Montana’s Department of Natural Resources and Conservation “opened a multi-day hearing to decide whether to grant the company, founded by Flathead resident Lew Weaver, a water-use permit to tap the aquifer.” Representatives of the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service were among those that raised concerns. Also reporting are Montana Public Radio (9/19, Kreimer) and KTVQ-TV Billings (MT) Billings, MT (9/19, Miller). 

## California Condor Takes Flight In Wild After Near Extinction. 

The AP (9/20, Chea) reports that “three decades after being pushed to the brink of extinction, the California condor is making a comeback in the wild, but constant vigilance is needed to ensure the endangered bird doesn’t reverse course.” Notably, plans also “underway to release some captive-bred condors in Redwood National Park in 2019 to establish a population near the California-Oregon border.” 

## The Oil-Drunk Trump Administration Needs To Leave Alaska Refuge Alone. 

In an editorial, the Los Angeles Times (9/19) says that the Trump Administration needs to leave the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge alone and not allow seismic testing to assess the oil potential because it is a bad idea for both environmental policy and energy strategy. The editorial says, “The future of the global environment hinges on the decisions we make now about our energy sources, and taking even a baby step toward developing new sources of fossil fuels — especially in one of the harshest climate zones in the world — would be foolhardy and dangerous.” E&E Publishing (9/19) also provides coverage of the move towards the Arctic Refuge. 

## Airbnb For Monarch Butterflies Can Prevent Demise. 

In an op-ed for the San Jose (CA) Mercury News (9/19, Festa), David Festa, senior vice president of ecosystems programs at Environmental Defense Fund, writes that “there is a new wildlife solution that taps into the sharing economy to create new habitat for butterflies.” Festa calls for investing “in farmers and ranchers who already manage much of the habitat appropriate for milkweed.” According to Festa, “farmers and ranchers from California to Texas to Missouri now have the opportunity to participate in an emerging program called the Monarch Butterfly Habitat Exchange, which rewards them for restoring and enhancing monarch habitat in field edges, buffer zones, marginal lands and rangelands – areas that would not decrease productivity.” 

# National Park Service 

## National Mall Faces Space Crunch For Global War On Terror Memorial. 

The Washington Times (9/19, Richardson) reports that “more memorials are seeking space on and near the National Mall as their sponsors seek to ensure that honoring the past never gets old.” According to the article, “the latest project vying for turf in the country’s most exclusive real estate district is the Global War on Terror Memorial, which got off to a fast start last week with a $1 million donation from NewDay USA toward a goal of raising $40 million to $50 million in seven years.” The article notes that “other high-visibility projects in the pipeline include those commemorating former Presidents John Adams and Dwight D. Eisenhower, the doughboys of World War I, the Peace Corps and those who fought in Operation Desert Storm against Iraq.” 

## Man Arrested For Using Penny To Deface Lincoln Memorial. 

Newsweek (9/19, Perez) reports that “a man was arrested after he vandalized the Lincoln Memorial in Washington, D.C. with a penny on Monday afternoon, authorities said.” U.S. Parks Police “say they caught Nurtilek Bakirov, 21, as he tried to write an ‘M’ into two pillars on the famous shrine.” However, “closer inspection revealed the words ‘HYPT’ and ‘MEAK’ carved into the memorial to the 16th president, police said.” Also reporting are the New York Daily News (9/19, Brennan) and WTTG-TV Washington Washington (9/19, McGrady). 

## D.C. Councilmember Says National Park Service Would Charge Him With Trespassing For Removing Confederate Statue. 

WAMU-FM Washington (9/19, Lefrak) reports that on Tuesday, the D.C. Council members Jack Evans and Mary Cheh introduced a resolution to remove a monument to Confederate Brigadier General Albert Pike from Judiciary Square. However, the article notes that “the statue was erected by an act of Congressional approval, and transferred to the jurisdiction of the National Park Service in 1977.” Therefore, “for it to be removed, Congress must pass a bill authorizing the removal, and the Park Service must oversee the process.” 

## NAACP Pushes To Remove Battle Of Chickamauga Monument In Tennessee. 

Fox News (9/19) reports that “the local chapter of the NAACP is pushing a petition, that’s already garnered more than 2,000 signatures, calling for the removal of a Confederate statute commemorating one” of the Civil War Battle of Chickamauga’s “main players – Confederate Lt. Gen. Alexander P. Stewart – from outside Tennessee’s Hamilton County Courthouse.” But “since the monument is part of the National Park Service, and therefore federally protected, it’s not going anywhere anytime soon.” Kim Coons, who works with the park, said, “The monuments will stay here. And the reason they exist is because both sides reunified here to place the markers to tell the stories of the people who fought here.” 

## Federal Grant To Send Baltimore Students On Field Trips To 3 Historical Sites. 

The Baltimore Patch (9/19) reports that Rep. John Sarbanes on Tuesday announced that the National Park Foundation will “award $142,820 to support field trips for Baltimore City fourth graders to visit Fort McHenry National Monument and Historic Shrine, Gwynn Falls in Baltimore National Heritage Area and Hampton National Historic Site.” Funding comes from NPF’s Open OutDoors for Kids program. In addition to Baltimore, the program will “provide $2 million in grant funding to 130 National Park Service sites around the country and help bring more than 200,000 students to national parks for outdoor educational field trips during the 2017-2018 school year.” 

## Docks, Marinas Get Repaired After Microburst On Lake Powell. 

The AP (9/20) reports that “authorities say repairs are nearly finished to property in the Glen Canyon National Recreation Area that was damaged by last week’s microburst along the Arizona-Utah border.” According to the article, “a sudden, powerful downward gust of wind swamped or sank dozens of powerboats and jet skis last Thursday on Lake Powell and resulted in damages to the park’s docks and marinas.” Also, “at the Wahweap Marina, water, power and sewer weren’t available and the dock was damaged.” National Park Service officials “say most of the pairs and docks have been repaired as of Tuesday and the Wahweap Marina should be reopened soon.” 

## Fly Fishing On A Day Of Healing For Veterans. 

WNEP-TV Scranton, PA (9/19, Mataloni) reports that a group of veterans spent a “beautiful, late-summer day fly fishing on the Delaware River in the Poconos” as part of “Project Healing Waters Fly Fishing.” It was “the first time the National Park Service has teamed up with ‘Project Healing Waters.’” The NPS “hopes to host ‘Project Healing Waters’ during both the spring and fall seasons.” 

## 49 Become U.S. Citizens At Yosemite National Park. 

KMPH-TV Fresno, CA (9/19, Vang) reports that “the U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services and the National Park Service joined to present a naturalization ceremony Tuesday at Glacier Point Amphitheater in Yosemite National Park.” According to a USCIS spokesperson, the 49 new U.S. citizens came “from 15 countries that included United Kingdom, Australia, Bulgaira, Zambia, China, India and Mexico.” 

## New Muir Woods Reservation System Aims To Reduce Overcrowding, Traffic Congestion. 

The Napa Valley (CA) Register (9/19) reports that the National Park Service has “selected a new parking and shuttle reservation system at the Muir Woods National Monument in Marin County.” Ace Parking Management Inc. will “manage on-site parking at the popular tourist destination.” 

# Office Of Insular Affairs 

## Trump Declares Emergency As Hurricane Maria Heads Toward Puerto Rico. 

ABC World News Tonight (9/19, story 2, 2:20, Muir) reported that Hurricane Maria is “already deadly and battering the Caribbean.” Maria made landfall in Dominica with 160 mph winds. Dominica Prime Minister Roosevelt Skerrit: “I believe we caught a very bad blow. There appears to be a lot of destruction.” The New York Times (9/19, Semple, Ramzy) reports that Skerrit said Dominica “sustained ‘mind boggling’ damage.” Skerrit wrote on Facebook, “So far we have lost all what money can buy and replace. ... My greatest fear for the morning is that we will wake to news of serious physical injury and possible deaths as a result of likely landslides triggered by persistent rains.” The CBS Evening News (9/19, story 3, 2:00, Mason) reported the Caribbean island of Tortola is “bracing for the worst.” The Washington Examiner (9/19, Correll) reports that President Trump has “issued an emergency declaration for the US Virgin Islands and Puerto Rico, making the territories eligible for federal funding for disaster relief.” In a tweet Tuesday evening, Trump wrote, “Puerto Rico being hit hard by new monster Hurricane. ... Be careful, our hearts are with you – will be there to help!” ABC World News Tonight (9/19, story 2, 2:20, Muir) said that as Puerto Rico braces for impact, more than three million US citizens are “at risk” there, with some “warned to evacuate or risk death.” NBC Nightly News (9/19, story 2, 2:30, Holt) reported that the San Juan airport is shutting down as Puerto Rico Gov. Ricardo Rossello “warns of catastrophic impact.” Rossello said on CNN’s Anderson Cooper 360 (9/19) that “conditions are deteriorating rapidly. We are expecting a very tough hurricane, the worst hurricane in modern history in Puerto Rico. So for the past couple of days, we’ve been organizing so that we can get people out of harms way.” Rep. Jennifer Gonzalez-Colon said on CNBC’s Closing Bell (9/19) that Puerto Rico has “never been hit by a hurricane of this category before since 1928. At that time, there were more than 5,000 people who lost their lives in that kind of hurricane. So we’re very concerned. The Governor has taken measures. I’ll tell you that FEMA and all the Federal agencies in the island are doing a wonderful job moving people and actually we got more than 500 shelters this time and asking people to move and be safe.” Meteorologist Eric Fisher said on the CBS Evening News (9/19, story 4, 0:35, Mason) that Maria “has a very tight core, meaning the winds, the most destructive ones are right around the eye, but that eye bearing down on St. Croix, as well as Puerto Rico, as we head into early on Wednesdays morning, just before daylight, crossing the island as a catastrophic hurricane.” The Washington Post (9/19, Samenow) says a warning statement from the National Weather Service “carried an apocalyptic tone,” warning people to expect “‘catastrophic damage’ from winds to 160 mph, including ‘structural damage to sturdy buildings, some with complete roof and wall failures.’” The statement “also predicts ‘devastating to catastrophic flooding’ from rainfall amounts of 12 to 18 inches, with isolated totals exceeding 25 inches.” NBC Nightly News (9/19, story 3, 1:10, Holt) reported that Puerto Rico could see a storm surge of six to nine feet before Maria continues to Turks and Caicos on Friday. ABC World News Tonight (9/19, story 3, 0:55, Zee) reported that Maria will keep “well east of Florida and...away from the Carolinas in all of the computer modeling as we go into next week.” 

# US Geological Survey 

## Earthquake Outside Mexico City Kills At Least 226. 

On Tuesday, less than two weeks after suffering a magnitude 8.1 earthquake, Mexico was again struck by a powerful quake. Reporting on the quake led all network news outlets. Coverage focused predominately on the rising death toll, devastation, and domestic rescue efforts. In its lead story, ABC World News Tonight (9/19, lead story, 3:05, Muir) reported the “massive” 7.1 earthquake struck less than 100 miles from Mexico City on Tuesday afternoon. Dozens of deaths have already been reported, and “authorities say this death toll will go much higher.” Meanwhile, rescuers are trying to reach people trapped in the rubble. In its lead story, the CBS Evening News (9/19, lead story, 2:00, Mason) reported dozens of children remain trapped in a collapsed school in Mexico City. Elsewhere, “The roofs of a shopping center caved in. The airport runway is cracked. A government building sits tilted on its side. Many, many people are injured, and even more still feeling panicked.” Leading NBC Nightly News (9/19, lead story, 2:40, Holt), correspondent Miguel Almaguer similarly reported the quake “toppled buildings in Mexico City,” and while “thousands” fled into the streets, “untold numbers of people are trapped or missing.” Mexico has declared a state of emergency as it braces for aftershocks. At the end of its broadcast, the CBS Evening News (9/19, story 11, 0:40, Mason) updated the death toll to at least 100. On Tuesday night, the head of Mexico’s Civil Defense agency, Luis Felipe Puente, increased the confirmed death toll to 149, but the AP (9/19, Stevenson) in updated coverage said at least 226 people have been confirmed dead. The New York Times (9/19, Semple, Malkin) reports the death toll included “scores in the state of Morelos, close to the epicenter of the quake, and dozens here in the capital, Mexico City.” On Twitter, Mexican President Enrique Peña Nieto announced he had immediately returned to Mexico City. Earlier on Tuesday, “Peña Nieto attended a memorial service for those killed in the 1985 earthquake.” The Washington Post (9/19, Partlow) reports the US Ambassador to Mexico, Roberta Jacobson, said one US Embassy staffer broke an elbow in the earthquake, but that no other Embassy workers were harmed. While Mexico City has a large American expatriate community, she said there have been no reports of affected US citizens. The embassy building “did not appear to sustain structural damage, Jacobson added.” 

# Top National News 

## Trump Slams “Rocket Man” At UN, Threatens To “Totally Destroy” North Korea. 

Media coverage of President Trump’s address Tuesday to the UN General Assembly is widespread, with most reports focusing on his comments about North Korea. Outlets overwhelmingly cast the President as toughening his stance on Pyongyang, threatening to “totally destroy” North Korea and repeating his “Rocket Man” nickname for leader Kim Jong-Un. All three networks covered the President’s speech, dedicating seven-and-a-half minutes of total airtime, but none of them led with it. Jonathan Karl said on ABC World News Tonight (9/19, story 4, 2:25, Muir) that while he “has spoken of fire and fury...today, President Trump went even further, raising the possibility of wiping North Korea off the map.” Trump was shown saying: “The United States has great strength and patience, but if it is forced to depend itself or its allies, we will have no choice but to totally destroy North Korea.” Trump then “directly referred to North Korean dictator...by his new nickname: ‘Rocket Man.’” Trump: “Rocket Man is on a suicide mission for himself and for his regime.” On NBC Nightly News (9/19, story 4, 2:40, Holt), Hallie Jackson said the comment was “met with gasps inside the room.” Jim Sciutto said on CNN’s The Lead 

(9/19) that “a senior UN diplomat in the room” said that “when Trump uttered those words...the diplomats in the room were taken aback. It, in his words, ‘felt like a wind had swept through the room,’ an emotional response from those present unlike anything they had heard from an American President before.” According to CNN’s Situation Room 

(9/19), “an official” says the comment was added to the President’s speech Tuesday morning. The CBS Evening News (9/19, story 5, 2:25, Mason) said that during “his debut,” Trump “vowed to work with [world leaders] for peace, but threatened to wipe one nation off the face of the earth.” Trump, Bloomberg News (9/19, Talev, Wadhams) says, “bluntly threatened North Korea with annihilation,” and the Los Angeles Times (9/19, Wilkinson, Bierman) says he “delivered a forceful inaugural speech” that “ranged from warlike to flowery and that challenged some long-cherished tenets of US foreign policy.” In particular, he “caused a stir when he mocked...Kim...as ‘Rocket Man on a suicide mission’ and threatened his ‘depraved regime.’” The Hill (9/19, Fabian) similarly says that the President’s comments “caused a stir among the crowd of leaders and diplomats at the UN and represented his starkest ultimatum yet against North Korea,” while the Wall Street Journal (9/19, Stokols, Fassihi) was more measured, saying that the speech drew a mixed reaction. USA Today (9/19, Jackson) writes that “even as he addressed deadly serious issues that could involve American forces, the reality television star-turned-president deployed a colorful array of Trumpian phrases to make his points before the traditionally staid United Nations delegates.” With regards to Kim, Bloomberg News (9/19, Talev, Wadhams) says Trump “at times cast aside conventions of political and diplomatic dialogue in favor of the aggressive dialect of social media,” and McClatchy (9/19, Hadley) says he “used harsh and mocking language when addressing” the North Korean leader. John Roberts said on Fox News’ Special Report (9/19) that Trump “left no room for interpretation or ambiguity, demanding Kim Jong-un give up his nuclear program or else.” Reuters (9/19) says Trump “escalated his standoff with North Korea...threatening to ‘totally destroy’ the country of 26 million people and mocking its leader.” His remarks, Reuters adds, “rattled world leaders.” Using what the AP (9/19, Lemire, Superville) calls “dark language reminiscent of his ‘American carnage’ inaugural address,” Trump delivered a “combative debut speech to the UN General Assembly, threatened to ‘totally destroy’ North Korea.” The AP adds that while his “lashing was a vigorous restatement of what’s been said by US leaders before,” it was “likely to hit home harder for being intensely delivered in diplomatic prime time at the UN General Assembly.” The New York Times (9/19, Baker, Sengupta) says the “bellicose speech...drew a series of good-versus-evil lines that forecast confrontations to come,” but the President “singled out North Korea for his harshest words, broadening his indictment of the Pyongyang government beyond just its pursuit of nuclear weapons to its treatment of its own people and captured foreigners.” And “without mentioning it by name,” Trump also “chastised China for continuing to deal with its rogue neighbor,” saying, “It is an outrage that some nations would not only trade with such a regime, but would arm, supply and financially support a country that imperils the world with nuclear conflict.” The New York Post (9/19, Moore) reports that while Trump “thanked members of the UN Security Council, which has imposed several rounds of sanctions against North Korea,” he also “chided those countries that still do business with Pyongyang.” The Washington Post (9/19, Nakamura, Gearan) reports that following the speech, White House press secretary Sarah Huckabee Sanders “sought to temper the idea that Trump’s remarks about North Korea were a break from past US policy.” The Washington Times (9/19, Boyer) reports Sen. Dianne Feinstein criticized Trump for using his UN address “as a stage to threaten war,” while Sen. David Perdue said he is “glad” that Trump and Ambassador Haley are getting more aggressive with the UN. Sen. Ben Cardin said on CNN’s Situation Room (9/19), “I don’t think his remarks were well received by our allies.” He added that the “international community should be there to help us” deal with the threat posed by the North, but “the President’s comments put a wedge in our international coalition.” House Foreign Affairs Committee Chairman Ed Royce said on CNN’s The Lead 

(9/19), “These aren’t the words I would have used. But what I’ll share with you here is that in point of fact our biggest challenge right now is applying full diplomatic and financial pressure on North Korea and getting compliance from these other countries to do it.” Rep. Andre Carson said on CNN’s Situation Room (9/19) that Trump was being his “provocative” self in his threats to North Korea. Carson added that “to President Trump’s credit...you have to be firm with those who threaten to do us harm,” but “having said that, in our firmness we should not ostracize those trying to keep the peace.” The CBS Evening News (9/19, story 7, 2:50, Mason) reported on an interview with former New York Mayor Michael Bloomberg, who said “you can’t deal with a rogue state like” North Korea “by yourself. You have to have great, tight relationships with all, or lots of other countries, particularly the surrounding countries. And, unfortunately, America is going in the other direction.” A Washington Post (9/19, Blake) analysis says Trump’s “oddly chosen colloquialisms masked what was a pretty astounding escalation of his rhetoric when it comes to North Korea. Just to be clear: The president of the United States threatened to wipe a country of 25 million people off the map.” James Rubin, however, writes in a Politico Magazine (9/19) analysis headlined “Trump’s UN Speech Was Bad, But Let’s Not Lose Our Heads” that despite “the screaming headlines about Trump’s threat to destroy North Korea, that comment was merely a somewhat blunter statement of US declaratory policy going back decades.” The Washington Examiner (9/19, Scarry) reports that Trump “disturbed some in the press” after vowing to “destroy” North Korea. MSNBC host Lawrence O’Donnell tweeted that Trump “threatened to commit a war crime” by threatening North Korea, while a reporter for the Huffington Post “seemed to suggest Trump’s harsh comments may justify the rogue state’s actions,” saying, “Gee, Kim Jon-un is so irrational for wanting nuclear weapons.” A USA Today (9/19) editorial calls the President’s threat to “destroy” North Korea “deeply unsettling,” and argues that though he “rightly called upon all nations to isolate Kim’s murderous regime,” he “undermined that goal with the kind of man-to-man tabloid bombast...that raises Kim’s stature and makes him more, rather than less, likely to cling to the nuclear arsenal that he thinks will guarantee his survival.” David Ignatius writes in his Washington Post (9/19) column that the “most surprising thing” about Trump’s address “was how conventional it was. He supported human rights and democracy; he opposed rogue regimes; he espoused a global community of strong, sovereign nations. Pretty shocking stuff.” But “because he’s Trump, the zingers got the headlines: He repeated his childish, snarky (but sort of funny) playground denunciation of North Korean leader Kim Jong Un,” as well as his “bombastic threat” to “totally destroy” North Korea. Ignatius writes that what worries him about Trump’s speech is “that it was so conventional. If Trump is going to deal successfully with North Korea, he’ll truly have to think outside the box.” 

Poll: 82% Of Republicans Back Military Strike Against North Korea If Diplomacy Fails. 

The Washington Times (9/19, Harper) reports that a new Gallup poll shows the “American attitude toward North Korea appears to be evolving – and not necessarily in a docile direction.” The polls shows that the number of Americans who would support a US military response is “significantly higher” these days. While the percentage of Democrats who favor military action “has hardly changed since 2003: 37 percent now vs. 41 percent then,” the “major shift has been among Republicans, whose support for military action is up 23 percentage points.” 

Bolton: Tillerson Pursuing “Wrong Policy” On North Korea. The Washington Examiner (9/19, Gehrke) reports former Ambassador John Bolton said Tuesday that Secretary of State Tillerson backs “the wrong policy” on North Korea. Hours after the President’s UN address, Bolton “dismissed” Tillerson’s assertion that the US has imposed sanctions on North Korea in order to induce a “constructive, productive dialogue” with the regime. Said Bolton, “We’ve had constructive dialogue with North Korea for 25 years; it doesn’t work. That’s the wrong policy.” 

Colin Powell: Ignore North Korea When It Launches Missiles. The Detroit Free Press (9/19, Jesse) reports that hours after President Trump threatened to “totally destroy” North Korea if it launched nuclear weapons, former Secretary of State Colin Powell “said a different tactic would be better.” Speaking at the University of Michigan, Powell said, “Let’s not go crazy every time they shoot missiles. Start ignoring them and maybe you can find a different way to solve this. It would probably drive them crazy if we ignored one of their launches and after the media interest went away, it would die down.” 

## Trump At UN: Iran Nuclear Deal An “Embarrassment.” 

President Trump’s criticism of the Iran nuclear deal during Tuesday’s address to the UN General Assembly also receives significant media attention, including mentions on all three networks last night. ABC World News Tonight (9/19, story 4, 2:25, Muir) reported Iran’s delegation listened as Trump accused the country “of funding terrorism and lashed out at the nuclear agreement negotiated with President Obama and America’s European allies.” Trump: “The Iran deal was one of the worst and most one-sided transactions the United States has ever entered into. Frankly, that deal is an embarrassment to the United States.” Trump, who ABC noted didn’t say if the US would withdraw from the agreement, “cast this moment as a turning point for the UN.” Trump: “It is entirely up to us, whether we lift the world to new heights or let it fall into a valley of disrepair. If the righteous many do not confront the wicked few, then evil will triumph.” The CBS Evening News (9/19, story 5, 2:25, Mason), however, said Trump “implied he might pull out” of the deal. The Hill (9/19, Chalfant) reports Trump insisted that “it is time for the entire world to join us in demanding that Iran end its pursuit of death and destruction.” Fox News’ Special Report (9/19) reported Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu “loved” Trump’s comments on Iran. Fox showed Netanyahu saying of Trump’s address: “I have listened to countless speeches in this hall. I can say this: none were bolder, none were more courageous and forthright than the one delivered by President Trump today. President Trump rightly called the nuclear deal with Iran, he called it an embarrassment. I couldn’t agree more.” Breitbart (9/19, Danan) also reports Netanyahu’s reaction. On NBC Nightly News (9/19, story 4, 2:40, Holt), Hallie Jackson reported that Iranian Foreign Minister Mohammad Javad Zarif, by contrast, accused Trump “of ignorant hate speech.” Fox News’ Special Report (9/19) reported Zarif tweeted, “Trump’s ignorant hate speech belongs in medieval times, not the 21st century. UN -unworthy of a reply.” Iran, Reuters (9/19) reports, denounced Trump’s remarks as “shameless and ignorant” and “said his speech on Tuesday showed his lack of knowledge about Tehran’s fight against terrorism.” State media quoted Zarif as saying, “Trump’s shameless and ignorant remarks, in which he ignored Iran’s fight against terrorism, displays his lack of knowledge and unawareness.” CNN’s Situation Room (9/19) reported Trump’s assertion that the Iran nuclear deal is “one of the worst and one-sided transactions the United States has ever entered into” was also “a cause of concern” for French President Emmanuel Macron, who said, “If we simply throw out this agreement, there is nothing to replace it. And if you have nothing, then it’s the same situation as North Korea, and I don’t want to find myself in a no man’s land.” Politico (9/19, Toosi) reports that “in public, in private, and with few exceptions,” world leaders gathered at the UN this week are urging Trump “not to follow through on his threat to derail the Iran nuclear deal. But so far, Trump shows no sign of listening to them.” The issue, Politico says, will “take center stage on Wednesday,” when Secretary of State Tillerson joins a multinational meeting on the nuclear deal that will also be attended by Iranian Foreign Minister Javad Zarif, marking “the first time the two men will meet face-to-face.” CNN (9/19, Watkins) reports on its website that House Foreign Affairs Committee Chairman Ed Royce said Tuesday that the US “should focus on enforcing the nuclear agreement with Iran instead of renegotiating it.” Speaking to CNN’s Jake Tapper, Royce said, “I think we should enforce the hell out of the agreement and thereby force compliance on the part of Iran.” Rep. Andre Carson said on CNN’s Situation Room (9/19) that withdrawing from the deal would be a “tremendous mistake” that “brings us closer to war.” Carson commended the Obama Administration for securing the pact, and said he thinks the “deal is working” and “is worth it.” Sen. Ben Cardin said on CNN’s Situation Room (9/19) said “our concern” is that Trump will “rip up” the nuclear agreement despite Iran not being in violation of the deal. He said if Trump did tear up the deal, “we would be the ones walking away,” and “our allies would be scratching their heads.” 

Tillerson: Deal’s Sunset Provisions “Not A Sensible Way Forward.” Reuters (9/20, Mohammed, Irish) reports Secretary of State Tillerson said Tuesday that the nuclear agreement’s “sunset” clauses, under which some restrictions against Iran’s nuclear program are slated to expire in 2025, “simply is not a sensible way forward.” Said Tillerson, “It’s just simply...kicking the can down the road again for someone in the future to have to deal with.” 

Rouhani: “No One Will Trust America Again” If It Leaves Nuclear Deal. “Minutes before” Trump “ripped Iran,” Lester Holt of NBC Nightly News (9/19, story 5, 3:00) sat down with Iranian President Hassan Rouhani, who warned that if the US pulls out of the nuclear deal, “no one will trust America again. ... Because after such a possible scenario, which country would be willing to sit across the table from the United States of America and talk about international issues?” When asked if he’d ever sit down with President Trump, Rouhani replied, “When the United States government in very transparently speaks of an aim of regime change in Iran, talking in bilateral fashion becomes very meaningless. In the current atmosphere, I do not see the current requirements for such a meeting.” Rouhani also dismissed the Trump Administration’s attempts to put Iran in the same basket as North Korea, saying, “North Korea has said in very straightforward manner that it seeks nuclear weapons. ... Iran is completely the opposite point.” 

Families Of Americans Imprisoned In Iran Welcome Trump’s Call For Their Release. The Washington Free Beacon (9/19, Crabtree) reports that “families and advocates for Americans imprisoned in Iran applauded President Trump for demanding the release of all US prisoners and others unjustly detained in Tehran” during his speech Tuesday. Family members of Siamak and Baquer Namazi, a father and son who are being held in Iran, “also urged Trump to take urgent action to try to secure their release. “ 

Former Iranian Political Prisoner Urges Regime To Acknowledge 1988 Executions. 

Former Iranian political prisoner Shabnam Madadzadeh writes in the Wall Street Journal (9/19) that in 1988, an estimated 30,000 Iranians – mostly members of the opposition group Mujahedin-e Khalq (MEK) – were executed. Madadzadeh calls on Iran’s leaders to acknowledge the killings and hold the mullahs responsible for them accountable. The first step, he says, is the establishment of an independent international investigation. 

## Trump Calls Out Venezuela, Cuba In UN Speech. 

The CBS Evening News (9/19, story 5, 2:25, Mason) reported in his address to the UN General Assembly on Tuesday, President Trump “called Cuba and Venezuela failed socialist states. He said Venezuela has descended into chaos after illegitimate elections.” Trump: “We are prepared to take further action if the government of Venezuela persists on its path to impose authoritarian rule on the Venezuelan people.” McClatchy (9/19, Ordoñez) reports that during his address, Trump threatened “further action” against Venezuela and “promised not to lift sanctions against Cuba until the government in Havana makes fundamental reforms.” In a speech that McClatchy says “moved quickly from criticism of America’s adversaries to dire warnings of nuclear war,” Trump “singl[ed] out Venezuela and Cuba for, he said, delivering only ‘anguish and failure’ to its people.” The President also “called on world leaders to do more to help the people of Venezuela and not look the other way as their government destroys democratic institutions.” Fox News’ Special Report (9/19) reported Venezuela had a “sharp reaction” to Trump’s speech, as the regime “didn’t like being called out for imposing a brutal dictatorship.” Bloomberg News (9/19, Bristow) reports Venezuela said in a statement that it is prepared to defend itself against aggression from US and its allies. Venezuela will “keep defeating in the political and diplomatic spheres” what “it described as an onslaught of nefarious threats against its sovereignty.” 

Newsweek: Trump’s Condemnation Of Socialism Met With “Laughter,” “Weak Applause.” 

In what Newsweek (9/19, Haltiwanger) calls “perhaps the most awkward moment of Trump’s speech,” when Trump “criticized socialism during his speech...he seemed to expect roaring approval from the audience. Instead, world leaders responded with laughter and weak applause.” Conservative commentator Bill O’Reilly “perhaps described it best,” saying, “Most fascinating part of Trump [United Nations] speech: After lambasting socialism, he paused, perhaps waiting for applause. None came. Stony silence.” 

## In UN Speech, Trump Vows To Always Put America First. 

Also garnering media attention is the President’s vow to put America first during his UN remarks. The CBS Evening News (9/19, story 5, 2:25, Mason), for example, reported that in his first address to the UN General Assembly, President Trump “told the leaders of the world he will always put America first and said they should put their countries first, too.” CNN’s Situation Room (9/19) said Trump’s “address started much like a campaign speech, minus the applause from his conservative base, as the President talked about making America first.” While Trump “tried to win over a world body he has ridiculed as ineffective,” he also “made it clear he’s ready to go it alone on a variety of fronts.” Fox News’ Special Report (9/19) reported Trump “says it’s not his intent to nation build or impose democracy through military...action, but rather to create global stability by partnering with nations that put the well-being of their citizens first.” Trump was shown saying that as President, “I will always put America first. Just like you, as the leaders of your countries, will always and should always put your countries first.” The President, says the New York Times (9/19, Baker, Sengupta), “defended his America First policy and argued that nationalism can be reconciled with common causes,” repeatedly using the word “sovereignty” to “describe his approach in a setting where the term traditionally has been brandished by nations like Russia and China to deflect criticism of their actions.” On its front page, the Washington Post (9/19, A1, Jaffe, DeYoung) says Trump “hammered the principle of national sovereignty...but then outlined an agenda that would keep the United States deeply engaged in the world.” In a New York Times (9/19) analysis, Mark Landler similarly writes that Trump “offered a strikingly selective definition of the concept, threatening to act aggressively against nations like North Korea, Iran and Venezuela, whose policies he opposes, yet saying almost nothing about Russia, which seized territory from its neighbor, Ukraine, and meddled in the American presidential election.” USA Today (9/19, Korte) says Tuesday’s address “was perhaps the most aggressive speech ever delivered by a US president at the UN,” but “amid the provocative language, the widely anticipated address also provided a clear articulation of Trump’s emerging worldview. He envisions an international order in which each nation pursues its own self interests — and cooperates only when those interests converge.” Politico (9/19, Toosi, McCaskill) reports Trump “urged nations to band together to fight ‘evil’ — even as he extolled the virtue of respecting national sovereignty and insisted that America isn’t looking to impose its ‘way of life’ on others.” The “at-times contradictory remarks,” Politico adds, were “filled with soaring rhetoric that touched on everything from ‘God’ to ‘chaos,’ and the dark tones were reminiscent of Trump’s inaugural address, in which he promised to bring an end to ‘American carnage.’” The Wall Street Journal (9/19) editorializes that while Trump is right to challenge the UN and promote “national sovereignty,” there is no substitute for US leadership on the global stage. Max Boot writes for USA Today (9/19) that “the Trump Doctrine is selfishness squared. Just as Trump has never done anything in his life that did not benefit him personally, so he cannot imagine any nation acting for the general good. In his private life, it’s me first. In his foreign policy, it’s America First.” Wall Street Journal (9/19) columnist Gerald F. Seib writes that Trump offered world leaders a concise summary of his approach to world affairs, declaring: “We are guided by outcomes, not ideology.” Reuters (9/19, Mason, Holland) writes that “among the many signals” that Trump sent in his speech, “one was especially clear: former chief strategist Steve Bannon’s White House departure has not muted the president’s ‘America First’ foreign policy instincts.” Reaction to the President’s address in the media and lawmakers was generally split along party lines. Of note, however, the New York Times (9/19) – which is typically very critical of the President – writes on its editorial page that the UN “isn’t the venue one would expect for threatening war. Yet that’s what President Trump did in his first address to the General Assembly.” But overall, the Times says Trump’s “largely benign comments about the United Nations were encouraging, considering he once condemned it as useless and having no place in his ‘America First’ vision.” A Washington Post (9/19) editorial says that “for those who have been alarmed by President Trump’s retreat from traditional American values, there were reassuring moments” Tuesday. Trump, it says, “rightly and scathingly attacked regimes that deprive their own people of liberty, such as those in North Korea and Venezuela.” And “less reassuring” were Trump’s “schoolboy taunts” of “Rocket Man.” And then, “somewhere in between, there was Mr. Trump’s repeated emphasis on sovereignty.” Fox News’ Special Report (9/19) reported that Rep. Mark Takano called Trump’s speech “shockingly reckless.” Rep. Barbara Lee tweeted, “Dangerous rhetoric & abdication of values” from President Trump. By contrast, Mitt Romney said Trump “gave a strong and needed challenge to UN members to live up to its charter and to confront global challenges.” New Gingrich said Trump’s speech “is historic and sets a new standard. Sovereignty and national interest are reasserted as principles.” Rep. Andre Carson noted on CNN’s Situation Room (9/19) that Trump in his speech “praised” the State Department. Carson found that “interesting, because his proposal in his budget makes the deepest cuts in State Department history.” Gloria Borger said on CNN’s Situation Room (9/19), “This was a speech that you can say is full of bombast, which it was, but is the first time we heard laid out completely, clearly Donald Trump’s vision for the world. He took on North Korea directly. He took on Iran directly. He took on Venezuela. He took on Syria directly And he also, in addition to taking on those bad actors, he made the case that we foot a lot of the bill in the United Nations and that has to change. There are a lot of people in the audience that would be upset about it. People who will not upset about it are Donald Trump’s base and lots of Republicans.” A McClatchy (9/19, Kumar) analysis says Trump “delivered the message of the voters who elected him.” Mara Liasson of NPR said on Fox News’ Special Report (9/19), “This is what the White House wanted. I thought the speech had something for everyone. For people who wanted some tough, nationalist populist rhetoric, it was in there. I thought it was a step back from the UN bashing that Trump had done during the campaign.” Catherine Lucey of the AP said on Fox News’ Special Report (9/19) that Trump “really put the world on notice today. The President came in with a clear message he wanted to deliver. If you’ve been watching his speeches throughout the year and the campaign, it really was a continuation of a vision we’ve seen from him before. This was a dark interpretation of the state of affairs in the world, but it revealed his frustration and the way he thinks, and it’s the way he thinks he needs to deliver the message. This is the kind of rhetoric he’s comfortable with. This is the way he wants to communicate. He wanted to make a stand today.” In his opening monologue on Fox News’ Hannity (9/19), Sean Hannity said of Trump’s address, “This is what leading on the world stage actually looks like. President Trump refused to appease and capitulate to countries like Iran and the hate America crowd in North Korea, countries that want to see Israel wiped off the map.” Hannity added that Trump “is receiving very high praise for his very bold and direct address.” 

## White House Joins Graham-Cassidy Push, But Bill’s Prospects Remain Uncertain. 

On Tuesday, the White House threw itself into the effort to pass the Graham-Cassidy bill to repeal and replace the Affordable Care Act, but reports portray the bill’s prospects as uncertain despite the optimism of Sen. Lindsay Graham – with the vote of Graham’s close friend Sen. John McCain again possibly proving decisive. ABC World News Tonight (9/19, story 6, 2:00, Muir) reported on the “last-ditch effort” in the Senate “to kill Obamacare, but time is running out. They have to get it done by next week.” ABC’s Mary Bruce: “Tonight, the mad dash to deliver. Mr. Vice President, are you finally going to get health reform done?” Vice President Pence: “We’re making progress.” Bruce: “Just six working days left for Republicans to overhaul Obamacare with a simple majority vote. The White House tonight is fully on board; the President’s working the phones.” Pence: “All-in.” Bruce: “The new GOP plan ends Obamacare subsidies and the Medicaid expansion. Instead, states will get some money to use as they see fit.” Graham: “Here’s the choice for America: socialism or federalism when it comes to your healthcare.” The Los Angeles Times (9/19, Mascaro) reports that the President “is making a big push to revive the Republican healthcare overhaul days before a Senate deadline.” Pence, who was in New York with the President for the General Assembly meeting, “returned to the Capitol to tell Republican senators: ‘Now is the time. We have 12 days.’” Breitbart (9/19, Moons) reports, “Pence said that President Trump is ‘a great believer in federalism.’ The Vice President indicated that this fact moved the Trump Administration to spend the past six weeks ‘in discussions about the way forward, about [Graham’s and Sen. Bill Cassidy’s] development of the bill’ and have ‘provided administration resources to support their analysis.’” The Hill (9/19, Carney) reports that Graham told reporters on Tuesday, “I really believe we’re going to get 50 Republican votes. I’ve never felt better about where we’re at.” Guy Benson of Townhall (9/19) writes that Graham told reporters that House Speaker Ryan “pledged to him that if the Senate passes the legislation, the House will follow suit – but that the House will not take up a bill that merely props up Obamacare with more bailout-style money, which is the ‘compromise’ sought by Democrats.” Townhall (9/19, O'Brien) additionally reports that Graham has been working with Stephen Bannon, who he dubbed “Darth Vader,” as well as “figures like Alan Greenspan [and] Jeb Bush,” to help win support. Reuters (9/19, Cornwell) reports that Senate Majority Leader McConnell said on the floor that “lawmakers should act because ‘our opportunity to do so may well pass us by if we don’t act soon.’” The deciding vote could be McCain’s, and the New York Times (9/19, Stolberg) writes that the bill is testing the very close bond between McCain and his close friend Graham – “who is so closely identified with Mr. McCain that when he arrived in the Senate after serving in the House, he was called ‘McCain’s mini-me.’” The Washington Times (9/19, Howell) reports that McCain “refused to tip his hand Tuesday.” He told reporters, “I have nothing to say. I have nothing to say.” Margot Sanger-Katz writes in the New York Times (9/19) “The Upshot” that “the bill faces substantial challenges.” Sen. Rand Paul “is a hard no, which makes the math difficult,” the bill contains “a huge redistribution of money between states in the bill’s formula” that would negatively impact “states with must-get senators,” and “the timing is tight, and the bill still has a long way to go.” However, ACA repeal “is a core promise for Republicans,” and the GOP is motivated to get it done. Sen. Ben Cardin said on CNN’s Situation Room (9/19), “We’ve been working the last two weeks, Democrats and Republicans, in order to improve the Affordable Care Act. That’s what the American people want us to do. ... But what the Cassidy bill would do is significantly reduce coverage in this country. Tens of millions of people lose coverage. And more tragically, the progress we’ve made against abuse of practices with insurance companies...is at great risk with the Cassidy bill. It’s moving again in the wrong direction.” In an editorial, the Washington Post (9/19) calls the bill “about as execrable as the others that GOP lawmakers previously failed to approve,” and the process “as sloppy and partisan as the one to which” McCain and other senators “objected earlier in the summer. The outcome would be no less destructive.” Timothy Jost of Washington and Lee University Law School writes in the Washington Post (9/19) that Graham-Cassidy would “hand the states block grants and abandon to them millions of Americans whom the ACA now helps. ... It would effectively strangle the efforts of states – predominantly Democratic – that have been most successful in extending coverage under the ACA’s Medicaid expansion, tax credits and cost-sharing reductions. Conversely, it would lavish funding on states – predominantly Republican – that have resisted the coverage expansion opportunities the ACA offered.” 

CNN Analysis: With “Private Outreach,” Trump Trying To Smooth Relations With Senate Republicans. On its website, CNN (9/19, Raju) reported that earlier this summer, Trump “had a contentious phone call with” Sen. Lisa Murkowski “and also berated her on Twitter, accusing her of letting the country down for voting against GOP plans to gut Obamacare. But behind the scenes, Trump has since tried to make nice, inviting her to a private lunch earlier this month – something that seems to have defused tensions, at least for now..” CNN added, “The private outreach is part of a more concerted White House effort to repair relations Trump damaged with his own party over a tumultuous August, following the failure of the GOP effort to repeal Obamacare and a slew of White House controversies.” The effort “comes at a critical time: The White House is desperately trying to revive its health care push before a September 30 deadline – and needs senators like Murkowski to salvage the President’s agenda.” 

Bipartisan Group Of Governors Opposes Graham-Cassidy. The New York Times (9/19, A1, Pear, Kaplan) reports that a bipartisan group of governors “including five Republicans and a pivotal Alaskan independent urged the Senate on Tuesday to reject a last-ditch push to dismantle the Affordable Care Act.” Govs. Charles Baker of Massachusetts, Steve Bullock of Montana, John Bel Edwards of Louisiana, John Hickenlooper of Colorado, John Kasich of Ohio, Terry McAuliffe of Virginia, Brian Sandoval of Nevada, Phil Scott of Vermont, Bill Walker of Alaska, and Tom Wolf of Pennsylvania signed a letter opposing Graham-Cassidy, while Govs. Larry Hogan of Maryland and Chris Sununu of New Hampshire “expressed similar concerns in separate statements.” The Washington Post (9/19, A1, Sullivan, Snell, Eilperin) says that Walker “holds sway” over Sen. Lisa Murkowski, “a potentially decisive vote,” while Sandoval “is now at odds” with Sen. Dean Heller, “who is a co-sponsor of the bill.” The Washington Examiner (9/19, King) reports that “a group of 15 Republican governors” announced their support for the bill in a Tuesday letter. 

Americans For Limited Government Backs Bill. Breitbart (9/19, Moran) reports that Americans for Limited Government President Rick Manning endorsed the bill on Tuesday, saying, “We are encouraged that the Senate is close to passage on the Cassidy-Graham bill, which is the last best chance for Republicans to keep their basic promise to repeal and replace Obamacare.” 

Kimmel: Cassidy “Just Lied Right To My Face.” On ABC’s Jimmy Kimmel Live (9/19), host Jimmy Kimmel criticized Cassidy for saying on his show earlier this year that he would enact “the Jimmy Kimmel test” to protect families from losing health coverage. Kimmel said, “He got a lot of credit and attention for coming off like a rare, reasonable voice in the Republican Party when it came to healthcare. ... [Cassidy] just lied right to my face.” Kimmel’s segment on the bill ran seven minutes. 

## Senate Republicans Tentatively Agree On $1.5 Trillion Tax Cut Plan. 

The AP (9/19, Taylor) cites “congressional officials” who said that “top Republicans” on the Senate Budget Committee “have reached a tentative agreement on a tax plan that would add about $1.5 trillion to the government’s $20 trillion debt over 10 years.” Panel member, Sen. Bob Corker, “said on Tuesday that Republicans have ‘potentially gotten to a very good place’ on agreeing to how much the upcoming tax measure might cost, once the Senate’s tax writers have blended together rate cuts, additional revenue raised through curbing tax breaks, and the beneficial effects of what he called ‘pro-growth tax reform.’” While Corker “didn’t offer a number...officials familiar with the Senate Budget panel’s internal discussions said the allowance for the tax measure would amount to $1.5 trillion.” Ylan Mui said on CNBC’s Closing Bell (9/19) that committee Republicans “are looking at a package of between $1 trillion to $2 trillion in tax cuts.” Politico (9/19, Ferris, Scholtes) reports that Corker and Sen. Pat Toomey have “reached a compromise on the scope of tax breaks.” Corker “has not yet said if he’s agreed to the $1.5 trillion in tax breaks over a decade that GOP senators reportedly have been considering,” but he “acknowledged to reporters asking about the $1.5 trillion figure: ‘I think you guys already know what the number is. I’m not going to say it.’” The New York Times (9/19, Rappeport, Kaplan) reports that while Republicans “say a tax cut of this magnitude will stimulate economic growth enough to offset any deficit impact,” critics “say a deficit-financed tax cut is at odds with longstanding Republican calls for fiscal discipline, including that tax cuts not add to the ballooning federal deficit.” A short story in the Wall Street Journal (9/19, Hughes, Rubin) also reports on the tentative agreement. 

Hatch: Tax Reform Should Include Dividend Deduction. Reuters (9/19) reports that Senate Finance Committee Chairman Orrin Hatch said Tuesday that allowing US companies “to deduct dividend payments to shareholders from federal income tax could overcome problems facing Republican efforts to overhaul the US tax code.” Speaking at the opening of a tax reform hearing, Hatch “said he sees the proposal known as ‘corporate integration’ as a way to end the perceived double taxation of US companies through tax legislation.” 

Jordan, Meadows: Tax Plan Must Help Families, Grow The Economy. In an op-ed for the Wall Street Journal (9/19), Reps. Jim Jordan and Mark Meadows, the former and current chairmen of the House Freedom Caucus, that the Freedom Caucus has been told not to offer tax reform legislation and to wait for leadership’s bill, which they will not be able to see until after they vote for the 2018 budget. Jordan and Meadows argue that the Freedom Caucus will pass the budget if they are sure the tax plan will reduce taxes for families and grow the economy. 

## Report: Cutting Wasteful Spending Would Balance Budget In Three Years. 

According to a report from Citizens Against Government Waste titled “Prime Cuts 2017,” Congress “could balance the budget in three years” if it would “cut unnecessary and wasteful spending in the federal government,” the Washington Free Beacon (9/19, Meyer) reports. The report “outlines 607 recommendations to cut inefficient government spending that would not only balance the budget within three years but also save taxpayers $336.2 billion in the first year and $2.3 trillion over five years.” 

## Pruitt Questions Whether Climate Change Is An “Existential Threat.” 

EPA Administrator Pruitt said on Fox News’ Fox & Friends (9/19), “With this climate change, we know certain things. We know the climate is always changing. We know that humans contribute to it in some way. To what degree to measure that with precision is very difficult. But what we don’t know is we are in a situation where it’s an existential threat. Is it unsustainable with respect to what we see presently. Let’s have a debate about that, bring scientists in, red team scientists, blue team scientists and have a discussion about the importance of this issue so the American people deserve that type of objective, transparent discussion.” 

Brown: Trump’s Claims About Paris Agreement Are “Fake.” California Gov. Jerry Brown was asked on CNN’s The Lead (9/19) about President Trump’s claim that China got a better deal than the US in the Paris agreement. Brown said, “China is doing more than the US right now. They are closing down coal plants. They are massively investing in solar and wind. They are mastering battery technology, which will help America. So this point that America got a bad deal is fake. It’s more fake than any fake news assertion by President Trump.” 

## Federal Report On Climate To Be Released In November. 

E&E Publishing (9/19) reports a study that warns “of the dire consequences of climate change that some feared would be suppressed under the Trump administration is tentatively set to be publicly released Nov. 3.” The report, which is part of the National Climate Assessment, “spans more than 600 pages and has received input from 13 federal agencies.” Texas Tech University climate scientist Katharine Hayhoe said, “While the full report is 600 pages long, it can be summarized in one sentence: It’s real, it’s us, it’s serious, and the window of time to prevent dangerous impacts is closing fast.” E&E adds that “a draft of the report drew national attention in recent months after The New York Times highlighted the study’s findings and fears the Trump administration would hide the results.” 

# Editorial Wrap-Up 

## New York Times. 

“Warmongers And Peacemakers At The UN.” The New York Times (9/19) writes on its editorial page that the UN “isn’t the venue one would expect for threatening war. Yet that’s what President Trump did in his first address to the General Assembly.” But overall, the Times says Trump’s “largely benign comments about the United Nations were encouraging, considering he once condemned it as useless and having no place in his ‘America First’ vision.” 

“Even College Doesn’t Bridge The Racial Income Gap.” A New York Times (9/20, Board) editorial examines how “racial pay gaps have expanded the most for college graduates, which makes it seem clear that discrimination is a leading cause.” The Times adds, “The racial pay gap is narrower among women, but the gender pay gap in average hourly earnings is large,” in part because “black women at all education levels are likelier to be their family’s sole or primary provider, and thus more attached to the work force.” The Times questions why “economic disparities persist even among college-educated workers,” and cautions, “Racism and sexism are entrenched, and leaders need to acknowledge that and address the problem head-on.” 

## Washington Post. 

“Another Execrable Healthcare Bill Proves Bad Ideas Never Die.” In an editorial, the Washington Post (9/19) calls the Graham-Cassidy healthcare bill “about as execrable as the others that GOP lawmakers previously failed to approve,” and the process “as sloppy and partisan as the one to which” McCain and other senators “objected earlier in the summer. The outcome would be no less destructive.” 

“Trump Undermines His Own Advocacy For Human Dignity.” A Washington Post (9/19) editorial says that “for those who have been alarmed by President Trump’s retreat from traditional American values, there were reassuring moments” during his address to the UN General Assembly Tuesday. Trump, it says, “rightly and scathingly attacked regimes that deprive their own people of liberty, such as those in North Korea and Venezuela.” And “less reassuring” were Trump’s “schoolboy taunts” of “Rocket Man.” And then, “somewhere in between, there was Mr. Trump’s repeated emphasis on sovereignty.” 

“Who Pays For The White House To Lawyer Up?” The Washington Post (9/19) editorializes that as special counsel Robert Mueller’s investigation “apparently gathers steam, so does a debate over an Office of Government Ethics rule prohibiting anonymous donations to legal defense funds of government employees. While no such defense fund has yet been set up” for Trump’s aides, “its creation would help staffers shoulder the costs of the high-quality legal representation needed to weather questioning. ... And the recent confusion over OGE rules shows that it’s time for the office to make clear its position on requiring donor disclosures.” 

## Wall Street Journal. 

“Trump Shock At Turtle Bay.” The Wall Street Journal (9/19) editorializes that while President Trump is right to challenge the UN and promote “national sovereignty,” there is no substitute for US leadership on the global stage. 

“James Madison Weeps.” In an editorial, the Wall Street Journal (9/19) writes that a new Brookings Institution survey of more than 1,500 undergraduates found that most did not know hate speech was constitutionally protected, half agreed with shouting down speakers with whom they disagreed, and a fifth believed in the use of violence against speakers. The Journal concludes that many college students are clueless about free speech. 

“All Mr. Comey’s Wiretaps.” The Wall Street Journal (9/19) says in an editorial that a Paul Manafort wiretap would show that there was indeed federal wiretapping of Trump Tower, where Manafort has owned a condo since 2006, during the campaign. 

# Big Picture 

## Headlines From Today’s Front Pages. 

Wall Street Journal: 

Trump Issues Dire Warning To North Korea In Address To UN Heavy Debt Crushed Owners Of Toys ‘R’ Us CEO Catches Stranger After Hours, Prompting Espionage Charges How Antifa Violence Has Split The Left 

New York Times: 

With Combative Style And Epithets, Trump Takes America First To The UN Trump Offers A Selective View Of Sovereignty In UN Speech Powerful Earthquake Strikes Mexico, Killing Over 100 Senate Republicans Embrace Plan For $1.5 Trillion Tax Cut Republican Leaders Defy Bipartisan Opposition To Health Law Repeal Aung San Suu Kyi, A Much-Changed Icon, Evades Rohingya Accusations A ‘Quest For Justice’ For A Murdered Civil Rights Pioneer, 52 Years Later 

Washington Post: 

GOP Health Bill Hits Hurdle In Resistance From Governors Trump Makes Defiant UN Debut Robust Emphasis On Sovereignty Echoes President’s Domestic Agenda Puerto Rico Prepares For Direct Hit By Maria Ugly Past, Unattractive Present For Biggest Confederate Monument Scores Dead After Powerful Quake Jolts Mexico 

Financial Times: 

Trump Threatens To ‘Totally Destroy’ North Korea Theresa May Prepares €20bn EU Budget Offer Russian-Built Nuclear Plant Revives Chernobyl Fears Aung San Suu Kyi Defends Handling Of Rohingya Crisis 

Washington Times: 

Trump Defines ‘America First’ To Wary World Leaders At U.N., Warns North Korea And Iran Senate Republicans Close To Pushing Through Obamacare Repeal National Mall Faces Space Crunch For Global War On Terror Memorial In U.N. Address, Trump Replaces Obama’s Soft Talk With Big Stick At Least 149 Dead In Mexico After Magnitude 7.1 Earthquake 

Story Lineup From Last Night’s Network News: 

ABC: Mexico City Earthquake; Hurricanes-Caribbean; Hurricane Tracking; Trump-UN Address; Russia Meddling Investigation-Manafort; Congress-Healthcare Reform; Louisiana-Racial Murders; Wheaton College-Football Team Hazing; Florida-Hospital Outrage; Russia Military Training Accident; Toys R Us-Bankruptcy; Disabled Pilot. 

CBS: Mexico City Earthquake; Mexico City Earthquake-Expert Comment; Hurricanes-Caribbean; Hurricane Tracking; Trump-UN Address; Russia Meddling Investigation-Manafort; Michael Bloomberg Interview; Guns In Classrooms; Louisiana-Racial Murders; Toys R Us-Bankruptcy; Mexico City Earthquake-Situation Update. 

NBC: Mexico City Earthquake; Hurricanes-Caribbean; Hurricane Tracking; Trump-UN Address; Iranian President Interview; Red Cross Controversy; Toys R Us-Bankruptcy; Florida Sinkhole; Dodge Trucks Recall; Wrong Baby Registry; Children Night Lights. 

Network TV At A Glance: 

Mexico City Earthquake – 10 minutes, 15 seconds Hurricanes – 9 minutes, 30 seconds Trump-UN Address – 7 minutes, 30 seconds Russia Meddling Investigation-Manafort – 4 minutes, 35 seconds Toys R Us-Bankruptcy – 2 minutes, 20 seconds 

Story Lineup From This Morning’s Radio News Broadcasts: 

ABC: Mexico City Earthquake; Hurricanes; Louisiana-Racial Murders; Congress-Healthcare Reform. 

CBS: Mexico City Earthquake; Hurricanes; Trump-UN Address; Russia Meddling Investigation-Manafort; Sanctuary Cities; Wall Street News. 

FOX: Mexico City Earthquake; Hurricanes; Trump-UN Address. 

NPR: Hurricanes; Mexico City Earthquake; Trump-UN Address; Congress-Healthcare Reform. Washington Schedule 

## Today’s Events In Washington. 

White House: 

PRESIDENT TRUMP — Participates in an expanded meeting with the King of Jordan; participates in an expanded meeting with the President of the Palestinian Authority; attends a working lunch with African leaders; participates in an expanded meeting with the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom; participates in an expanded meeting with the President of Egypt. VICE PRESIDENT PENCE — Delivers remarks at a UN Security Council high-level debate on reform of United Nations Peacekeeping Operations; joins the President for an expanded meeting with the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom; joins the President for an expanded meeting with the President of Egypt. 

US Senate: 9:00 AM Senate Aging Committee hearing on disaster preparedness and response – Hearing on ‘Disaster Preparedness and Response: The Special Needs of Older Americans’, with testimony from former New Orleans Health Commissioner Karen DeSalvo; University of South Florida School of Aging Studies Professor / Florida Policy Exchange Center on Aging Director Dr Kathryn Hyer; Portlight Inclusive Disaster Strategies CEO/President Paul Timmons Jr.; and Wilkes-Barre, PA, Fire Chief/Emergency Management Coordinator Jay Delaney Location: Dirksen Senate Office Building, Rm 562, Washington, DC http://aging.senate.gov/ 10:00 AM Senate Judiciary Committee nominations hearing – Nominations hearing considers Allison Eid to be U.S. Circuit Judge for the Tenth Circuit; Annemarie Carney Axon to be U.S. District Judge for the Northern District of Alabama; Michael Lawrence Brown and William Ray II to be U.S. District Judges for the Northern District of Georgia; and Thomas Alvin Farr to be U.S. District Judge for the Eastern District of North Carolina Location: Dirksen Senate Office Building, Rm 226, Washington, DC http://judiciary.senate.gov/ 10:00 AM Senate Environment and Public Works Committee nominations hearing – Nominations hearing considers Michael Dourson, Matthew Leopold, David Ross, and William Wehrum to be Environmental Protection Agency Assistant Administrators; and Jeffery Baran to be a Nuclear Regulatory Commission member Location: Dirksen Senate Office Building, Rm 406, Washington, DC http://epw.senate.gov/public/ 10:30 AM Republican Sen. James Lankford meets with Office of Management and Budget Director Mick Mulvaney Location: Washington, DC http://www.lankford.senate.gov/ https://twitter.com/SenatorLankford 1:00 PM Dem Sen. Jack Reed and military consumer advocates hold briefing on the CFPB arbitration rule – Democratic Sen. Jack Reed and military consumer advocates hold briefing on ‘how the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau’s arbitration rule directly benefits the military community and helps protect service members from financial frauds and abuses’, and ‘how the CFPB rule directly impacts Equifax and Wells Fargo customers’. Other participants include Commissioned Officers Association Deputy Executive Director John McElligot, Public Justice Executive Director Paul Bland, and Wells Fargo fake account victim Tracey Kilgore Location: Dirksen Senate Office Building, Rm 538, Washington, DC http://reed.senate.gov/ https://twitter.com/SenJackReed 2:30 PM Senate Governmental Affairs subcommittee hearing on end of the year spending – Federal Spending Oversight and Emergency Management Subcommittee hearing on ‘Prudent Planning or Wasteful Binge? Another Look at End of the Year Spending’, with testimony from Section 809 Panel Commissioner Dr Allan Burman; Mercatus Center at George Mason University Senior Research Fellow Dr Jason Fichtner; and Government Accountability Office Director of Strategic Issues Heather Krause Location: Dirksen Senate Office Building, Rm 342, Washington, DC http://hsgac.senate.gov/ https://twitter.com/SenateHSGAC 

US House: 9:00 AM Dem Rep. Sheila Jackson Lee co-hosts event on ending all discrimination against all women and girls – ‘Target One: Ending All Forms of Discrimination Against All Women and Girls Everywhere’ – the inaugural event of a new breakfast series hosted by Democratic Rep. Sheila Jackson Lee and the International Foundation for Electoral Systems (IFES) exploring each element of the United Nations Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) #5, ‘Achieve Gender Equality and Empower All Women and Girls’. Participants include University of Delaware Assistant Professor of Women and Gender Studies Dr Kara Ellerby, Smash Strategies partner Susan Markham, and IFES Director of Monitoring and Evaluation and Public Opinion Research Rakesh Sharma Location: Rayburn House Office Building, Rm 2045, Washington, DC www.ifes.org https://twitter.com/IFES1987 #SDG5 10:30 AM Pelosi, others ahead of HBCU Roundtable – House Democratic Leader Nancy Pelosi, Congresswoman Alma Adams, Congressman Bobby Scott, and Members of the Congressional Black Caucus will deliver brief remarks ahead of a roundtable with Historically Black Colleges And Universities (HBCU) Presidents and Chancellors to discuss legislative priorities. Remarks will be delivered at the top of the meeting. Location: Gabe Zimmerman Room, HVC-215 Capitol Visitor Center The Capitol. http://www.democraticleader.gov/ https://twitter.com/NancyPelosi 12:00 PM Pelosi Weekly briefing – Democratic Leader Nancy Pelosi will hold her weekly press conference. Location: HVC Studio A (Enter through HVC-117), Capitol Visitor Center. http://www.democraticleader.gov/ https://twitter.com/NancyPelosi On recess until 25 September. 

Other: 7:30 AM Air, Space & Cyber Conference continues with Defense Secretary Mattis keynote – Air Force Association Annual Air, Space & Cyber Conference and Technology Exposition continues, with final day keynote from U.S. Secretary of Defense James Mattis Location: Gaylord National Resort and Convention Center, 201 Waterfront St, National Harbor, MD National Harbor www.afa.org https://twitter.com/AirForceAssoc #ASC17 8:00 AM U.S. Black Chambers Policy Breakfast – U.S. Black Chambers Policy Breakfast, with panel discussions on ‘Doing Business with Corporate America’, and ‘Public Sector Contracting: Diverse Supply Chains on a Local Level’. Speakers include Democratic Rep. Cedric Richmond Location: NCTA – The Internet & Television Association, 25 Massachusetts Ave NW, Washington, DC www.usblackchambers.org https://twitter.com/usblackchambers 9:00 AM Department of Labor releases updated child labor report and apps – Department of Labor simultaneously releases an update to its annual child labor report, representing ‘the most comprehensive research product to date on the state of child labor in over 130 countries worldwide’; a new app entitled ‘Comply Chain’, designed to help businesses root out child labor, forced labor, and modern slavery from global supply chains; and an updated version of the smartphone app ‘Sweat & Toil’, which contains information on goods produced by child labor or forced labor, and the latest findings on govts’ efforts to address child labor (9:00 AM EDT) * Deputy Under Secretary of Labor for International Labor Affairs Martha Newton participates in briefing on the releases at the Washington Foreign Press Center, National Press Building, 529 14th St NW, Washington, DC (11:00 AM EDT) Location: TBD http://www.dol.gov https://twitter.com/USDOL 11:30 AM HUD Secretary Carson pen-and-pad on hurricane recovery efforts – Secretary of Housing and Urban Development Ben Carson discusses HUD’s role in the long-term recovery efforts for Hurricanes Harvey and Irma. Topics will include CDBG-DR funding, the timeline for recovery, and what people in the affected region can expect from HUD, via pen-and-pad with select reporters. Other participants include Associate General Deputy Assistant Secretary for Housing Janet Golrick, General Deputy Assistant Secretary for Policy Development and Research Todd Richardson, and Deputy Assistant Secretary for Grant Programs Stan Gimont Location: Robert C. Weaver Federal Building, 451 7th St, Washington, DC http://www.hud.gov/ https://twitter.com/HUDNews 2:00 PM Brookings Institution discussion on Saudi Arabia and ‘Vision 2030’ – ‘Saudi Arabia looks forward: Vision 2030 and Mohammed bin Salman’ Brookings Institution Intelligence project discussion, with Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs Senior Fellow Karen Elliott House discussing the findings from her new paper ‘Saudi Arabia in Transition’, which analyzes the progress the Saudis have made and the challenges they face in implementing Vision 2030 – a plan to modernize its economy and society while allowing it to maintain its hold on power – amidst the recent changes in leadership Location: The Brookings Institution, 1775 Massachusetts Ave NW, Washington, DC http://www.brookings.edu https://twitter.com/BrookingsInst 8:00 PM Congressional Black Caucus Foundation Annual Celebration of Leadership in the Fine Arts – Congressional Black Caucus Foundation Annual Celebration of Leadership in the Fine Arts, honoring Spike Lee, Yolanda Adams and Simone Paulwell * Organized in cooperation with the Congressional Black Caucus Spouses Visual and Performance Arts Scholarship program Location: Sidney Harman Hall, 610 F St NW, Washington, DC www.cbcfinc.org https://twitter.com/CBCFInc Congressional Black Caucus Foundation Legislative Conference – Congressional Black Caucus Foundation 47th Annual Legislative Conference, themed ‘And Still I Rise’. Includes National Action Network panel discussion with NAN Founder and President Rev. Al Sharpton and Democratic Sen. Cory Booker on diversity in asset management (12:30 PM EDT) Location: Walter E. Washington Convention Center, 801 Mt Vernon Pl, Washington, DC www.cbcfinc.org/alc https://twitter.com/CBCFInc #CBCFALC17 

# Last Laughs 

## Late Night Political Humor. 

Jimmy Kimmel: “[Donald Trump] spoke to the representatives of one people in the UN General Assembly. The President was a little bit disappointed. Usually when Donald Trump meets with representatives from different countries, there’s a swimsuit competition, and they wear sashes. Instead, he was forced to make a speech.” 

Jimmy Kimmel: “Usually if Donald Trump wants to yell at that many foreigners in one day, he has to visit like nine of his construction sites.” 

Jimmy Kimmel: “[Donald Trump] said Kim Jong-Un was ‘Rocket Man’ on a suicide mission. If you want to insult Kim Jong-Un, maybe don’t make it sound like he’s an action-packed movie franchise. Just call him Kim.” 

Stephen Colbert: “Speaking of traveling, Donald Trump is on a trip to a very hostile region, New York City.” 

Stephen Colbert: “[Donald Trump is] in town because this morning, he gave his first official address at, I want to say, Starfleet Academy. Radical Klingon extremists. They violated the neutral zone. We had no choice.” 

Stephen Colbert: “We learned over the weekend that Trump lawyers are clashing over how much to cooperate with the Russia inquiry. If only those Trump lawyers were around when he decided how much to cooperate with Russia.” 

James Corden: “During the speech, Trump threatened to ‘totally destroy North Korea,’ which can only mean one thing: He’s going to run for President of North Korea.” 

James Corden: “Donald Trump Jr. has decided to give up his Secret Service protection in order to have more privacy. He said it got annoying having Secret Service guys always standing around, listening in, and making it almost impossible for him to call Russia to receive further instructions.” 

Trevor Noah: “Trump’s address included many familiar themes. How much great he’s doing as President, how great the country is doing with him as President, how much he’s President, did I mention he’s President?” 

Trevor Noah: “It is refreshing to see an American leader who is not going to dictate to the world. In fact, Donald Trump almost wants nothing to do with the world. It’s like Trump looks at the globe and all he sees is a map full of Erics.” 

Trevor Noah: “So Trump’s new policy, no interfering with how other countries are run, unless he doesn’t like how other countries are run.” 

Jimmy Fallon: “President Trump gave his big speech at the UN General Assembly today, and at one point he threatened to totally destroy North Korea. He said he has a good plan to do it too. He’s going to run for President of North Korea.” 

Seth Meyers: “Trump also said during his address that if North Korea continues working on its nuclear program, the US will have no choice but to totally destroy North Korea. Oh, my God. Trump is going to run for President of North Korea!” 

Seth Meyers: “A lawyer who was part of the investigation that led to the impeachment trial of former President Bill Clinton recently said the Special Counsel, Robert Mueller, is trying to set a tone to, quote, ‘strike terror in the hearts of people of Washington,’ which used to be Steve Bannon’s job.” 

Seth Meyers: “Senate Republicans led by Lindsey Graham and Bill Cassidy have revived the effort to repeal Obamacare. Again? Usually when a bad idea comes back this many times, Johnny Depp is in it.” 

Conan O’Brien: “Today at the UN, President Trump threatened to return immigrants to their home countries. After making those comments, he got a standing ovation from Melania. She wants to go home.”
