Title: TOWARDS A LOCAL COMMUNITY:

URL Source: https://www.ideals.illinois.edu/items/89543/bitstreams/229556/data.pdf

Published Time: Wed, 21 Sep 2022 16:45:00 GMT

Markdown Content:
WRITING “TAIWANESE”: 

THE PÉH-OĒ -JĪ ROMANIZATION AND IDENTITY CONSTRUCTION IN TAIWAN ,

1860S-1990S 

BY 

HUANG-LAN SU 

DISSERTATION 

Submitted in partial fulfillment of the requirements 

for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy in East Asian Languages and Cultures 

in the Graduate College of the 

University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 2015 

Urbana, Illinois 

Doctoral Committee: 

Professor Kaiwing Chow, Chair 

Associate Professor Dan Shao 

Associate Professor Gary Xu 

Associate Research Fellow Lung-chih Chang, Academia Sinica in Taiwan ii 

Abstract 

This dissertation explores how Pe̍h -oē -jī ( Jiaohui roma zi/Baihua zi , literally meaning 

“church romanization” or “vernacular script” in Chinese, POJ hereafter) was transformed from a “foreign” writing system as a religious tool for Bible study into an identity arker for various groups of “Taiwanese”  (Taiwan ren ) in Taiwan from 1865 th rough the 1990s. Under three 

political regimes― the Qing Empire, Japanese colonial rule, and the post -war Nationalist 

regime, POJ, originally created by the Presbyterian Church missionaries for Taiwanese peoples 

in the 1860s, was utilized in proselytism,  school education, medical study, and as an expression 

of Taiwanese culture and nationalism under different social, political, and cultural circumstances. 

Looking into the various ways whereby POJ has become symbolically associated with different 

identitie s deepens our understanding of how it was important in the process and politics of 

identity making in modern Taiwan. Based on POJ materials,  I aim to provide the first history of 

POJ literacy in Taiwan and to provide an analysis of the critical role of PO J in the formation of 

“Taiwanese” identities in modern China .iii 

Acknowledgments 

I am incredibly grateful to my dissertation committee members. This project would not have been possible without their support. My advisor, Professor Kai-wing Chow, always provided me with insightful observations as we discussed the outline, arguments, source materials, and writing style of my dissertation. I was truly lucky to have Professor Dan Shao on my committee. She has provided significant encouragement and support to me as I have worked to establish my professional career. Professor Gary Xu has provided me with invaluable assistance in navigating the challenges I have faced during the dissertation writing process. No words can fully express my gratitude to Professor Lung-chih Chang from Academia Sinica in Taiwan. I am grateful for his participation in this process. He raised tough questions, brought 

unresolved issues in Taiwan’s history to my attention, and gave me a helping hand in the last 

stage of my doctoral studies. 

I also want to thank my colleagues Jing Jing Chang and Dongxin Zou for their comments on working drafts of my dissertation chapters. We shared intellectual discussions that helped to further this project. 

Finally I wish to thank my father who actively supported my career and insisted on having me complete my Ph.D. even as he was suffering from brain cancer. iv 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 

INTRODUCTION  ...................................................................................................................... 1

CHAPTER 1: EVANGELICALISM AND MISSIONARY PRINT CULTURE, 1865-1895 ......  29 

CHAPTER 2: SCHOOL EDUCATION AND WESTERN MEDICAL TRAINING, 1880S-1940S ........................................................................................................................................ 73 

CHAPTER 3: JAPANESE COLONIALISM AND THE EXPANSION OF PÉH-OĒ -JĪ 

COMMUNITY, 1895-1940S ................................................................................................ ... 110 

CHAPTER 4: R.O.C. LANGUAGE POLICY, THE DECLARATION ON HUMAN RIGHTS, AND THE INCLUSION OF PÉH-OĒ -JĪ IN PUBLIC EDUCATION, 1945 -1990S................. 163 

CONCLUSION  .......................................................................................................................  224 

MAPS AND FIGURES ........................................................................................................... 239 

ACRONYMS .......................................................................................................................... 257 

GLOSSARY  ...........................................................................................................................  258 

BIBLIOGRAPHY ................................................................................................................... 268 1

Introduction 

My dissertation intersects with scholarship from four fields of historical inquiry: the history of Christian missions in China, the history of Taiwanese identities, the history of print culture, and the history of Taiwanese education. 

This study explains how Pe̍h -oē -jī ( Jiaohui roma zi/Baihua zi  教會羅馬字 /白話字 ,

literally meaning “church romanization” or “vernacular script” in Chinese, POJ hereafter) was 

transformed from a “foreign” writing system used as a religious tool for Bible study into an 

identity marker  for various groups of “Taiwanese”  (Taiwan ren  臺灣人 ) in Taiwan between 

1865 and the 1990s. Across three political regimes, POJ printed sources were used in 

proselytism, education, medical study, and as an expression of Taiwanese culture and 

nationalism und er different social and cultural circumstances. Looking into the ways that using 

POJ has become symbolically associated with different forms of identity deepens our 

understanding of how important a writing system is in the process and politics of identity  making 

in modern Taiwan. 

Using POJ was a marker of an individual’s identification with different groups of people 

between the mid-19 th century and the late 20 th century. In the 1860s, European Presbyterian missionaries introduced POJ as a proselytizing tool. It was primarily designed to transliterate the southern Fujianese language ( Minnan hua  閩南話  or  Taiyu  台語 ) which is the most commonly 

spoken language in Taiwan. POJ evolved from a foreign text imparted as a result of the Treaty 

of Tianjin (1858), to an  auxiliary device for learning the southern Fujianese language for 

Japanese officers during the colonial period, to a tool for the development of a “Taiwanese” 

ethno -linguistic identity in the 1920s -1930s, to a forbidden writing system under the Nationalist 

government in the 1960s, to a symbol of “Taiwanese” national identity that was claimed by 2

Presbyterian church leaders, and finally to a phonetic tool in public education in the 1990s. This research project reveals the cultural and political circumstances that led to shifting understandings of what it meant to read and write in POJ in Taiwan. 

The objective of this dissertation is to discuss the process by which POJ literacy was progressively attached to different forms of identity in Taiwan and ultimately to provide an explanation of how the use of POJ by different groups of users contributes to what it means to be 

“Taiwanese.” 

My overarching research question is: how did a foreign transliteration system gradually increase its cultural and political importance — in evangelism, knowledge transmission, print culture, Christian and secular school education, western medical training, and finally, in the politics of ethnic and national identity construction — in a land of multilingual immigrants? 

Based on POJ source materials, this dissertation argues that the formation and construction of various forms of identities through the use of POJ was closely associated with demands for an individual writing system in Taiwan from the 1860s through the 1990s. Southern Fujianese language speakers, the majority of the Taiwanese population, had no independent writing system before Presbyterian missionaries arrived in the 1860s. It is important to discuss the changing relationship of  POJ  users to the society so we can better  understand the 

way that POJ literacy was connected to different types of group identity. Printed POJ sources 

represent the largest textual legacy of the mid - 19 th  and late 20 th  centuries in Taiwan, but they 

have rarely been the subject of major historica l analyses. Since POJ has had an increasingly 

important impact on the general public in Taiwan’s education system, the study of POJ and its 

relations to society are extremely urgent and valuable to the writing of Taiwan’s history. 3

In the first several decades after it was taught in Taiwan, POJ served as a religious and linguistic tool for Bible studies in the Christian community. Learning POJ was a prerequisite for baptism. Being literate in POJ later became a feature of membership in the community of Taiwanese who had attended Church-affiliated schools or received Western medical training from Christian missionary doctors. 

Under Japanese colonialism, the use of POJ expanded beyond the Christian community. The expanding use of POJ from the 1895 onward and its shifting meanings were driven by colonial policies and backlash against them. Japanese officers learned POJ in order to make the Taiwanese people more receptive to Japanese colonial governance. A cluster of Taiwanese intellectuals worked to tran sform POJ’s significance from a medium of access to Christian or 

medical knowledge to a symbolic marker of ethnic identity. These Taiwanese elites promoted 

the use of POJ to highlight the difference between being “Taiwanese” and being “Japanese” 

through t he promotion of “Taiwanese culture,” written language, and literature. They 

emphasized the differences between themselves and the Japanese as an act of resistance to their political exclusion from the Japanese empire. 

Over the last three decades, the symbolism of POJ has been transformed in relation to Taiwanese politics, social movement, and education. During the post-colonial period, the Republic of China (R.O.C., the Nationalist government) enforced the use of Mandarin Chinese in public education and suppressed the use of POJ and the southern Fujianese language until the 1980s. POJ supporters tried to adapt POJ into the Mandarin Phonetic System so it would be 

included in national education. The supporters’ attempts to support the R.O.C. and its langu age policy ended after the R.O.C. withdrew from the United Nations. They feared that once the R.O.C. lost its UN seats the P.R.C. would attempt to invade Taiwan in order to occupy it as the 4

23 rd province of China. In response, the Presbyterian Church in Taiwan made a Declaration on Human Rights to claim Taiwanese Independence in 1977. Since the Declaration came from the Presbyterians who learned POJ in church or school, it transformed the use of POJ into a symbol 

of “Taiwanese” political identity. The m ost important symbolic outcome of the Declaration was the creation of the Mother-Tongue Movement in the 1980s. Movement supporters convinced the R.O.C. regime to include POJ and local languages in the language curriculum for public schools. Nevertheless, the inclusion of POJ in compulsory education created a language hierarchy in which Chinese script became the main writing system and POJ became a phonetic device for learning mother tongues. 

***** 

The definition of writing systems has changed over time. Powell Barry defined a writing 

system as “a system of markings with a conventional reference that communicates information.” 1

His definition does not clearly identify what types of markings should be considered writing. Instead, he emphasizes that a unique difference between human beings and animals is the ability 

to write, which echoes Peter T. Daniels’ argument—“Humankind is defined by language: but civilization is defined by writing.” 2 In order for Taiwan to be recognized as a unique civilization, culture, and nation, it needs its own writing system. 

A writing system, in this dissertation, refers to a system characterized by “the use of graphic marks to represent specific linguistic utterances.” 3 In other words, a writing system is not a language, but it represents spoken language. It is a visual form of a spoken language. As          

> 1B.B. Powell, Writing: Theory and History of the Technology of Civilization (Hoboken, N.J.: John Wiley & Sons, 2012), 13.
> 2P.T. Daniels and W. Bright, eds., The World's Writing Systems (New York: Oxford University Press, 1996), 1.
> 3H. Rogers, Writing Systems: A Linguistic Approach (Hoboken, N.J.: Wiley, 2004), 2.

5

most linguists might agree, writing indicates a series of systemized graphemes that represent phonemes and morphemes; that is, sounds and meanings. If a spoken language displays how sound and meaning are related, then writing, ideally, should be able to preserve that relationship 

as well. This is why Daniels and Bright go on to state that the meaning of writings “can be 

recovered more or less exactly without the intervention of the utterance.” 4 No definition can 

perfectly embrace all features of writing. Grounded in Henry Rogers’ classification of writing systems, in which an utterance can be represented “by writing at any of three levels: phonetic, linguistic, and semantic,” POJ, rather like the International Phonetic Alphabet, is a phonetic writing system not affiliated with a particular language. 5 It does not matter what the language is as long as its phonemes and morphemes can be precisely represented in POJ. 

Since POJ is a phonetic writing system, it was a practical tool for transliterating the southern Fujianese language, Hakka, and indigenous languages in Taiwan. Yet, Presbyterian missionaries introduced POJ to serve mainly as a transliteration of the southern Fujianese language . The official language, the Beijing dialect, was not the main spoken language in Taiwan during the Qing dynasty. The southern Fujianese language was (and is) the most common form of verbal communication in the island. Less than half of the native language speakers spoke Hakka and most of them could speak the southern Fujianese language as well. Another small portion of the population spoke indigenous languages and they were divided into more than ten Austronesian language groups. Whenever a missionary planned to disseminate the Gospel in an aboriginal village, he or she had to learn an individual indigenous language which complicated mission work significantly. Later, although the Japanese and R.O.C. governments 

tried to designate a single “national language” for Taiwan neither regime could neglect the fact     

> 4Daniels and Bright, The World's Writing Systems , 2.
> 5Rogers, Writing Systems: A Linguistic Approach , 269.

6

that the southern Fujianese language was the most widely spoken language from the Qing Dynasty onwards (and probably earlier). 6 Although each regime attempted to impose their language as the national language of Taiwan, they were not successful in replacing the southern 

Fujianese language in people’s daily lives. Each regime had to adjust their language policy 

according to the reality of social practice. 

As the use of language changes over time, the names for a language change as well. The southern Fujianese language has been called Minnan yu/hua  閩南語 /話 (southern Fujianese 

language),  Taiwan hua  臺灣話 , Taiyu  台語  (both  Taiwan hua  and  Taiyu  refer to Taiwanese 

language),  Holo  (Hoklo)  hua  福佬話  (Holo language),  Taiwan  yu  臺灣語  (Taiwango ) or Tuyu 

土語  (dogo, both Taiwango  and  dogo  refer to indigenous language ),  etc. Southern Fujianese 

language speakers called the language  Minnan hua/hua , Taiwan hua , or  Taiyu .7 The Hakka 

people referred to the language as  Holo . During the  Japanese colonial period, colonial officials 

referred to the language as  Taiwan  yu  or  Tuyu  as part of an  attempt to distinguish between 

different groups of Japanese subjects.  

> 6

See Lin Qingxun’s A Brief History of Taiwanese Minnan yu (Taipei: Xinlu chuban she, 2001), 18;  Sh uanfan 

Huang,  Language, Society, and Consciousness of Ethnicity  (Taipei:  Crane , 1995),  19 -21; Hakka Affairs Council, 

Annual Research Report of Hakka Affairs Council 

—A Survey of Hakka in Taiwan, 2010 -2011  (Taipei: Hak ka 

Affairs Council, 2011),  174. The annual report cond ucted a survey of self -identified ethnicities. 67.5% of the entire 

Taiwanese population stated that they are Hoklo people, but this did not clarify if they spoke  southern  Fujianese 

language . As not all Hoklo people speak  southern  Fujianese language  and som e Hakka people are bilingual in 

southern  Fujianese language  and Hakka, we are not given enough information to calculate the precise number of 

southern  Fujianese language  speakers.  

> 7

From the databases of Taiwan wenxian congkan  臺灣文獻叢刊  (The Taiwan Literatu re Series) and  Taiwan 

fangzhi  臺灣方志  (Taiwan Gazetteers),  Minnan yu  was not found used by the end of Japanese colonial rule.  Minnan 

hua  appeared once in  the  commentary about missionary’s records. But we are not given sufficient information 

regarding when th e commentary was written.  Taiwan hua  was used once in a letter by Minister Li Hongzhang  李鴻 

章 (1823 -1901) in 1874 discussing  Charles W. Le Gendre’s  李仙得  (1830 -1899)  involvement in Taiwan’s Mudan 

Incident  牡丹社事件  (Taiwan Expedition , 1874).  Taiwan yu  臺灣語  and  Taiyu  臺語  were used mostly by Lian 

Yatang  連雅堂  (1878 -1936) in his publications such as  Taiwan yu dian  臺灣語典  (Dictionary of Taiwanese 

Lanaguge,1933) and  Taiwan tong zhi  臺灣通史  (General History of Taiwan, 1920) during the Japanese colonial 

period. Some of Qing publi cations such as Liu Jiamou’s  劉家謀  (1814 -1853)  Haiyin Shi  海音詩  (Poems of the 

Sea’s Sounds) also used  Taiyu . All the above usage of  Taiyu , Taiwan yu/hua, Minnan hua  refer to the southern 

Fujianese language  in Taiwan as a regional language. 7

For the Taiwanese people deciding whether to refer to the language as Minnan yu/hu a or 

Taiyu is complicated. Each name is associated with the awakening of ethnic and national identities in a different period of Taiwanese history. The R.O.C. used the name, Minnan yu/hua ,after World War II, because they did not recognize the southern Fujianese language as a separate language from Mandarin Chinese and referred to it as a fangyan  方言  (topolect ) of Mandarin, 

although the two languages are unintelligible. 8 Minnan yu/hua  refers to the southern Fujianese 

language spoken by different wave s of immigrants moving from China to Taiwan who mostly 

originated from southern Fujian province. The language from the southern Fujian province is the 

dominant language in that province. 9 Since there were so many immigrants to Taiwan from this 

province,  the majority of Taiwanese people today, at least 70 percent of them, speak this 

language. Though the provincial language is linguistically divided into Zhangzhou  漳州 ,

Quanzhou  泉州 , and Amoy accents, with assimilation of local phonemes, grammar, and 

vocabula ry, speakers who use the different accents can understand one another. 

Since the 1970s, many Taiwanese have chosen to refer to the southern Fujianese language as Taiyu as part of their attempts to construct a Taiwanese national identity. This is a sav vy strategy to “de -Sinicize” the language  that outmanoeuvres any cultural and political  

> 8

Regarding the differences between language and topolect, or dialect, Victor H Mair has clearly explained and cited 

Xing Gongwan’s three conditions of claiming the speech of members of two communities to be fangyan , rather than 

separate languages. They are “they share a comm on standard language, the share the same script, and they can 

converse directly.” Even though the southern Fujianese language in the Qing Dynasty and under the Nationalist 

regime shared the common official languages and the same Chinese script in some cases, they are not intelligible. In a dictionary of a linguistic terms, it is usually understood that people speak different languages if they do not understand each other. In my understanding, Chinese languages as sinophone all belong to the group of the great Sino-Tibetan language family, but it is not necessarily to mean they can communicate with each other. It however becomes an issue on defining fangyan and yuyan (language) when some groups of language speakers are unable to mutually understand each other but are governed by the same political regime. See Mair’s “What Is a Chinese ‘Dialect/topolect’? Reflection on Some Key Sino—English Linguistic Terms,” Sino-Platonic Papers 29 (1991): 1-31.  

> 9

Among the languages used in Fujian province, Minnan hua occupied 66.1 % of entire Fujian population. See Lin 

Qingxun’s A Brief History of Taiwanese Minnan yu (Taipei: Xinlu chuban she, 2001), 5. 8

association between the language and Chinese regimes, including the P.R.C. (People’s Republic 

of China) and R.O.C. (Republic of China, i.e., Taiwan).  In some instances, people have shied 

away from using the term  Taiwan hua  and called the language  Taiyu  so as to avoid triggering 

conflict with another self -proclaimed group of “Taiwanese,” namely the Hakka. 10 

The preference of using the term  southern Fujia nese language  mostly in this dissertation 

has fuelled concern from readers who speak the  southern Fujianese language  from different 

corners of the world, but who have no shared history that is analogous to what their Taiwanese 

counterparts have gone throug h. Other names might mislead readers in an attempt to conflate 

cultural experience with identity. Referring to the language as the southern Fujianese language 

indicates its linguistic connection with Fujianese language users in a global context and 

recog nizes the language as a complex system of oral communication that has been used in 

Taiwan and is changing over time. 

***** 

In my dissertation, “Taiwanese” in most cases is used with quotation marks because its 

definition has changed over time. I do not intend to provide a comprehensive definition of what 

it means to be “Taiwanese” in my dissertation, though my analysis touches upon how an 

individual writing system became a symbol of Taiwanese ethnic and national identities in Chapters Four and Five. Taiwanese people having the ability to write about their experiences in Taiwan is different from their self-identification with a group of “Taiwanese.” When people in Taiwan by the 1920s-1930s shared their life experience and cultural opinions in writing, they did not spontaneously believe that they belonged to an ethnic community because of their writings. Their experiences as writers were attached to their membership in other types of groups such as        

> 10 Qinan Li and Weiren Hong, “ A Language has no Name?” Journal of Taiwan Literary Studies 15 (2007) :36 -41.

9

writing or religious clusters. They might not have self-identified with the people they depicted 

as the “Taiwanese” as we understand them now. Before the 1920s, POJ writers were not pushed 

to distinguish Taiwanese culture from Japanese culture. They were southern Fujianese language speakers and used POJ for different purposes, e.g. learning Chinese or reading the Bible. By the 

awakening of the Taiwanese culture in the 1920s, the “Taiwanese” in their writings had no clear 

ethnic features that distinguished them from others and definitely should be understood 

differently from the “Taiwanese” that later writers identified with after the 1920s. 

My research is shaped by scholars who began to research and analyze cultural aspects of 

Taiwan’s society because of the Mother To ngue Movement in the early 1990s. As native speakers of this language, my family, Taiwanese educators and scholars taught me that southern Fujianese language speakers in the 1990s constituted an ethnic community where being 

“Taiwanese” was defined as bein g able to write in a unique writing system that was notably different from Chinese script. Writing, however, is simply a measurement, a visual representation of human minds, of how the world is observed and of what we might anticipate learning about. Bei ng “Taiwanese” can be demonstrated through other aspects of identity as 

well. Among the ethnic labels in language, appearance, history, race, region, customs, food, habits, class, genealogy, medical ailments, etc. each feature could represent a category of people. There is no clear-cut indication of criteria that define membership in a specific group because ethnic markers change temporally and spatially following cultural and economic development. Based on the dimension of writing, my dissertation describes a social practice in which the symbolic and practical significance of POJ literacy changed as it was identified with different communities of people from the mid-1860s forward. 10 

The complexity of what it symbolically means to be “Taiwanese” exceeds sta ndard 

expectations. Nowadays, the discourse of the ethnonym “Taiwanese” is still evolving. Issues related to “Taiwanese” identity, particularly in politics, have been fervently debated. Defining what it means to be “Taiwanese” is challenging. Individua ls who are evaluating their ethnic 

identity as “Taiwanese” must subjectively consider whether or not they are part of the Chinese 

people. Even though colonial and post-colonial governments attempted to give the native 

“Taiwanese” a sense of ethnic and nat ional identity that was grounded in their own cultures, the 

“Taiwanese” were able to resist the imposition of an outside ethnic identity if they wanted to. Defining what it means to be “Taiwanese” is also contentious because we all have our own 

perspectives supported by different historical materials and narratives that we rely on to make judgments about identity. Examining both the experiences of individuals and collective actions can give us a more complex and complete picture of the development of identity.  We also have 

to pay attention to how temporal and spatial factors influenced people’s understanding of their 

ethnicity and the role that using a specific writing system played in creating that ethnicity. 

The process through which POJ usage and identity intertwined is noteworthy. In my dissertation, identity refers to what you write and how you utilize a writing system, specifically 

to the idea that those practices are “among the most normatively significant and behaviorally 

consequential aspects o f politics.” 11 This reference does not arbitrarily simplify the complexity of identity, but, as Rawi Abdelal, Yoshiko M. Herrera, Alastair Iain Johnston, and Rose 

McDermott all suggest, it treats “identity as a variable” that has to be conceptualized in one’s 

scholarship. 12 From a historical sociolinguistic point of view, my research explores the identities    

> 11 Roger Smith, “Identities, Interests, and the Future of Political Science,” Perspectives on Politics 2:2 (2002): 301-12.

11 

that were formed through the use of POJ and the dynamic social practices associated with POJ under different regimes in Taiwan. Attributes of identities are fluid and situated in certain sociocultural contexts. The ever-evolving features of membership in a specific group can be self-selected, given, and/or responsive to changes and conflicts in a society. In other words, 

investigating POJ’s centrality to constructing identities helps us to understand the myriad social relationships of 19 th -20 th century Taiwan. Users decide whether or not a written language will be incorporated into their sense of identity when they chose to use it or not use it to communicate 

with diverse groups of hearers. “Identity is the source and the outcome of culture;” written language is a type of cultural production that indexes its users’ social status, ideology, age, 

ethnicity, education, gender, religious belief, and nationality. 13 When a linguistic utterance or text is created, it is symbolic of both self-perception and given knowledge to the interlocutors. 

Walter Ong’s theory of written language fleshes out the link between writing systems and 

identity. According to On g, a writing system structures a user’s consciousness in a way that is 

distinguishable from the influence of a spoken language. 14 His comments stress the properties of writing as literature or other types of complicated presentations of thoughts. Some POJ users believe that written presentations in POJ are much closer to text than they are to literature which is a production that is stylistically shaped in genres. POJ writing is supposed to accurately transliterate an utterance without (re)shaping its meaning. Unlike Chinese characters or written English, POJ is not a written language with its own vocabulary that native languages are 

‘translated’ into. It is a spelling system that enables speakers to ‘transcribe’ their speech. The          

> 12 R. Abdelal et al., Measuring Identity: A Guide for Social Scientists (Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press, 2009), 17.
> 13 Mary Bucholtz and Kira Hall, “Language and Identity,” in Alessandro Duranti, ed., A Companion to Linguistic Anthropology (Hoboken, N.J.: Wiley-Blackwell, 2006), 369-94.
> 14 W.J. Ong, Orality and Literacy: The Technologizing of the Word (New York: Routledge, 1982), 123.

12 

problems that are associated with written formats of language, which could change the readers’ 

understanding of the spoken language, seem inapplicable to POJ. However, POJ writings should 

be considered ‘translations’ of texts because of the way that the meanings of words are re -shaped in the POJ Bible, textbooks, and medical knowledge reference books. 

Writing systems label a group of people and allow them to separate themselves from 

other groups. In his analysis of written language and the construction of identity, Roz Ivanič suggests that writer identity is “an understanding of the way in which the use of written language 

is connected to other aspects of social life. 15 Different forms of literacy highlight different aspect of identity, e.g. writing newspapers or school textbooks. 16 Using POJ in various genres might 

develop different people’s sense of belonging to different POJ communities. 

Understanding the identities of POJ users in Taiwan is important since POJ literacy influenced the construction of group identities in Taiwan.  Learning POJ improves a person’s 

ability to speak the southern Fujianese language, but a southern Fujianese language  speaker 

cannot automatically use POJ without training. The  southern Fujianese  language speakers in 

Taiwan were not required to study POJ if they were enrolled in elementary school before the 

1990s. Taiwanese Christians and church attendants were the exce ptions since POJ was the main 

writing system of Church publications by the end of World War II. 

Since POJ was not the official written format of the southern Fujianese language we need to understand why some users chose to study it. First, POJ offered a shared writing platform for non-southern Fujianese language learners to learn pronunciation and tones. Secondly, the language speakers used POJ as a convenient mechanism for writing in the language. A recent      

> 15 Roz Ivanič ,Writing and Identity: The Discoursal Construction of Identity in Academic Writing (Philadelphia:
> John Benjamins Publishing, 1998) , 71.
> 16 Ibid.

13 

study demonstrated that the naturalized spouses of Taiwanese citizens from Vietnam and other Asian countries generally show interest in learning POJ for daily communication in the southern Fujianese language. The author suggested that speaking the southern Fujianese language should be a priority for long-term foreign residents in Taiwan, inasmuch as it is the most useful language for daily life. 17 No matter how much a speaker can use the southern Fujianese language, POJ is a visual demonstration of the language. Since more and more Mandarin speakers are capable of understanding the southern Fujianese language, thanks to living in an immersive language environment, my research explores how identity information and construction is influenced by being able to write in a major language in contemporary Taiwan. 

***** 

In current scholarship, the study of POJ as a marker of identity is part of the study of the Taiwanese people. Most scholarship tends to include several factors in understanding the Taiwanese people: knowledge (re)production though printing, written language preference, the post-1945 R.O.C. language policy, deteriorating political relati ons with the “Chinese” who 

retreated to Taiwan from China after 1945, speaking the southern Fujianese language, the influence of the Presbyterian Church, and the shared fate of people in Taiwan. Many scholars do not situate their studies in the shifting historical and cultural circumstances in Taiwan thus obscuring how understanding and markers of ethnicity and identity changed over time. 

While political science scholars urge us to believe that the construction of Taiwanese identity cannot be examined outside of the political field, Chang Miao-Chuan’s  張妙娟  study 

outlines how printing technology promoted missionary teaching in terms of the comprehensive     

> 17 Hak -Khiam Tiuⁿ ,“Pe̍h -oē -jī and the Modernization of Taiwanese Written Language, ”An Anthology of
> International Conference on Taiwanese Romanization in 2004 (Tainan: National Taiwan Literary Museum, 2004),
> 1-17.

14 

introduction of the first newspaper, Tâi-oân-hú-siâⁿ k àu-hōe -pò  臺灣府城教會報  (Taiwan 

Church News ), which has been in circulation since the 1880s in Taiwan. 18  As Chang 

convincingly argues, the newspaper in POJ encouraged using POJ instead of Chinese characters 

in Christian schools, churches, and private meetings. Furthermore, POJ learners gained two 

ad vantages from their studies. First, POJ is a system that can be quickly learned. Second, some 

editions of the paper advertised that as long as POJ was studied first, the difficulty of learning 

complicated classical Chinese characters would decrease by st udying POJ annotations alongside 

characters. In addition to advocating the study of POJ, the newspaper printed school news and 

religious messages for church educational institutions as well. A writing language community 

was gradually fashioned that inclu ded only POJ users, most of whom were Christian. 

Consequently, Chang implies that a Taiwanese religious identity formed around reading the 

printed language. 

The use of POJ could convey how social status was identified within a writing community. Pan Wei-Hsin’s  潘為欣  work further examines the contrast between using  kana ,

syllabic Japanese scripts, and POJ to compose southern Fujianese language during the Japanese 

colonial period.  19  An interesting discovery by Pan demonstrates, surprisingly, that POJ 

publish ers did the exact opposite of what the Japanese government expected by publishing 

Confucian classics in POJ, whereas  kana  were used more for transliterating folklore. According 

to Pan, this commercial publishing phenomenon explains an established idea―nam ely, that there 

existed a language hierarchy between “phonetic tools” in  kana  and “vernacular writing” in POJ.      

> 18 Miao-Chuan Chang, Kaiqi Xinyan-Taiwan Fucheng Jiaohui Bao Yu Zhanglao Jiaohui De Jidutu Jiaoyu ( Open Your Eyes and Minds-Taiwan Church News and the Christian Education of Presbyterian Church) (Tainan: Presbyterian Church in Taiwan Press, 2005).
> 19 Wei-Hsin Pan, “Relationship Between Taiwanese Vernacular Writing and Writing Symbols during Japanese -Occupied Period ── Centering on Specialized Taiwanese Education Magazine and Taiwan Prefectural City Church News, ”(M.A. Thesis, National Taipei University of Education, 2011).

15 

The former was designed by the educator Izawa Shūji  伊澤  修二  (1851 -1917) for Japanese in 

Taiwan to manage a foreign spoken language, while the latte r was created by the Church to 

substitute for characters which occupy the dominant position of Chinese literacy and tradition. 

From a comparative perspective, Pan’s research unexpectedly bridges a gap in Chang’s book. 

By integrating Chang’s insight with  Pan’s textual materials, it is reasonable to conclude that POJ 

was used by diverse classes of people in printed versions of individual literary compositions, 

information exchange, and commentaries of Confucian works circulated through literacy media. 

From a sociocultural anthropologist’s point of view, Melissa Brown boils down her 

research to the fact that Taiwanese identity was fashioned by social experience, e.g., the ordinary 

people’s life experiences, rather than by state invention or the ideology of th e elite. Many of her works focus on the plains indigenous tribes during the Japanese period. She argues that local 

ethnic identity “can have a different basis than that which is claimed by a larger ethnic group or society.” 20 Even though a group of plains tribes, or their adopted daughters, were registered as Han people by virtue of having a patrilineal line of Han in a census, local individual memory viewed them as plains tribes members, since they were immersed in an aboriginal society. Evan Nicholas D awley’s view aligns with Brown’s analysis. His dissertation deals with Taiwanese 

identity in the context of a port city, Keelong  基隆 . Dawley, as a historian, makes an argument 

that ethnicity and identity are constructed from within through the agency of i slanders, not by 

state enforcement. Through developing an in -group and out -group sense in their social 

organizations, work, and religious traditions, to name a few, local Keelong people connected 

with one another by means of actual historical conditions.  By his logic, the ethnic identity    

> 20 Melissa J. Brown, “Reconstructing Ethnicity: Recorded and Remembered Identity in Taiwan,” Ethnology 40:2 (2001): 153-64.

16 

constructed in Taiwan went through a distinctive route in order to build a Taiwanese nation-state and ethnic group, though both were imagined to be independent from each other. Political regimes invented a set of Japanese- or Chinese-oriented identities for the people, but they were found to be invalid. Instead of simply receiving the identities given them by outsiders, the people developed their own ways of calibrating their responses to state policies and of delineating ethnic boundaries from the formulated ones. 21 

POJ was an evangelical tool invented by Presbyterian Church missionaries in order to provide a common reading medium for the promotion of a foreign religious system, as well as to provide an orthography for non-script readers who were mostly “illiterate.” The actions taken by 

and related to the Church cannot help being closely associated with what the use of POJ has 

stood for at different given times. Lee Weicheng’s  李偉誠  “A Tale of Two Worlds” emphasizes 

how fa r-reaching the impact of the Presbyterian Church in post -war Taiwan has been on the 

formation of Taiwanese ideology underlying the nationalistic movements of the 1970s.  22  Since 

the Presbyterian Church in Taiwan released its Declaration on Human Rights for  Taiwanese 

independence in the 1970s, the Church’s subsequent activities have attracted attention from 

international political liberals. Lee implies that the Church’s political involvement made using 

POJ or the southern Fujianese language a symbol of an i ndividual’s political antagonism toward 

the KMT’s diplomatic decision to withdraw from the United Nations. It was also seen as a 

symbol of a person’s anger over the regime’s incompetence in dealing with international 

relations in the Cold War era.     

> 21 Evan Nicholas Dawley, “Constructing Taiwanese Ethnicity ―Identities in the City on the Border of China and
> Japan,” (Ph.D. Dissertation, Harvard University, 2006).
> 22 Weicheng Lee, “A Tale of Two Worlds— Presbyterian Church in Taiwan and Post-war Nationalism, ”(M.A. Thesis, National Tsing Hua University, 2009).

17 

Some scholarship takes for granted the continuous use of the spoken southern Fujianese language as a consistent identifier of Taiwanese identity. Some scholars, such as Thomas Gold, have proposed that during the political awakening of the early 1980’s, the emerg ence of a Taiwanese identity expressed through speaking the language confirmed the formation of an anti-hegemonic ideology. Without the consideration of the sociolinguistic history of POJ, his theory simply emphasizes the language use as a political issue. 23 Gold assumes that using this language naturally leads to the construction of a Taiwanese identity to distinguish from the Chinese-identified R.O.C. government, and that language users naturally acquiesced to the process with little or no resistance. However, such a tidy explanation seems simplistic. Leo Ching, in his 

Becoming Japanese , encountered a telling predicament wherein the imagined Taiwanese individuals could not be clearly identified, and were grouped, however arbitrarily, by their ability to speak the language and by governmental fiat. 24 

Similar to Lee’s argument, Hsiau A -Chin’s  蕭阿勤  “Language Ideology in Taiwan” 

elucidates one alternative cause as to how speaking the southern Fujianese language came to be 

viewed as a marker of being Taiwane se; this notion was a result of the Nationalist (Kuomintang, 

KMT) language policy. 25  In his article, Hsiau points out that the KMT’s National Language 

Movement ( guoyu yundong  國語運動 ), initiated in 1946, had exalted Mandarin and suppressed 

other local languag es. In order to defend linguistic hegemony, the Nationalist regime not only 

banned Japanese columns in newspapers and magazines, but compelled Taiwanese people 

literate in Japanese to become “illiterate.” He argues that the KMT government seemed not to           

> 23 Thomas Gold, “Civil Society and Taiwan’s Quest for Identity,” i nCultural Change in Postwar Taiwan , eds.
> Stevan Harrell and Huang Chun-chieh (Boulder: Westview Press, 1994), 47-68.
> 24 L.T.S. Ching, Becoming Japanese: Colonial Taiwan and the Politics of Identity Formation (Oakland, C.A.: University of California Press, 2001).
> 25 A-Chin Hsiau, “Language Ideology in Taiwan: The KMT's Language Policy, the Tai -yü Language Movement,
> and Ethnic Politics,” Journal of Multilingual and Multicultural Development 18:4 (1997): 302-15.

18 

consider the extent of the population’s language use, as the southern Fujianese language speakers of Hoklo made up 75% of the island’s population, while 70% of the population was literate in 

Japanese at the time. 

As Hsiau states, the use of Mandarin spontaneously turned into a testimony to the Chinese identity of the KMT, as well as a linguistic marker of mainlander ( waisheng ren  外省 

人) identity. Any support for speaking the southern Fujianese language in a public space would 

be deemed ideologically anti -KMT , or even as an agitation for independence movements. 

Starting in 1945, those who were incapable of speaking Mandarin were classified as 

“Taiwanese.” Classification through language, as Pierre Bourdieu has shown, has become an 

everyday social and cultural  experience practiced in contemporary Taiwanese society. It even 

serves to outline normative voting expectations, exacerbating the differences between 

mainlanders and native Taiwanese ( bensheng ren  本省人 ), who have resided in Taiwan since 

before 1945, in th e cultural context of political elections since the 1990s. 

The southern Fujianese language plays a less important role as a self-selected marker of 

Taiwanese identity in John Tse’s article. The survey he conducted in 1996 and subsequent 

surveys of similar focus bring us the results that on the one hand, the category of “New Taiwanese,” as a supra -ethnic identity, proposed by previous president Lee Teng-hui  李登輝 

(1923 -), was not well established at the time. On the other hand, the most salient factors that 

influenced a person’s sense of being Taiwanese were “born in Taiwan, identifying with Taiwan, 

living in Taiwan, regarding self to be Taiwanese, and listing Taiwan as an ancestral 

birthplace.” 26  It is intriguing to learn that his survey echoes the results o f the survey conducted     

> 26 John Kwock-ping Tse, “Language and a Rising New Identity in Taiwan,” International Journal of Social Language 143 (2000): 151-64.

19 

by the Election Study Center of the National Chengchi University. They both indicate that a growing number of people in Taiwan identify themselves as Taiwanese since 2001 and that they outnumber those who consider themselves both Chinese and Taiwanese since 2008. Based on the new statistics, Hsiau revised his understanding of Taiwanese identity to include democracy as 

an essential element, partially due to China’s rapidly growing economic power. 27 

Why the use of POJ as an identity marker has been neglected in scholarship on the history of Taiwan is complex. The most important reason for this oversight is the fact that the corresponding spoken language of POJ, the southern Fujianese language, is situated in a relatively inferior position in Taiwan. The language had no written form as late as the mid-19 th 

century. In contrast to this, every dominant regime in Taiwan established an official written language for use in the educational and literary fields. Different administrations have institutionalized their accepted written forms in publication. For that reason, POJ has been marginalized as long as the southern Fujianese language has regarded as a non-official means of spoken communication, a situation that continues into the present. This bias is evidenced in the 

literature. For instance, Hsiao’s argument pays less attention to how such a large number of the 

southern Fujianese language speakers, who were illiterate in Japanese and Chinese characters, could communicate in written form and pass the usage of the language on to the next generation. 

To present a decentering history, my dissertation project attempts to fill a gap in the extant research. 28 Specifically, by studying POJ materials, I explore how the narrative of        

> 27 A-Chin Hsiau, “Taiwanese Identity —Island Spirit Rising, ”China Economic Quarterly 14 (2010): 31-34.
> 28 Natalie Zemon Davis, “Decentering History: Local Stories and Cultural Crossings in a Global World,” History and Theory 50 (2011): 188-202. Davis proposes decentering history, to move research topics to the working class, women, communities that defined race and ethnicity, and so on. Her approach heavily impacts my epistemology on writing history in which human society is not composed simply of those central subjects. Cultural interaction can cross the two ends between the center and marginal and between the local and the global, and sometimes blur their boundaries. The representation through a writing system that for a long time was used by the majority of the population of Taiwan, though not overlapping the power centers, is noteworthy for historians to rethink the relationship between the center and non-center.

20 

identities c hanges when it is informed by written reflections from the “Taiwanese” people. Their 

perspectives should be examined over a long period of Taiwanese history since identity is a slowly shifting concept. Taiwanese people have formulated different forms of identity through the long-term use of POJ. On the one hand, the Presbyterian Church has continually promoted POJ literacy within and outside of their religious community. On the other hand, different types 

of identity have been defined by people’s POJ li teracy following its changing relations with the society and the state as responses to social circumstance and national policies. The continuous use of POJ from its introduction by missionaries in the 1860s onward is closely tied up with the development o f identities associated with writing in “Taiwanese” native languages during 

different periods. 

Most significantly, previous scholarship has focused on Chinese and Japanese printed 

records of Taiwan’s past and many of them are either one -sided or lacking long-term observation of the changing society. A full contemplation of the topic of identity formation requires more than merely recognizing that written language is an attribute of identity formation. Rather, we have to face an important yet overlooked fact. POJ materials from the 1860s forward, with the exception of 1969 when POJ was temporarily banned, are an unbroken historical repository of 

written sources in which the “Taiwanese” people are being “Taiwanese” in terms of the use of a 

non-character writing system. 

With a number of theoretical supplements, this dissertation uses three theoretical concepts as the basis of analysis — Pierre Bourdieu’s concepts of “ethnic” identity and the power of “standard” language 29 in a linguistic market, and Benedic t Anderson’s notion of “print    

> 29 Pierre Bourdieu, Language and Symbolic Power: The Economy of Linguistic Exchanges (Cambridge: Polity Press, 1991).

21 

language.” 30 When discussing the criteria of “ethnic,” or regional, identity, Bourdieu formulated the concept of “mental representations.” As he suggests, no matter whether the criteria are defined as dialect or accent, “ethnic,” or region, is merely a name for a classification created by a 

monopoly of power that imposes a “vision of the social world through principles of di -vision.” 31 

Particularly, the power relations constructed through classification are highlighted in the process of the standardization of language use. An educational system plays a decisive role in defining language competence or the capacity to write and speak. As Bourdieu explains, a 

linguistic market is “an objective competition in and through which the legitimate competence can function as linguistic capital, producing a profit of distinction on the occasion of each social 

exchange.” 32 That is to say, speakers lacking the competence are “de facto excluded from the 

social domains or are condemned to sile nce.” 33 Thus the southern Fujianese language taught officially —in national schools —would improve its users’ status in society and politics. The symbolic power given through language competence might strengthen a person’s identity when 

using a legitimate l anguage, as the construction of the ethnic identity of “Taiwanese” responds to 

the education reforms in Taiwan that began in the late 1980s. 

More specifically to a sociolinguistic issue, Anderson underlines the point that the dissemination of languages and dialects forms a simultaneously imagined world in which people learn what happened to their own kind. The sharing of their written languages is not necessarily used within an official broadcasting system because it also extends to communities where the 

written language can be understood. It is the “fatality of linguistic diversity” that makes         

> 30 Benedict Anderson, Imagined Communities: Reflections on the Origin and Spread of Nationalism (London: Verso, 2006).
> 31 Bourdieu, Language and Symbolic Power, 220.
> 32 Ibid., 55.
> 33 Ibid.

22 

linguistic unification impossible, so that particular languages associated with specific territorial units can accidentally generate a reaction against universal l anguage. Anderson’s words advise 

us that the significance of printed language lies not only in its ability to provide a unified field for conversation, but a new permanent , stabilized form in public media. The power of language thus is produced when a community decides how to use the written language as their imagined 

commonality in the centralization of public media. Anderson’s brilliant insight into the power of 

printed language benefits my examination of the historical role played by POJ in the formation 

of “Taiwanese” as an ethnic identity, especially in light of other possible means of phonetic 

transcription such as Chinese characters, Japanese syllables, and even other Roman-letter scripts. 

Through analyzing archival materials, individual collections and conducting interviews in Taiwan, Japan, China, and the United Kingdom, this dissertation aims to provide sociocultural interpretations to the research questions and issues. My source materials will include missionary and individual diaries, memoirs, newspapers, gazettes, religious texts, textbooks, medical references, Confucian classics, church administrative reports, government regulations, and films. The majority of them are either written in POJ or spoken in the southern Fujianese language. The wide range of materials to be transliterated and investigated will surely provide a rich and 

extensive account of POJ’s influence on Taiwanese identity construction. 

A summary of archival sources is as follows: The Presbyterian Church Records (1860-1960); Minutes and reports of the Foreign Mission Committee (FMCPCC, 1860-1960); George 

Leslie Mackay’s diary (1844 -1901); Minutes of the Presbyterian Church in Taiwan (1912-1942); Minutes of the Presbyterian Church in Southern Taiwan (1931-1956); The Presbyterian Church of England Foreign Mission Archives (PCEFMA, 1847-1950); The Messenger (1850-1947); The Chinese Recorder and Missionary Journal (1867-1941); Taiwan Youth (1920-1922); Journal of 23 

Language (1909-1931); Taiwan Church News (TCN, 1885-2002), southern Fujianese language films (1950s to 1980s); Archive of Taiwan Memory. 

In addition to archival materials, I am indebted to a number of Presbyterian Church elder pastors and presbyters who provided original copies of POJ sources from their repositories and conversed with me about the experience of using POJ across different political regimes. 

***** 

This introduction will conclude with brief descriptions of the four core chapters of this dissertation. The chapters are organized thematically. Chapters One and Two focus on POJ 

users’ religious identity and the ways they used POJ as a linguistic tool t o increase literacy first in the church and later in westernized schools and hospitals. In Chapters Three and Four, I analyze the transformation of POJ literacy into a symbol of Taiwanese ethnic and national identity as the POJ community expanded beyond the church. Since then, POJ users have not only promoted POJ literacy but also have encouraged people to use POJ as an expression of their 

“Taiwanese” identities. POJ was still used within the church, but POJ literacy spread to non -religious circles whose members used it as a marker of their membership in various ethno-linguistic, political and ultimately national groups. 

Chapter One explores POJ’s early relationship with evangelicalism, print culture, and 

imperial power in Taiwan. The European Presbyterian mission, supported by British imperial power, created the earliest POJ literacy circles as a prerequisite for becoming Christian in Taiwan after the 1860s. This chapter focuses on how the early writing systems in Taiwan were closely associated with Christianity. The Dutch regime brought the Sinkan writing system into Taiwan in the 17 th century. To effectively civilize plains aborigines, the Dutch ministers translated religious knowledge so that they could educate the Formosan peoples in Western 24 

culture and religion. This writing system was not in continuous use one hundred and fifty years after the Dutch left the island in 1662. The Presbyterian Church missionaries arrived in Taiwan in the 1860s as a result of the Treaty of Tianjin (1858). Following the example of their successful missions in Amoy and Shantou, China, this group of evangelists decided to use POJ as the main written language to teach Christianity to Taiwanese people who were illiterate in Chinese characters. POJ enabled its users to access knowledge written in POJ and classical Chinese, and to the world beyond local neighbourhoods via POJ newspapers. In the first several decades of the Presbytery Church mission era, POJ writing and reading communities defined the legions of Taiwanese inhabitants illiterate in Chinese. Before POJ was disseminated, they were a group of people who spoke  southern Fujianese language  but who had no common written 

medium of communication. Within their communities, they shared thoughts, ideas, and reli gious 

teachings, and thus became aware of each other through POJ publications. With the assistance 

of a western movable -type press, POJ publications were circulated around the island and to other 

areas where the southern Fujianese language was used. Broa d circulation of POJ publications 

did not necessarily lead to the formation of “Taiwanese” identity in this period because POJ was 

only used in the Christian community. At this stage, POJ literacy was not associated with the 

sense of belonging to a “Taiwa nese” ethnicity. POJ helped to create a linguistic and religious 

identity for people who identified themselves with the ability to read and write the Taiwanese 

Fujianese language. 

Chapter Two  explains POJ’s role as a language of Christian and general scho ol 

education. It also discusses the role that POJ played as a language for western medical studies 

and training from the late Qing through the end of the Japanese colonial rule. The significance 

of using POJ shifted from a requirement for baptism into a  linguistic device associated with 25 

school education and medical study. Following its philosophy of school education, the Presbyterian Church in Taiwan founded schools to replicate its successful educational mission work from Shantou and Amoy, China. Moreover, the previous achievement of medical missions in China also motivated the Church to open clinics and hospitals in Taiwan. Church hospitals were thus established but they quickly realized they were short staffed. Taiwanese people who showed an interest in working with hospitals often had no knowledge of Chinese characters or other written languages. Since it was easy to teach the students POJ, the missionary doctors decided to use POJ to conduct medical training classes. POJ literacy created a new route to 

professionalization for the Church’s students. It also enabled church -affiliated school attendants to study Chinese texts and a variety of western subjects. 

Chapter Three  researches how the POJ community expanded under Japanese colonialism. 

Duri ng the colonial period, the use of POJ increased beyond non -Christian educational circles 

and became associated with a distinct Taiwanese ethnicity and culture. The expansion was a 

response to the Japanese government’s colonial policy. More specially, it  first reflected Japan’s 

promotion of POJ and the southern Fujianese language. In order to further their communication 

with Taiwanese people, Taiwan Sōtokufu, the highest Japanese authority in Taiwan, encouraged 

Japanese police and prison officers to lear n the southern Fujianese language for daily 

conversation. POJ was selected to write this local language. Some Japanese educators thus 

promoted the use of POJ in Taiwanese - Japanese dictionaries and magazines. Information 

written in POJ newspaper was eve n translated and published in Japanese journals. 

Secondly, the POJ community expanded in response to the shifting Japanese assimilation 

policy. Colonial officials hoped that Taiwanese people would become “Japanese” by studying the Japanese language and culture. However, for the Empire’s leaders, being “Japanese” was not 26 

equivalent to becoming Japanese citizens. Title No. 63, a law promulgated by the Empire, shifted the assimilation policy and excluded the Taiwanese from making laws to help govern their own land. Some Taiwanese intellectuals tried hard to repeal the law while others resisted it by working to develop an independent Taiwanese culture. Some elites developed a sense of 

Taiwanese ethnic identity as a way to symbolically resist Japan’s assimilation policy. A group of 

elite started to promote the difference between being Japanese and being Taiwanese through the work of the Taiwanese Cultural Association and other private organizations. They promoted the adoption of POJ as a Taiwanese written language for producing Taiwanese literature so that a distinct Taiwanese culture could emerge. This formation of a “Taiwanese identity” was not only 

a byproduct of colonial policy but also a response to intellectual movements across China, Taiwan, and Japan in the 1920s. It was also influenced by the worldwide atmosphere of post-war self-determination. The freedom to write POJ in public spaces had inspired users to 

construct a “Taiwanese identity” and an understanding of “Taiwanese” culture in POJ essays and 

literary works. 

By examining the multilayered contexts of POJ literacy, Chapter Four elaborates on two interconnected processes: ethnic identity formation eventually creating the impetus to demand the authorization of POJ in national education, and the inclusion of POJ in public education re-enhancing the sociocultural configuration of Taiwanese identity through a language hierarchy in which Mandarin and mother tongues and their writing systems are emphasized to different degrees in social and school use.  This chapter  investigates the process of ch anging POJ from a 

forbidden language to securing its inclusion in national school education in the post -colonial era 

from 1945 through the 1990s. During the process, the use of POJ evolved into a nationally 

recognized marker of “Taiwanese” identity and an  authorized language tool for teaching mother 27 

tongues in public school. All of the above changes demonstrate that a national consciousness of 

“Taiwanese” identity in the 1970s involved a negotiation with the R.O.C.’s national language 

policy. 

The R.O.C. government enforced Mandarin Chinese as the national language and suppressed other languages and writing including the POJ Bible and the southern Fujianese language. In order to legitimize the newly-established regime, the Nationalists drew a clear-cut distinction between the national language and dialects. Implementing language standardization created a language hierarchy in Taiwanese society. Using Mandarin was compulsory in school education and media broadcasting. Speaking Mandarin was also considered superior to speaking any other language in Taiwan. 

The 1970s sociopolitical events were landmarks in the history of Taiwanization. The 

Presbyterian Church’s immediate response when the KMT came to power was to adapt POJ to 

the Mandarin Phonetic Symbols so that POJ could coexist with the national phonetic writing system next to Chinese characters. In response to Chiang Kai-shek’s regime’s loss of seats in the 

United Nations, the Church announced the Declaration on Human Rights to claim Taiwanese independence in the 1970s. Following this liberal trend, Taiwan was enveloped in a series of debates about Taiwanese literature and ideology and movements. The most important one was the mother-tongue movement. Taiwanese activists argued that mother tongues (southern Fujianese language, Hakka, and aboriginal languages) should be included in the curricula of compulsory education. The R.O.C. accepted their request and followed up by including native language classes in several county-level elementary schools in the late 1980s. 

Subsequently, a revised POJ scheme, as a system of phonetic alphabet, was recognized for use in national-school teaching. Learning POJ to enable mother tongues education in public 28 

school has given student users different identities from those who learned POJ through the promotions of the Church and other channels of social organizations. Under the policy of promoting Mandarin, Taiwan is a multilingual society in which the phenomena digraphia and diglossia occur because its students are taught to use languages hierarchically. 

My  dissertation is not an attempt to comprehensively analyze the historical development 

of “Taiwanese identity” in Taiwan. Instead, I examine the history of how using POJ was 

involved in the process of identity for mation for people in Taiwan. POJ evolved from a religious 

training tool for Taiwanese people who were illiterate in characters in the mid -19 th  century to an 

educational device for promoting mother tongues after the Chinese character literacy rate 

increase d up to 98% through the Nationalist Mandarin language policy. 34  In the process, the 

multi -layered identities attached to POJ remind us of the roles that POJ plays in shaping and 

reshaping identities in Taiwan, the ways that POJ users participated in awaken ing the sense of 

being “Taiwanese,” and the changes that POJ language education made in strengthening an 

established identity. 

A person’s choice to use POJ, instead of other scripts, is only one aspect of many that 

influence her sense of identity. Many POJ users use multiple languages to express their sense of identity and their understanding of events in Taiwan. Messages carried in a written language for daily practice help us to understand the ways people define themselves in relation to others. Hence, people, messages, events, education, and language politics are key elements highlighted 

in my dissertation to examine a number of sociocultural contexts in which POJ users’ social 

status gradually increased from the mid-19 th century on as POJ was adopted and endorsed by elite users.  

> 34 Statistical Yearbook of the Interior, Literacy Rate 2013 , sowf.moi.gov.tw/stat/year/list.htm (accessed 27 August 2014).

29 

Chapter 1: Evangelicalism and Missionary Print Culture, 1865-1895 

From the 1860s to 1895, POJ served two functions in Taiwanese society. First, it was a prerequisite for baptism into the British Presbyterian Church and a critical means through which religious knowledge was spread to Taiwanese people. Specifically, POJ was used to transliterate the Gospel into Taiwanese native languages, including the Southern Fujianese language, Hakka, and aboriginal languages. The Church also used it to publish a newspaper in the native languages. Furthermore, missionaries used it to teach Chinese script to converts and church workers. Missionaries encouraged Christian POJ users to study Chinese script transcribed in POJ so that learning POJ could help converts access other texts. The early promotion of POJ should be understood in the context of how European Presbyterian missionaries, supported by British imperial power, bolstered evangelicalism by teaching people POJ and encouraging them to participate in missionary print culture through reading and writing for a church publication. 

Native Taiwanese have not been able to write about their homeland for very long. In order to capture how the island was imagined before its native inhabitants could write, this chapter begins with an account of how outsiders of Taiwan named and mapped the island. Most of the early Taiwanese writers were closely associated with Christianity. In the 17 th century (1624-1662), Dutch ministers invented the Sinkan script, a writing system based on the Roman alphabet, for the plains aboriginal people in southern Taiwan so they could have a common written medium to facilitate Bible study. The Sinkan romanization was not continuously used after the early 19 th century for unknown reasons. 

Two hundred years after the Dutch left Taiwan in 1662, the British Presbyterian Church arrived in the wake of the Treaty of Tianjin (1858). In the 1860s, they copied the successful 30 

mission model used to develop POJ in Amoy, China, to introduce POJ to Taiwanese Christians. The Church required Taiwanese converts to learn POJ before they could be baptized because many Taiwanese natives were illiterate in Chinese script and other written languages. 35 Converts learned POJ so that they could read the Scripture and church-disseminated brochures and booklets at home or with the aid of a dictionary. Having the congregations read by themselves lightened the burden of travel back and forth to the plains and mountain areas for clergy. 

POJ also enabled the British missionaries to transfer knowledge to the native inhabitants via printed sources. POJ functioned symbolically to (re)produce knowledge in a written format through the practices of transliterating Chinese and western epistemology, learning Chinese script and culture, and circulating church publications. In fact, Taiwanese converts were not the only people using POJ to study texts written in other languages. Everyone in Taiwan who could speak the southern Fujianese language could use POJ to improve their access to written knowledge. In order to effectively disseminate religious information, the Church imported the first western movable-type press to Taiwan. Since 1885 they have printed the Taiwan Church News to create a public forum for sharing information about the Church. Christian POJ readers became writers as they participated in the life of the Church by writing essays for the newspaper. 

The number of POJ users increased not only because learning POJ secured their access to Chinese studies, but also because the Presbyterian missionaries were supported by British imperial power. The power relations between the local government and the British authorities  

> 35 Literacy in nineteenth-century Taiwanese society referred to the ability to read and write in Chinese before the introduction of POJ. For Chinese immigrants and Taiwanese natives, except some plains aborigines who used Sinkan romanization until the first two decades of the century, knowledge acquisition and production were customarily recognized through the system of Chinese script and evaluated by the civil service examinations. Illiteracy in the Chinese context traditionally meant those who did not know the first thing about Chinese writing, nor reading. This definition, however, changed when literacy in POJ made knowledge and Chinese written information accessible. Even so, the use of POJ in its early phase was limited to a small group of people, namely, Christians in Taiwan, and overall as not recognized by the majority of Taiwanese residents, particularly Chinese scholars.

31 

assured Christians —and thus POJ users —that they could access “benefits” associated with their 

religious participation including safeguards and advantages in their interactions with local officials. The Presbyterian missionaries further demonstrated the social power of becoming a Christian to the Taiwanese natives when they used their status as British citizens to broker the non-violent takeover of Taiwan after China ceded it to Japan at the end of the First Sino Japanese War. The missionaries approached the Japanese Army on behalf of their congregants. They asked the inv ading army to leave the people and their property alone in exchange for the people’s 

cooperation. After the Army agreed to their request, the number of people who were willing to become Christian converts increased notably. By 1895, supported by the Treaty of Tianjing, the 

Church provided political “benefits” to attract Taiwanese converts. Christian POJ users had 

access to political protection and preferential treatment in legal matters. 

Understanding “Taiwan” through the Lens of Outsiders 

Before Koxinga (Zheng Chenggong, 1624-1662) and Chinese immigrants on a large scale retreated from the mainland to the isolated island after the mid-17 th century, “Taiwan”  臺灣  was 

an island where  Chinese, Japanese, Americans, Europeans, and other worldwide sojourners 

visited or stayed for residential, commercial, religious, political, and research purposes, or 

simply for pleasure.  36  Travelers recorded their experiences in different languages, and in the 

process they shaped how the borders of “Taiwan” were envisioned a nd how people thought of 

the island. Chinese visitors and foreigners created a great volume of travel writings and official 

documents about “Taiwan” in Chinese and other languages before POJ was used to discuss the      

> 36 John E. Wills, “The Seventeenth -Century Transformation―Taiwan under the Dutch and Cheng Regime,” in
> Murray A. Rubinstein, ed. Taiwan
> ―A New History (New York: M. E. Sharpe, 2006), 84 -106.

32 

island. Foreign contexts shaped represe ntations of “Taiwan” in maps and travel writings before 

POJ became a communication medium for native Taiwanese. 

Foreigners who learned about Taiwan by studying maps gained symbolic information about the island. 37 Symbolic depictions of a place or city are generally processed through linguistic descriptions and visual representations. Learning from maps and stories involves the use of imagination, because map or text readers often have no real experience of a place or concrete ideas about the spatial and cultural configuration of it. The Dutch approach to mapping Formosa had a great impact on how the island was later represented by cartographers. Formosa 

has not always been drawn as a single “yam” oriented on a vertical axis. Instead, as with other 

island chains, most of the atlases by Dutch captains and Spanish merchants by the 1720s pictured Formosa as a horizontal archipelago because of their use of shared Formosan maps. 38 Although maps presented an imagined contour of this small island, the lack of further details about its culture and society called for textual elaboration, especially in its various names (Maps 1, 2, and 3). 

The names used for “Taiwan” demonstrate how it was identified by translators in 

transliterations of the southern Fujianese language. People named Taiwan by discussing it in terms of its location relative to other places. Its names were also influenced by the fact that people discussed Taiwan in multiple different languages. No matter which name (including        

> 37 Guy Denhiere and Michel Denis, "The Processing of Texts Describing Spatial Configurations," in Knowledge Acquisition from Text and Pictures , eds. Heinz Mandl and Joel R. Levin (Elsevier, 1989), 249-61.
> 38 Kaim Ang, "Yam-Shaped Taiwan: Study of 16 th and 17 th Century Taiwan Maps," in New Perspectives on Geographic Space: International Symposium on Historical Cartography (Taipei: National Palace Museum, 2008)

33 

“Liuqiu  琉球 ,”  39  “Beigang  北港 ,”  40  “Dongning  東寧 ,”  41  and “Dongfan  東番 ”) was used for the 

island in Chinese texts by the mid -18 th  century, it was necessary to look into information across 

textual descriptions and the culture of cartography at the time the maps were released for  further 

validation of the names. For instance, “Liuqiu” referred only to the northern part of Taiwan, 

Keelung  雞籠 , as “Tyowan”  42  (sounding like Tâi -oan i n the southern Fujianese language  and 

Taiwan in Mandarin Chinese) indicated a specific area of souther n Taiwan during the Dutch 

period.  Cross -language references demonstrate an interesting phenomenon specifically that 

“Formosa” 43  was not the only name for the island in Westerners' travel notes. 44  Instead, often in 

their voyages travelers called Taiwan “ Le queo pequeno” (sounding similar to Sió -liû -kiû in  

> 39

See Shen Shuzhou's  申叔舟  (Shin Suk -ju , 1417 -1475)  Chronicle of the Countries of Eastern Asia  海東諸國紀 

(1471). Ang has proposed an explanation that China had known Taiwan and Liuqiu (Okinawa now) in the Ming 

period. To distinguish the former from the latter, Chinese people called Formosa Xiao Liuqiu  小琉球  and Okinawa 

Da Liuqiu  大琉球 .

> 40

Formosa under the Dutch (Chapter 1) and Voyages et aventures du Capitaine Ripon aux Grandes Indes 1617-1627 

(pp.122) mentions that Chinese people called the island “Beigang”  北港 . The name is used in the Chinese context, 

too. In the  History of the Ming Dynasty , Mount Keelong is stated to be located on the northeastern side of Penghu 

Islet; thus, it is also called “Beigang.” Even so, “Beigang” also referred to Taiwan, an area of southeastern Penghu 

Islet in Gu Zuyu's  顧祖禹  (1631 -1692)  Notes on Reading the Geograph y Treatises in the Histories  讀史方輿紀要 .

It seems that in the early Qing period, Chinese scholars used the same place name to refer to different areas of 

Taiwan.  

> 41

Taiwan wen xian cong kan (Historiography of Taiwan) records that Koxinga's son Zheng Jing  鄭經  changed the 

name of Taiwan to Dongning because its previous pronunciation, Tyowan, in the southern Fujianese language 

sounded inauspicious. However, later when Zheng's regime in Taiwan was overthrown, the place was returned to 

being called Taiwan. Dongning  is also seen in  A Map of the Myriad Countries of the World , printed by Matteo Ricci 

in 1602, and  Illustrated Sino -Japanese Encyclopedia,  complied by Japanese doctor  Terajima Ryōan  in  1713.  

> 42

Chen Kan's  陳侃  (1489 -1507)  Records to Liuqiu  使琉球錄  (1534) and Zheng Shungong's  鄭舜功  (n.d.)  A Mirror 

of  Japan  日本一鑑  (1567 -1572) .

> 43

An appellation from a non-Chinese language instead fixes the very first name of Taiwan —“Formosa” (meaning “beautiful island” in Portuguese) in its history and post -colonial school textbooks, though no existing textual material directly proves this word slipping out of the mouth of a Portuguese sailor. The latest research supports the notion that this Western name originated from a Spanish captain. Kaim Ang, "Portuguese and "Formosa"--with a Discussion of the Shipwreck in 1582," Historical Monthly 220 (2006): 72-79.  

> 44

Formosa was not a name circulated by Chinese travel writers, but on the Chinese mainland among English readers from the 19th to 20th century. For instance, the English periodical, The Chinese Recorder, published in Fuzhou, Shanghai, Canton, and Hong Kong expressed the fact that Formosa was a familiar name in Romanized publications. Soon after the news that Taiwan had been ceded to Japan was released to the Taiwanese people, the newspaper (June 1895) wrote that "Formosa declared independent by the governor," despite the use of Taiwan in the Treaty of Shimonoseki in which Japan formally took jurisdiction of Taiwan. 34 

southern Fujianese language and Xiao Liuqiu  小琉球  in Mandarin Chinese ). 45  In addition, 

“Tangarruan,” a transliteration of “Tang -hoan” in southern Fujianese language (dongfan  東番  in 

Mandarin Chinese), was anothe r case which demonstrates the mixed use of names among 

Chinese and Western travelers. Coincidentally, Spanish priest Martín de Rada's (1533 -1578) 

naming of “Taiwan” as “Tangarruan” in his 1575 voyage echoes the Chinese travel notes 

Dongfan Ji  東番記  (An Acco unt of  Eastern  Barbarians ). 46 

Scholars have yet to determine when the name “Taiwan” was first used to refer to the entire island. The name “Taiwan” was used in different types of Chinese transcriptions as early 

as the late Ming dynasty. The Qing emperor incorporated Taiwan into his empire’s domain by officially creating the administrative unit “Taiwan -fu”  臺灣府  (Taiwan prefecture) in 1684. 47  In 

the same year, the Zhuluo  諸羅  county governor of Taiwan, Ji Qiguang  季麒光  (1634 -1702), 

wrote that the pirate Yan Siqi  嚴思齊  (1589 -1625) had occupied Taiwan during the Wanli  萬曆 

period of the Ming Dynasty. Subsequently, the island was called Taiwan. 48 

Historian Emma Teng’s Chinese -language perspective on the travel writings and illustrations of Taiwan from 1683 through 1895 a nd Laura Hostetler’s understanding of 

cartography in early Modern China are marked by gaps associated with the process of imagining 

“Taiwan” via maps and texts from non -Chinese source materials. 49 Both Hostetler and Teng                

> 45 Ang (2006) ascribed the inaccuracy to the merchants and navigators of Zhangzhou and Quanzhou, Fujian province. Notwithstanding the danger and illegality, it was a route back and forth for Macao , Amoy, and Japan for
> trading merchandise by water dated as early as the 15 th century. Due to the tradition of sailing through t he regular
> course, a pile of travel notes and merchant records correspond to the fact of calling Taiwan “Liuqiu” 琉球 .
> 46 See Dongfan Ji (An Account of the Eastern Barbarians )by the Chinese scholar Chen Di (1541-1617).
> 47 Taiwan became a part of the Qing Empire's map in 1684.
> 48 Historiography of Taiwan, 73,
> 49 Emma Teng, Taiwan’s Imagined Geography: Chinese Colonial Travel Writing and Pictures, 1683 -1895
> (Cambridge: Harvard University Asia Center, 2004); Laura Hostetler, Qing Colonial Enterprise: Ethnography and Cartography in Early Modern China (Chicago and London: The University of Chicago Press, 2001)

35 

concentrated on historicizing Qing Empire building and the construction of the discrepancies 

between the political center of the Empire and its remote provinces. Drawing on Edward Said’s notion of “imaginative geography” and Benedict Anderson’s concept of “imagined communities,” Teng devot es her discussion to Chinese travel writings, 1697-1847. She argues 

that the changing conceptions of "Taiwan" in the imagination of the Qing literati’s travel notes were significant to understand the Qing Empire’s imagined expansion beyond the seas. These writings were essential to the process of establishing the juxtapositions, the center versus the borderland and the civilized versus the uncivilized, which were the key to defining the Empire. Hostetler applies a similar approach to her analyses of the Qing state’s choice to use Western 

cartography to demarcate its territory and define its relative position in the world since the technique was universally readable. 50 They created representations of “Taiwan” because of 

power relations between themselves and non-Western nations. 

Early Writing Systems and Christianity 

Sinkan Manuscripts 

By 1684, the year Taiwan was included in the map of the Qing Empire, the island’s 

settlers were Spanish, Dutch, Chinese, and mostly aboriginal tribes who had no written language, except for those who lived in the areas of Sinkan  新港 .51  Current research indi cates that the 

Sinkan Manuscripts  (X inkang wenshu  新港文書 ), a collection of Sinkan romanization created in      

> 50 Hostetler, Qing Colonial Enterprise: Ethnography and Cartography in Early Modern China , 23.
> 51 According to George Barclay, the number of inhabitants of Taiwan by the 16 th century was only a few thousand, but it experienced great growth soon after Koxinga arrived with new migrants who moved to Taiwan. The population was up to more than two million by 1895 ( George W. Barclay’s Colonial Development and Population in Taiwan (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1954).

36 

the 17 th century, are the earliest written records by plains islanders. 52 A Dutch missionary group established the first Western-style education in Taiwan to teach plains aborigines the Bible by using the Sinkan script. 53 The missionaries struggled to communicate in Taiwan’s multilingual 

environment. Not only were inhabitants from different linguistic groups unable to understand 

each other’s speech, but a lso some people from different subgroups who shared the same 

language could not understand each other’s pronunciations of specific words. 54 This language environment spurred the missionaries to create a shared writing system that could be used by people who spoke different languages. Their larger goal was to create a script to write a  

> 52

Henning Klöter claims that the earliest r omanized script for the community of southern Fujianese language speakers, titled Doctrina christina en letra y lengua china (The Christian Doctrine in the Chinese Script and Tongue ) date s "back to the 16 th century. " Klöter, in addition, asserts that another anonymous manuscript that transliterates the Fujianese languages, titled Diccionario  de la  lengua Chincheo  que  contien e los  vocablos tambien simples  que  compuestos , con los  caracteres  generales y peculiares  aquesto dialecto , segun lorden  del  alfabeto  españoly las cinco tonadas chineses (Dictionary of the Zhangzhou language, containing simple and compound words, with peculiar characters of this language, in Spanish alphabetical order and the five Chinese tones) most probably dates from 1609. We do not know of any direct evidence that demonstrates that these romanizations were used in Taiwan, since the southern Fujianese language was spoken worldwide within Chinese diaspora communities. Hopefully, future studies will bring to light any and all possible sources for clarifying how Spanish visitors could communicate with Taiwan's plains aborigines in writing. See Henning Klöter, "The History of Peh-oe-Ji," in 2002 International Conference of Taiwan's Peh-Oe-Ji Teaching and Studies (Taidung: National Taitung University, 2002), 1-2. In addition, t he Spanish regime (1626-1642) in Formosa overlapped some years of the Dutch occupation and they may have taught a particular Roman alphabet orthography to plains natives, but no extant texts have convincingly proved this point of view . According to Nakamura Takashi 's "Spanish Enlightenment Campaign in Taiwan in the Seventeenth Century" ( Japanese Culture 20: 25-61), Rev. Esquivel published 

Vocabularino de la lengua de los Indios Tanchui en la Isla Hermosa (Vocabularies of Danshui Languages) and 

Cristiana en la lengua de los Indios Tanchui en la Isla Hermosa (Catholic Doctrines in Danshui Languages). However, we lack extant textual evidence to support his statement.  

> 53

Albrecht Herport (1641-1680), who traveled to Taiwan with Kommandeur Joan van der Laen (a Dutch general), in the second section of his voyage titled “Formosanen,” jotted down that the Dutch established a church and converted a number of plains residents to Christianity. He noticed that a pastor by the name of Hambruch conducted Christian teaching in a type of Latin letter system in which the Bible was translated into the Sinkan language. Herport believed that this was a good indication that Formosa’s Christian children could accept education. See Chia-jaan Lee, Shiqi Shiba Shiji Ouzhou Wenxian Dangan Zhi Fuermosha Wenxue Kao (a Scholarly Research of European Literatures & Archives Concerning Formosan Literature in the 17th-18th Centuries) (Taipei: Tangshan chuban she, 2007), 115.  

> 54

William Campbell, Formosa under the Dutch: Described from Contemporary Records (London: Kegan Paul, 1903), 305. 37 

catechism that could be used around several villages of plains aborigines who spoke the Sinkan language, or Siraya  西拉雅 , in the Sinkan  she  社 and its contiguous  she. 55 

The Sinkan Manuscripts demonstrate that the Sinkan script was used in formal documents and private records by regional aboriginal users. The 19 th century collection of Sinkan Manuscripts at the National Taiwan Museum suggests that native inhabitants used the Sinkan romanization alone or a mixture of Sinkan script and Chinese characters to record land contracts. Some of these deeds were also accompanied by hand-drawn maps. 56 The script was also used in writing village administrative rules and daily notes, including price lists for goods and a booklet with Chinese translations of aboriginal surnames (Fig. 1). 

It is important to note that plains aborigines did not have to have a writing system in order to from an ethnic identity that differentiated them from other groups. Ann Heylen, a linguist who studies Taiwanese languages, asserts that the Sinkan Manuscripts show that the 

Sinkan peoples’ identity was defined against the Han people from the mainland through the use 

of land contracts. 57 Resistance might be demonstrated through writing, but claiming that Sinkan  

> 55

Such as Soulang, Mattau, Teopan, Tifulukan, Taffakan, Bakloan, and Tefurang. In fact, Dutch missionaries needed a common language to facilitate communication with the natives. Grounded in the layout of Formula of Christianity , approved for printing by the Amsterdam Classis in 1650, the Dutch church in Amsterdam requested that Formosan converts learned the Dutch language. A proviso, attached to the approval, states that the Formula 

must be published "in the Dutch language alone, and also Formosan and Dutch in parallel columns." Thus, the evangelical givers and receivers shared Dutch language as a common language in the long run. Soon after that, a letter to the Governor-General and Council of India from N. de Hooghe implied that the Governor-General believed that teaching plains aborigines the Dutch language would be feasible since the island had no united language at that time. Before teaching the Dutch language, the use of a mixed language and multi languages hampered missionary work because it was impossible for a minister could not master all the languages that circulated in southern Taiwan. 

See William Campbell, Formosa under the Dutch: Described from Contemporary Records , 251, 182, and 196.  

> 56

Ornithologist Joseph Beal Steere (1842-1940) from Michigan, U.S.A., found about thirty pieces of Sinkan 

Manuscripts during his travels around Formosa in 1874. He was surprised that the teaching in Sinkan writing had been successfully used to transcribe different languages. His findings were associated with property transfers and mortgages from 1723 through 1800. See J.B. Steere, Formosa and Its Inhabitants (Taipei: Academia Sinica, Institute of Taiwan History (Preparatory Office), 2002 reprint), 120.  

> 57

Ann Heylen, "Helan yuyan zhengce yu yuanzhumin shizi nengli de yijin, 1624-1662 (Language Studies under the Church in Dutch-Controlled Formosa-Dutch Language Policy and the Literacy of Native People, 1624-1662)," 

Taipei Historical Documents 125 (1998): 81-119. 38 

writing was the natives’ proclamation of their unique ethnicity is farfetched. In the Sinkan 

Manuscripts, not every document was recorded in two languages. The majority of the texts were written in Sinkan languages with no juxtaposition of Chinese characters. 58 That is, they were written for members of a specific writing community and the content of the texts might have had nothing to do with the Han community. They do not prove "resistance" to the Han, as Heylen assumed. Adoption of a non-Chinese writing system can scarcely be attributed to fighting with outland races since aborigines were the main residents of the island in the 17 th century. Whenever indigenous landowners traded with Han immigrants, written records were made in each of the parties' native language. This practice protected both signers in a fixed format and ensured that both parties could understand the documents they were signing. In addition, so far we have not discovered textual evidence that clearly shows the Sinkan peoples using the romanization to distinguish themselves from outsiders. 

The use of Sinkan romanization was a distinctive feature of religious identity that was given to the native aborigines by a foreign colonial power. Religious authority was granted to the missionaries because their empires had military supremacy in Taiwan. Evidence of the relationship between proselytizing missionaries and politicians could be found as early as the Dutch rule. 59 The first Dutch missionary, Rev. Georgius Candidius  干治士  (1597 -1647), 

requested that the third Formosan governor, Pieter Nuyts (1627 -1629), intervene on behalf of the 

evangelists. Candidius discovered that the plains aborigines in Sinkan accepted his residency 

because they wanted protection from the Dutch mili tary. The military protected Sinkan's 

inhabitants from attack by neighboring aborigines in the Madou  she  麻豆 社. The Sinkan natives,       

> 58 Paul Jen-kuei Li, Studies of Sinkang Manuscripts (Taipei: Institute of Linguistics, Academia Sinica, 2010), 6.
> 59 Changhua Lin, "The Founder of the Dutch Reformed Church in Formosa‒Rev. Georgius Candidius, " The Messenger (2008): 35-41.

39 

who were inferior in weapons and numbers, felt constantly threatened by the Madou natives. If Dutch people lived nearby, the natives and Dutch settlers benefited since the Dutch government guarded its people against disturbances from nearby natives. Based on his observation, Candidius urged Nuyts to visit Sinkan. Nuyts aided the missionaries by guaranteeing the Sinkan natives that he would protect them from other tribes as long as they converted to Christianity. Furthermore, the Governor-General's office sent gifts to Sinkan, including meat, beverages, and cloth, as rewards for conversion under the name Candidius. After that, in his daily notes, 

Candidius “complained” about his business of teaching day and night to cater to everyone's work 

schedule. Formosan Christians were secured by the Dutch as long as they were willing to read the Lord's Prayer and catechism in Sinkan script. Sinkan script users were clearly distinguished from non-Sinkan script users in Formosan society. 

The Sinkan romanization was not used in Taiwan after the 1830s, one hundred and 

seventy years after the Dutch’s occupation (1624 -1662) ended. 60 Recent research has not explained why Sinkan script disappeared several decades into the 19 th century. The next missionary group came in after the Qing Empire lost the Second Opium War (1856-1860). The Chinese were forced to compensate the victorious countries in the Treaty of Tianjin of 1858. Article 11 stated that British subjects could frequent the Taiwan port (now Anping Harbor  安平 

港 in Tainan), so British missionaries enjoyed privileges and considerable advantages over the 

islanders since the port was al ready opened to them for trade. Under the treaty’s protection, the 

first Scottish doctor -missionary, James  Laidlaw  Maxwell  馬雅各  (1836 -1921), a graduate of    

> 60 Paul Jen-kuei Li, “Preliminary Interpretation of the 15 Recently Uncovered Sinkan Manuscripts,” Studies of Taiwan History 9:2 (2002): 2-5. Although the last piece of Sinkan script is dated in 1818, Li suggests that it might take one or two more decades for stopping using a written language. Also see Li, Studies of Sinkang Manuscripts , 1.

40 

Edinburgh University, settled in Taiwan-fu (the capital of Taiwan, now Tainan) in 1865, two hundred years after the Dutch left. He brought another romanization system, POJ. Benefiting from the treaty and the rise of British imperial power, the British Presbyterian Church took advantage of a foreign-introduced romanization to conduct evangelism in the 1860s. 

POJ’s Origin and Its Relationship with Formosa 

Formosa was not the first place where POJ was used to help spread Christianity. POJ was used in Amoy and Malacca before it was formally introduced in the first newspaper in Formosa by Rev. Thomas Barclay  巴克禮  (1849 -1935). Linguistic studies concur that Rev. 

Walter Henry Medhurst  麥都思  (1796 -1857) was the first writer to use POJ to transcribe the 

Fujianese language. His work launched the use of POJ among the Chinese communities of early 

Fujianese emigrants in  Malacca and Singapore. 61  Restricted by Qing law, foreigners were not 

allowed to form a mission in China’s territories or learn Chinese languages from the natives 

before the Treaty of Wangxia was signed in 1844. Before the treaty, the most convenient 

appr oach to learning Chinese languages was to reside in countries with large Chinese diasporas. 

Medhurst therefore studied Mandarin Chinese and the Fujianese language in Malacca. 62 

Regardless of the ban on foreigners’ printing in Chinese, he chose to have his  first Fujianese 

language dictionary,  Dictionary of the Hokkeen Dialect of the Chinese Language,  published in            

> 61 See Fangyuan Dong, "The Historical Positions of Taiwanese Romanization," Taiwan Wen Xian 55:2 (2004): 289-324 and Ann Heylen, "The Historical Meaning of the Taiwan Romanisation," in The 1st Conference for Young Scholars on Taiwanese Romanization (Tainan: Kailang, 2008).
> 62 Wei-Jen Hong, Annotated Bibilography of Taiwan Historica--Language (Taipei: National Taiwan Library, 1996), 198. For more about the prohibition against foreign mission by Yongzheng emperor, please refer to Guo
> Chengkang’s History of Yuan and Qing Dynasties (Taipei: Wunan Books Inc., 2002), 498. After the James Flint Incident in 1759, the Qianlong emperor disallowed native Chinese to be taught foreigners Chinese languages. Therefore, for later missionaries, it was very difficult to hire a Chinese teacher in China and purchase language textbooks (See Guangzhou Daily , July 30, 2013).

41 

Macao by the East India Company Press in 1832. 63 The layout demonstrates that this dictionary was codified for English, Mandarin Chinese, and Fujianese language users (Figs. 3 and 4). 64 

The relationship between Medhurst's system and the previous Sinkan romanized writing systems warrants discussion. Referring to Yoshihide Murakami's article, linguistic scholars Wei-Jen Hong and Henning Klöter argue that Medhurst's dictionary was not based on the earlier romanization from Dictionario de la lengua Chincheo (The Fokien Dialect Dictionary) codifed by the Spanish in 1609, which was mentioned in footnote 18. 65 As for the connection with the romanized system in the Sinkan Manuscipts devised by the Dutch preists, Medhurst admitted that since he had never been to China before 1832, he did not have access to the Dutch documents in Formosa, let alone have any contact with Formosan plains natives to help him develop his written sources. In addition, a linguistic comparison of the systems suggests that the two romanization systems differ in spelling and tonal markers. 66 

The Fujianese language transcribed by Medhurst is not the same as the one spoken in Amoy or Formosa. The different languages spoken in Amoy and Fujian province might not have been mutually intelligible. Moreover, Medhurst had never been to Amoy before his publication was released for public use. This implies that the Fujianese language he learned in the Malacca  

> 63

A type of romanized writing published by the British East India Company, it was the first extant Fujianese language dictionaries, but not exclusively for the Amoy language. Since Fuzhou was one of the five ports open to foreigners in the Treaty of Tianjin, Western missionaries were allowed to preach religion in Fuzhou, Fujian. However, this does not mean that no mission works were engaged in in the interior of China before the Treaty was signed. According to Hong Wei-jen ( Taiwan shumu jieti, 1987), Medhurst was a friend of Robert Morrison (1782-1834) and continued Morrison’s mission after his death. At that time, missionaries were not permitted to live in China, so Medhurst found his work especially difficult when he first arrived in Kuangzhou.  

> 64

In his preface, Medhurst proudly states that the collection of 12,000 Chinese characters originated from the colloquial idioms of the Fujianese language. Medhurst's dictionary was grounded in Fifteen Sounds  十五音  (1818) 

and followed the spelling of nasal tones from Dr. Robert Morrison's (1782 -1834)  A Dictionary of the Chinese 

Language  (1819) . Medhurst’s dictionary was the  first of its kind in POJ and was later revised for day -to -day use in 

Amoy.  

> 65

Yoshihide Murakami, "W. H. Medhurst in the history of Chinese linguistics," Tenri Journal of Religion 7 (1965): 59-63.  

> 66

For example, the phrase “public” (gong zhong  公眾 ) is transliterated in Sinkan romanization as "kong-sioung" but spelled as "kong chiòng" in POJ. 42 

archipelago differed significantly from the one spoken in Amoy. Later lexicons based on Medhurst's romanized system were developed to transliterate other Fujianese languages. 67 

Several dictionaries in the Amoy language published after his work indicated that the Amoy language speakers and foreign missionaries were in need of practical references for use in everyday life. In addition, the table of orthographic alternations in POJ shows that POJ was continuously revised until the early 20 th century due to the southern Fujianese language’s 

complexity in accent and word usage (Fig. 2). This could indicate that the missionaries transcribed different Fujianese languages, or accents, whereas the basic POJ used in Amoy was not exactly identical to the southern Fujianese linguistic structure used in Formosa. 

To encourage more people to read the Scriptures and other types of religious texts in Medhurst's romanization, John Van Nest Talmage  打馬字  (1819 -1892 ) 68  and his Christian 

colleagues restructured POJ with seventeen letters expressing consonants and vowels, with 

several tone marks t o transliterate the Amoy language , a type of language close to the southern 

Fujianese language used in Formosa. 69  They codi fied the first POJ textbook  Tn̂g -oē Hoan -jī 

Chho͘ -ha̍k  唐話番字初學  (Romanized Amoy Dialect for Beginners , 1852) for Amoy 

missionaries and non -Chinese character users. Rev. Talmage’s incomplete lexicography,  E-mng 

im e Jitian  廈門音的字典  (Dictionary of Amoy Dialect ), published two years after his death by             

> 67 For instance, Rev. Samuel Wells Williams' (1812 -1884) Yinghua fen yun cuoyao (Tonic Dictionary of the Chinese
> Language in the Canton Dialect , 1856) used Mehurst's system to transliterate Cantonese.
> 68 J.G. Fagg, Forty Years in South China the Life of Reverend John Van Nest Talmage (Whitefish: Kessinger Publishing, Reprint., 2004), See se ction “Romanized Colloquial,” 106.
> 69 Zhou Changyi in his Minnan fangyan da cidian (Dictionary of Southern Fujianese Dialects, 2006, 29-34) compares the finals of the southern Fujianese language used over Taipei, Amoy, Zhangzhou, and Quanzhou. His comparison shows that those finals spoken in Amoy, Zhangzhou, and Quanzhou were all collectively used in Taiwan.

43 

the Chūi -keng-tông  萃經堂  bookstore in Kulang yu  鼓浪嶼 , Amoy, China, was the earliest 

dictio nary of POJ for the Amoy language  in China. 70 

Some dictionary authors were trying to help the missionaries learn Chinese characters and native languages by spelling out words from the native languages in characters (Figs. 5 and 6). 71 Yet, the missionary linguist, Carstairs Douglas  杜嘉德  (1830 -1877), pointed out that the 

Amoy language “is a distinct language,” not a Chinese dialect, and therefore deserved to be 

written in its own unique writing system instead of in characters. 72  Douglas’s lexicon did not 

include Chinese scripts next to En glish or the transliteration of the southern Fujianese language. 

In his preface, he justified the changes in his layout. 73  Arguing that the “vernacular of Amoy is 

an independent language, which is able to stand alone without the help of the written charac ter,” 

his lexicon was not designed to teach Chinese characters.  74  Furthermore, he criticized the united 

Chinese writing system for being a “dead language,” much like Latin in relation to modern  

> 70

Rev. Talmage’s incomplete lexicography, E-mng im e Jitian (Dictionary of Amoy Dialect) was published in 1894. The first, probably the most important, POJ lexicon in Formosa, E-mng-im Sin Ji-tian  廈門音新字典  (A Dictionary 

of the Amoy Vernacular Spoken throughout the Prefectures of Chin -chiu, Chiang -chiu and Formosa , 1913) by Rev. 

William Campbell, was a revised version  of Talmage’s and has been in constant use ever since.  

> 71

See the layout of Medhurst’s , Elihu Doty’s (1809 -1864) Anglo-Chinese Manual with Romanized Colloquial in the Amoy Dialect (1853), Carstairs Douglas’ Chinese English Dictionary of Vernacular or Spoken Language of Amoy 

(1873), and William Campbell’s A Dictionary of Amoy Vernacular Spoken, Spoken Throughout the Prefectures of Chin-Chiu, Chiang-Chiu and Formosa (1913).  

> 72

A modern Taiwanese linguistic scholar also claims that the southern Fujianese language and the northern languages, e.g. the Beijing language, are different language systems. Their relation is not language vs. dialect because the speakers of the two languages are not intelligible to each other. In other words, they are supposed to be able to understand one another if they speak language and dialects. However, without preparation and studying, Beijing language speakers cannot understand the southern Fujianese language, and vice versa. As a matter of fact, 

Emperor Yongzheng  of the Qing dynasty  complained that the oral presentations  by officials from  Fujia n were 

almost unintelligible. That is because the emperor only understood the Beijing language and those Fujianese 

officials did not speak the language well. They  instead spo ke their native languages.  See  Lu Guangcheng’s  Taiwan 

minna n yu gai yao  (A Brief Introduction of Taiwanese Southern Fujianese Languag)  (Taipei: SMC Publishing Inc. ,

2003 ),  118 . 

> 73

"...It (the Amoy Colloquial) is not a mere colloquial dialect or patois; it is spoken by the highest ranks as by the common people, by the most learned as by the most ignorant […]. Nor does the term "dialect" convey anything like a correct idea of its distinctive character; it is no mere dialectic variety of some other language; it is a distinct language (underline added), one of the many and widely differing languages which divide among them the soil of China," vii.  

> 74

Ibid., viii. 44 

southwestern European languages. In his understanding, the Chinese character system was not phonetic, but could be pronounced in different forms, such as the southern Fujianese language or Cantonese. His dictionary was designed to teach English users the Amoy language without the distraction of Chinese characters placed next to the romanization. He also complained that there were no corresponding characters for between a quarter and a third of the Amoy language. Borrowing characters of the same sounds would break the semantic connection between the spoken and written systems. 75 

As Douglas observed, the missionaries had spent a significant amount of time learning Chinese characters as well as spoken languages, but after several years in overseas missions, even they could not master Mandarin Chinese. They were also still struggling with the Amoy language which was linguistically very different from Mandarin. He suggested that they 

concentrate on learning the Amoy “language” first instead of Chinese writing in southern Fujian. 

A POJ version of the Bible therefore was a welcome invention for missionaries, who found it useful for helping them master the local language much faster, and for the use of local illiterates who did not know the first thing about how to read Chinese characters. POJ was successfully popularized among the Amoy missionaries and their churches because they could all skip the tough process of learning Chinese script and begin to read a transliteration of the Amoy 

language. Regardless of whether his understanding of the Amoy “language” was recog nized, 76 

the Formosan missionaries found his dictionary to be a great help in the study of POJ and actually purchased three copies of it in their early periods of studying the southern Fujianese      

> 75 Ibid.
> 76 William Campbell disagreed with this thinking and preferred to use a POJ dictionary as a “cheap convenient little
> Handbook for helping those who use it to a fuller and more accurate knowledge of the written language of China.”
> (See his A Dictionary of Amoy Vernacular Spoken throughout the Prefectures of Chin-chiu, Chiang-chiu and Formosa, iii).

45 

language in Taiwan. 77 Rev. Douglas’ argument demonstrates the hardships that missionaries experienced in their struggle to learn Chinese script and the hope that using a simpler written format, i.e. POJ, gave them for furthering their work. 

The Amoy language and the Fujianese language in Taiwan were mutually intelligible. The British missionaries modeled their mission on the successful strategy of using the local language in Amoy. Most of the missionaries chose to learn the southern Fujianese language because it was used by the majority of the population. In a letter to Mr. George Barbour of Edinburg (n. d.), Rev. Carstairs Douglas recorded his first impression of language use in Formosa. On a nice day in October 1860, while he and Rev. Hen. L. Mackenzie (n. d.) traveled around the Bang-kah  艋舺  area (in northern F ormosa), he found that a large group of people 

from the Fujian province had probably emigrated there from Zhangzhou and Quanzhou of Fujian 

province since they spoke the same accents of the southern Fujianese language. Not only did 

they use the same langua ge that was used in Amoy,  but the language  was spoken all over 

Formosa as well. The constant interactions between natives, foreigners and immigrant groups 

made it a natural choice to evangelize Taiwan using the same strategy they employed in Amoy. 

As Dou glas blurted out, "it seems quite strange, after crossing the sea, to find the very same 

language, while a hundred miles, or even seventy, on the mainland, would bring us to 

unintelligible languages. Therefore, the call from Formosa is very strong to us.. ." 78  After he 

discovered the same language (meaning the southern Fujianese language) being used in the city 

of Bang -kah, Douglas decided that the missionaries were called to Formosa! By suggesting "the 

same missions" as at Amoy, he meant that they should  copy the proselytism strategy and the 

medical missions being used in Amoy. Douglas’s observations during the 1860 journey were no     

> 77 "Letter from Rev. Hugh Ritchie," EPM, December 1, 1873, 314.
> 78 Ibid.

46 

doubt a shot in the arm to the prospect of a Formosa mission. Such a strong call finally induced Dr. James Maxwell to journey to Formosa after he read the 1860 report of Formosa news from 

The Chinese Repository (Zhongguo cong bao  中國叢報 ).

In addition to the hospital work, the medical missionary Dr. Maxwell prioritized teaching POJ as a common writing and reading medium for Taiwanese converts. 79 It was the most urgent service in the Formosan mission. The British missionaries learned the colloquial written format several months before they arrived in Taiwan. They usually stayed in Amoy with senior colleagues in order to get themselves acquainted with local languages and the culture of the missionary work in China. They found reading the Chinese Bible was too challenging for converts who were illiterate in Chinese characters. 80 Pubic readings of the Scriptures could only temporarily attract irregular listeners who had no opportunity to read the Gospel for themselves. The ability to read and write facilitated the process of spreading knowledge of the Gospel. POJ enabled the missionaries to spread their message effectively since it enabled them to speak and 

study with potential converts in the converts’ native language. With prayers and hymns written 

in Roman letters, people who "were ignorant of the language (meaning Chinese) were able to join with the natives in singing the psalms in their own language during the evening service." 81 

Learning POJ was not simply an auxiliary tool to participate in worship. It was a requirement for the examination for Presbyterian Christian baptism in Taiwan. Being baptized signified the ability to read POJ in the early phase of the missions since the examinations required Formosan converts to answer questions from the missionary and the Gospel that they could not have studied without first learning POJ. The written language training was intended to      

> 79 Ibid.
> 80 The London Mission Society published Chinese New Testament in High Wenli in Delegates version in the 1850s in Shanghai and Canton.
> 81 "Formosa," EPM, December 1, 1874, 296.

47 

ensure that a Christian illiterate in Chinese characters could read the Bible at home or with dictionaries at hand. Although baptismal candidates did have to learn POJ there were also people outside of the Church who learned POJ. 82 

To expand the use of POJ, the church’s leaders became engrossed in the task of 

translation and lexicography. Dr. Maxwell transliterated the New Testament into a POJ catechism in the 1870s. 83 From then on, converts could read the Bible on their own. Furthermore, publishing Chinese-Amoy dictionaries demonstrates POJ's importance to the 

missionaries’ knowledge of Chinese. A Chinese -Amoy lexicon was designed to assist Taiwanese native POJ users in recognizing characters. Foreign evangelists valued it for different reasons. They wanted to be qualified POJ users so they could study Chinese culture, literature, and languages via the romanized system. They believed that precise knowledge of self and the other, in this case the Chinese culture, would enable them to convert people. 

Moreover, POJ did not just help Taiwanese natives who were illiterate in characters to read the Gospel. Learning POJ helped to convert people who were literate in characters from Confucianism to Christianity because it introduced them to the Taiwanese Christian community. In comparison to Dr. Maxwell's focus on transliteration and lexicography, Rev. Hugh Ritchie (1840-1879), the second minister who came to Formosa on December 13, 1868, paid more attention to teaching POJ. Through the process of his enthusiastic religious teaching in POJ, a notable baptism case in the 1870s occurred that is worth mentioning. Rev. Ritchie witnessed a beautiful moment when a Chinese degree-holder (equivalent to a BA degree in England), who should have been able to read the Chinese Bible, asked to be baptized after he learned POJ. 84      

> 82 "The Close of 1880 at Ka-gi, Formosa," EPM , April 1, 1881, 63-65.
> 83 "Formosa," EPM, October 1, 1873, 260.

48 

According to his testimony, this young man spontaneously destroyed idols and tablets at home that were symbols of his former Confucian beliefs since keeping them was incompatible with practicing Christianity. Mr. Ritchie described this conversion as an illustration of the enlightening and regenerating power of teaching people POJ and encouraging them to read the Gospel in POJ. 85 We do not know if the young man acquired Western medical knowledge as a medical assistant through the Presbyterian training hospitals as his brethren who were illiterate in Chinese did. Such an extraordinary case of conversion demonstrates that even a Chinese scholar, fluent in classical Chinese, might choose to learn POJ and be greatly changed in the process. 

Knowledge Transmission: The First Newspaper in Taiwan and Learning Chinese Script in POJ 

Missionary work can be described as a form of knowledge transmission in which various vehicles carry knowledge through different cultures and languages. 86 In the case of Formosa, three vehicles: POJ, the southern Fujianese language, and printing culture, drove POJ users to cross the boundaries between non-Christians and converts, the literate and the illiterate, and Chinese and non-Chinese readers. POJ functioned symbolically to transfer knowledge in the written format as people used it to write and read the Church newspaper and to translate and read Chinese texts. The introduction of a writing system changes the modes of knowledge transmission because written modes of communication enable their users to convey more complex ideas and information than spoken modes. Some ideas are too complex to be fully grasped through oral communication. The new forms of a cquiring “knowledge and transmission           

> 84 For the Chinese graduate here, he probably meant jinshi 進士 (a degree holder) .Mr. Ritchie did not offer further
> information about the degree in Chinese title.
> 85 In his letter to The English Presbyterian Messenger , August 8, 1871.
> 86 Jürgen Renn, Robert Schlögl, Bernard F. Schutz, Beatrice Gabriel, eds. The Globalization of Knowledge in History (Germany: Epubli, 2012), 7-28.

49 

that necessitated result in social changes.” 87 A printed form of knowledge transmitted through POJ could definitely do more. 

Rev. Thomas Barclay, who arrived in Formosa in 1875, founded the first newspaper 

Taiwan Church News on July 12, 1885. It was circulated through the Taiwan-fu (capital of Taiwan) area of Formosa to propagandize POJ after Dr. Maxwell donated the first western movable-type printing press. To move the mission and amplify the effects of Dr. Maxwel l’s 

written language strategy, this Scottish minister made his mark by devoting himself to the publication of the POJ newspaper and teaching. 88 His great work to convince the Presbyterian Church in Formosa to use POJ earned him a reputation as the most authoritative promoter of the romanized writing. 89 

On the first page of the first issue of Taiwan Church News , Barclay explained that the newspaper was designed to promote POJ as an innovative instrument for reading the Bible ( sēng 

keng  聖經 ), acquiring knowledge, and studying Chinese classics. He said, 

…We are here to broadcast the words of the Kingdom of God; therefore, we urged you to 

read the Bible. We hope that you will gradually learn the truth from God and do not rely on Reverends or pastors to lecture God’s messages if you can read on your own. Although you read 

alone, you still learn from the instruction of God. Unfortunately your Chinese written language is very difficult, and only a few people can read. We therefore use other written language. We use POJ in publication so as to make general public easily read. Also, recently the Taiwan-fu has set          

> 87 M. Farr Whiteman, ed. Writing: The Nature, Development, and Teaching of Written Communication (Hillsdale,
> N.J .: L. Erlbaum Associates, 1981), 91.
> 88 Edward Band, Barclay of Formosa (Taipei: Ch'eng Wen Publishing Co., 1972), 139-51.
> 89 Early ministers applied the romanized vernacular to reading Scripture. Rev. Barclay engaged in revising Dr.
> Maxwell’s POJ Bible starting in 1884 as Maxwell’s transcription was based on English Bible and thu s was different from the original Bible. Due to the heavy workload of the daily mission and the war in Shanghai, his revision was not published until 1916 and reprinted in 1933, when the New Testament and Old Testament were published separately. John Lai, Database , www.laijohn.com/Bible/F/about/skkh.htm, (accessed 12 December 2013).

50 

up a printing press. Prints looked as they were in newspaper. We hope that you will try hard to learn POJ in order to read later publication from us. People should not have blind faith in thinking that it is not necessary to learn POJ because one can read Chinese or it is a language for children. The two languages are both useful, but POJ is much easier to learn. Therefore, people should learn it first. After that, it is good to lean Chinese. Hence, I again urge that Christian and 

laity, women and men, and the old and young, all come to learn POJ… 90 

The promotion of POJ was not a rejection of using characters (called Khóng-chú-jī  孔子 

字, Confuc ius' words, in the newspaper). 91  Barclay’s opening statement in  Taiwan Church News 

clearly indicated that he believed POJ was beneficial for learning Chinese characters for all 

groups of people. 92  POJ language education was not designed to exclude the elit e, but the 

missionaries were primarily concerned with the linguistic needs of the common people. 

Barclay's goal was to see that Taiwanese Christians could read the Bible in their homes without 

the aid of a pastor. POJ was a new language tool to increase  the natives’ ability to read the Bible  

> 90

TCN , July 1885, 1. “ Goán kòe -lâi chit -pêng sī in -ūi ài thoân Thian -kok ê  tō-lí ……só -í goán taúh - taúh khó -khǹg 

lín tíoh th ák-chhheh lâi khòa ⁿ Sèng -keng,  ǹg-bān g lín ná ⁿ-kú  ná ⁿ-bat Si ōng -tè ê t ō-lí ; iā m̄  bián tek -khok óa -khò 

Bo̍k -su á -sī Thoân -tō-lí ê lâng lâi kóng h ō lín thiaⁿ; in -ūi lín pún -sin khòa ⁿ sèng -chheh, Sèng -sîn ê kám -hòa, sui -jiân 

bô lâng lâi kà -sī, lí n iau kú ēchai Siōng -tè ê chí -i. Khó -sioh lín pún -kok ê jī chin  oh, chió chió lâng khòa ⁿ ē hián -tit. 

Só-í hoán ū siat p át-mih ê hoat -tō, ēng  péh-ōe -jī  lâi in -chheh, hō lín chèng -lâng khóa ⁿ khah khoài bat. Iā kīn -lâi tī 

chit -e Hú -siâⁿ goán ū siat chit -ê ì n-chhek ê khì -khū, thang in -jī  chhin -chhiuⁿ chit hō ê khoán -sit.  Taⁿ goán ǹg bāng 

lín chèng -lâng beh chhut -lát ôh chiah -ê péh-ōe -jī ; āu -lâi goán nā in sím -mih cheheh lín long ê hiáu -tit khoa ⁿ.  Lâng 

m̄ -thang phah -sǹg in -ūi  i b at Khóng -chú -jī só -i m bian óh  chit -hō ê jī ; iā m̄ -thang khòa -khin i, kóng si gín -á só that -

ê. N n̄g -iū ⁿ ê jī long ū lō -ēng. Put -kò in -ūi chit -hō khah -khoai iākhah -bêng, só -í lâng tióh tāi -sheng th ák-i. Āu -lâi  nā ⁿ

beh sòa th ák khóng -chú -jī sī chin hō ；chóng -sī p éh-ōe -jī tióh khah tāi -seng…. só -í goán khó -khńg lín chéng -lâng, 

jíp -kàu í -kíp thia ⁿ to -lí ê  lâng, lâm -hū ló -iù, bat -jī, m̄ -bat -jī ê lâng long -chóng tiók kín -kín lâi óh…. “  

> 91

In most contexts, Khóng-chú-jī means a Chinese character as the stereotype that classical Chinese mainly 

elaborates Confucian doctrine so that script seems a language written for Confucius. In addition, the calling symbolizes that learning characters is as difficult as understanding the sage's philosophy.  

> 92

Based on his conviction about the importance of promoting POJ, he also supplemented Rev. Douglas’s dictionary 

in adding the newly usage of the southern Fujianese dialect in Formosa after 1867. The changes on listing Chinese characters along with POJ suggest his stand on reading Chinese as an additional value of studying the dialect. He thus came out with the Supplement to the Dictionary of the Vernacular or Spoken Amoy in 1923. See Edward Band, 

Barclay of Formosa, 67-70. 51 

and later Chinese script. Barclay urged people not to look down on POJ and he invited everyone, regardless of their sex or age, to learn POJ. 93 

The Church did not discourage missionaries from learning the Chinese script. 94 POJ was designed as an auxiliary device for studying Chinese texts. A remarkable message annotated in the POJ New Testament suggested that the Church hoped that a "striking gain" of teaching people POJ was that it would also help them teach everyone to read in romanized Chinese. 95 

POJ’s disadvantages include the fact that it is less appropriate than characters to articulate 

profound ideas in the Fujianese language. Yet the advantages of learning POJ incontestably overrode its disadvantages. Study activities recorded in Rev. George Leslie Mackay's (1844-1901) diary bear witness to its benefits. 96 Every week, he and his students recited classical Chinese. With the aid of POJ, they could read the Chinese classics aloud. Native islanders who were illiterate in Chinese script had as much difficulty learning to read it as for foreign missionaries did. Rev. Barclay, an accomplished scholar, confessed that in grappling with the complexity of characters, missionary teachers did not understand many of the ones that were necessary to understand the meaning of Chinese classics. 97 POJ transcriptions were very helpful to Chinese script learners. As long as they could speak the southern Fujianese language, learners could easily grasp the meanings of romanized Chinese script even though the typical issues of translating a text from one language to another occurred. 

Foreign missionaries working throughout Formosa and Amoy utilized POJ to popularize Chinese values in the southern Fujianese language. In 1908, a POJ version of the Sheng yu        

> 93 TCN , July 1885, 1.
> 94 Ibid.
> 95 Ibid., 68.
> 96 Mackay's Diaries , March 16, 1875.
> 97 "Chinese characters versus roman-letter words in the Formosa mission," EPM, April 1, 1881, 68.

52 

kuang xun  聖諭廣訓  (Sacred Edict ) was published in Taiwan which eased the pain of studying 

the Chinese version. Protestant missionaries designated the  Sacred Edict  a must -read text 

because it was the most widespread educational materi al circulated in the Qing dynasty. 

Emperor Kangxi (1654 -1722) issued sixteen maxims in 1670, and Emperor Yongzheng (1678 -

1735) elaborated his father's rules into sixteen essays and a preface in 1724. The  Sacred Edict ,

composed of the two emperors' words,  was promulgated in the same year that all civilians, from 

scholars and officials in the capital area to county people, young and old, were asked to read the 

edicts. Staff from every county administration had to publicly read out the edict twice a month. 

Central officials or regional gentry would gather people in the municipal temple, township 

meeting plaza, or any adequate public space for further interpretations of the meanings of its 

content. The law also demanded civil service examinees, at both coun ty and capital levels, to 

write the edict from memory. To pass the examinations their copies could not contain mistakes 

or revisions. 98  The Tainan Mission Council in Formosa prescribed the  Sacred Edict  as one of the 

textbooks for recently arrived missiona ries to help them understand Chinese culture. 99  It was 

agreed that this didactic work was valued as "a model of style, the principles on which the 

Emperors of China profess to conduct their rule are to be found in it in the smallest possible 

compass." 100 

The book of emperors' rules was the best textbook for missionaries to acquire eloquent speaking skills in the laguage to deal with incidental religious conflicts and to learn how Chinese                 

> 98 Jenn-wang Liao, " 'The Meaning of the Emperor' on Protestant Missionaries' Publishing and Understanding of the
> Sacred Edict in 19th Century China " Chinese Studies 26, 3 (2008): 225-62.
> 99 In his preface, Rev. Campbell said he was indebted to Chinese -language intellectual Lîm Bō͘ -sen g(Lin, Mosei,
> 1887 -1947), the first Formosan who received a Ph. D fr om Columbia University, U.S.A.. With his help, Campbell
> completed and promoted his transcribed work throughout southern Fujianese dialect communities.
> 100 Rev. William Campbell trans., The Sacred Edict--Translated into the Vernacular of the Bible Used Throughout Chinchew, Changchew and Formosa (Amoy: The Poe-Bun-Tsai Press, 1908), preface.

53 

officials propagandized imperial ideology. In addition to publishing vernacular translations of 

the text, the Empire’s administrators believed that regular public lectures elaborating on the edict 

were necessary to help the general public understand the emperors' profound instructions in the sublime classical Chinese in which the edict was originally written. Lecturers would prepare handouts in a variety of vernacular spoken languages to simplify the emperors' words. Missionaries learned how Chinese people performed political rites and how the State propagandized the top-down decrees by attending the lectures. For the foreign evangelists, observing these public acts could not have been more significant to the advancement of their 

mission in China. Understanding the Chinese people’s own strengths and weaknesses was a sure 

way to success for the foreign missions. According to Rev. H. R. Eichler (n.d.), missionaries liked to read the Sacred Edict because they first patterned their missions after the Qing 

government’s method of moral education. Secondly, they learned lesson s that helped them explain why some critical issues emphasized in Buddhism and Daoism were not included in Christianity. 101 In Formosa, such refutations in religious debates were important to help the native inhabitants adopt Christianity. 

The benefits of using the romanization was also noted by POJ users in essay competitions. Intriguingly, before Barclay published the first issue of his newspaper, an Amoy pastor, Tông Hián-Lí organized a POJ writing competition on "Pe̍h -ōe -jī ê Lī -ek"  白話字的利益 

(Discussion  of the Benefits of POJ) in 1884. All the POJ users in Amoy and Taiwan were 

encouraged to submit creative essays. The process of this competition and the compositions by 

the first and second place winners, Ia̍p Hàn -chiong and Lâu Bō͘ -chheng, were publish ed 

sequentially in the newspaper. In their long essays, the authors did not focus simply on opinions    

> 101 E. R. Eichler, "The K'uen Shi Wan or, the Practical Theology of the Chinese," The China Review 11 (1882): 94-5.

54 

about benefiting the illiterate. Rather, both essayists focused on the time consumed in studying Chinese. Ia̍p suggested that if people could acquire kn owledge in a few weeks, or an even shorter period, by reading texts written in POJ, they should not bother with several years of reading characters. 102 For the laboring class who worked every day, as opposed to the elite, learning POJ meant saving time. 

Most strikingly, these composition’s authors voiced their enthusiasm for women’s education, which was specifically targeted to women from non-elite families. Ia̍p said that 

Western women were capable of educating their children because a good number of mothers could read. By comparison, their Chinese counterparts were stuck studying numerous pictographic characters. Reading made women wise, Lâu claimed. In addition, women's aptitude for reading was not in any way lower than men's and, therefore, women should be taught to read. Another article echoes the point that women were expected to be the better half 

of married couples (lōe -chō  內助 ).  103  If they were not educated, there was no way for them to 

teach their children. The author, Ông Chiap -thôan, critici zes the Chinese tradition that valued 

sons over daughters. He believed that if women’s education could be popularized as it was in the 

West, then Taiwan would have female doctors, teachers, and reporters. 104  Women’s capacity to 

study was not doubted since girls from elite families were already sometimes educated. These 

POJ writers emphasized that all women, rich or poor, should learn to read and write. 

Taiwanese natives who were illiterate in Chinese characters shared their ideas and cultural values publicly in POJ publications. Some people who could not read characters probably wanted to be able to learn by reading Chinese texts, but they did not have enough time     

> 102 TCN , July 1885, 2 and January 1886, 7.
> 103 Ibid.
> 104 Ông Chiap-thôan , “Lē-lú-ha̍k” ( Encouraging Girls' school), TCN , November, 1902, 86.

55 

to tackle the complexity of the Chinese ch aracters. Making a living was the priority of their lives. If they learned POJ in a short time, other users could share miscellaneous information and social values with them. One day, Ia̍p's missionary friend obtained a pamphlet in POJ telling of 

a girl 's filial piety to her father. They were both touched by the narrative and felt it would benefit people, both inside and outside the church, if the story were reprinted. The following year, a historian's anecdote attracted Ia̍p's friend's attention. The friend not only admired the protagonist 

of the story but also wanted to share the story with others. Upon the friend’s request, Rev. John 

Van Nest Talmage, who revised POJ from the Amoy language, transcribed the story for him. The friend published it later. 105 

Apart from supporting POJ transcription, Ia̍p criticized Chinese translated copies of the Bible as inadequate. Ia̍p argued that the Chinese translation of the Scriptures often contained mistakes that derived from the language’s inability to arti culate the texts phonetically as POJ did. Characters also have a multitude of morphemes that were not identical to a single word (e.g., 

gou ; dog), but rather, they matched a compound word (e.g., putao ; grape). The original meaning of the Bible was gradua lly lost in the transcription with each new error. Ia̍p also complained that 

the errors in the translation were being spread throughout China since people were actively using the faulty translation and the Church was not sending out a corrected copy. 106 

Ia̍p’s argument seems reasonable, but was problematic in practice. He neglected two 

factors in his argument. Firstly, his argument did not make the translation issue clear in the process of information sharing. He neglected the fact that the Bible was first translated to Chinese script from English or other languages and later was transcribed into POJ from the   

> 105 Ibid.
> 106 Ibid.

56 

Chinese version. 107 That is the reason why he believed that if the Chinese version was wrong, then the POJ one could not be correct. He ignored the possibility that the POJ version might be incorrect even if it was translated from a language other than Chinese into POJ. Secondly, he criticized that during the process of translating the Scriptures to Chinese, sometimes it was difficult to find corresponding words within each linguistic system which would cause mistranslation. He paid less attention to the fact that some POJ "transcription" in fact was "translation," which was not monosyllabically sounded text, but a paraphrase of the original text of the language into a colloquial context or with an additional explanation. Mistranslations from foreign languages to Chinese could occur in the process of transliterating the southern Fujianese language from classical Chinese writing. 

Figure 7 in The English Presbyterian Messenger displays a contradiction to Ia̍p’s 

assertion that POJ was always phonetically transcribed text. The figure is an example of the translated New Testament (John 3:16) that was used in Formosa. As juxtaposed, the Delegates' Chinese version of the New Testament was listed in the left column along with the POJ transliteration in the right column. 108 The writer of this example commented that the POJ version was a "translation" of the Delegates' vision, not simply a reproduction. It was translated because a fixed sound to each character would generate a "dead language" that "conveys no meaning at all." 109 It had to be translated into "the language of common speech" so that a precise meaning of the original was retained. In other words, even though POJ was designed to      

> 107 Walter Benjamin, in his "The Task of the Translator," claims that "translation is a mode of its own." A translator has the task of generating meanings from the original texts, a task different from that of a poet. However, no matter how great a translator is in translation, we have to face those issues that occur in the two sides of the author, as the creator of the work, and reader, as the translator. To solve the predicament located in the middle ground in which two languages find no precise correspondence, the latter must decide on his/her own which phrase, or word, articulates better for the former. To some extent, translation is a representation of the original.
> 108 Finished by Rev. Medhurst, John Stronach, and William Charles Milne in 1850.
> 109 "Chinese characters versus roman-letter words in the Formosa mission," EPM, April 1, 1881, 67.

57 

transcribe speech, the transmission from the classical Chinese of the Delegates to the southern Fujianese language in POJ was necessary for meaningful delivery. That is, verbatim transliteration, word by word, was not feasible, based on the linguistic nature of the transliterated text. 

The ability to read and write POJ was an essential instrument for religious knowledge transmission. This language strategy earned the foreign mission a great number of local converts when compared to the number of Christian conversions in Amoy and Swatow, Guangdong province. 110 The statistics on Formosan converts from the 1860s-1880s showed that the number of native converts who did not know Chinese characters increased dramatically as a result of the use of POJ. 111 This implies that the majority of the Christian population in Formosa may have been illiterate in Chinese characters. Moreover, the Taiwanese tribal culture also benefited from the increase of POJ users. In the 1870s, Dr. Maxwell sent a letter to the church in Amoy highlighting the spectacular phenomenon of collective conversion. In reality, the tribal structure often brought in additional family members after the head of a family decided to believe in God. 112 The congregations and the use of POJ prospered coincidentally thanks to the indigenous groups' exclusive ethnicity. 

POJ as a Writing Repertoire to Share Knowledge and Records 

Printing, at its very beginning, was devised to solve the problem of the shortage of religious teaching pamphlets in POJ delivered from Amoy. 113 Intense demand for printed        

> 110 Before the Hainan and Singapore missions were added in, most church statistics, notes, and news were reported from Formosa, Amoy, and Swatow, the three main areas of Foreign mission of Presbyterian Church in southern China.
> 111 "Missionary notes," EPM , May 2, 1880, 90.
> 112 "Formosa," EPM , August 1, 1870, 185-187.
> 113 William Campbell, Handbook of the South Formosa Mission , 67.13, 144.

58 

catechisms and hymnals spoke volumes about the fact that Christianity had spread more rapidly than expected. In addition, the early reports repeatedly argued that the Formosa mission was short-handed. Since the aboriginal Christians had risen in number, the demand for more churches increased. However, in most remote areas, there were no on-site ordained or diaconal ministers. Rev. Campbell complained continuously that missionaries were exhausted from traveling to distant churches to preach. They had to regularly confirm converts’ progress in POJ 

studies, examine new Christian candidates, baptize converts, and most significantly, give medical treatment to the diseased who lived far away from cities. They were frustrated not just because they were overextended, but also from the lack of printed sources. 114 Dr. Maxwell’s 

donation of a printing press from England in 1880 diffused the crises in labor and printed matter. Native converts could read printed Bibles and catechisms and thus lessen the missionaries’ 

burden of having to read the Gospel to church members. 

Early Printing and POJ 

POJ imprints were the first western moveable-type printed texts, but were not the first printed works produced in Formosa. The earliest extant printed text issued by Ming adherent Zheng Jing  鄭經  (1642 -1681), the eldest son of Koxinga, was  Yongli datong li  永曆大統曆 

(United Calendar of Yongli Period) in 1671. Its printing was an indication of the persistence o f

the regime of the last emperor of the southern Ming dynasty (1647 -1662). When Koxinga 

landed in Amoy, a temporary military base for staving off the Dutch, the Office of Revenue, 

called  huguan  戶官 , was founded . All woodblock prints for the purpose of military  

> 114 Rev. Campbell was even forced to leave Formosa because of his anxiety over missionary work. Rev. Maxwell and Dr. Barclay suffered from high fever when they left, with no support, to get a handle on church affairs and teaching

59 

announcements and prohibitions were produced by this office. A group of woodblock carvers traveled with the Ming so they could print official declarations at any time. 115 Koxinga died of an acute disease (believed to be malaria or pneumonia crouposa) 116 several months after his conquest of Taiwan. Designated by his successor Zheng Jing, Wu Fengtai  吳鳳胎  (1605 -1680), 

a grand scribe in the conquered land, issued the united calendar. 117 

The history of printing in Taiwan prior to the Koxinga period is sketchy. 118 After Koxinga's occupation, the technique of woodblock printing was imported to Tainan and was 

disseminated across Taiwan. Before his arrival, observing Qing officials’ woodblock 

publications, such as Ji Qi guang’s  季麒光  Taiwan za ji  台灣雜記  (Miscellaneous  Notes of 

Taiwan, 1685), Sun Yuanheng’s  孫元衡  (1661 -?)  Chikan ji  赤崁記  (Book of Chikan, 1710), and 

Zhu Jingying’s  朱景英  (n.d.)  Haidong zha ji  海東札記  (Notes of the East of the Sea , 1774), we 

see that most authors hired indiv idual carvers and proofreaders.  119  Only books produced in 

mainland China and shipped to Taiwan indicate their publishers and sometimes the names of 

carvers. Considering the large number of books published throughout the Qing rule, we can 

speculate that a  group of woodblock makers had developed their business in Taiwan.  

> 115

Dianquan Huang, Zheng Chenggong Shishi Yanjiu (Studies of the History of Koxinga) (Taipei: Commercial Press, 1996), 26.  

> 116

Yangjun Zheng, "Zheng Chenggongsiyin Kao (An Investigation of the Cause of Death of Koxinga)," Gaoyuan University Press 12 (2004): 214-17.  

> 117

Ziwen Zhang ed., Taiwan Lishi Renwu Xiaozhuan (Bibliography of Historical Characters in Taiwan) (Taipei: National Library, 2003), 143-44.  

> 118

Tianbin Wang's Taiwan Baoye shi (History of Newspaper in Taiwan , 2003) and Taiwan xinwen chuanbo shi (The Evolution of Mass Communication in Taiwan , 2002) both claimed that the first information from texts started in 1807 when the Garrison Commander of Taiwan, Wulonge, engraved Shengyu Guangxun zhu (Annotated Imperial 

Edicts and Wide-Reaching Instructions) in copper blocks, but no further evidence has verified whether the printing was done in Taiwan.  

> 119

Yongzhi Yang, Mingqing Shiqi Tainan Chuban Shi (Publishing History Duing the Ming-Qing Periods of Tainan) (Taipei: Taiwan xue sheng shu ju, 2007), 51-217. 60 

The publishing industry had developed in Taiwan during the late Qing period, even though it was convenient for Taiwanese readers to directly order publications from Fu Zhou  福

州, Quan Zh ou, Tongan  同安 , Amoy, and Zhang Zhou of Fujian province. As early as 1821, 

several private publishers started operating bookstores in the capital, Taiwan -fu. The first known 

publisher in Tainan, Songyun Xuan  松雲軒 , owned by Lu Chongyu  盧崇玉  (n.d.), who served a s

an official in Taiwan -fu, focused its core business on woodblock printed religious manuscripts 

and classical editions of medical nursing texts, such as  Taichan bidu  胎產必讀  (A Must -Read 

for Childbirth) and  Cuisheng fujue  催生符訣  (Symbolic Formula of  Augmentation). 120  Until the 

Japanese rule, private publishers in Taiwan remained  small -scale businesses due to the high price 

of wood materials and small market demand. 121  Readers had to order books for leisure reading 

from the mainland. 

The early private publishers in Taiwan produced a good number of religiously-oriented works. The Songyun Xuan bookstore, for instance, focused on printing Buddhist and Daoist texts. 122 As for Christian texts, the shortage of missionary laborers and technical assistants to operate the printing press delayed the first western movable type imprint of POJ schoolbooks until 1884, though the press had arrived in Taiwan four years earlier. Soon after the press's arrival in 1880, Rev. Campbell requested that the Amoy church hire a printing labor force to work in Formosa. However, the request was denied. Instead, the church suggested sending a missionary to learn how to operate the press. 123 As no spare hand was available, the eleven boxes of machinery languished unpacked until after Rev. Barclay returned from his first        

> 120 Ibid., 284-87.
> 121 Qiongfang Shi, Shilanshan Guan Yi Gao ( Bequeathed Draft of Shilanshan Guan) (Taipei: Longwen chuban she, 1992), 7.
> 122 Yongzhi Yang, Mingqing Shiqi Tainan Chuban Shi , 51-217.
> 123 William Campbell, Handbook of the South Formosa Mission , 121.3, 189.

61 

furlough. Thus, the printing press was initially designed to supply a sufficient number of printed copies of the catechism. 

As usual, the British and Foreign Bible Society furnished local Christian churches with copies of the Scriptures. Even so, every individual church society was responsible for making "hymnbooks, tracts, and Christian literature on their own." 124 A local publication office in Taiwan was desperately needed. Not only would it alleviate the anxiety caused by insufficient labor, but it could offer enough texts that were promptly printed. During his vacation back to Scotland, Barclay learned the printing process from Mr. Aird and Mr. Coghill, two British printing mechanics, so that he could assemble the press immediately upon his return to Formosa. The first printed item from the press was dated May 24, 1884. 125 A simple, yet well-equipped printing room was located in close proximity to the back of the City Tengakha chapel on the west side of the Theolo gical College library. Its name, Chū -tin-tông  聚珍堂 , was formally 

announced shortly after construction of the building was completed. 

Symbolic Importance of a Printed Romanization in the Late-Qing Taiwan 

Romanized imprints in Taiwan were used for much more than Christian teaching during the last few decades of the Qing Empire. At first, they offered a diachronic information platform for didactic sharing in lieu of synchronic oral communication. In addition to advancing 

the Theological College’s work by making it easier to create more teaching materials, the technique of western movable-type printing, which was more efficient and less labor-intensive than the woodblock-type printing, eased Rev. Campbell's anxiety about tackling the shortage of    

> 124 Edward Band, Barclay of Formosa , 71.
> 125 Ibid., 71-72. The first issue was deferred until July 12, 1885, because of the interruption of the Sino-French War (from August 1884 to April 1885).

62 

missionaries for the plains aboriginal tribes. 126 Colporteurs made regular trips to remote churches in mountain and rural regions to distribute religious flyers and pamphlets for free. POJ users, who resided in remote areas, owned their printed copies without having to share them with churches. 127 So the missionaries did not have to travel to remote areas to see congregations as often. With a united and clear layout of the printed format, social interaction and interpersonal communication between Taiwanese Christians was maintained in spite of topographical limitations and ethnic boundaries. 

An anonymous essay in 1892 attests to the essential role that a printed language played in circulating information in Christian society. The author stated that anything posted in Taiwan Church News was important to deliver to Christian communities. The more the church was established, the more Christianity was accepted, but its expansion was hindered by the obstacles they encountered circulating the newspaper. Christian values, great achievements, school and church rules were circulated through the newspaper to other churches as far as it was possible. Information about newly opened churches, donations, an increase in conversions, and hiring missionaries needed to be shared with the Christian community. Furthermore, reading the newspaper guarded against potential nuisances from precedents set by other churches, such as problems with alcoholism among church members. The most favorable aspects of the Christian community were displayed in the newspaper, a space in which the intelligent and wise expressed their points of view on issues of interest. Before the operation of the press, the profound preaching of erudite pastor-teachers was only available to those who lived in the immediate vicinity of the church. 128 Western movable-type printing technology not only improved people’s      

> 126 EPM, March 1, 1884, 122.
> 127 In TCN , it was often mentioned that colporteurs ’job was to regularly travel back and forth to the plains and mountain areas for book and publication delivery for free.

63 

access to well-developed sermons but also the structure of social interaction to which the Christian community was closely tied. 

Benedict Anderson's view of the printed language is worthy of examination since it helps explain the significance of POJ itself. He argues that Protestants used print-capitalism, by "exploiting cheap popular editions," to create a new readership among those who had little knowledge of the classical written language. 129 This phenomena occurred during the 19 th 

century in foreign missions in Formosa. The unique characteristics granted by the printed language, what he calls "fixity" for various dialects, were probably similar to those found in transliterated works. Printed POJ, as a type of transcribed language, was designed for southern Fujianese language users' convenience to distribute information and carried no "image of antiquity" from the romanized letters themselves. It was, instead, kept in a "permanent form" and was simply a form, since printed POJ had no fixed meanings in spelling. 130 In POJ, meanings are received as soon as the sounds of an intelligibly composed phrase or sentence are read aloud. POJ publications were different because their linguistic features did not nurture anything related to "national consciousness." In the 19 th century, the spread of POJ was not 

mobilized by a political drive or ideology of the Qing empire’s or Taiwan's historical glory. 

Furthermore, romanized publishing signified a decisive turning point in the use of POJ, because it began the process of transforming POJ readers into POJ writers. POJ compositions in public spaces were an evaluation of POJ and Bible studies. The new writing population established an "imagined community" of POJ users. Participants identified their writing community as a group who would never meet but whose members would become acquainted         

> 128 Anonymous, "Lūn Kàu-hōe -pò "(An essay on Taiwan Church News ), TCN , January 1892, 3.
> 129 B. Anderson, Imagined Communities: Reflections on the Origin and Spread of Nationalism (Verso, 2006), 40.
> 130 Ibid., 44.

64 

through reading one another’s works in the newspaper. The imagined wr iting community created a type of POJ writing identity which largely overlapped with the Christian society in Amoy and Taiwan. 

We do not have sufficient information to demonstrate whether or not non-Christian 

participants were involved in this “imagined community”. In comparison to Chinese characters, 

POJ was relatively easy to master for southern Fujianese language speakers. The first local operator of the donated press, Saw Sa (n.d.), only spent three days learning POJ, and the general public might need a few weeks at most. 131 The writing community members had no obligation to contribute to church activities. They could simply pay six qian monthly 132 or read the paper for free by standing in front of the bulletin board at any church. 133 Though without textual and statistical evidence, one can speculate that being baptized was not a prerequisite to be a POJ user at that time. Some of them might simply have taken a shortcut to the written information or paid a regular visit to the church in order to receive the benefits offered by the missionaries. 

Taiwanese natives experienced noteworthy transformations as they went from being illiterate in Chinese script to being literate in POJ via the published language. Following the definition of literacy as the ability to read and write in social practice, being illiterate in the early context of the Formosa mission meant being "without book-learning or education and ignorance or lack of learning or subtlety" in classical Chinese. 134 Becoming literate in Chinese typically took a few years' study of the Chinese script. Traditionally, having an education meant receiving              

> 131 Band, Barclay of Formosa, 71.
> 132 Ten qian was equivalent to one tael. According to "1882-1991 Taiwan Danshui Haiguan baogao shu" (A report of Danshui custom from Taiwan, 1882-1991) from Taiwan jingji shi yanjiu 台灣經濟史研究 (Studies of History of
> Taiwan's Economy) , volume 6, the rice price in 1885 was more expensive than any year during 1882 -1891, and the
> average price was about 1.75 -80 tael per dan (1 dan was equivalent to 100 liters).
> 133 One or two pages in every TCN have larger font size, most likely for bulletin board reading.
> 134 Alastair Pennycook, Critical Applied Linguistics: a Critical Introduction (New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc., 2001), 76-77.

65 

instruction in a private Chinese academy ( sishu  私塾 ) or from home tutors. Chinese characters, 

as the official written language of Fujian province and T aiwan during the late Qing periods, were 

the only officially -recognized written medium through which to acquire knowledge. People who 

were illiterate in characters were not supposed to be able to read or publish texts. The Taiwanese 

who were illiterate i n Chinese script were unable to create their own texts before the advent of 

POJ. This underrepresented group, including the blind, women, and poor, was stereotyped as 

unable to produce their own written works. POJ publications signal nothing short of a 

revolutionary change in the "illiterate’s" cultural involvement. 

POJ users belonged to a special group in which some were conditionally illiterate and marginalized for their lack of proficiency in characters or had been natively taught in another language system. Others were purely illiterate and had not received any training in writing. They were remarkable inasmuch as they all learned a set of letters beyond the mainstream writing system and might have wished to enable themselves to read characters. They definitely were not incapable of producing their own works, for their literary works were published in the newspaper. Publishing the newspaper in POJ publicly demonstrated that a foreign-imported transliteration system equally transformed foreign intellectuals and the domestic uneducated into a group of writers, though many of them were still "illiterates" in Chinese script. 

Print language played a prominent role in enlightenment. No matter what genre it was used for, be it textbooks, the Bible, catechetic handouts, novels, or medical guidance, printed POJ provided a text-friendly environment, and POJ promoters advocated at the outset for equal opportunity in education for both genders. An article by Ông Chiap-thôan urged that girls and boys should be treated equally with regard to education, but he observed that most Chinese parents in Taiwan did not allow their daughters to attend school. Education, he believed, would 66 

release women (hū -jîn-lâng  婦人人 ) from their hell of ignorance.  135  This he ll prevented females 

from being informed. Thus he concluded, “how could we expect women to be responsible for 

children's education at home?” 136  Ông argued that Taiwanese people simply took for granted 

that women learned from life’s experiences, and not fro m texts or school education. He argued 

that this fallacy had to be examined. He proposed that free printed POJ course books and cheap 

tuition (four silver  yuan  per year) in women’s boarding schools sponsored by the Presbyterian 

Church in Taiwan were an i ncentive, especially being tremendously attractive for plains native 

girls, to attend. 137  He, however, overlooked the fact that elite families allowed their girls to go to 

Chinese academies or be educated by tutors at home. His statements oversimplified wo men’s 

education in Taiwan, which centered on the large proportion of female illiterates. 

Unlike the writing community using Chinese script, members of the POJ writing community could participate anonymously. Both Kai-wing Chow and Robert J. Griffin, from Chinese and Western contexts respectively, might agree that big name authors with literary reputations contributed to book sales in the seventeenth century in the Jiangnan area of China 

and in London respectively. Using author’s names for marketing books revealed a diversity of culture. In the late Ming period, commercial bookstores in the Jiangnan area used paratextual strategies to increase book sales by requesting famous authors to write prefaces for books as endorsements of the works. 138                     

> 135 Ông Chiap-thôan, “Lē-lú-ha̍k,” TCN, December 1902, 86.
> 136 Ibid.
> 137 Anonymous, "Khui-siat Lú-óh" (Launching a Girls' School), TCN , November 1886, 17.
> 138 There were certainly a number of publishing items actually not authored or edited as they were purported to be. For example, nine anthologies of poetry listed Li Panlong 李攀龍 (1514 -1570), a literary critic and imperial scholar
> who passed the highest imperial civil service examination, as the editor, but eight of them were published after his
> death. Another example investigates Li Mengyang's 李夢陽 (14 72 -1529 )career in publishi ng. Chow argues that Li
> "did not edit or anthologize other writer's books" but several titles under his name in Zhongguo shanben shu tiyao 中
> 國善本書提要 (Annotated catalog of Chinese rare books) relate him to the editing of Tang poems by Meng Jiao 孟
> 郊(751-814). To "misonymize a book to a famous writer" meant the publishers had to make a plausible case by

67 

During the 1710s, this was not the relationship between copyright and naming in British publishing. When an author was protected by the Copyright Act, the value of a publication as a commodity returned to the author, who therefore signified a brand name to identify certain types of literary works in terms of quality. The transformation of literary values triggered by the legal protection of property, quoted by Griffin from Foucault's descriptions, is demonstrated in the absence of an author's name. 139 Although "anonymous" gives no reference to the name of a specific author, Griffin suggested that extra information about the anonymous author came from how the author established the "homogeneity" of his or her works in texts. Thus, even though the cover page lacked the legal name of an author, anonymous, or a pseudonym, could refer to authors we might know. Famous writers such as Jane Austen have published anonymously. The poetical personality of an author might be presented in "multiple entities." 

Griffin's conclusion about different levels of discourse on the legal and aesthetic identities of authors enables us to speculate on the essentials of aesthetic identity and literary 

reputation in POJ publications. That is whether the author’s name, whether it was unl isted or it was a celebrity's name, significantly affected the market for a specific work. 

In the early period, the authors of POJ publications were less concerned about paratext or 

sales promotion. This special print culture deemphasized readers’ associa tion with writers. By the time of the Japanese rule, many POJ writers in Taiwan Church News were listed as "anonymous." The relationship between the readership and the authors, unlike their Chinese and Western counterparts, was not tied by commercial profits; thus, it was not necessary to identify authors, although names such as the Reverends Barclay and Campbell were sometimes listed.      

> selecting the appropriate author in the genre, thereby making it necessary for the name to be visible. See K.W. Chow, Publishing, Culture, and Power in Early Modern China (Standford, CA.: Stanford University Press, 2004), 179-205.
> 139 Robert J. Griffin, "Anonymity and Authorship," New Literary History 30:4 (1999): 879.

68 

Every church was obligated to order at least one copy of a work for public use. Designated missionaries of the South Formosa Mission Council wrote a number of works under the name 

“Phian -chíp-sek” (editing room). 140 Furthermore, their anonymity arose from non-authorial anonymity. Through the feature of sharing global news, some articles carried by-lines of "Bûn Iok-hān kì ê" (reported by Wen Yuehan), while others had "Phoaⁿ Bûn -bêng chò ê" (done by Pan Wenming). Travel literature that was the result of first-hand observation was not considered a genre, nor an individual work with a conception of copyright, but rather a paraphrase of events, phenomena, and happenings. The goal of POJ publications was information sharing and religious teaching for non-character users. Reporters and anonymous authors most likely cared less about, or lacked knowledge of, their intellectual property as authors. 

Imperial Power and the POJ Population 

The empire’s endorsement of the European Presbyterian missionaries indirectly backed 

up their promotion of POJ and its publications. Many marginalized indigenous groups converted to Christianity and thus become POJ users because the Presbyterian Church in Taiwan would bring them "benefits" in exchange for their profession of faith. The Church extended favors to 

natives who became Christians. The local government also offered converts “benefits” such as dealing with litigation cases with neighboring ethnic groups. 141 The church, on behalf of native converts, could heavily impact how local officials ruled on legal cases. 

John Shepherd, an anthropologist who specialized in Taiwan's non-Han aboriginal groups explained why Chinese immigrants showed less interest in conversion to Christianity. For the      

> 140 Chang Miao-Chuan, Kaiqi Xinyan-Taiwan Fucheng Jiaohui Bao Yu Zhanglao Jiaohui De Jidutu Jiaoyu , 102-03.
> 141 John Shepherd, "From Barbarians to Sinners: Collective Conversion among Plains Aborigines in Qing Taiwan, 1859-1895," in Daniel H. Bays, ed. Christianity in China: From the Eighteenth Century to the Present (Stanford: Stanford Universtiy Press, 1996), 120.

69 

Chinese, only the traditional institutions (the imperial bureaucracy and Confucian institutions) could confer access to power, prestige, and wealth. Since they already had access to power through existing cultural institutions, converting to Christianity was unnecessary and might cost them access to the traditional institutions as well. Shepherd concluded that the plains aborigines were looking for short-term advantages by adopting Christianity. They also sought "a worldview and reference group that enables them to set a higher value on their own cultural identity." 142 

Since the Qing officers from China regarded plains aborigines as “barbarians,” the pl ains natives found a champion in Christianity to restore their self-esteem. The foreign religion might not be very well received among the indigenous people, but it interested them because of the leverage it offered to rival the Chinese immigrants and other ethnic groups. 

Apart from safeguards and advantages, the political influence of foreign missionaries authorized by imperial endorsement increased the number of Christians. It was exemplified when the missionaries peacefully escorted the Japanese army into Tainan as Formosa was ceded to the Japanese Empire as a result of the Treaty of Shimonoseki in 1895. The British missionaries were not simply escorted by their imperial Army; they were mediators between the Japanese state and the Taiwanese residents. At the time, the Black Flag Army, mustered by the independent regime of Liu Yongfu  劉永福  (1837 -1917), had retreated to Guangdong province, 

China, although social order and riots were temporarily kept under control by his military, while 

the Qing lost their  authority over Formosa. A senior naval officer informed the South Formosa 

Mission Council that he would soon withdraw the Navy guarding Anping harbor and also 

provide safe passage for British, German, and American subjects to Amoy in June of the same  

> 142 Ibid., 132.

70 

year. 143 Not having the heart to turn down their church members and other Taiwanese people, Revs. Barclay and Ferguson walked to submit the signed petition to the Japanese barracks at Ji-chan-hang  二層行  in northern Kaohsiung.  General Nogi Maresuke  乃木  希典  (1849 -19 12) 

accepted the plea only with the condition that no one would be harmed as long as the entire city 

surrendered peacefully. However, this agreement could be reversed if any uprising occurred. As 

a result, General Nogi ordered Rev.  Barclay to deliver thi s conditional oral consent throughout 

the city . He asked Rev.  Ferguson to lead the Japanese army through the city gate the next 

morning. Surprisingly, the takeover was concluded as the missionaries had hoped. 144 

The natives developed a significantly better impression of the missionaries since they had the power to broker the peaceful transition to Japanese rule. Prior to that point, many Taiwanese residents had a negative impression of the missionaries because they believed that Taiwan had been forced to allow the missionaries into the country because of the treaty of 1858. 

As a result of their intervention, the missionaries earned back a great increase in the number of baptized Christians and a larger POJ user population in the early years of Japanese rule. At the end of 1895, there were about 1,256 regular churchgoers involved with church activities, but the number of baptized adults in southern Formosa rapidly increased to 2,190 between 1896 and 1901. 145 However, even by the end of 1901, expulsions from the church in 

> 143

Wm. Campbell, Handbook of the English Presbyterian Mission in South Formosa (Hastings: F.J. Parsons, 1910), 471.2, 599. Foreigners were strongly advised to temporarily leave since the coast guard intended to depart soon. It is, however, surprising, that no words about the history of any negotiation with the Japanese General were recorded in the Handbook of the South Formosa Mission in which every important decision made by the Council of the South Formosa Mission, a foremost board of the British foreign mission in Formosa, should be listed. No meetings or Council minutes accounted for anything that happened from August 1 to October 29, 1895, while the Japanese army took control of Taiwan-fu on October 21. On October 30, the Council "noted" Japan's takeover and was preparing a list of damaged chapels for compensation from the Japanese authorities. We thus can reasonably imagine that the situation was so desperate that Rev. Barclay had to take action to negotiate with the colonial authority immediately rather than reporting to the Council or waiting for further instruction from senior church dignitaries in Amoy. However, he later sent a letter to the mother church for details. (See Campbell, 474.1, 602).  

> 144

“Letter to Foreign Mission,” 1895, from special archive stored at SOAS, University of London.  

> 145

Campbell, Handbook of the English Presbyterian Mission in South Formosa , 84. 71 

plains native groups occurred from time to time. 146 The Missionary Council attributed their betrayal of the church to a lack of knowledge about Christianity. They were not serious converts, but opportunists. The opportunism of renegade converts demonstrates the importance of political influence in conversion. The change of political regime complicated foreign missions in Formosa. 

Conclusion 

To encourage new Christians to read the Bible on their own, the British Presbyterian mission in Taiwan promoted POJ as a religious marker for the Taiwanese Christian community. During the early decades of the mission, POJ played a pivotal role by helping Taiwanese Christians write about their own culture. The European ministers decided to use the southern Fujianese language and POJ to engage in the same missions they were using in Amoy because of the linguistic similarities between Taiwanese natives and the Amoy people. It was also appropriate to do so because the majority of Taiwanese converts were illiterate in Chinese script. All Christians had to pass POJ examinations in order to participate in church activities. Becoming Christians symbolized not only their transformation from illiterate in Chinese script to literate in POJ, the process also enabled users to study Chinese script and culture. Knowledge transfer through POJ was expanded from religious information exchange to the Chinese language world. This expansion could not have been completed without the assistance of the western movable-type press donated by Dr. Maxwell. The Church invented a print culture through the first Taiwanese newspaper in which POJ users became writers and shared church information. 

The British missionaries came to Taiwan with the endorsement of the military in power. 

The missionaries could provide “benefits” to attract more converts and therefore POJ users. The  

> 146 Ibid.

72 

imperial power behind the missionaries played an important role in the early success of the Presbyterian mission in Taiwan and the increasing number of POJ users. 73 

Chapter 2: School Education and Western Medical Training, 1880s-1940s 

POJ was primarily used in Presbyterian school education and western medical training programs from the 1880s through the 1940s. 147 The Presbyterian school education and western medical training system differed in important ways from the Chinese and Japanese educational systems. In addition to its initial use for religious proselytizing, POJ literacy rates expanded from the 1880s as it became a central component of these church-affiliated education programs. Becoming degree holders and medical professionals by learning POJ changed the lives of many Taiwanese students. POJ literacy enabled many Taiwanese who were not fluent in Chinese and Japanese to become upwardly mobile. The Church educated professionals constructed a new social community and professional network of people who were literate in POJ. Within this community and network, Taiwanese people, particularly Christians, developed a sense of group identity associated with their use of POJ and their participation in Westernized education from the late Qing dynasty until the end of Japanese colonial rule. 

The Presbyterian Church in Taiwan decided to provide public education and medical training based on the educational principles they adopted from Scottish Presbyterianism. From the 1880s, or earlier, the Church was devoted to providing equal access to education regardless 

of a student’s gender or family income. They als o hoped to replicate the successes of the 

educational and medical missions in Shantou and Amoy. The Church’s choice to make POJ their 

primary written language in school and medical study led to its expanded use and survival in Taiwanese society. Yet learning POJ and receiving a Presbyterian education or medical training     

> 147 Foreign missionaries were requested by Japanese government to return homeland due to the Pacific War in 1941 so that church property, including schools and hospitals, were transferred to the administration of native pastors. The secondary schools, seminary colleges, and missionary hospitals still operate now. See the regulation from
> Communique of Taiwan Sōtokufu (Taiwan Zongdufu fubao 臺灣總督府報 ), no. 4271, August 21, 1941.

74 

did not come without the Taiwanese natives also being willing to participate in an expanding Christian network. 

The Church organized and developed an independent and holistic educational system for students from preschool through college starting in the late 19 th century. POJ was the official written language of the Taiwanese Presbyterian educational system. It was used in elementary 

schools, middle schools, girls’ and women’s schools, and theological colleges. Until the end of Japanese rule, the faculty primarily taught their courses in the southern Fujianese language; it was the main spoken language of their system. POJ was adopted as the writing system for the schools because it was easy to transcribe the native language in POJ. They also adopted POJ because most of the students were illiterate in Chinese or Japanese and it was easier to teach them how to use POJ than a whole new written language. Missionary teachers transliterated western textbooks and Chinese classics into POJ for use in the schools. 

The Church also had missionary doctors who offered medical care and training to the Taiwanese. Their clinics and hospitals provided medical treatment to many Taiwanese who were too poor to afford to see traditional Chinese physicians. The medical missionaries were quickly overrun with patients and they realized they had an urgent need to train Taiwanese medical personnel. Thus they began to offer medical training programs through their missionary hospitals where they used POJ and the southern Fujianese language to facilitate communication with their patients and to teach medical students who wanted to obtain certificates issued by the missionary doctors. Students were also required to use medical textbooks written in POJ. 

The Educational Philosophy of the Taiwanese Presbyterian System 

School education is a cornerstone of the Reformed Church tradition. The Presbyterian Church originated from the Reformed Church tradition which stressed that humanistic education 75 

belonged to the sovereignty of God, and so it should be extended to human civilization and shape its relation to Christianity. 148 John Calvin (1509-1564), the founder of the Reformed Church, viewed education as an arena for proselytizing young adults outside of the church. 149 Three hundred years later, the Presbyterian Church in Taiwan inherited this philosophy of education from British missionaries. 

British Presbyterians also believed they had a moral duty to educate people in order to save them from poverty and vulnerability. For them, providing people with an education was just as important as providing them with medical care. They also embraced the belief that everyone deserved access to education regardless of their social class or gender. The 

Presbyterians’ willingness to provide school education for women and the poor differentiated 

them from the conventional Chinese education system. In the late 19 th century, the underrepresented and the poor, particularly women, had few opportunities to attend Chinese schools. Most of the time they were doing work for their families and they did not have time or money to invest in an education. 

The Presbyterian Church in Taiwan created a western educational system that accepted both male and female students and utilized POJ to teach them. The rest of the chapter will examine how POJ was used to teach Christianity, general education and medical studies. 150 

POJ as a Language of Religious and General Education 

Christian School Education: Theological Colleges         

> 148 W.L. Lingle and J.W. Kuykendall, Presbyterians: Their History and Beliefs (Atlanta :John Knox Press, 1978),
> 20 -28 .
> 149 Yang-en Cheng, “ The Influence of Scottish Enlightenment on the Early Taiwan Christianity: Tracing the Root of Modern Educational Ideas of George Leslie Mackay, ”Taiwan Wen Xian 63 (2012): 143-44.
> 150 General education means that the church started to offer non-religious school curricula. General school education did not aim to train evangelists since they were trained in theological colleges or women’s bible schools. Instead
> they attempted to include western school subjects, such as physics, in daily teaching.

76 

Since clergy who would work in Taiwan were in short supply, the Presbyterians’ first 

venture in their education system was to establish theological colleges to formally educate native-born Taiwanese pastors. By the time the first college was founded, church officials in the two biggest ports, Dakao  打狗  (Kaohsiung) and Anping  安平  (a suburb of Taiwan -fu), had 

already started two classes (1875 -1876) for seminary students who could serve in suburban 

areas. The Reformed Church in  Amoy appointed a Chinese teacher, Lu Liang  盧良  (n. d.), to 

serve in Tainan, Taiwan.  151  Rev. Barclay merged the two training classes to create the Tainan 

Theological College, the first seminary in Taiwan, in 1880. All the students moved into a new 

building  near  the northeast corner of the hospital in Taiwan -fu.  152  They had regular classes, 

teaching materials, classrooms, students, and an executive committee which was administrated 

by the Council of the English Presbyterian Mission in South Formosa (hereafter  the South 

Mission Council). 153 

The Tainan Theological College was not very successful in recruiting and training new clergy for the Presbyterian missions in their earliest years. Their program numbers did not increase over time and they had some years when there were no new seminarians in training. 154 

Foreign ministers recommended local candidates. Yet their recommendations guaranteed nothing more than that the applicants were of a decent moral quality. Attracted by a guaranteed job after graduation and free accommodations, students often hid their daily gambling habits or         

> 151 The English Presbyterian Messenger , October 1876, 97.
> 152 W. Campbell, Handbook of the English Presbyterian Mission in South Formosa , 139.
> 153 Rev. Campbell explained there were two missionary centers in Tainan and Dakao (Kaohsiung) continuously reported to the Committee of London Overseas Mission. In order to make the Formosan missions work efficiently and train local clergy, after Rev. Barclay arrived in Tainan in 1877, missionaries decided to merge two centers to become the Council of the English Presbyterian Mission in South Formosa. From then on, this Council was the administrative center for all church-affiliated organization, affairs, and activities. See W. Campbell, Handbook of the English Presbyterian Mission in South Formosa , xiv.
> 154 Tainan Theological College, Tainan Shenxueyuan qingzhu bashi zhounian te kan (A Special Issue for the Celebration of Eighty Years in Taiwan Theological College) (Tainan: Tainan Theological College, 1957), 232-44.

77 

other behaviors that would disqualify them from seminary. When their inappropriate conduct was exposed, the faculty had no choice but to expel them from the school. 155 An individual’s 

moral conduct was the most significant criterion in deciding whether they were accepted to the 

seminary. It is clear, based on the South Mission Council’s expulsion records, that the success of 

students in seminary was based on their moral purity and not on their intellectual capacity. Many foreign ministers believed that Taiwanese theological colleges produced inferior clergy by comparison with Scottish theological colleges. Even so, the Taiwanese theological college created a system for ordaining future ministers who received a western missionary education. Their graduates went on to serve as local missionaries. 

The first Canadian Presbyterian Church missionary, George Leslie Mackay (1844-1901), who worked in northern Taiwan, started another type of training education, called a "Peripatetic 

College" or “Itinerant College." 156 By 1882, his itinerant college lacked classroom buildings, but he was not discouraged. Instead, he believed that to educate clergy, "great buildings, large libraries, and wealthy endowments might be helpful, but they are, however, not indispensable. As good work cannot be done without these, but if the work done is genuine, increased facilities will follow." 157 Even without facilities, he could still start lessons by singing hymns every day. In good weather, his students sat outside to recite the Bible, study, and take their exams. At night the class moved into the church, took notes in POJ, reviewed, and prepared for the next day's lessons. They used field trips to help them apply what they learned to daily practice. On their walks in the country, the teacher and his students discussed evangelism and how to conduct missions. They also collected plants, flowers, insects, and other samples of nature to use in          

> 155 Campbell, Handbook of the English Presbyterian Mission in South Formosa , 192-93.
> 156 John Lai, "Mackay’s Peripatetic College," TCN ,May 25 ,13.
> 157 George Leslie Macdonald and J. A. Mackay, ed., From Far Formosa. The Island, Its People and Missions (New York and Chicago: F.H. Revell Co., 1896), 287.

78 

biological experiments and study when they arrived in nearby towns. 158 Mackay claimed that the purpose of mobile training was to enable students to serve as "effective workers, fluent speakers, skillful debaters, and successful preachers." 159 He offered theological courses in various settings before formally founding Oxford College  牛津學堂  along the Tamsui River  淡

水河  in 1882 after seeking new funding from Canada in 1880. 

Church members complained that Presbyterian seminarians educated in Taiwan did not know enough about topics outside of Christian theology. This prompted the church to add courses on secular topics to seminary training. This change was advantageous for students because it helped them broaden their education. These additional courses also attracted non-Christians to the Presbyterian education system. The Church therefore expanded their system to include secular primary schools which easily attracted impoverished non-Christian students who could not afford to attend the other secular schools available in Taiwan. 

General Education: Elementary and Middle School 

The transition from offering religious training to general education in elementary and middle schools was supported by the Scottish educational philosophy. According to Zheng Yang-en's  鄭仰恩  research, the early for eign missionaries  were influenced by the spirit of the 

Scottish Enlightenment (1730 -1790), a scholarly movement that urged the integration of general 

and Christian education.  160  The interdisciplinary dialogue of the Scottish Enlightenment created 

a culture where the Christian faith, scholarship, and education were tied together. Educators    

> 158 Ibid., 287-89.
> 159 Ibid.
> 160 Those designated to the south came from British Presbyterian Church and those to the north originated from Canadian Presbyterian church since Canada was colonized by British Empire from the signature in Peace of Paris in 1763 to 1870-1880s.

79 

integrated religious education into their universities in order to create students who possessed a 

‘democratic intellect. 161 Influenced by the Enlightenment, educators were encouraged to teach non-religious subjects and humanitarian values. 

Elementary Schools 

In the 1880s, the Taiwanese Presbyterian church opened an elementary school that offered a general education curriculum instead of completely centering on teaching Christianity. From that point on, they focused more on teaching non-religious subjects and opened their school system to non-Christian students. 162 At the beginning, the elementary school lacked both pupils and qualified teachers. In the early 1880s, several Taiwanese churches opened a small elementary school on a trial basis. They encountered problems with low enrollments because impoverished Taiwanese parents were reluctant to allow their children to attend school every day since it limited the children’s ability to work. The parents were less bothered by their children 

attending Sunday school because they all took the day off on Sundays. 

The system initially recruited both Christian and non-Christian teachers for the primary school. Unfortunately, they found that some of their non-Christian teachers would not adhere to the moral standards of conduct that they expected teachers to possess. Two non-Christian teachers in the elementary school were fired because of their addiction to opium. The incident led the Presbyterian Conference of Formosa to ban the practice of hiring non-Christian teachers     

> 161 A type of education claims to educate "the whole child and student as a whole, and to see child as a part of whole." However, what the "whole" means is not clearly defined. Please see S. H. Forbes, Holistic Education: An Analysis of Its Intellectual Precedents and Nature (Oxford, UK: University of Oxford, 1999), 2.
> 162 Jiaying Lin, “A Study of the Development of Sunday School in Presbyterian Church in Taiwan,” (MA Thesis,
> National Taiwan Normal University, 2006), 79.

80 

in 1885. 163 From that point on, Church brethren were recruited to teach on a part-time basis and traveling preachers filled the other teaching needs for the school. 164 

Their curriculum was grounded in POJ and scriptural studies but they also offered classes on non-religious subjects including mathematics, geography, and Chinese studies. 165 Expanding the curricula helped the schools attract more students. One of the main reasons the school adopted a general curriculum instead of continuing to only cover religious topics was that 

religious education did not fulfill the government’s prerequisites for entering middle school. 

Since middle school graduates could serve as elementary teachers in the Presbyterian system, they were expected to possess a certain amount of knowledge. 166 Primary school, in contrast to religious learning in Sunday schools, was designed to prepare students for secondary education. The C hurch’s primary school offered an expansion of the curriculum they offered in Sunday 

school over the course of a longer school day. 

Many of the Church’s elementary school graduates went on to pursue training at Tainan 

seminary. Since the Church did not have a middle school before 1885, seminary training was one of the only options available for further education. The theological college also had a shortage of students and most students only needed a recommendation from a church member to gain admission. In Taiwan Church News , the following accounts of two Presbyterian elementary  

> 163

Campbell, Handbook of the English Presbyterian Mission in South Formosa , 288.  

> 164

Ibid., 276.  

> 165

However, church elementary school put special importance on POJ and Chinese script. The exam and class 

schedules of Nâ hōo church elementary school dwelled on the weight of these two subjects. Every Saturday, the 

school tested students on POJ writing and reading, mathematics, and Chinese-character reading and writing practice. 

The teacher N̂ g Sìn-kí recorded that everyday teaching started with explaining a section of Bible and then praying before reading the Chinese classics. A short recitation of Chinese articles would come before one-page Chinese-character practices. Prior to dismissal for lunch, the teacher would give a lesson on mathematics. In the afternoon, after reading POJ and writing 1-2 passages from the Bible, the class was allowed to take a short break. After the interval, they read POJ Bible until it was time for individual studies. During lesson review, the teacher would make corrections on students' POJ and character-writing practices. When it was close to sunset, the entire class recited several pages of Four Books and Three-Ch aracter Classics with a subsequent textual annotation and the day’s studies were at an end. See N̂ g Sìn-kí, "Siau-sit" (News), TCN , August 1894, 82-83.  

> 166

Anonymous , "Tāi -huē ê Kì-lio̍k " (Minutes of the Synod), TCN , December 1885, 34. 81 

school graduates demonstrate that morality was a more important factor for seminary admission than academic training in its early years. The accounts demonstrate both the shortage of seminarians and the lack of a complete western education system. 

The first case discusses Tiō Sî -hôe’s experience of studying to become a clergyman with the moral endorsement of Rev. Barclay. Tiō learned to read and write POJ at the Tang -káng  東

港 Church primary school. 167  One day, Rev. Barclay met Tiō on one of his regular visits to 

Tang -káng Church and found him to be a diligent boy with a promising future. Barclay brought 

him to Taiwan -fu and employed him at the church as an assistant in order to  strengthen his 

spiritual development and enrich his life experiences. The minister was satisfied with Tiō's 

moral conduct, and recommended him as a candidate in the theological college in Tainan. 

During his college life, Tiō got along well with all his  classmates and showed sincere respect to 

his professors. In Tio’s case, Rev Barclay’s recommendation made up for the fact that Tio did 

not have a middle school diploma. Tiō was not admitted simply because he was literate in POJ 

but because the people of  the Taiwan -fu parish helped him cultivate the morality that was 

required to become a seminarian. 

In the second case, the life of Rev. Chhî Chhun-ki and his journey from a disadvantaged child to a respected pastor also demonstrates the influence a Presbyterian education could have on the social status of poor Taiwanese. Chhî, a local of Fengshan  鳳山  County, lost his father in 

early childhood. Without their main breadwinner, the family fell apart. His mother remarried 

and Chhî had no choice but to become a  child laborer at a very early age to feed himself. His 

employer was the husband of a plains native who invited Chhî to church. He enrolled in the       

> 167 Lâu C hùn -sîn, "Tiō S î-hôe ê Sió -tōan "(An Biography of Zhao Shihui), TCN ,October 1909 ,84 .

82 

church’s elementary school in 1871 at the age of eighteen. 168 Two years after he began attending the school, at the age of twenty, he was baptized. The next year, the seminary was in need of students. Many of his fellow parishioners thought that he was highly eligible, so they asked their minister to recommend him. 169 After graduation, Chhî and Tiō both served as pastors in suburban churches. 

The Education Edict for Public School, promulgated by the Governor-general’s Office, 

increased the difficulties that church affiliated elementary school administrators had in attracting new students in 1898. 170 The South Mission Council was very distressed about the difficulties that their elementary schools experienced because of this act. 171 The edict announced that all Taiwanese school-aged students were eligible for Japanese public school for free. In spite of the anger of their congregants, the Presbyterian elementary schools could no longer retain a sufficient number of students. 

After 1898, the Council gradually closed all the church elementary schools. Enrollments in the Presbyterian schools did not drop simply because of the educational reform sponsored by the colonial government. Taiwanese parents had ongoing concerns about th eir children’s ability 

to pursue further education after they graduated from church-sponsored schools. Church school graduates had to learn Japanese for several years before they could become students in the               

> 168 According to this news, an elementary school was opened in 1871. But we have no further information about it including discussion of curricula and school faculty. It could be the author’s misinformation in year .
> 169 Phian-chip-sek, “ Chhî sian -siⁿ Chhun -ki ê sió -toān ”(A biography of Mr. Xu Chunzhi), TCN , August 1907, 60.
> The College was officially founded in 1880. Sources suggest that college -level training began informally somewhat
> earlier than 1880.
> 170 After the promulgation, a number of church parents switched their children to government-funded schools for ages ranged from 8 to 14 years old. Due to the influx of pupils into public schools, church elementary schools were gradually abolished and replaced by official-supported education.
> 171 Jiaying Lin, “A Study of the Development of Sunday School in Presbyterian Church in Taiwan,” 43.

83 

Japanese educational system. Students who earned their primary school degrees from public schools did not encounter that problem. 172 

Middle School 

The Presbyterians founded a middle school in Tainan in 1885 to provide teenagers with religious instruction and an expanded general education. They expected their graduates would benefit the church as well as the society. The first middle school taught Chinese characters, reading literacy in POJ, geography, mathematics, world history, and astronomy. 173 In order to attract more students, the first-year class accepted illiterate students who were twelve years old and over. They only requested a small registration fee: ten yuan for a year’s worth of meals 

since it was a boarding school. 174 The Church waived fees for the poor who were eager to learn but could not afford to attend. The first principal, George Ede (1856-1905), urged the rich in the church to help the poor pay their school fees by offering them financial support. 175 

Starting in July 1886, the middle school began to enforce proficiency in POJ as a prerequisite for enrollment. Teachers saved time by not having to teach basic POJ language classes. 176 Students were supposed to use POJ to further their knowledge acquisition. The 

middle school’s administrators set their sights on helping students enga ge in more sophisticated learning than they undertook in elementary school. By the end of the third decade of the colonial  

> 172

Moreover, school administrators also had concerns about the ability of Christian families to afford to send their children to elementary schools full-time. The s chool administrators’ concerns reflect the fact that church -sponsored primary schools were mostly targeted to Christian children, and in many cases Taiwanese Christian families needed their children to work in addition to going to school. Even so, Sunday schools and elementary schools were not strictly restricted to Christian children. Some churches even accepted as many as 50% non-Christian students. See "Chiong-hoà Chú-jit- o̍h” (Sunday Schools in Zhanghua), TCN , June 1914, 4, and “ Chú-jit- o̍h” (Sunday school), 

TCN , January 1914, 4.  

> 173

Anonymous , "Lūn siat-li̍p tiong-o̍h," (A discussion of founding a middle school), TCN , June 1885, 3.  

> 174

George Ede, "Formosa ‒Opening of Middle School," EPM , January 1886, 11-12.  

> 175

Moreover, to carry out his educational philosophy, he strongly advocated that the church should start a holistic educational system starting with elementary school through middle school, to college. Anonymous, "Tāi-hōe ê kí-lio̍k," (Minutes of the Synod), TCN , December 1885, 34-35.  

> 176

Anonymous, "kàu-hōe ê siat -sit," (News from the church), TCN , July 1886, 89. 84 

period, students were still required to be able to read POJ before they could be admitted to the Presbyterian middle school. The POJ writing system functioned throughout the Japanese colonial era as a channel of access to classical Chinese studies and Western knowledge and science in school. 

The middle school enlightened young adults through Confucian classics transliterated in POJ. In 1885, Principal Ede annotated and transcribed Sām jū keng  三字經  (Three -Character 

Classic), a textbook in which Chinese characters, POJ, and transcribed annotations were printed 

side -by -side in columns (Fig. 8). After its publication in 1897, the book bec ame a required text 

for the entrance examination for the middle school. 177  The POJ promoter, Rev. Barclay praised 

the text in the press. He believed that there was no transliterated book in China better than Ede's. 

It was useful for both students and fore ign teachers who were unfamiliar with Chinese 

characters. The annotations also provided careful and detailed explanations of the historical 

background of the original text. 178  Ede’s book demonstrated the importance of teaching Chinese 

history, virtues, and  worldview in Taiwan. School administrators wanted their students to 

internalize a Christian understanding of these Chinese texts. They were not simply teaching a 

Confucian interpretation of the text. Southern Fujianese language speakers and foreign 

mis sionaries were interpreting these texts very differently than their Chinese peers. 

The Chinese Classics written in characters were interpreted in different ways in pre-modern China. Scholars debated how to identify Confucian philosophy and morality through the texts. The various annotations by later scholars created more contradictory interpretations for readers to consider. In spite of these difficulties, foreign missionaries devoted themselves to    

> 177 Houji Chang, "One-Hundred-Year History of Private Chang Jung Middle School, 1885-1985,"(Tainan: Chang Jung Middle School, 1991), 23.
> 178 Rev. Barclay, "Formosa," EPM , April 1895, 84.

85 

learning Chinese culture via classical Chinese texts. Missionaries believed that they had a responsibility to familiarize themselves with Chinese culture. 179 Even though they desired to 

learn from the texts, foreigners’ ability to interpret these texts was hindered by their lack of 

higher level of education in Chinese intellectual history and culture. 

POJ transcribers created their own alternative interpretations of Chinese texts. For local Taiwanese pupils, they might include an imagined collective memory of China or an interpretation of Chinese culture that fit the needs of the missionary teachers. It is possible that foreign ministers lacked sufficient knowledge of the texts they were transcribing in order to do so accurately. On the other hand, church transcribers like Ede chose to manipulate their reader s’ 

interpretation of classical Chinese texts via their own annotations. A remarkable example of this phenomena is the interpretation of the parallel phrase "Men at their birth are naturally good" ( ren zhi chu, xing ben shan  人之初 , 性本善 ). Ede's POJ version i ncludes an annotation that says 

"Three -Character Classic  indicates a contradictory instruction from our Bible which teaches us 

that men are sinful at birth. The sin is inherited from our ancestors Adam and Eve..." 180 

Through these annotations romanized Con fucian Classics became a cultural medium for teaching 

Christianity. Transcribers compared and privileged Christian ideas over Confucian ideas in texts 

that were originally designed to teach Confucianism. The annotated POJ texts were designed to 

shift Tai wanese students’ understanding away from traditional Confucian morality. 181  The                     

> 179 Starting from the top-down spiritual principles of the emperors was recommended. The decision made by South Mission Council to include the Campbell's transcription of the Edict into the examination subjects for foreign ministers weighted the importance of the POJ version, especially if exam-takers decided not to take the plunge to read the Chinese Edict . Rev. William Campbell trans., The Sacred Edict--Translated into the Vernacular of the Bible Used Throughout Chinchew, Changchew and Formosa (Amoy: The Poe-Bun-Tsai Press, 1908), preface.
> 180 I Jiâu-lí (George Ede), Sām jū keng Sin choān pe̍k -ōa chù kái (New Interpretation of the Three-Character Classic
> in POJ 三字經新撰白話註解 )(Tâi -lâm: Tâi -lâm Hú -sia, 1894), 2 .
> 181 It is similar to transcribed books such as Zhongguo lidai pulue 中國歷代譜略 (Chinese Historical Periods,1890)
> and Wanguo jilu 萬國輯錄 (World Georagphy,1887)

86 

Church included Christian education materials in the middle school’s curriculum by adapting 

Three-Character Classic to help them proselytize teenagers. The content of the teaching materials were completely different from the conventional Chinese interpretation of the text. 

POJ not only made Confucian Classics readable for Taiwanese students, it also made it possible to introduce Western subjects such as physiology, physics, arithmetic, and gymnastics. 182 Some of these subjects had more or less appeared in Chinese publications but were not all included in secondary school curriculums. By 1895, traditional Chinese academies in Taiwan continued to focus on literary studies to help students pass the civil service examinations. The overemphasis upon preparation for the exams meant that students in the Chinese academies often received insufficient science education. Students studying for the civil service exams were not required to study physiology, so they did not study it. In contrast, the Presbyterian schools included Sin-thé lí-ha̍k  身體理學  (physiology) classes which gave students 

a basic knowledge of how the body works. Church educators believed that God created the 

human body.  Learning to take care of their bodies was a way for students to honor God by 

caring for His creations. 183 

Presbyterian educators placed an equal emphasis on learning how to read and write in POJ. Learning to read POJ might allow a person to transform his or her social status from illiterate to literate; learning to write POJ made it possible for a person to become a scholar. The school acknowledged the differences between reading and writing. Initially, in 1895, students were required to read in POJ to enter the middle school; the ability to write in POJ became the       

> 182 Chang, "One-Hundred-Year History of Private Chang Jung Middle School, 1885-1985," 32.
> 183 Kó lōng -sū chūi keng tông, Sin-thé-lí chóng lūn (A Brief Introduction of physiology) (Amoy: K ó lōng -sū chūi -keng -tông,1896), 1.

87 

prerequisite for admission to the middle school in the next school year. 184 Students were sorted into grade levels based on their degree of reading and writing fluency in POJ. 

The Taiwan Church News began to publish students’ essays written in POJ in order to give them a forum for practicing written communication. POJ writers’ cultural status improved 

because they could create their own works for publications. The newspaper also published an honor roll to reward excellent students for their academic achievements. 185 Being listed on a public honor roll was a novel idea in Taiwan for motivating students to study hard. POJ publications created a new Taiwanese social group who wrote in a language that had not been recognized by any previous political regime. 

The South Mission Council frequently sponsored essay competitions and posted winning articles as praiseworthy models in the newspaper. They hoped to encourage more people to write publications in POJ. Prizes for the top essays were highly desirable. In the 1889 essay 

competition on "Lī -ik gín-ná ê lūn"  利益孩子的論  (Essays on benefits for children), each of the 

first -prize winners received four  yuan ; the second place were awarded  half that amount, and so 

on. 186  Considering that five  yuan  paid for one semester of middle -school meals in 1889,  187  the 

awards were an excellent motivation for young writers. The essays were not limited to religious 

topics. The laity were welcome to join  the competition as long as their submitted works satisfied 

the selection criteria from the South Mission Council. 188            

> 184 Anonymous, "Tiong-óh," (Middle school), TCN , October 1893, 114.
> 185 Anonymous, "Tiong-óh," (Middle school), TCN , January 1895, 3.
> 186 Anonymous," Lī -ik gín-ná ê lūn " (Essays on benefits for children), TCN , May 1889, 39.
> 187 Middle school teachers' monthly salaries ranged from 7 to 10 yuan, depending on their teaching experience. For example, Gôo Kuah's (1853-1901) salary in 1888 was 10 yuan per month but Phun bêng-chu's (1864-1899) salary in 1894 was only seven dollars. A Japanese-Taiwanese interpreter earned 12 yuan in 1896. See One-Hundred-Year History of Private Chang Jing Middle School, 1885-1895 , 17, 22, and 32.
> 188 N̂g Goa̍t -tek (1843-1907), as an example, was in charge of the renovation of school and church buildings in southern Taiwan. Serving as the laity for dozens of years, he decided not to be baptized until he was forty-six. By then, he smoked opium, milked a cow for missionaries, and worked as a colporteur. Thanks to his close connection with the church, he studied POJ hard, and that earned him the great reputation of a top-ranking essay published in

88 

The Middle School’s Encounter with Colonialism 

The Japanese Empire was not initially aware that supporting POJ-based education might hinder the adoption of the Japanese language. At the time Japanese was not the central language 

in the Christian middle school but it was becoming the language of Taiwan’s job market. 189 The school did not make Japanese a required course until 1904. In 1906, the 5th Governor-General, Sakuma Samata  佐久間  左馬太  (1844 -1915), recognized the Presbyterian middle school as a 

registered private school (Fig. 9). 190  Official recognition brought the school into the educational 

market in competition with Japanese public s chools. The middle school’s polices and academic 

subjects were matched to the state's course of linguistic education. After this adjustment, the 

middle school graduates could continue their education in Japanese schools. 191  From 1911 on, 

the national lang uage, Japanese, was part of the material covered in the middle school’s entrance 

examinations along with other requirements, including passing POJ,  Three Character Classic ,

and arithmetic exams. 192  Taiwanese Christian education was a multilingual endeavor b ecause 

Japan’s colonial language policy required students to learn Japanese in school. Chinese 

characters, POJ, Japanese, and English were all taught in the school, and the southern Fujianese 

language remained the most common spoken tongue. 193                  

> the Church News . It was such an unprecedented case that the church authorities urged that all Christians in southern areas of Taiwan to read this model essay by a non-Christian. See TCN , July 1886, 91-94; Maoqing Huang, Ninety-Year History of Thài-Pêng-Kéng Maxwell Memorial Church (Tainan: Thài-pêng-kéng Maxwell Memorial Church 1988), 146-47.
> 189 Ko Thian-sù, "Tiong-óh khah hó á-si Jit-pún óh khah hó?" (Taiwanese middle school is better or Japanese public school is better?), TCN , February 1897, 15.
> 190 The document noting the approval of the founding a private middle school (under the name 私立臺南長老教會
> 高等學校 ) by the Governor -General of Taiwan, Sakuma Samata 佐久間 左馬太 (1844 -1915 ), is stored at private
> Chang Jung Senior High School.
> 191 Bān En̂g -hôa, "Tiong-ôh ê Kò-péh," (Announcement from the middle school), TCN , March 1915, 11.
> 192 Liâm Tek-lia̍t, " Tiong-ôh ê Kò-péh," (Announcement from the middle school), TCN , January 1911, 3.
> 193 Anonymous, "Tiong-óh ê Khó" (Courses in middle school), TCN , August 1904, 71.

89 

The Presbyterian Church schools administrators stayed out of trouble with the Japanese colonial government for the most part. Both educational systems coexisted peacefully until 1919, although the general curricula were designed differently. The 1919 Education Law regulated school education in regards to particular ritual practices. On national holidays, to reinforce Japanese nationalism, all schools had to hold a national worship ceremony in honor of Prince Kitashirakawa Yoshihisa of Japan  北白川宮能久親王  (1847 -1895). 194  In the same year, 

the Presbyterian middle school’s administrators were asked to re -register the school as an 

authorized private institute. In the beginning, they did not take the request of re -registration 

seriously and ignored the 1919 Law because Christi ans only worship God so it would be 

sacrilegious to hold a worship service for the Emperor. The administrators’ refusal to re -register 

the middle school did not create an open conflict. 

Unfortunately their refusal made their graduates ineligible for admission to public high schools and national colleges. Colonial post-middle education administrators in Taiwan refused 

to recognize the middle school’s diplomas as long as they were not compliant with the 1919 

Law. Under the circumstances, Presbyterian middle school students had no choice but to transfer to schools in Japan to continue their education. The Church decided to re-register the school as a private institution in order to enable their students to pursue further education in Taiwan. 195 

During the process of re-registration, Japanese authorities attempted to force the 

Presbyterian schools to stop teaching classes in POJ. Izawa Shūji, a minister of Academic 

Affairs under Taiwan governor-general, designated by the Taiwan Sōtokufu, criticized the sch ool for teaching in POJ and argued that conducting classes in POJ dangerously undermined      

> 194 Xiqing Xu, “Regulations of Taiwan Public General High School,” Taiwan Jiaoyu yange zhi (History of Taiwan Education during Colonial Period) (Nantou: Academia Historica, 2010), 348-51.
> 195 Edward Band, "New Education Edict, 1919," 25.

90 

reverence toward the Emperor. He contended that Presbyterian missionaries were resisting Japanese cultural education by using POJ. 196 In order to escape their legal difficulties, the Church recruited Japanese educators to teach Japanese. They also seized every opportunity to exhibit how the schools were successful and well-managed under the Empire's domination in order to administrate the school as it was and continue using POJ. 197 All of the students worked 

cautiously and fearfully to prepare for regular examinations that were made by the Inspector’s 

Office. From the perspective of the Head of Civilian Affairs, their behavior demonstrated the success of civilized education led by the colonial government. 198 In consideration of the middle 

school graduates’ future careers, school administrators showed compliance with the colonial law 

even as the church aimed to maximize Taiwanese missions in education as well as medical service. The school continued using POJ and the southern Fujianese language as the main school language throughout the colonial period. 

POJ in Girls’ and Women's Education 

The Church recognized that women should be educated since they played a central role in raising the next generation and maintaining family morality. Scottish ministers observed that some Taiwanese elite families sent their unmarried daughters to Chinese schools. In order to be able to teach their future children, girls were permitted to go to school if their families could 

afford it. Many families in Taiwan would not invest in a woman’s education because they did 

not see a reason to do so. 199 In the Scottish evangelists’ minds, Scottish girls received their                

> 196 Shinano Kyōikukai ed. Isawa Shūj isensh ū(Anthology of Isawa Shūji )(Nagano :Shinano Kyōikukai, 1958 ), 571.
> 197 Edward Band, "Tainan Middle School, Report for 1926," EPM , April 1927, 337-38.
> 198 Anonymous, "Bîn chèng tiú-koa sûn Tiong-ôh" (The head of civilian affairs at Taiwan Sōtokufu inspected the
> middle school), TCN , July 1917, 2-3.
> 199 R. A. Houston, Scottish Literacy and the Scottish Identity: Illiteracy and Society in Scotland and Northern England, 1600-1800 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2002), 127.

91 

education in a similar manner to Taiwanese girls. They typically received as much education via informal methods as they did through public schools. Self-teaching and dame schools which were designed to educate poor women were increasingly common in Scotland by the 18 th 

century.  By 1872, disadvantaged groups of people in Scotland enjoyed access to school 

education or informal studies. 

Formal education and learning are different matters. 200 Generally, writing or reading literacy was closely associated with the pursuit of formal academic study. In the Chinese context, literacy was taught through a variety of activities including reading and writing in classical Chinese. Chinese character readers proved they were literate by reading the governor's posted announcements, prescriptions, family letters, bills, and property contracts. Nevertheless, school was not considered necessary for everyone, particularly for women. Women could study at home to become literate. 

Literacy education was also a gendered process in Taiwan. A traditiona l girls’ education 

in Taiwan included instruction on morality that was based on Chinese classics taught in private academies or with tutors. Private Chinese instructors taught girls by having them read the Nü lunyü  女論語  (Female Analects ), Three -Character C lassic,  Xiao Jing  孝經  (The Classic 

of  Filial  Piety ), Lienü  zhuan  列女傳  (Biographies of Exemplary Women ), and  Guize  閨則  (Rules 

in Female Chamber ).  201  Although some girls attended mixed gender classes in private Chinese 

academies, their teachers made it plain that literacy would not be of use to them and that sewing, 

cooking and other domestic duties should be their focus. Girls did not practice their  writing 

skills but were instead urged to derive knowledge from reading. Their education was designed to       

> 200 B.V. Street, Cross-Cultural Approaches to Literacy (Cambridge University Press, 1993), 169.
> 201 Ningyan Liu, Second Edition of Gazetteer of Taiwan Prefecture, Vol. 6 (Taipei: Academia Historica, 1994), 103.

92 

make them good wives and mothers, not to help them contribute to scholarly debates. Girls only made up 0.2 percent of registered students in Chinese academies in Taiwan in 1898. 202 

As early as 1879, Rev. Hugh Ritchie (1835 -1879 ) planned to begin offering girls’ 

education. 203 The first modern middle school was designed for male students only. 204 The Presbyterian Church Girls' school did not open until Feb. 14, 1887 due to the lack of institutional support and staff. The school accepted girls who were nine years old and older. To attract students, they charged a relatively low tuition of four yuan per year, only half that of the middle school. 

Taiwanese parents in southern Taiwan allowed girls to attend Christian schools so they could learn to read the Bible not so they could study academic subjects. In the beginning, missionary teachers had to persuade parents that girls should be educated. The parents, however, were hesitant about sending unmarried girls to boarding school. In the first semester, the school only had 18 students: 13 girls lived with their schoolmates and 5 commuted between home and school every day in Tainan. 

Christian girls’ education equipped them with reading literacy in POJ and moral 

cultivation. School subjects included POJ studies, Chinese classics, arithmetic, family hygiene, parenting, physiology, bible studies and a variety of sewing techniques. Christian girls' education in Taiwan was partially based on the Chinese traditional perception of women. Teachers used Lí-ke Iàu-Lio̍k  理家要略  (Principles of Family Management) and  Tāi -bêng Jîn 

Hào Hông -hō Lōe -hùn  大明仁孝皇后內訓  (Inte rnal Principles by Queen Renxiao of the Ming 

Dynasty) in POJ in the early years to make girls virtuous, well -mannered and intelligent. The        

> 202 Association of Taiwan Education Ed., History of Taiwan Education (Taipei: Nantian Publisher, 1939), 84.
> 203 Campbell, Handbook of the South Formosa Mission, June 11, 1879, 47:3.
> 204 Chang, "One-Hundred-Year History of Private Chang Jung Middle School, 1885-1985," 539.

93 

texts used in the school were POJ transcriptions of Chinese morality texts. 205 The texts the Presbyterian missionaries used for female education were written specifically for female audiences. They were designed to reinforce traditional gender identities and perpetuate the associations between women and the home that were expressed in the Chinese texts. 206 

Four years earl ier, in 1883, Rev. Mackay founded Tamsui Girls’ School, the first northern Christian girls’ school, in northern Taiwan. Before this school officially became the 

Tamsui Girls' School, it was essentially a female educational camp where Mackay attempted to recruit the daughters of non-Christian farmers, labors, and merchants to be students. 207 The school was sponsored by the Woman's Foreign Missionary Society of the Presbyterian Church in Canada. They hired native teachers and requested instructors from Oxford College to co-teach. Unlike the school in the south, it had less well-equipped school facilities and classrooms. Teachers were unpaid, as the founder spent the available funds to build the school. Most of the time, experienced or elderly Christian volunteers taught POJ and catechisms. In Mackay's opinion, girls did not need to master the use of Chinese characters, or learn sewing from foreign women because the native girls were already experts in embroidery. His primary objective was for all the girls to read the Bible in POJ. 

This girls’ school selected native students so they could train them to be evangelists. 

Consequently the school taught fewer Western school subjects by comparison with its southern counterpart. Bible study was prioritized over all of the school’s other curriculum. Girls read, 

wrote, sang hymns, and studied geography and history through the Bible. In order to be able to       

> 205 Chang Jung Girl's Senior High School, The One-Hundred-Year History of Private Chang Jung Girl's Senior High School, 1887-1987 (Tainan: Private Chang Jung Girl's Senior High School, 1987), 46.
> 206 So far, I have not seen POJ transcriptions of Japanese cultural texts on womanhood. They probably had some, but I have not seen extant materials that showed that the church or the school taught the Japanese ideas of morality. The
> curricula in the middle and girls’ schools were completely different from the Japanese public school’ s curricula.
> 207 Mackay, From Far Formosa: The Island, Its People and Missions , 305.

94 

serve the church as soon as possible, they also studied catechisms as well as other necessary religious knowledge. Mackay believed that these promising female Christian evangelists experienced a healthier life at the learning center because of their studies. 208 He also insisted that hiring native female missionaries rather than foreigners was a wise plan. He observed that foreigners in Taiwan had difficulty getting used to local customs, weather, and language. Foreign female missionaries also had to be sent back home if they became ill which wasted time and money. Moreover, the salary of a native woman was a tenth of the salary of a foreign missionary. They also believed that potential converts would feel more at ease with native missionaries who had a good command of the language and customs by comparison with foreign female missionaries who were struggling to speak the language. Native evangelists were also very successful at converting their sisters, friends, neighbors, and relatives. 209 

Mackay’s contemporaries, including Marjorie Landsborough (1884 -1984), the wife of a missionary doctor, wrote about the nat ive women’s success in converting their families. Their 

stories demonstrate that Taiwanese women possessed religious autonomy from the late Qing 

period on. Landsborough’s manuscript discusses the role that women's family gatherings played 

in conversions. One of the most interesting stories described the successful conversion of a high-ranking lady, Mrs. Six, by an evangelist named Mrs. Righteousness. Mrs. Six visited a Christian church where she met Mrs. Righteousness. Afterward she invited Mrs. Righteousness to her home to teach her family POJ. During the visit, Mrs. Six lay on a sleeping couch and smoked 

opium. She was surrounded by concubines and her fellow wives. Although Mrs. Six’s husband, 

Squire Li, objected to his wives studying POJ and practicing Christianity, both Mrs. Six and Squire Li's second wife decided to accept baptism. A number of their maidservants also     

> 208 Ibid.,306.
> 209 Mackay, "Lūn koo -niû" (Essays on female missionaries), Tâi-pak ê kì-lio̍k (Records of Taipei), Manuscript.

95 

converted. As a result of their conversion, the concubines sought drug treatment at Canadian Presbyterian Mission Hospital in Taihoku (now Taipei) so that they could stop using opium. 210 

It was a cultural innovation for Taiwan that the Church allowed married women into schools instead of forcing individuals to hire family tutors. Teaching married women enabled schools to conduct an alternative and public assessment of literacy. In Taiwan, women's household tasks included sewing, cooking, and managing domestic relationships; only a minority of them managed their household accounts. Financial management, which required reading liter acy, was typically a man’s task in the family. School training helped wives take care of 

household tasks, and it also facilitated these women's social tasks, e.g. evangelism, outside of the 

home. Most graduates of women’s school were expected to serve th e church and missionary hospitals. 

The Presbyterian Church’s choice to offer married women’s education was 

unprecedented. The Church allowed married women to enroll in the Women's Bible School in southern Taiwan and the Women's School in northern Taiwan. The Women’s Bible School, 

founded in 1896 by Miss Margaret Barnett (?-1933), accommodated women who were too old to attend the Girls schools or who suffered from family problems. 211 

In 1910, the Women’s School admitted elderly women to pursue a tw o-year program, focused on Bible studies, POJ, singing, Chinese characters, and Japanese. 212 These students increased women's visibility in their male-centric society and expanded their career opportunities         

> 210 Marjorie Landsborough, Stories from Formosa & More Stories from Formosa (Tainan: Church News Publisher, reprint, 2004), 140-51.
> 211 C.H. and Cheng Hus, L. M. eds., A Centennial History of the Presbyterian Church of Formosa,1865-1965
> (Tainan: Presbyterian Church of Formosa centenary publication committee, 2000), 187.
> 212 Board of Foreign Mission of Presbyterian Church in Canada , Report of the Board of Foreign Mission of Presbyterian Church in Canada for 1911 (Toronto: Presbyterian Church in Canada, 1912), 114.

96 

in the process. 213 Most students, however, did not complete a degree for various reasons. 214 

These schools hoped to improve the financial and social well-being of lower income women 

through education. Learning POJ and being able to read the Scriptures improved the students’ 

capacity to participate in soci ety in meaningful ways. A women’s school where the curriculum 

was limited to learning the Bible and POJ helped marginalized women confidently venture into the world with support from the church. 

POJ and the Bible were the core subjects in the schools because the female students were being trained as missionaries and church workers. They were also required to preach in missionary church hospitals, if needed. In hospital wards, these groups of female laborers developed a novel occupation as working women. Female clergywomen taught patients POJ in waiting rooms; moreover, religious teaching on the wards was the most important opportunity to convert the sick to Christianity. 215 Female preachers from the Women's Bible School and the Women's School were in charge of evangelical work in hospital rooms as long as their audience showed an interest in learning about God. 216 

Learning POJ improved women’s education and social position. POJ advocate Cai 

Peihuo believed that men looked down on women in Taiwan for their lack of education. 

Educating women through POJ, in Cai’ understanding, would push men to respect them more. 217 

This Taiwanese scholar argued that women were given fewer opportunities for education so that they could focus on looking after their children and families due to their husbands' selfishness                       

> 213 Board of Foreign Mission of Presbyterian Church in Canada, Report of the Board of Foreign Mission of Presbyterian Church in Canada for 1921 (Toronto: Presbyterian Church in Canada, 1922), 82.
> 214 The most famous example was Ciwang Iwal, a native woman whose marriage fell apart and who appealed to the church. She later became the mother of a native church.
> 215 Duncan Macleod, The Island Beautiful (Toronto: Presbyterian Church in Canada, 1923), 202.
> 216 Hildur Hermanson, Zhuo Banghong trans., “My Life,” An Anniversary Issue —The One Hundred and Fifth Year
> of Mackey Memorial Hospital (Taipei: Mackey Memorial Hospital ,1985), 287.
> 217 Pôe-hóe Chhòa, Lūn Lú -chú ê tāi -chì" (Views of women's positions), Cha̍p -Hāng Koán -Kiàn (Ten essays about Taiwan 十項管見 )(Tâi -lâm Sin -lâu Chheh -pâng, 1925), 56 -74 .

97 

which prevented women from being as well educated as men. Cai urged that women should go to school so they could fulfill their obligation to raise good citizens. Moreover, as he believed, women were mothers who served as their children's teachers. Being literate would help them contribute more to the running of their households. 218 Cai's rationale for bolstering female 

education mirrored the aims of female education that were regulated in Japan’s 1919 Taiwan 

Education Law. 219 The colonial government assured that women should be educated so that they 

could become good wives and wise mothers (ryōsai kenbo  良妻賢母 ). 

The curricula in the Girls' School in Tamsui demonstrates that Chinese, Christian, and 

Japanese ideologies about women’s education had coalesced. Unlike the Western subjects 

taught at the Presbyterian middle school, girls received a series of religious and home management courses, including Bible study, music, languages (POJ, Chinese characters, English, and Japanese), arithmetic, family hygiene, and Western-style sewing. 220 Taiwanese Christian 

women’s and girl’s education was designed to make women better housewives and mothers by 

nurturing their Christian faith. Since their emphasis was on making women better mothers, one 

of the women’s schools allowed married female students to live with their children in single sex 

dorms. 221 

The Role of POJ in Medical Training and Evangelism in Missionary Hospitals 

Church leaders believed that providing medical services was as important as their educational mission in Taiwan. They created the same mission in medical service for Taiwan             

> 218 Ibid.
> 219 Chien-ming Yu, The Women Education in Taiwan under Japanese Rule (1895-1945) (Taipei: Institute of History, National Normal Univ., 1988), 270-71. The 1919 Education Law promulgated that General Girls' High Schools were the venue where students acquired useful knowledge and skills for life and cultivated female virtues.
> 220 Board of Foreign Mission of Presbyterian Church in Canada , Report of the Board of Foreign Mission of Presbyterian Church in Canada for 1907 (Toronto: Presbyterian Church in Canada, 1908), 104.
> 221 TamKang Senior High School Ed., History of Tamkang Senior High School (Taipei: TamKang Senior High School, 1997), 130.

98 

that they used in Shantou and Amoy. 222 Missionaries did not create medical missions solely to promote conversions; there was a genuine need for medical treatment in Taiwan. The first Presbyterian Church missionary to Taiwan, James Laidlaw Maxwell (1836-1921) was a doctor. 223 His first impression of the island was that beggars' untreated sores and unwashed bodies filled the air with terrible smells. 224 A lack of hygiene and medical care caused fatal diseases in these people. 225 After Maxwell’s arrival, a temporary clinic was immediately 

founded in Taiwan-fu (later moved to Dakao). The poor sanitation and the lack of western medical care encouraged Presbyterian missionaries and doctors to provide medical services. Impoverished native Taiwanese patients were not only in need of medical care; they were not able to afford care from traditional Chinese doctors. It also happened in northern Taiwan. Based on his medical training, the Canadian missionary George L. Mackay found a desperate need to offer simple treatments such as dental extraction, surgery assistance, and prescribing  quinine for 

malaria, sometimes for free. In  his diary, Mackay regularly ordered Western medicine and 

medical supplies from Europe. 

Church authorities were concerned about the effectiveness and appropriateness of making medical missions a strategy for evangelism in Taiwan. Rev. Campbell Naismith Moody (1865- 

> 222

Rev. Carstairs Douglas, "A Visit to Formosa," EPM , October 1, 1860. Medical missions were considered one of the most effective strategies in the evangelical career. For more information, please see Peter Williams, "Healing and Evangelism: The Place of Medicine in Late Victorian Protestant Missionary Thinking," in W.J. Sheils, ed. The Church and Healing: Papers Read at the Twentieth Summer Meeting and the Twenty-First Winter Meeting of the Ecclesiastical History Society (UK: Ecclesiastical History Society, 1982).  

> 223

He was  a graduate from the University of Edinburgh who later worked for the General Hospital, Birmingham.  

> 224

Ibid.  

> 225

According to the Medical Report s, authored by European doctors between 1871 and 1895 (a medical report from 1871 to 1895 recorded by foreign doctors hired by the Imperial Chinese Maritime Customs Service in Taiwan-fu and Takao), malarial fever, syphilis, diseases of the eye, leprosy, and rheumatism were the most common diseases in Taiwan. A number of missionaries suffered from malaria themselves, including Rev. Mackay and Barclay; Rev. Hugh Ritchie even died of it. Under-developed public hygiene, an unfavorable natural environment, and fatal epidemic diseases created a high demand for medical care. Mackay was also concerned that repeated illness would hinder foreign missionaries from being effective in the medical field, particularly female missionaries. See Wenfeng Dai, "Medical Reports of the Chinese Imperial Maritime Customs Service and Diseases," Thoughts and Words 33: 2 (1995): 157-211. 99 

1940) praised medical missions, but he also wondered to what extent a doctor should attempt to convert his patients to Christianity. During their practices, doctors also rarely had enough time to witness to their patients, let alone busy doctors like Dr. David Landsborough (1870-1957) whose hospital was always bursting at the seams. His "long-suffering-kindness" earned him a 

beautiful reputation but also contributed to the natives’ uncertainties about his motivations for 

caring for them. 226 Some locals believed that Western doctors were a group of professionals healing people for small money or free and asking nothing in return. 227 

Missionary doctors had an absolute faith that patients’ acceptance of their treatment 

signified that the patients believed in their charismatic power and their capacity to heal illnesses. 228 They also believed that treating patients helped demonstrate God's love and benevolence over human beings one and all, rich and poor alike. 229 Even though Taiwanese patients wondered about the motivation behind the free treatment, doctors worked tirelessly and even fell ill due to overwork. 230 

After three decades in Taiwan, the doctors gradually discovered that they needed help from medical specialists to meet the demand for health care. 231 When Dr. James Laidlaw  

> 226

Campbell N. Moody, The Heathen Heart: An Account of the Reception of the Gospel among the Chinese of Formosa (Taipei : Ch'eng Wen Publishing Co., reprint 1973), 23-26.  

> 227

Ibid.  

> 228

In fact, not all foreign doctors agreed with the strategy of free treatment. Non-missionary doctors such as Patrick Manson (1844-1922), who served as a Customs doctor in Takao suggested that it was necessary to charge patients in order to attract elite natives and local officials' trust in Western medicine. Free treatment would only attract attention from the poor, coolies, opium smokers, farmers, soldiers, beggars, vagrants, and prostitutes, which would hurt the career of Western medical science in China. See Patrick Manson, Report of the Amoy Chinese Hospital for the Year 1873 (Amoy: A. A. Marcal, 1874), 3-4.  

> 229

Native people believed in the power of Western medicine, but were unaware of the structure of the Western medical system. Non-medical missionaries such as George Leslie Mackay and William Campbell, in their diaries and sketches, mentioned their regular routes to distribute medicine even though they had no medical degrees or certificates. They claimed that they could recognize malaria, and experience had taught them the best medicine at the time to cure the disease was quinine. Therefore, medicine takers, especially those plains natives, fell over themselves to demand quinine as a panacea.  

> 230

James Maxwell, "Letter from Dr. Maxwell," EPM , January 1866, 19-20.  

> 231

Roujin Chen,  Taiwan's First Experience of Western Civilization  (Taipie:  Rye Field Publishing Co , 2005),  57.100 

Maxwell arrived at the southern island, Taiwan had no western-trained medical professionals. The Scottish doctor requested medicinal assistants from Amoy which was not a permanent solution for the shortage of medical technicians. After the founding of clinics, hospitals, and 

sanatoria, the church’s doctors realized they would have difficulty keeping track of their patients 

without adequate support personnel. 

In addition to recruiting more colleagues who had theological and medical degrees from the homeland, the church called for doctor's assistants in the Taiwan Church News and offered training classes and final certificates for volunteer trainees in 1896. Unfortunately, many who showed interest in the work were illiterate in both Chinese characters and English. In that case, Chinese and English medical publications were rendered useless even though they were invaluable in medical practices and education. Missionary doctor teachers therefore formulated a unique training plan to teach Western-styled medical knowledge in POJ so that they could communicate with native trainees. 

Missionary doctors founded medical programs through learning POJ and working in church-affiliated hospitals in Tainan, Taipei, and Changhua. Missionaries were the first group of people who brought Western medicine into the non-West. Western Protestant missionary doctors, who came with the imperial overseas expansion, offered medical services in the context of modernization and standardization. They were trained to understand diseases as the result of "structural abnormalities and physiological malfunctions," which were systematically identified and effectively controlled by Western medicine. 232 To understand more about diseases, Taiwanese medical interns studying at the Presbyterian hospitals had to be able to read and write in POJ. Students received four years of training and a medical certificate after the completion of    

> 232 I. Loudon, Western Medicine: An Illustrated History (Oxford University Press, 2001), 249.

101 

training. If a student could not afford the tuition, funding was available but he/she had to approach the physicians about it directly. 233 Students were not required to be able to read or write in Chinese characters, English, or Japanese. Most of the prospective student assistants spoke the southern Fujianese language and could easily learn POJ to enable written communication with their teachers. The interns, who were commonly illiterate in Chinese and Japanese, received modern hospital training, education in Western advanced treatment, and medical knowledge from the Presbyterian Church mission. They acquired scientific knowledge by reading and writing POJ in Presbyterian medical training practices. 

To make hospital service cooperative, Dr. George Gushue-Taylor  戴人壽  (1883 -1954), 

who was influential in the medical field of Leprosy  and served as a director in the missionary 

hospital in Tainan and Mackay Hospital in Taipei,  planned to hire nurses and founded a school 

of nursing in northern Taiwan. 234  The nursing school administrators gave preference to 

candidates who were girls’ schoo l and public school graduates. They were expected to be 

Christians who could read and write POJ and possess tenderness and diligence. Students had to 

be between eighteen and twenty -five, physically healthy and possess a love for their patients. 235 

POJ literacy gave Taiwanese students access to western professional medical knowledge through the Presbyterian system . Dr. Gushue-Taylor subsequently announced the publication of his textbook Lāi gōa kho khàn hō ha̍k  內外科看護學  (The Principles and Practice of  Nursing) in 

POJ in 1917. 236  It included nursing science, anatomy, physiology, and general medical science.                  

> 233 Anonymous," I-Koán ê Kò-péh" (News from hospital), TCN , October 1896, 78.
> 234 Dr. George Gushue -Taylor was very important to the promotion of medical knowledge through POJ and the
> treatment of Hansen Disease in Taiwan. He founded the first special hospital for the patients of Hansen Disease in
> Bali, a suburban area of Danshui. See Zhenyi Zhu, “ Dr. George Gushue -Taylor ,”Taiwan yi jie 51 (2008): 358 -62.
> 235 Tè Jîn -siū , "Tâi -lâm Pīⁿ -īnⁿ" (Tainan H ospital), TCN , January 1 918, 12.

102 

He also announced a forthcoming POJ publication on teaching midwifery with detailed illustrations. By publishing POJ textbooks, he demonstrated that he was benefiting sisters, their neighbors, and the church. 237 In order to improve nurses’ medical knowledge, he bought every 

nurse a Chinese version of A Handbook of Nursing translated by Zhong Maofang  鍾茂芳 

(1884 -?), the first Chinese overseas graduate who  received a nursing education in England. Dr. 

Gushue -Taylor  used Zhong's translation 238  and twenty or so other medical references  to  complete 

his first POJ nursing text in 1917 for southern Fujianese language speakers who could not read 

Chinese characters. 239 

Many western medical textbooks and reference books available for the Taiwanese interns were written in POJ. Even though Chinese and English versions of popular science publications were accessible, Taiwanese medical novices and interns could quickly absorb knowledge of biomedicine through POJ texts. Reading POJ publications was as easy as speaking the southern Fujianese language because POJ was a transliteration system for the language. Immediate benefits came particularly from practical books, like Dr. Gushue-Taylor's , as, without much knowledge of abstract theory, any aide could directly apply the illustrated information to patient care. For instance, feeding methods and instructions for medicine distribution were clearly described in his book. He created charts of medical terminology and untranslatable terms were written side-by-side in POJ, Chinese characters and English for further reference. Soon after his book was published, almost every western medical professional in Taiwan had a copy at hand.             

> 236 There must have some other handouts or medical pamphlets published before this textbook since the hiring of medical interns in Taiwan Church News started in 1896. I unfortunately have not found other medical-related text
> that was published earlier except Sin-thé lí-ha̍k 身體理學 (physiology, 1907)
> 237 Ibid.
> 238 G. Gushue -Taylor ,Lāi gōa kho khàn hō ha̍k (The Principles and Practice of Nursing) (Taiwan, Formosa, English
> Presbyterian Mission Hospital, 1917), preface.
> 239 John Lai, Database , www.laijohn.com/works/kangsu/14.htm (accessed 25 December 2013).

103 

Foreign missionary surgeons who held medical degrees probably did not have a practical need for the textbook. However, it served a vital function by teaching Western missionaries medical vocabulary in the southern Fujianese language. When they were unsure how to term diagnoses and procedures in the language to their patients and students, they could consult Dr. Gushue-

Taylor’s book .240 

Having more medical personnel who could read and write in POJ enabled the missionaries to assign medical support personnel the duty of teaching illiterate patients about the gospel of Christ. Missionary doctors did not have time to read the Bible with their patients. During busy days, there were around 400-500 patient visitors and perhaps 200-300 on a less busy day. 241 To treat the endless stream of patients day and night from every corner of the island, the hospital asked ten patients to enter the preparation room at a time. Doctors complained of being swamped with patients and questioned if medical services could really help the church grow if they were not able to talk to people about Jesus in the course of their work. Training nurses and students helpers to share the Gospel for them resolved the dilemma. 

Taiwanese intern doctors and nurses were trained to provide supporting medical care. Compared to their teachers, they had more time to attend to non-emergency patients. Western medicine, delivered by missionaries, had symbolic power to heal both sick bodies and fragile 

souls. Doctors’ assistants conducted evangelic al activities on the wards during their lunch hours. 242 Patients were particularly receptive to the medical personnel’s proselytizing efforts 

since Chinese doctors would not treat them due to their inability to pay their medical bills. 243                  

> 240 Meiling Chen, "An Introduction of the Principles and Practice of Nursing " Changhua Christian Hospital News
> 19:5 (2002): 22-24.
> 241 Gân Chín-seng, "Lâm-pō Kàu -hōe I -liâu Thoân-tō -sú" (History of medical mission in southern church), TCN ,June 1941, 4.
> 242 Lô ⁿI-sing, “ Tōa -siā ê I -Koán ”(A Clinic in Tōa -siā ), TCN ,January 1891 ,3.
> 243 Âng Io̍k, “Tâi -Lâm I-Koán ”(Tainan hospital), TCN, September 1896, 68 .

104 

Churchgoers were given preferential treatment by the medical missionaries. If a person attended a church service, they could pre-register for a clinic visit. Once they had seen the doctor they were only charged one-tenth of a yuan. Patients who had not pre-registered at a church service were charged twice as much to see the doctor. 244 They were charged twice the regular service fee because the missionaries wanted them to be preached to in addition to receiving medical care. If they had not already gone to church, the medical personnel would have to be paid to preach to them in the hospital in addition to treating their illnesses. 

The medical training offered in the missionary hospital system was a crucial factor in increasing the number of native doctors and medical personnel. There were simply not enough medical missionaries to meet the needs of the native population. When any of the European doctors left for furlough, the hospital would always have to close until their return unless a substitute could fill the vacancy immediately. A shortage of medical professionals was an ongoing problem. Even though there was no Western medical education or health care system in Taiwan before the missionaries came, there were established native Chinese medical doctors and practices. Yet there were no formal systems for education and training in traditional Chinese medicine. Traditional doctors qualified themselves via independent study and experience taking 

care of patients. For a native traditional doctor, “custom is the only la w, and success the only 

diploma.” 245 By experimenting on himself or on others “a man may come to know something of the medicinal values of certain compounds.” 246 The Western-trained doctors thus suffered because there was no ready medical education system or labor force to support their missions. Initiating an apprentice training system resolved the professional labor shortage. Hospitals           

> 244 Liāu Tit, “Tâi -Lâm I-Koán ”(Tainan hospital), TCN, July 1920, 10.
> 245 Mackay, From Far Formosa: The Island, Its People and Missions , 308.
> 246 Ibid.

105 

served as schools which provided interns with coursework and a practical training ground as well as experience in religious proselytism. 

Apart from medical practice during the day, missionary hospitals scheduled lectures and experimental classes for students at nights. In addition to basic knowledge of physiology from 

Sin-thé-lí (physiology) taught in middle school, physician educators taught students drug science. In order to optimize the quality of the study, in 1922, Dr. David Landsborough published the first POJ pharmacopoeia  Tâm -Lâm Chiang -Hòa Tiú -Ló -Kàu Kong -iōng ê Io̍h -Hng  臺灣彰化長老教 

會用的藥方  (The Pharmacopeia of the Ta inan and Shoka Hospital of the English Presbyterian 

Mission Formosa) which he  co -edited with Dr. James Laidlaw  Maxwell  Jr. (1873 -195l), 247  and 

Dr. Percy Cheal (n.d.) . In six chapters, his book introduced the common drugs used in hospitals 

and restrictions o f use, how to formulate medicine, treat hookworms, examine urine, and prepare 

samples for microscopy. The pharmacopoeia was essential not only in class discussion but also 

for the interns’ future medical careers as pharmacists and practitioners. 

Teaching medical knowledge through POJ texts unexpectedly improved social mobility. 

The capacity to use and compound drugs secured the interns’ careers and transformed them into 

professionals. Through POJ, they quickly acquired Western medical information in their mother tongue, the southern Fujianese language. Although hospital trainees would not earn a medical degree, graduation certificates in both Chinese and English were issued by doctors of medicine in whichever subjects an intern had satisfied examiners. 248 Native doctors could use their certificates to get jobs at hospitals founded by the Presbyterian Church. Their economic futures were secured through their educations.       

> 247 James Laidlaw Maxwell Jr, Thai-Peng-Keng Maxwell Memorial Church ,tpkch.dyndns.org/weblink/missionary/James_Maxwell.htm (accessed 15 April 2014).
> 248 Committee Members, A Limited Territory Medical Doctor (Tainan: PCT Press, 2008), 22 -23.

106 

Certified medical professionals earned money by selling drugs as they acquired the knowledge from  Dr. David Landsborough’s book. During the first two decades of the 19 th 

century, classification of pharmaceutical interns and certified physicians had not been 

standardized by the missionary medical teaching system. The church did  not restrict their 

certified doctors to serving as physicians. They were free to sell drugs if they preferred as long 

as they could create their own markets. At the time, to  abstain from opium and escape from high 

fever,  manufactured  opium pills and quin ine powder were still in great demand. The brisk 

market had  attracted unscrupulous hucksters who charged outrageous prices.  Taiwan Church 

News  repeatedly urged its readers not to purchase inauthentic medicine from unauthorized sellers 

who might state unt ruthfully that they were Dr. David Landsborough’s assistants. 249  In fact, the 

church strongly advised doctors to stop missionaries from selling drugs to cure illness (bē -io̍h 

híng -i 賣藥行醫 ). 250  Rev. Mackay and Campbell found that giving medication to cure illnesses 

provided them with an effective opportunity for missions in their early years in Taiwan. 251  But, 

from the church’s perspective, evangelical preaching was the most important aspect of  mission 

work. Medical practice, including drug sales, could not replace the work of spreading the 

gospel. Christian hospitals therefore, created on -site positions for ministers to assist medical 

missionaries. 252  Interestingly, the degreed intern doctors w ere free to open pharmacies and 

specialized clinics. The aim of educating medical interns was not to prepare them to become 

clergymen. Many native doctors eventually marketed Western drugs and practiced as certified 

doctors in their own pharmacies.            

> 249 Anonymous, “Tâi -tó siat -sit ─Phiàn -su̍t” (News of Taiwan, trick) , TCN , March 1916, 11 -12.
> 250 Anonymous, “Siat -sit, Lūn -kàu Thoân -Tō ê bē -io̍h híng -i, Thoân -Tō bē -io̍h ê chó -gāi ” (Essays on selling drugs
> for mission), TCN , November 1893 , 127.
> 251 See George Mackay’s Diary On November 12, 1872, December 31, 1872, May 28, 1873, and February 22, 1882.
> 252 Anonymous, “Kò -péh” (News) ,TCN , August 1901, 59.

107 

The Presbyterian Church supported  certified doctors’ business in drug sales in the POJ 

newspaper which served as a medium for advertising western medical modernization and 

success . The large space for medicine advertisements  in the  Taiwan Church News  until  the 

1940s demonstrates the fact that the church publicly endorsed formulated medicinal products 

created by the newly -generated middle class, the certified doctors. Illustrated advertising slogans 

demonstrate that there was a high demand for medical care a nd medications. Published flyers 

encouraged readers to see their doctors regularly and taught them how to treat their symptoms 

with Western medicines. If a newspaper reader diagnosed him - or herself with an irritated 

stomach and had symptoms of indigesti on and  flatulence as the ad suggested they might, they 

were encouraged to purchase medicines from a pharmacist or the company publishing the ad 

instead of seeing a doctor. 253  “Before” and “after” comparison photos were very persuasive. 254 

Furthermore, the ju xtaposition of POJ and characters with actual photos suggests that the 

newspaper had expanded its service to people who read Chinese characters (Fig. 10). 

Advertisements generally ran in newspapers for anywhere from several months to more than a 

year. Ph armacies reaped enormous profits which helped them pay for marketing and they 

probably made more via other types of media such as radio since they could access a large 

number of non -Christian southern Fujianese language speakers through voice transmission  who 

they could not reach through the newspaper. 

Illiterate native’s training and participation in foreign medical practices eventually 

enabled them to become members of the elite in their own right. In Christian medical training, POJ was the bridge between the original illiterate in Chinese and later elite and between medical service providers and patients, in most cases within the Christian community.        

> 253 Anonymous, “Khai -ūi Kāin -pī -oân ” ( Pills to increase appetite ), TCN , September 1938, 31.
> 254 Anonymous, “ Uí -lô Pó -siû -chiap ” (Weilao nutriment), TCN , February 1937, 31.

108 

Beyond the Christian community, the first encounter between the medical community and the law occurred in colonial regulations. Newly passed laws concerning medical specialists and certificates by the colonial government made a turning point in the ecosystem of these church-trained doctors. Most intern graduates were unqualified to practice as a “ master d octor” 

(isi  醫師 ), but they were qualified to practice as a “ doctor ” ( isei  醫生). In 1896, the Japanese 

state promulgated a law that designated “master doctors” as people who had received certificates 

from the ministers of Internal Affairs or Taiwan Sōtokufu.  To accommodate the status quo, a 

rule stated that those who had practiced medicine in Taiwan could apply for “doctors” 

certificates from the governor’s office by the end of 1901. In other words, the government had 

noticed that the group of missionary -tra ined doctors occupied the field of Western medical 

services. The 1916 law stipulated that a master doctor must graduate from either the Taiwan 

Sōtokufu -sponsored medical school (founded in 1898, now the College of Medicine at National 

Taiwan University) o r a foreign medical school. In the same year, another rule categorized this 

exclusive group of specialists into “certified doctors in restricted places” ( Genchikaigyōi  限地開 

業醫 ). They were doctors but could only practice in regions where there were no hospita ls or 

certified medical personnel within 2 kilometers  and only if they passed exams. More strictly, the 

permission of “practice tied to specific areas” expired in three years. To avoid constant moving, 

this cluster of medical professionals had to study in  a Japanese medical school or switch to 

another line of work. Restricted by language, some of them preferred to stay in their original 

status, some decided to study for exams, and some chose to open pharmacies instead. 255             

> 255 See Taiwan S ōtokufu. Regulations of Taiwan S ōtokufu (Taipei: Taiwan Daily Newspaper, 1912), 76-78; Taiwan Sōtokufu Digital Archive ,“Ritsuryō No.1: Law of Master Doctor in Taiwan,” January 1, 1916, vol. 2488 -9; Taiwan
> Sōtokufu Digital Archive , “Rules of Certified Dentists and Doctors in limited places ,” July 11, 1918, vol. 6507 -9.

109 

POJ played a decisive role in creating a modern Presbyterian system for both Christian and general school education and Western medical science in Taiwan from the late Qing through the Japanese colonial period. The Presbyterian Church in Taiwan worked to provide open access to school education and medical training in order to uphold the teaching philosophies of the Reformed Church tradition. They only required learners to show an interest in studying and to be able to use POJ. With an education or professional training conducted in POJ, any interested individual, poor or rich, male or female, could become educated. Moreover, POJ literacy was significant in Taiwanese education because anyone could become a degree holder or obtain a professional certificate by learning to use POJ instead of Chinese characters or Japanese. Some of the Taiwanese Christians associated using POJ with Western school education and professional knowledge. The Presbyterian education system gave Taiwanese who were illiterate in Chinese or Japanese an alternative route for upward mobility which was not open to those who could not use POJ. By using POJ as the primary language of their education and medical training system, the Presbyterian Church created new groups of people who associated the use of POJ with their educational and professional identities. 110 

Chapter 3: Japanese Colonialism and  the Expansion of  Pe̍h -oē -jī  Community, 1895 -1940s 

During the Japanese colonial period, Taiwanese residents expanded the use of POJ beyond evangelism, church sponsored education programs, and Western medical training. The POJ community also expanded as a result of Japanese colonialism in Taiwan. Japanese colonial officials promoted POJ to help officers communicate with Taiwanese southern Fujianese 

language speakers. The shifting goals of Japan’s assimilation policy and the Taiwanese response 

to those shifts also increased the use of POJ and ultimately changed the meaning of POJ literacy for Taiwanese elites. The function of POJ in Taiwanese society expanded as it went from a language used to facilitate education and proselytism in the Christian community to a marker of Taiwanese ethnic identity. 

The Japanese colonial government’s policy for ruling Taiwan transition ed through four 

stages over their 50 year rule. They pursued “assimilation as the main policy from 1895 to 1919, 

integration from 1919 to 1930, differential incorporation and coercion from 1930 to 1937, and 

the subjugation (Kōminka  皇民化 , literally meaning  “Japanization”) and mobilization of 

‘imperial subjects’ to participate in the ‘holy’ war in Asia from 1937 to 1945.” 256  The main 

thing that shifted in their policy was the degree to which they wanted the Taiwanese people to 

identify themselves as Japanese c itizens. 

The Japanese lacked experience in governing colonies and they were unsure if it was appropriate to fully assimilate the Taiwanese. Consequently, they did not allow their Taiwanese subjects to become full citizens in the Japanese empire. The go vernment’s official assimilation 

policies and principles were not consistent with the laws that they passed to govern Taiwan. In    

> 256 Ping-hui Liao, “Taiwan under Japanese Colonial Rule, 1895 -1945: History, Culture, and Memory,” in Liao Ping -hui and David Der-wei Wang eds. Taiwan under Japanese Colonial Rule, 1895-1945: History, Culture, and Memory (New York: Columbia University Press, 2013), 2.

111 

1896, the Imperial Congress decided that Taiwanese islanders should not be fully incorporated into the Japanese citizenry and so they passed Title No. 63. Title No. 63 barred the Taiwanese from participating in the governance of Taiwan and created a virtual dictator, the Governor-General of Taiwan, Taiwan Sōtoku , to govern the island. Although Title No. 63 was replaced by Title No. 31 in 1906, the Empire still did not grant Taiwanese residents the right of political inclusion. 

The head of civilian affairs at Taiwan Sōtokufu,  Gotō Shinpei  後藤  新平  (1857 -1929), 

impl emented a gradual assimilation policy that initially focused on Japanese national language 

education. In addition to helping the Taiwanese understand Japanese culture through education, 

the colonial government also urged Japanese officers to improve their  ability to speak the most 

widely used native language in Taiwan and to use its writing system. The POJ community 

expanded because the colonial administrators encouraged policeman and other bureaucrats to 

study POJ and the southern Fujianese language in o rder to further the public’s cooperation with 

their governance of Taiwan. This practice was emblematic of the Empire’s initial colonial 

policy. While they ultimately desired for Taiwan to be linguistically and culturally absorbed into 

Japan, they were wi lling to allow the native Taiwanese to continue to use their own languages to 

facilitate governance and Japanese language education. 

In the 1910s, a joint group of Taiwanese and Japanese elites founded the Association of Assimilation in Taiwa n (Taiwan Dō kakai  臺灣同化會 ) to promote Taiwan’s assimilation into 

the Japanese empire. The Taiwanese members’ initial aspiration was to be assimilated into the 

Empire so that they would have all the rights and responsibilities of Japanese citizens. In 1919, 

it seemed t heir ambition might be achievable when the government announced that the laws 112 

governing the Japanese mainland would now be the law in Taiwan ( Naichi enchō syugi  內地延 

長主義 ).

After the promulgation of the 1919 Naichi enchō syugi, Taiwanese elites expected that the law which governed their political participation would be amended soon but it was not. The elites soon realized that they were not going to be fully assimilated into the Japanese citizenry. 

Japan’s 1919 Education Law gave Taiwanese residents a lesser legal status than residents of the Japanese home islands. Specifically, people who were not fluent in Japanese would be educated differently than people living in the homeland. The Taiwanese elites were galvanized into political and cultural action after the Empire continued to refuse to allow them to participate in the governance of their island. 

A cluster of Taiwanese intellectuals who were disappointed by their exclusion from full political participation at that point began to use POJ as an act of cultural protest against the Japanese government. In response to the political exclusion and assimilation policy, they established a Taiwan Cultural Association  臺灣文化協會  to promote a unique Taiwanese culture 

and language that helped Taiwanese people define a  difference between being “Taiwanese” and 

being “Japanese.” This group of Taiwanese elites, who were primarily educated in Japanese, 

promoted POJ for the creation of a Taiwanese culture and literature. As a result of their actions, 

POJ evolved from a “ch urch” language into a “Taiwanese” written language. POJ also became a 

symbolic marker of ethnic identity for the “Taiwanese” that enabled them to write their own 

culture in their native language. 

Colonial Policies on Ruling Taiwan 

Initially, the Japane se empire’s administrators were unsure of how they wanted to govern 

Taiwan. Gotō Shinpei admitted that he lacked experience in governing colonies. He hired 113 

professionals and experts in various fields to write reports and advise him, but he would not comp letely adopt or implement anyone’s suggested policies. Before the Japanese army officially 

took over Taipei on June 17, 1895, members of the Taiwan Affairs Bureau discussed two proposals from foreign advisers. The French adviser suggested that assimilation ( dōka ) should 

be Japan’s guiding principle for governing Taiwan based on the French belief in universal law 

and the 1789 Revolution. Conversely, the British adviser urged the Japanese to adopt different laws for each country because of the differences between their cultures. The Bureau members’ 

understanding of colonial relationships was largely based on Western colonialism. They knew 

that many Western countries justified colonialism in the name of “rescuing” people who were 

assumed to be racially and culturally inferior. They were hesitant to refer to Taiwan as a 

“colony” because they did not want to imply that the Taiwanese were racially or culturally 

inferior to them. Instead the Bureau decided to adopt the principle of assimilation in order to stress the close relationship between the Japanese and Taiwanese in East Asia. 257 

Gotō stated that there were no clear guidelines from the Empire for the administration in Taiwan. That is, he sensed that assimilation would be an ongoing project that should not be forcefully implemented in a short span of time. The Japanese regime would take time, at least three generations, to finalize their specific policies. 258 He disagreed with immediately enforcing an extreme assimilation policy over Taiwanese society without respecting native customs and traditions. He preferred to understand Taiwanese culture first and assimilate the people gradually. 259             

> 257 Tay-Sheng Wang, Legal Reform in Taiwan under Japanese Colonial Rule, 1895-1945 (Seattle and London, University of Washington Press, 2000), 37-38.
> 258 Yūsuke Tsurumi, Autobiography of Gotō Shinpei, Vol. 2 (Tokyo: Sanshusha, 1937), 24-30.
> 259 Yūsuke Tsurumi, Autobiography of Gotō Shinpei, Vol. 1 (Tokyo: Taiheiyō Kyōkai Shuppanbu, 1943 ), 44 .

114 

In the short term, Gotō decided to focus on getting the Taiwanese people to learn and utilize Japanese. He suggested that it was time for teaching the Japanese language, but not for governing the native Taiwanese in Japanese. He believed that the Taiwanese people would become Japanese by gradually adopting the Japanese language and cultural customs. He believed that language assimilation was the first step to help the Taiwanese understand Japanese colonialism. 

Assimilation through National Language Education 

The Japanese language educational policy in Taiwan required all Taiwanese to learn Japanese. The Japanese authorities believed that pushing the Taiwanese to adopt the Japanese 

language would help transform them into “Japanese” citizens. Initially the Tai wanese were 

resistant to Japan’s language policy because Japanese was a foreign language. Within six weeks of The Treaty of Shimonoseki  馬關條約  (April 17, 1895), the first Japanese national education 

institute was founded in Shilin  士林 , a suburb of Taipei. I t was forced to close after an 

insurrection in January of 1896. Six Japanese teachers and staff were murdered by anti -Japanese 

activists. The Japanese Army took its revenge on the Taiwanese attackers by massacring about 

1,500 natives and burning down 10, 000 houses. 260 

The first minister of academic affairs under Taiwan governor -general,  Izawa Shūji,  was 

not discouraged by the  outrage . He insisted that  language  education was the only  strategy  to 

conquer  the  spirit  of the natives. 261  He then founded the  National  Language School  (Kokugo 

gakkō  国語学校 ) and  National  Language Learning School  (Kokugo Tenshūsho  国語 傳習所 ) for         

> 260 Izawa Shu ̄ji, Selected Collection of Izawa Shu ̄ji's Works (Nagano: Shinano Kyo ̄ikukai, 1958), 94-95.
> 261 See the first and 13 th articles of Japanese language training school in Xiqing Xu, trans. History of Taiwan Education (Nantou: Academia Historica, 2010), 72-3.

115 

Japanese and Taiwanese natives respectively. The mission of both institutions was to transform 

the “Taiwanese” into loyal subjects of the Emperor of Japan and to build a sense of being 

“Japanese” in the Taiwanese. The National Language School prepared Japanese educators to 

teach in Taiwan’s public schools. In later periods they accepted Taiwanese public-school graduates who had a working knowledge of Japanese for teacher training. The National Language Learning School created a Japanese language education system for the Taiwanese and later became a public school ( kō gakkō  公學校 ) in order to accommodate more Taiwanese 

student s and to expand the school subjects offered as preparation for middle -school studies. 

Students were granted a certificate for the four -year study of Japanese language speaking, 

writing, reading, and arithmetic (also conducted in Japanese). Additionally,  the school trained 

Taiwanese -Japanese translators. Students who had completed their study of  Sishu  四書  (Four 

Books ) and  Wujing  五經  (Five Classics ) were allowed to take a shortcut and be awarded the 

certificate in one year. Their lives were much improved  thanks to free public education, 

subsidies for tuition, and guaranteed job offers after graduation, which also attracted Chinese 

scholars who passed the basic level of the civil service examination. 262  Both of these  schools 

referred to Japanese as the “nati onal language” ( kokugo  国語 ), rather than calling it “the 

Japanese language” ( Nihongo  日本語 ). 

A single language was desperately needed to enable communication between the Taiwanese people and the Japanese state, and among different groups of speakers, since the southern Fujianese language, Hakka, and aboriginal languages were all used in Taiwan. 263 In 

Izawa’s reports to Taiwan Sōtokufu, he proposed that language assimilation was the best policy     

> 262 Ibid., 77.
> 263 Kiwata Ide, Taiwan Chisekishi (Taipei: Taiwan Daily Newspaper, 1937), 330-31.

116 

to gain support in the newly dominated territory. 264 Izawa claimed this single language must be Japanese. He therefore considered Japanese language education a priority of the colonial enterprise. But at the same time, Japanese administrators were willing to learn the native language and its writing system to make it easier for themselves to converse with their Taiwanese subjects. 

Japan’s Promotion of the Southern Fujianese Language and POJ 

During the first several decades of the Japanese administration of Taiwan, both Japanese officers and the Taiwanese learned each o ther’s languages. The Japanese officials promoted the 

study of the southern Fujianese language to facilitate communication with the Taiwanese. They required Japanese people who wanted to serve as officers and policemen in Taiwan to learn the southern Fujianese language because it was the common language of Taiwanese natives. 

In the beginning, the Japanese colonial government in Taiwan was dependent upon 

interpreters to communicate with its Taiwanese subjects. In December 1895, Taiwan Sōtokufu 

began to request that Japanese civil servants and military officers learn the southern Fujianese language ( dogo  土語  or  Taiwango  臺灣語 ) during their leisure time for better communication 

with the natives. 265  The second  Governor -general  of Taiwan,  Katsura Tarō  桂太郎  (1848 -1913), 

urged policemen to view themselves as duty -bound to study the  southern Fujianese language ,

inasmuch as their jobs involved direct contact with the populace. 266  Izawa Shuji  suggested that 

all Japanese officers study Taiwanese languages for daily  use. To carry out his policies, 

instructors, basic conversation materials, and Native Language Training Schools ( Dogo       

> 264 Ibid., 71.
> 265 Xiqing Xu, History of Taiwan Education , 71.
> 266 Kiwata Ide, Administration in Taiwan (Taipei: Nantian, 1937, reprint), 254.

117 

Kōsh ūsho  土語講習所 ) were desperately needed. 267  The Japanese colonizers sensed that the 

language barrier between themselves and the Taiwanese might slow down the Japanese 

immigrants’ adjustments to their new lives and imperial officials’ administration. Making 

Taiwan more culturally Japanese was the  primary goal, but before that goal could be achieved, 

the two linguistic groups had to be able to converse with each other. Encouraging the colonial 

officers to learn the  southern Fujianese language  as the second language used in Taiwan was an 

urgent work . Their language study increased the use of the native language and POJ as it was 

transliterated in POJ and discussed in Japanese writing. 

The large number of periodicals about Taiwanese language education provides evidence of the prosperity of training for prison and police officers and Normal schools ( Shihan gakkō  師

範學校 , schools for training Japanese teachers in Taiwan) in the native language. The education 

of prison and police officers is worthy of special attention because they played a double rol e as 

police officers and interpreters. In 1898, Taiwan Sōtokufu issued a decree that police officers 

were allowed to hold the post of interpreter. 268  Between 1898 and 1903, another decree allowed 

only police officers to become qualified interpreters. 269  The  colonial government trained entry -

level civil servants as bilingual professionals instead of hiring linguists to handle basic affairs. 

Japanese periodicals, such as  The Language Collection , Taiwanese Language Magazine  臺灣語 

學雜誌 , and  Magazine for Taiwan Polic e Association  臺灣警察協會雜誌 , all provided forums 

for  southern Fujianese language  discussion and listings for official  southern Fujianese language 

examinations.  270  Most of the  southern Fujianese language  discussions in the above periodicals,            

> 267 Ibid., 3-4.
> 268 Documents of Taiwan Sōtokufu, May 14, 1898 ,http://db1n.th.gov.tw/sotokufu/ (a ccess ed April 14, 2014 ).
> 269 Documents of Taiwan Sōtokufu, January 9, 1903, http://db1n.th.gov.tw/sotokufu/ (a ccess ed April 14, 2014 ).

118 

references, and exami nations were based on Izawa’s Shu wu yi  十五音  (Taiwan Fifteen Sounds ,

1896) 271  and referred to Ogawa Naoyoshi’s  小川  尚義  (1869 -1947)  Japanese and Taiwanese 

Dictionary  臺日大辭典 . 272  Encouraging policemen to become  southern Fujianese language 

interpreters unexpectedly promoted the transliteration of the  southern Fujianese language  into 

both  katakana  and POJ. 

In the early stages of colonization, the colonial government and Japanese scholars created a large quantity of southern Fujianese language instructional materials written in POJ. The most important reference book of the romanized southern Fujianese language by a Taiwan Sōtokufu interpreter was Iwasaki Keitarō’s  岩崎敬太郎  (1880? -1934)  Dictionary of Taiwanese Language 

臺灣語典 .273  Iwasaki used POJ to  teach pronunciation of the  southern Fujianese language  for 

daily usage. His dictionary diverges from other types of references by focusing on methods of 

speaking the language, emphasizing the  southern Fujianese language ’s special grammars and 

ways of spe aking. It also listed the expressions that were frequently used but were difficult to 

master in the vernacular  southern Fujianese language . For instance, he explained the usage of 

“have” (ū,  有) and the “question marker” (bȏ,  無). The sentence “Do you hav e parents?” should 

read, “Lí ū pē -bú bȏ?” However, in some situations bȏ is also used to mean, to “have not,” for 

instance, “Laū -pē ū, laū -bú bȏ” (I have a father but I do not have a mother). 274  This is a very                 

> 270 For more materials for teaching Japanese southern Fujianese language, please see Lai Hsin-yi’s “The Taiwanese
> Teaching Materials during the Japanese Governance-A Case study on “Taiwanese Textbook,” (Master Thesis, Master
> Thesis National Taiwan Normal University , 2011); Ihara Daisaku, “Taiwanese Language Textbooks Used During the Early Period of Japanese Rule: An Historical Analysis,” Compilation and Translation Review 6:2 (2013): 67-98.
> 271 He regulated Taiwan Fifteen Sounds (1896) with eight tones, as the standard transcription of southern Fujianese language, and published a revision in 1901.
> 272 Inspired by the Izawa’s regulation, Ogawa Naoyoshi (1869 -1947), a prominent linguist, designated by the Taiwan
> Sōtokufu , published Japanese and Taiwanese Dictionary in 1898 and later issued an expanded version in 1907 . See
> Wei -Jen Hong, Annotated Bibilography of Taiwan Historica --Language (Taipei: National Taiwan Library, 1996),
> 343 -51.
> 273 Keitaro Iwasaki , Dictionary of Taiwanese Language (Taihoku: Taiwan Goten Hakkojo, 1922).
> 274 Ibid., 47.

119 

common occurrence in southern Fujianese language conversations that might easily confuse Japanese-speaking learners. Iwasaki nicely juxtaposed katakana next to Chinese characters in a horizontal column followed by a translation in Japanese and transcription of POJ. Some of the Chinese was nonsensical in semantics but it was there simply to help learners understand the corresponding southern Fujianese language pronunciation (Fig. 11). Katakana and POJ helped learners gain accurate pronunciation while the Japanese words clarified the meaning of words and sentences. The Chinese script likely served as an auxiliary tool that got learners acquainted with the ways of the southern Fujianese language written in characters. Japanese learners of the southern Fujianese language were familiar with Chinese script, since they were a part of the Japanese writing system, even if some characters had different meanings in each language. 

The multi-lingual writing culture rid southern Fujianese language users of the difficulties associated with using a single written language. Multilingual juxtaposition demonstrates the acceptance of digraphia (the use of more than one writing system for the same language) by society and the state. Therefore, information exchange in different publications was unsurprising. In The Language Collection  語苑 , a periodical for Japanese officers to discuss 

southern Fujianese language  studies and compose literature, writers would transcribe news from 

the POJ newspaper,  Taiwan Church News  into Japanese or Taiwa nese using a different writing 

system. 275  This evidence demonstrates that different groups of written language readers 

overlapped, and that  southern Fujianese language  users were capable of employing several 

written forms for information acquisition.   

> 275 Wei-Hsin Pan, “Relationship Between Taiwanese Vernacular Writing sand Writing Symbols during Japanese -Occupied Period —Centering on Specialized Taiwanese Education Magazine and Taiwan Prefectural City Church
> News,” 133.

120 

The bilingual or trilingual written language interactions of kana, POJ, or characters suggest that southern Fujianese language learners learned from each other through each writing 

system. A kana user might have no difficulty in reading Zhang Hongnan’s  張洪南  (n .d.)  A Self -

Study of POJ  臺灣羅馬白話字自修書  (1922), thanks to its romanization. 276  The main language 

of this small brochure was kana; POJ juxtaposed key concepts in kana and spelled out a  southern 

Fujianese language  pronunciation (Fig. 12). In addition to helping t hose studying the language 

using multiple written forms, a side -by -side multilingual translation was also helpful for 

Confucian studies. As long as a reader could read one of the listed writings in characters, kana, 

or POJ, he or she was able to access th e world of classical Chinese texts, pronunciation and 

Confucian writings. 277 

Iwasaki’s dictionary and Zhang’s work show the central role that the southern Fujianese 

language played in facilitating communication with various groups in Taiwan. Having a single written form of the language might meet the needs of only one specific group of users. For instance, Koa-á booklets  歌仔冊 , a form of narrative song,  were written for  southern Fujianese 

language  speakers who could read Chinese script. POJ publication s were designed to assist non -

character users.  Southern Fujianese language  reference books in kana were codified for Japanese 

readers. The textual co -location of the three writing forms was not merely a colonial creation 

designed to accommodate the needs  of a multilingual setting. It was also a reproduction of 

translingual spoken practice. The  southern Fujianese language  was the primary spoken language               

> 276 Hongnan Zhang, A Self-study of POJ (Taipei: Mori Bun sha, 1922), 2.
> 277 Another case comes from Liu Qingyun’s 劉青雲 Interpretation of the Great Learning 大學精詳 (1941). It was
> an instruction manual for sounding out classical Chinese in southern Fujianese language . Advertising his book as
> “An instruction from an old wise sage; A must -read for the modern,” Liu was filled with an ambition to enhance the
> shared moral values by J apanese and Chinese philosophy. The layout of his book satisfied the majority of linguisti c
> groups in Taiwan, in which Chinese, southern Fujianese language , and Japanese users acquired language as well as
> morality ranging from daily use to national administration.

121 

because it could be represented in each of the three different writing systems. Southern Fujianese language users with multiple literacies were allowed the freedom of writing in their preferred written system. Over the years of the Japanese occupation, there was no single written language that monopolized the market of the southern Fujianese language ’s w ritten formats. The language users were free to learn any of the above writing systems for daily communication or literary writings. From the late 1910s on, colonial assimilation policymakers focused on integrating Taiwanese elites into the Empire through cultural activities instead of teaching them how to write their native language, the southern Fujianese language. So the bulk of language users, elite or commoners, did not have a standardized written system to use to write the southern Fujianese language. 

The Understanding of “Assimilation” and the Policy of Extending Mainland Statutes 

The first twenty years of Japan’s rule had immersed the Taiwanese people in the process 

of adopting Japanese culture and language. The Taiwanese people were also willing to participate in these cultural assimilation activities. As early as 1914, a semi-official sponsored assimilation association was established to discuss how Taiwanese people could be assimilated into the Japanese citizenry other than simply through a national language education. A group of both Taiwanese and Japanese members founded The Association of Assimilation in Taiwan 

(Taiwan Dōkakai) in November 1914 in order to propagate pan-Asian solidarity. 278 Of the 3178                  

> 278 With support from the Japanese liberalist Itagaki Taisuke (1837 -1919) and autho rities Ōkuma Shigenobu (1838 -
> 1922), a Japanese minister, and Uchida Kakichi (1866 -1933), the head of civilian affairs at Taiwan Sōtokufu, Lin
> Xiantang, Cai Huiru (1881 -1929), Cai Peihuo, and Itagaki Taisuke (1837 -1919) organized the Association of
> Assimilation in Taiwa n ( Taiwan Dōkakai )in November 1914. But the Association was banned after a year since the
> government claimed it violated the colonial administration ’s policy .

122 

members of the Association, 3134 people were upper-class Taiwanese. They were local elites, administrative officers, and heads of big lineages. 279 

Members claimed that to successfully incorporate Taiwan into the Japanese Empire, assimilation was the most promising strategy. They also asserted that since Japanese and Chinese people were both Asian peoples they should collaborate to resist Westernization. Taiwanese islanders, who were ethnic Han and had become Japanese subjects, had a unique role to play by forging an amicable relationship between the Chinese and Japanese cultures. 280 Since they could link the two cultures, Taiwanese elites expected to be treated the same as other subjects of the Japanese empire because they thought they were Japanese too. These Taiwanese intellectuals accepted assimilation so that they could gain equal rights to those enjoyed by people living in the Japanese home islands. 

The assimilation supporters believed that if they were effectively assimilated into Japanese society they would automatically gain equal rights within the Empire. The minister of Academic Affairs of Taiwan Sōtokufu, Kumamoto Sigekichi  隈本繁吉  (1873 -?)  rejecte d the 

logic of their claims. He believed it was impossible for the Taiwanese to completely assimilate 

into Japanese culture in a short period of time.  Until the Taiwanese were fully assimilated, 

different treatment was necessary. 281  In 1915, the associati on was disbanded upon the request of 

Taiwan  Sōtokufu because its goals conflicted with the Japanese administration’s assimilation 

policy. They also suspected the group would cause political disorder in Taiwanese society. 282              

> 279 Bowei Lin, The Hardship of Taiwan Cultural Association (Taipei: Taiyuan wenhua jijinhui) ,36-37.
> 280 Bureau of Police Office in Taiwan Sōtokufu ed. Wang Shilang trans. History of Police Office in Taiwan 2:2 (Taipei: Daoxiang, 1995) ,13 -14.
> 281 Pei-feng Chen , The Different Intentions behind the Semblance of D ōka (Taipei: Chengbang, 2006), 33.
> 282 Bowei Lin, The Hardship of Taiwan Cultural Association, 37.

123 

Four years later,  Den Kenjirō’s  guiding policy  reassured the Taiwanese intellectuals about his 

legal impartiality. 

In 1919, the  8th  Japanese Governor -general of Taiwan,  Den Kenjirō  田 健治郎  (1855 -

1930) announced that he would extend the laws that governed the Japanese mainland to Taiwan 

(Naichi enchō syugi ) and those ordinances would serve as  the  guiding principle  of colonial 

policy.  He planned to govern the people of Taiwan in the same way that the people of Japan 

were governed. To eliminate ethnic distinctions, he urged colonial offici als not to use the word 

“colony” to refer to Taiwan. Moreover, he discouraged the practice of referring to the 

Taiwanese people as the “people of the island” ( hontōjin  本島人 ). Calling the Taiwanese people 

“hontōjin” was designed to differentiate them from  Japanese citizens who were known as the 

“people of the mainland” ( naichijin  內地人 ). 283  Many Taiwanese believed that the extension of 

the mainland’s laws to Taiwan was the first step in the full assimilation of the Taiwanese into 

Japanese society. 284  They were h opeful that the Japanese were finally going to give them the 

right to participate politically in the ruling of the Empire and that being Taiwanese would no 

longer be synonymous with being second class citizens. 

However, the principles of Japan’s assimil ation policy and the laws they made to govern Taiwan were not always compatible. The 1919 Education Law linguistically demarcated islanders from people who could fluently use Japanese in the mainland. The Law stated that education in Taiwan and Japan should be different based on the fact that Taiwanese were not good at using Japanese. The Tokyo Privy Council wanted all Japanese citizens to be treated       

> 283 Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Japan Ed., Minutes of Titles 63, 31, and 3 in Taiwan (Tokyo: Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Japan, 1966), 404-19.
> 284 Jintang Cai, ” The Reality and Imagination of Assimilation Policy During Colonial Rule,” An Annual Report to Interchange Association, Japan in 2001 (Taiwan: Interchange Association, Japan, 2001), 4.

124 

equally in education without ethnic discrimination by using terms such as “ Joseon  people” ( 朝鮮 

人 Korean peop le) and “Taiwan people” ( 臺灣人 ). The Educational Law was amended in 1922 

because these two peoples received a different education than their comrades in Japan. In the 

amendment, “frequent users of the national language” replaced “people of the Japanese 

mai nland,” and “Joseon and Taiwan people” were changed to “infrequent users.”  285 

The Japanese nation-state functioned as an enforcement machine of ethnic and political 

conversion through language. People’s ethnicity was define d in terms of their fluency in 

Japanese. Groups who had been colonized were also juxtaposed with “Japanese mainlanders and national language”. “Becoming Japanese” was not simply an individual struggle for ethnic 

identity among Japan, China, and Taiwan, as Leo Ching argues. It was also a top-down, progressive re-education process that preceded their political inclusion in Japan. 286 The more fluently a citizen spoke Japanese, the more he/she was deemed Japanese. Izawa Shuji argued that the objective of education was not merely gaining knowledge and information. The foremost goal of Japanese education was to create loyal Japanese citizens. 287 Shuji’s thoughts on language education demonstrate that Japan’s plan to create a nation -state where all nationals were Japanese, or Japanese-to-be, regardless of their native languages, was ambitious and likely to encounter resistance. 

Resistance to “Assimilation” and the Emergence of Taiwanese Consciousness 

Different groups in Taiwan chose to resist “assimilation” in to the Japanese empire as they tried to bridge the gap between being assimilated and being treated equally. Some people             

> 285 Yoshizo ̄Kubo, Educational Policies in Emperor System Nation-State (To ̄kyo ̄: Keiso ̄shobo ̄, 1979), 290-339.
> 286 L.T.S. Ching, Becoming "Japanese": Colonial Taiwan and the Politics of Identity Formation , 186.
> 287 Shu ̄ji, Selected Collection of Izawa Shu ̄ji's Works , 587-649.

125 

resisted being incorporated into the Japanese empire because they were attached to using the southern Fujianese language and POJ. Many individuals who wanted to hold on to that linguistic heritage also clung to a vision of themselves as the descendants of the Han Chinese. The more strongly they imagined that Taiwanese culture was rooted in the Chinese past, the harder they resisted their full assimilation into the Japanese empire. Some people accepted being linguistically assimilated but rejected being excluded from full political participation in Japanese society. If they were going to be assimilated, they wanted to have the same language, culture, and civil rights as any other Japanese citizen living elsewhere in the empire. When they were not given equal access to political participation, they questioned the legitimacy of the entire assimilation process. 

Taiwanese intellectuals like Lin Mosei  林茂生  (1887 -1947) found it difficult to accept 

the language assimilation policy. 288  Influenced by his father, who taught Chinese writing in the 

Presbyterian middle school, Lin criticized the Japanese immersion model in public schools. In 

his  opinion, national language training schools should have included more Chinese classes and 

been taught in the  southern Fujianese language . That way, more Taiwanese students could have 

overcome the language obstacles easily and thus acquired more knowledge.  He argued that 

suppressing the use of the  southern Fujianese language  in national language training school 

would provoke resistance to the Japanese government as it was the language that was most 

widely used in the island. 289  The differences between a stu dent’s school and family languages        

> 288 He was the first Taiwanese Ph.D. recipient and an educator. He taught in the Presbyterian Church Middle School after he graduated from Columbia University, USA.
> 289 Lin suggested that it was fallacious to believe that language assimilation is equivalent to racial assimilation, though it, to some extent, helps cultural assimilation. He thus quoted the Japanese educators, Tadao Yanaihara ’s 矢
> 內原 忠雄 (1893 -1961), opinions that suppressing the language of the colonized might cause resistance to the
> colonizer and colonial policy. See Mosei Lin, Public Education in Formosa under the Japanese Administration
> (New York: Columbia University, 1929), 1 16 -17.

126 

negatively influenced their ability to use each language. The students experienced a growing conflict between their linguistic priorities because of these differences. Lin worried about the potential for tremendous change; namely, that Japanese would replace the Taiwanese language in Taiwan (here he meant the southern Fujianese language). 290 He fiercely attacked the Japanese 

government’s belief that the Taiwanese could be ethnically assimilated through a national 

language policy because he feared that they were correct. Contradictory to Izawa’s philosophy of Japanese language education, Lin’s Taiwanese -centered approach spoke volumes about the 

lack of persuasive motivation toward linguistically “becoming Japanese.” 291 

Gotō Shinpei’s early concern about whether it was feasible to implement a full -scale assimilation project over the Taiwanese people is noteworthy as it contributes to our understanding of this conflict. He consulted the British legal advisor, William Montague Hammett Kirkwood (1850-1926) for advice on colonizing Taiwan. Although his reports seemed 

to have had little impact, Kirkwood’s observation and concern about the gap between 

assimilation theory and practice foreshadowed the resistance to and problems with Japan’s 

assimilation policy. Kirkwood argued against the logic of the original plan that treated all Taiwanese equally as Japanese citizens. He believed that the distinctions between the colonizer and the colonized should be clearly drawn and that the key distinction between people and 

conditional citizens in the Japanese empire should be the people’s fluency in Japanese. By the 

time of his reports, the Taiwan Sōtokufu provided free Japanese language education to Taiwanese subjects, but tended not to recruit islanders into public employment. Since they were not actively recruiting native Taiwanese into public service, he argued that they should restrict language education to a specific group of people. Candidates supported by government officials   

> 290 Mosei Lin, 117-18.
> 291 Mosei Lin, 116.

127 

who were morally qualified to coordinate the society and the state should be taught Japanese and ushered into the civil service. Students from elite families were preferred. 292 He argued that Japanization should be restricted to a small cluster of promising natives who could afford education. Kirkwood warned Japanese policymakers against the popularization of Japanese as a national language; otherwise, public school graduates in Taiwan would resent the lack of opportunities in public service after succeeding in school. 293 From the perspective of language learners, he advised that any dreams of serving the government would be shattered when they realized that nothing changed in the political hierarchy after graduation. 

Like Kirkwood, Gotō embraced conditional assimilation. Gotō asserted that he had never 

been an advocate of full assimilation. He believed that the Taiwanese should be immersed in Japanese culture until the point that Taiwan was ready to be ruled by the same laws and standards that governed the Japanese mainland. 294 Clearly the Taiwanese colonial authorities had a different understanding of assimilation than the Taiwanese subjects who believed that they should be civil and political equals to all other Japanese citizens. From the Japanese perspective, if the Taiwanese had become Japanese it meant that they would feel a moral duty to die for Japan. It however did not mean that Taiwanese subjects could exercise civil rights in the Empire. 295 Although Izawa’s assimilation policy provided a rationale for language colonization, 

the implementation of that policy was problematic. The natives quickly discovered that they were not really going to be included in the Japanese empire as equal citizens, particularly after         

> 292 From Database of Gotō Shin pei Monjo, a report to Governor Gotō Shinpei written by William Montague Hammett Kirkwood about how to colonize Taiwan, section 2, article 1, March 8, 1898.
> 293 Ibid.
> 294 Pei-feng Chen , The Different Intentions behind the Semblance of D ōka , 127.
> 295 L.T.S. Ching, Becoming "Japanese": Colonial Taiwan and the Politics of Identity Formation , 89-210.

128 

Den Kenjirō  extended the Japanese mainland statutes to Taiwan and their legal status did not 

change. 

Title No. 63 from 1896 to 1921: A Law that Blocked Full “Assimilation” 

In March 1896, the central government and the Imperial Diet announced Title No. 63 which shaped the legislative process in Taiwan ( 臺灣ニ施行スベキ法令ニ關スル法律 ). 296 

The law stated that, due to the particularities of Taiwan, it was inappropriate for the Japanese 

government to use the same laws to govern  Taiwan that they used to govern Japan. The law also 

created the new administrative position “Governor General of Taiwan,” who could issue 

ordinances in the same way that Japanese statutes were made by the Diet. Title No. 63 was 

originally supposed to be  amended three years after it became the law but it was not actually 

replaced by Title No. 31 until 1906. Title No. 31 stipulated that Taiwanese ordinances passed by 

the governor general were not allowed to conflict with those passed by the Japanese Diet  for 

Taiwan. 297  Title No. 31 did not make significant changes from Title No. 63 because the 

Japanese still were the final legal authority in Taiwan. 

Some members of the Association of Assimilation in Taiwan argued that Title. No. 31 was contradictory to the assimilation policy they understood. They were angry because Title No. 31 still blocked their ability to participate in the governance of Taiwan. In 1918, some former members of the Association of Assimilation called a meeting in Tokyo to discuss repealing Law No. 31. 298 This group of Taiwanese elites decided to form a political society to promote the 

repeal of the law. They resisted their “de facto and de jure” status as second class citizens by highlighting the differences between the “Taiwanese” and the “Japanese.” They believed that        

> 296 “A History of Law No. 63,” Taiwan Youth , December 1918, 6-7.
> 297 Tay-Sheng Wang, Legal Reform in Taiwan under Japanese Colonial Rule, 1895-1945 , 38-42.
> 298 Bowei Lin, The Hardship of Taiwan Cultural Association, 48-49.

129 

the unique Taiwanese ethnic identity was grounds for their political authority in Taiwan. They, 

fundamentally, were also resisting Japan’s assimilation policy. 

Later, this group of elite, including Lin Xiantang  林獻堂  (18 81 -1956) and Cai Peihuo  蔡

培火  (1889 -1983), withdrew their petition for the repeal of Title No. 31. Instead they petitioned 

the imperial government to establish a Taiwanese Parliament in 1920. 299  For them, the act of 

asking for the repeal of imperial laws sym bolized Taiwanese disobedience to Japanese Imperial 

domination. They did not want to be labeled political activists who were demanding autonomy 

for Taiwan. They, instead, showed their willingness to be subject to Imperial Japan as citizens 

by asking for  a change in the law through legal channels. Having a Taiwanese Parliament was 

the bottom line for elites who wanted to claim their citizenship. From 1921 to 1934, they filed 

fifteen petitions for a Taiwanese Parliament. The Imperial Congress commented “ not to be 

considered” ( hu sai taku , 不採擇 ) on each petition. The political demands of the Taiwanese 

elites were not a concern of the Imperial Congress. As a matter of fact, to follow Den’s policy, 

in 1921, Title No. 31 was changed again to Title No. 3. It  reduced the power of the governor 

general of Taiwan. In Title No. 3, the newly -minted “ordinance for exception,” also restricted 

ordinances by the governor -general of Taiwan to some circumstances. Even though Taiwan 

could have the same laws as Japan, be cause of Title No. 3, the Taiwanese were not included in 

the process of lawmaking. Disappointed by the assimilation policy and the amendment of Title 

No. 63, some of the elites started to distinguish themselves by developing the Taiwanese culture 

in Taiwa n. They argued that it was distinct from the Japanese culture in order to gain attention 

for their grievances from the Japanese government.    

> 299 Cai Peihuo, “Taiwanese Movements during Colonial Period,” Taiwan Wen Xian 16:2 (1965): 176.

130 

The Taiwan Cultural Association and Cai Peihuo: the Promotion of Taiwanese Culture in POJ and its Role in Defining “Taiwanese Identity” 

Beginning in the late 1910s, a cross-island discourse of Taiwanese culture  臺灣文化 

emerged in the public activities in Taiwan and the Japanese islands as Asian countries were 

influenced by the culture of post -war self -determination and t he New Culture Movement that 

originated in China. Sponsored by Lin Xiantang in Tokyo in 1915, the T akasago Youth 

Association  高砂青年會  aimed to advance “Taiwanese culture in Japan” through the work of a 

group of Taiwanese student fellows who studied in Japan.  300  It initially provided a gathering 

space for Taiwanese students studying overseas. Later, it evolved into a cultural and political 

organization  after changing its name to the Tokyo Taiwanese Youth Association in 1920. 

Takasago was the Japanese name for  people from Taiwan and the name change signaled the 

group’s unwillingness to be named in the language of their colonizers. A group of elite had 

started their journey in search of a culture and language that was distinct from Japanese culture. 

Echoing the  periodical  New Youth  新青年 , published by Chinese intellectuals in China, the 

Association issued  Taiwan Youth  臺灣青年 . From  Taiwan Youth  (The Tāioān Chheng Liān) in 

1920, to  Taiwan  臺灣  (The Formosa) in 1922, to  Taiwan People’s Newspaper  臺灣民報  in 

1923, through  Ta iwan New People’s Newspaper  臺灣新民報  in 1930, the choice to identify as 

“Taiwanese” expanded from the youth to the people ( min  民) and thus created a new people ( xin 

min  新民 ) a distinct ethnic group from the Japanese.      

> 300 According to the research fellow Zhan Sujuan from Academia Sinica in Taiwan, the term Takasago used for calling Taiwan during the 16 th and 19 th centuries as a destination of voyage. It means “ the prosperity of the country and people. ” In 1895, the term was exclusively used to call Taiwanese indigenous tribes as Takasagozoku ( 高砂族 ).
> The aboriginal army of volunteers assigned by the Japanese government to fight during the World War II was called the Takasago Volunteer Unit. Source from Encyclopaedia of Taiwan,
> http://taiwanpedia.culture.tw/en/content?ID=3452 (accessed March 19, 2013).

131 

A turning point occurred in the ethnic history of Taiwan in 1920. In the first volume of 

Taiwan Youth, Cai Peihuo, a member of Tokyo Taiwanese Youth Association, claimed that 

“Taiwan is owned by the Taiwanese.” This volume was destined to be prohibited by the Home 

Ministry in Japan because of the w ording. A more moderate reading of Cai’s article suggests 

that he was seeking an ethnic identity for the Taiwanese people rather than national independence. He wrote in Japanese: 

“What is the relationship between the island of Taiwan and Taiwanese? In other 

words, how can we situate Taiwan and what connection do we island-born Taiwanese perceive to relate to the island? What life do we therefore live? .......We should not live lightheartedly all the time as incompetent [in politics]. Taiwan is subjected to the Japan Empire and meanwhile owned by Taiwanese (boldface added)…( 台湾は帝国の台湾であゐと同時に、我等台湾 

人の台湾であゐ … ) ” 301 

It is an over-simplification to read Cai’s message as an awakening call for Taiwanese independence. Cai, on behalf of the Taiwanese, was hoping to gain an autonomy for Taiwan, but only within the Empire of Japan. In practice, he wanted the Taiwanese people to be in charge of the day-to-day affairs of the island while still remaining subordinate to the Japanese empire. 

Japanese nationals on the mainland and overseas Taiwanese students might interpret Cai’s statements as political agitation for Taiwanese political independence. Yet, Cai’s identification of himself as “Taiwanese” was not dependent on removing Taiwan from the Japanese empire. He was a conservative who was influenced by Chinese tradition and the global movements for self-determination and more clearly defined ethnic identities. His writings and political activities suggest that he was more interested in creating an ethno-linguistically based identity for the Taiwanese people and gaining a voice for the Taiwanese in policy making over the island as a    

> 301 Peihuo C ai, “ Our island and we people (Wagasima to Warera 我島と我等 ), ”Taiwan Youth , October 1920, 13.

132 

part of the Japanese empire. He was not calling for an independent Taiwanese nation which is demonstrated by how he reacted to the repeal of Title No. 31. 

Cai enthusiastically promoted Taiwanese culture. He announced that the New People Association  新民會  in Japan,  302  as a continuation of the Tokyo Taiwanese Youth Assoc iation, 

would issue  Taiwan Youth  as a channel of raising awareness of Taiwanese culture among 

Taiwanese youth. 303  His usage of the pronoun ‘we’ and its positioning in his announcements 

about the journal indicate that he wanted to explore, along with the isl and youth, the Taiwanese 

past and work to define its future. He argued that since  they , their Japanese counterparts, had 

been so serious about launching sociocultural movements in Japan, we (Cai and the Taiwanese 

youth) should also work to develop a Taiw anese culture. His subsequent account argued for the 

reform of  undesirable Taiwanese traditions. 304 

It was not surprising that Cai did not elaborate more about the relationship between the 

“Chinese” and “Taiwanese” when he was discussing the distinction between the “Japanese” and the “Taiwanese.” Cai and many other Taiwanese elites believed that the Taiwanese were Han 

Chinese. C ai’s rationale for promoting the Taiwanese culture was based primarily on the Taiwanese people’s ignorance of their culture and historical relationship to Chinese civilization. 

Secondly, although it was unalterable that the Taiwanese shared a past that included the Chinese people, that fact would not change the reality that Taiwan was under Japanese governance. Furthermore, its people were still legally and culturally demarcated by the colonial policy. His         

> 302 As a continuation of the Takasago Youth Association and the Tokyo Taiwanese Youth Association.
> 303 See Taiwan People’s Newspaper , July 19, 1930, 19. The initiators of the New People Association, such as Cai Peihuo, Cai Huiru, Lin Chenglu, Cai Bofen (1895-1984), and Chen Xi (1893-1947), raised a fund to found the journal Taiwan Youth at Iidamachi 飯田町 in Tokyo, Japan. Cai Peihuo served as an editor and publisher.
> 304 Ibid.

133 

understanding of Taiwanese people’s blood tie wit h the Chinese will be analyzed later in an analysis of his POJ work. 

Constructing a cultural identity, via internal consciousness as well as external classification, helps us to differentiate ourselves from one another. Cai Peihuo worked to 

construct “Taiwanese identity” by urging the Taiwanese public to ponder the ethnicity of Taiwanese people, the features of Taiwanese culture, and the subject of “Taiwan” as a special 

individual entity. These reflections necessarily pushed the Taiwanese to consider their identity in relation to China and Japan. 

In 1921, some members of the New People Association of Taiwan and native elites founded the Taiwan Cultural Association (TCA, 1921-1931) in Taiwan in order to attract more local Taiwanese to cultural learning. The Taiwanese culture promoted by the Association played a decisive role in helping the Taiwanese resist ethno-linguistic assimilation into the Japanese empire. Unlike previous associations, the Association popularized POJ and the cultural exploration of a Taiwanese identity. It affirmed that its goal was to develop the culture of Taiwan while avoiding political agendas. 305 Its mission statement asserted that the status quo in Taiwan was to be disengaged from the world because of its remote location on the southern side of the Japanese Empire. However, the waters of the Sea of Japan flowed to Europe and the U.S., and thus ideas from other parts of the world would converge in Taiwan sooner or later. 306 It goes without saying that TCA members expected to engage in straightforward discussion with the                      

> 305 Before the TCA was officially approved to launch, one of the most important founders Lin Xiantang conversed with the director of Police Office, Kawasaki Takukichi 川崎卓吉 (1871 -1936) .Lin seriously promised Takukichi
> that the association would not involve any political activities. Any members who considered relating to political
> movements would have nothing to do with the TCA. This conversation before the submission of TCA’s application
> indicates that both the Taiwanese elite and Japanese officials presumed that political involvement was not allowed
> but developing a Taiwanese culture indeed was e ncouraged. See Bureau of Police Office in Taiwan Sōtokufu ed.
> Wang Shilang trans. History of Police Office in Taiwan 2:2 ( Taipei :Daoxiang, 1995 ),252.
> 306 Peihuo Cai, History of National Movemen tin Taiwan (Taipei: Zili wan bao, 1983), 286.

134 

Western world. Cultural activities and scholarly meetings on the establishment of morality, and general, physical, and art education held by the TCA were open to the public in Taiwan, Japan, and China as they were working to (re)define Taiwanese culture. 

Dialogue between Chinese intellectuals and Taiwanese elite addressed how the complexity of the colonial, political and historical contexts fashioned a Taiwanese culture and 

thus an “identity” that was created t hrough input from several cultures. To explain this idea more fully, we must first imagine Taiwanese culture and its relation to identification. Elites were determined to rescue the people from their so-called cultural deficiency by awakening them to a sense of being “Taiwanese,” articulating the characteristic morality of Taiwanese people, and 

lecturing on how to situate the people and culture in the world stage. 

The Taiwanese elite wanted to define Taiwanese culture in terms of social norms such as loyalty to the family, society, and the state. They hoped those social norms would shape the behavior of individuals by helping them learn to be Taiwanese. 307 The TCA members believed 

that the “Taiwanese” people had a frail body and lacked a distinctive cult ure. A Taiwanese doctor named Chiang Weishui  蔣渭水  (1891 -1931)  gave an  opening talk in the first TCA 

meeting. Analogous to the advocacy of the cultural movements in China during the 1910s -

1920s, he used Taiwan as an allegorical figure for the Taiwanese peo ple to promote the message 

that the Taiwanese were sick because they lacked knowledge. 308  Chiang created a story of 

Taiwan’s past and its connection with China. He said that “Taiwan” by birth, was registered in 

Fujian, China, but moved to live under the Sō tokufu’s administration. “He” was a descendant of 

Chinese sages and had been healthy as a child during the Koxinga  鄭成功  period (1661 -1683).              

> 307 Bureau of Police Office in Taiwan Sōtokufu ed. Wang Shilang trans. History of Police Office in Taiwan 2: 2
> (Taipei :Daoxiang, 1995 ),251 -52.
> 308 Weishui Chiang, “ ‘I’ in Five Years” Taiwan People’s Newspaper , August 1925 , 45.

135 

But his body had become increasingly weak since the Qing Dynasty, as a result of the Japanese 

Empire’s harassment. Long starved of knowledge, his afflictions sapped his mental and moral vitality. 309 To heal the weak-minded Taiwanese people, Chiang believed, education, libraries, and a newspaper study group would create a permanent cure. Dr. Chiang was not the only intellectual who diagnosed the ethno-cultural ‘body’ of the Taiwanese people in his writings. 

Several other similar opinions about the status of Taiwan and Taiwanese culture were seen in the following articles. 

Taiwanese elites encouraged people to utilize POJ as a tool of cultural enlightenment 

which marked a significant shift in that group’s perception of POJ as a writing system. The 

number of POJ users in Taiwan increased because of the activities of the TCA. 310 Some Taiwanese elites were impatient to utilize a representative writing system for the Taiwanese language, the southern Fujianese language. Unlike the European missionaries who educated Taiwanese Christians with a POJ translation of the Bible, a cluster of Japanese-educated Taiwanese intellectuals wanted to spread the use of POJ to the general public to offer them access to knowledge and cultural activities. As the documents from the Police Department of 

Taiwan Sōtokufu show, the literacy rate of the Taiwanese people in the 1920s, compared to the  

> 309

Bai Chengzhi ed. Posthumous Works of Chiang Weishui (Taipei: Wenhua chu ban she, 1950), 94-5.  

> 310

POJ was not the only Roman-based writing system suggested during the colonial period. Before the TCA was launched in 1921, a Taiwanese intellectual, Lian Wenqing  連溫卿  (1894 -1957), took over  Kodama Shirō ’s  兒玉四 

郎(n. d. ) ambitious career to develop an international auxiliary language,  Esperanto, which was created by Ludwig 

Lazarus Zamenhof (1859 -1917), a Polish doctor, in 1887 . Lian was not only a student of Shirou’s but also assisted 

him in foun ding the  Taiwan Esperanto Association  臺灣世界語協會  in Taipei County in 1913.  Esperanto, 

composed of 28 letters and 15 grammatical rules, was designed as a neutral transnational communication tool to 

diminish language barriers. Given his suffering from switching  between Russian, Yiddish, Polish, Latin, Hebrew, 

French, Greek, English, and Italian, Zamenhof found it helpful to have an  intermediary linguistic form like 

Esperanto for people who were in need of understanding multiple types of languages. In addition, he  also supposed 

that the less misunderstanding from language communication of diverse ethnic groups, the more world peace could 

be generated. Seeing a  Romanized language as a comparatively simpler and universal arrangement offered an 

alternative to prompt c ulture in text other than an original or national writing form. Such  a language is convenient 

for multilingual users or in an ethnic group that uses a logographic system. 136 

Japanese living in Taiwan, was low. 311 The TCA worked to decrease illiteracy and educate people via lectures by core members on such subjects as hygiene, the history of Taiwan, and civil law. 312 The TCA decided that teaching Chinese and Japanese was not an efficient choice for educating a low-literacy populace. Instead they argued that a romanized language was a much more feasible medium for the introduction of Taiwanese culture as long as it could express the Taiwanese language and culture. 

The ways that the TCA defined Taiwanese culture represent their attempt to construct a 

narrative of the ethnogenesis of the Taiwanese people. Ethnogenesis may “apply to how people 

appear in history, to how or what people speak as their native language, or to the overall culture 

that seems to have emerged” in a society. 313 “The symbolic criterion of contrast ─ one language 

(italics added), appearance, or culture as distinct from another ─ is a key feature” in creating an 

ethnogenesis. 314 “Taiwanese” identity emerged during the cultural reforms “when people 

consciously forged (or tried to forge) their features by making specific reference to their common 

heritage” which was the southern Fujianese language from China. 315 For the TCA, the “one language” of Taiwan was the southern Fujianese language and not Japanese. It was the language 

TCA members used in cultural activities and POJ was its written form. Since Taiwanese people were politically dist inguished from the “Japanese” people of the mainland, they developed a cultural linguistic mechanism of ethnogenesis to “become Taiwanese.”                 

> 311 Bureau of Police Office in Taiwan Sōtokufu ed. History of Police Office in Taiwan vol. 3 (Taipei: Nantian
> Bookstore, 1995) ,148 -51.
> 312 Monitored by the Police Department, every lecturing meeting boasted an attendance of anywhere from 200 to 1000 people. Bureau of Police Office in Taiwan Sōtokufu ed. History of Police Office in Taiwan vol. 3, 152.
> 313 D. Levinson and Melvin Ember, eds., Encyclopedia of Cultural Anthropology (New York: Henry Hott, 1996), 407.
> 314 Ibid.
> 315 Ibid.

137 

The TCA’s effort to advance Taiwanese culture through POJ literacy represented a 

negotiation with the policy of using the Japanese national language for education. It also 

symbolized their developing sense of belonging to a “Taiwanese” ethnolinguistic group. The linguistic and cultural activities of the TCA created a story of who the “Taiwanese” people were. 

This social institution played a pivotal role in organizing individuals into cultural groups who performed symbolic collective acts for or against the political status quo. 316 

The Worldwide Awakening of Ethnic Culture and Cultural Ties with China 

The TCA’s endeavors to promote cultural activities were carefully planned. Their endeavors signified the prevailing mood of cultural discourse across China, Japan, and Taiwan, and the interchanges about cultural movements in newspapers and between intellectuals. 317 

Seeking a Taiwanese culture and identity made sense in a global context. In the 1910s-1920s, countries all over the world began to consider their unique national identity and their relations to one another. One of the most important causes of this awak ening appeared in Wilson’s Fourteen 

Points in the 1919 Paris Peace Conference. One of the points called for the self-determination of nations and it awakened a huge swath of European ethnic groups and colonized peoples to their desire for an end to colonialism. A Taiwanese youth living in Japan at the time remarked that  

> 316

In 1927, TCA was separated into two groups, the old group of people such as Cai Peihuo and Lin Xiantang and the new group dominated by socialists like Lian Wenqing. The former group decided to withdraw from the TCA because their aims of promoting the TCA were different from the latter. Therefore, since 1927, the TCA was directed to advocate for the labor movement and proletarian culture by Lian and other proletarians. In 1928, the Taiwanese communists took over the TCA and the association disbanded in 1931 due to internal conflicts among members. See Bowei Lin, The Hardship of Taiwan Cultural Association, 231-46.  

> 317

Lin Qiyang  林淇瀁  (1955 -), also known as Xiang Yang  向陽 , a scholar of Taiwanese literature, argues that  the 

Taiwanese intelligentsia of the 1920s fell into a mire in which the dichotomous forces of assimilation and anti -

assimilation misdirected their unique cultural consciousness. They were caught in the purlieus  between Japanese 

cultural hegemony ( riben w enhua baquan  日本文化霸權 ) and the Chinese  homeland imagination ( zuguo tuxiang  祖

國圖像 ). He suggested that this digression caused the Taiwanese to lose opportunities for establishing a distinctive 

cultural identity. His allegation ignores the influence of non -Asian  ideas on the Taiwanese quest for a distinct 

cultural identity.  See Qiyang Lin,  Writing and Mapping: a Study of Phenomenon of the Literary Communication in 

Taiwan  (Taipei: Maitian, 2001),  97 -122. 138 

“thinking back to Taiwan, facing such a turning point in thinking, I was taking a dose of “awakening” to picture the future belief and hope….” 318 This course of introspection and construction of culture was not only shaped by the Taiwanese observation of how other Asians responded to the liberal ideas circulating in cultural discourse. 319 Rather, it was part of an immediate chain reaction of global movements for cultural identity formation. 

Since the complex bloodlines between China and Taiwan influenced Taiwan’s cultural 

establishment in the 1920s, we should contemplate what role China and the symbolism of the shared past played in the process of constructing a Taiwanese culture. The Chine se “nation” 

seemed to take root in the minds of some Taiwanese elite, though Taiwan was not part of the 

“nation” of the Republic of China, at the time. As Huang Chaoqin  黃朝琴  (1897 -1972), a 

Taiwanese studying in Japan who later founded the  Taiwan People’s N ewspaper , appealed, 

“China is the mother nation of Taiwan…” 320  Chinese culture and its historical legacy in Taiwan 

was the weightiest component of being “nationalized” that the imagined ancestors and ethnicity 

bridged intellectuals in China and Taiwan. 

Japanese official documents on the TCA support my interpretation on the development of the Taiwanese cultural heritage. Acquiring the official perspective of the Japanese empire 

cannot be more important, especially as it impacts how we understand “Taiwanese” and 

“Taiwanese identity” from the state’s point of view. In addition to giving a definition of                    

> 318 Bingyao Cai, “Social Reform and My Mission ,”Taiwan Peopl e’s Newspaper , July 1923 , 2
> 319 Standing in the frontline of the cultural movement, TCA members in Japan voiced their sympathy in newspapers, though they could not act in support of the Korean March 1 st Movement, 1919. Gathering with Korean students in Japan pressed the Taiwanese elite to feel the fever and anxiety of whether the global tendency of political thinking
> was practical in reality. Korea’s success in gaining partial autonomy certainly was a stimulant and thus a model for Taiwan’s future. TW elite such as Cai Peihuo and Lin Chenglu often wrote in the editorial section of “Forum of Asia” ( 亞細亞公論 )and the Korean political magazine Korean Youth . See Bureau of Police Office in Taiwan
> Sōtokufu ed. Wang Shilang trans. History of Police Office in Taiwan 2: 2 (Taipei :Daoxiang, 1995 ),43 -44.
> 320 Chaoqin Huang, Wo de hui yi (My Memory) (Taipei: Longwen chuban she, 1989), 13.

139 

“Taiwanese” via the demographics 321 in the Police Officers' Records ,322 Japanese officers 

observed that the “ethnic identity” of the Taiwanese elite originated from their understanding of themselves as Han. The Han was a cultural community generally known since the Han dynasty (BC 202-220) in China whose members differentiated between themselves and outsiders by describing themselves as the elite and civilized. 323 

Moreover, Japanese officials recorded that Taiwanese ancestral grave worship suggested that the Taiwanese saw themselves as descendants of the people from China. 324 One of the 

Japanese reports stated that the “Taiwanese” were still proud of their five -thousand-year old Chinese history and proved it by maintaining their old customs. Japanese officials elaborated that Taiwan was separated from the Kuangdong and Fujian provinces of China only by the Taiwan Strait. In view of the bloodlines that existed between the “Taiwanese” and the mainland 

Chinese, any cultural or political discussion between these two peoples against the current 

“mother nation” (Japan) seemed politically sensitive. 

For the government, the Taiwanese affinity with the Chinese people and culture endangered the national language policy. An officer’s letter to the Taiwan Governor -general,  

> 321

To implement the policy of nationality ( kokuseki ), a series of censuses, starting from 1905 up to 1940, established a reliable registration system in order to effectively manage people. In 1936, official statistics stated the 

total population of Taiwan was 5,541,863, and 5,042,941 out of the population were “Taiwanese.” Taiwanese 

indigenous tribes, overseas Chinese, Japanese, and expatriates such as Koreans were excluded from the category 

“Taiwanese.” This population census also commented that the “Taiwanese” instigated most social movements in Taiwan. To be integrated in the official category as “Taiwanese,” one had to provide evidences of one’s birthplace. 

Someone born in Mainland China who later moved to Taiwan was regarded as alien, though in the very beginning stage of occupation the number of aliens was very small. Not welcoming of a flood of Chinese nostalgia into Taiwan, the Japanese government deliberately decreased migration from China, while at the same time encouraging immigrants from the Japanese mainland. See G.W. Barclay, Colonial Development and Population in Taiwan (New York: Kennikat Press, 1972), 3-17.  

> 322

It was written for Japanese officers in Taiwan as a reference for guiding future principles of policy-making and categorized as secret by 1945. It was not completely released to the public until the 1980s. See Bureau of Police Office in Taiwan Sōtokufu eds. Wang Naixin trans. History of Police Office in Taiwan 2: 2 (Taipei: Chuangzao, 1989) , 1-12 . 

> 323

Cho -yun Hsu , The Difference between the Self and Others  (Hong Kong: Chinese University Press , 2009) , 47 -56.  

> 324

Wakabayashi Masahiro,  “Taiwan Sōtokufu’s Secret Documents about ‘Strategy for Taiwan  Cultural 

Association’ ,”  Studies of Modern History of Taiwan  (1978) , 159 -74. 140 

Kamiyama Mannoshin  上山  満之進  (1869 -1938), the 8 th  Governor -general of Taiwan,  325 

demonstrates their strategy for dealing with the TCA’s activities in 1927. The letter complained 

about the manners of TCA members who arrogantly claimed “we China or we R.O.C will 

impede the popularization of national language (meaning Japanese)…They ( Ta iwanese ) even 

propagandize a romanized language and instigate the use of Chinese characters! It is even worse 

that those Taiwanese elite were getting along intimately with Mainland Chinese ( Sina jin  支那 

人)!”  326  Maintaining customs such as ancestral worship  was more tolerable than ideological 

discourse that favored Chinese culture and the use of its written language. From that point on, 

the letter proposed disbanding the TCA by urging the cadre Lin Xiantang to temporarily leave 

Taiwan for his planned travel  in Europe. Then Japanese officials could suppress the leftist -

oriented communist members and radicals who dominated the TCA from 1927 onward. 327  The 

proposal was adopted. The “Taiwanese” nostalgia for their Chinese homeland had become a 

threat to Japanes e colonial governance. 

Cultural Associations and POJ Literary Translation 

Cultural associations advanced cultural enlightenment through the improvement of literacy. It is very possible that the majority of the TCA audiences, though they spoke the southern Fujianese language, could barely read POJ, Japanese or Chinese in the 1920s. Cai Peihuo believed there was still a group of underrepresented illiterates, like peasants, who hardly          

> 325 Ibid.
> 326 Ibid.
> 327 See footnote 316. In fact, before Lin was requested to leave for travel, the TCA had been controlled by Taiwanese communists and proletarian socialists such as Lian Wenqing and Wang Minchuan 王敏川 (1889 -1942 ).
> The Japanese government found it was a good time to suppress the association as their promotion of the labor
> movement and agitation against the government was not welcome by the colonial rulers. See Bowei Lin, The
> Hardship of Taiwan Cultural Association, 235 -60.

141 

had time for colonial education. 328 Even though there was no officially-sponsored reading circle for POJ users, we should not neglect the role that the TCA played in galvanizing widespread reading. In addition to the promotion of newspaper reading houses, the TCA worked to develop Taiwanese culture through the use of the southern Fujianese language and its writing format, POJ. It was a thorny challenge. On the one hand, writing and reading activities were a relatively small part of the TCA-sponsored cultural events including summer schools, general lectures, and cultural operas. On the other hand, POJ printed materials had to apply for imprimatur. 329 Under the double censorship of publication, the TCA newsletter only ran for four issues, which was understandable as its contents used Taiwanese ethnicity and political metaphors as weapons against imperialism. 330 The TCA therefore preferred to conduct cultural promotion through speeches, performances, and singing in operas and films. 331 Oral and visual enlightenment accordingly were considered more effective than written forms. 

Even so, Cai and his fellows Han Shiquan  韓石泉  (1897 -1963) and Wang Shoulu  王受祿 

(1893 -1977), both medical doctors, enthusiastically engaged in teaching POJ to interested 

attendees. They provided POJ classes to the general public and lectured on the advantages  of 

studying POJ. It turned out that reading and writing in POJ was to a large degree performed in 

private societies and in Christian -associated publications, which will be analyzed in later                 

> 328 Peihuo Cai, A Collection of Cai Peihuo’s Works vol.1 (Taipei: Wushi tushu, 2000), 194.
> 329 Taiwan Sōtokufu’s Rules of Publication in Taiwan (1900) ruled out any potential printed products that might
> impinge on imperial dignity or endanger the regime and social order. Sōtokufu maintained rights of double
> censorship on imported books from Japan and other countries to Taiwan. Permission to import books was not necessarily equal to being allowed to sell them in Taiwan. The 1900 Rules granted the Police Department the authority to review the contents of publications for the sake of public security before they flowed into market. Chinese and POJ books, flyers, and newspapers that criticized the government were naturally forbidden. See Seichiro Suzuki, “Rules of Publication in Taiwan,” Interpretations of Laws of Publication in Taiwan (Taipei: Sugita Bookstore, 1937), 221-26.
> 330 Bureau of Police Office in Taiwan Sōtokufu ed. Wang Shilang trans. History of Police Office in Taiwan 2:2 (Taipei: Daoxiang, 1995) ,265 -66.
> 331 Bowei Lin, The Hardship of Taiwan Cultural Association, 95-148.

142 

sections. Cai’s individual efforts to stimulate the use of POJ m ight not have been in vain, but unfortunately there are not sufficient extant materials to provide proof of the results of his efforts. Even so, a great volume of historical and literary writings during the colonial periods were created in POJ which demonstrates its role in the cultural enlightenment movement. 

Study groups affiliated with county-level cultural associations deserve credit for promoting POJ literacy and cultural enlightenment during leisure time. Private regional cultural associations, such as The I-xin Association  一新會 , encouraged reading activities outside of 

school. 332  Sponsored by Lin Xiantang and his elder son Lin Panlong  林攀龍  (1901 -1983), I -xin 

was an omnibus organization that hosted art exhibitions, lectures, debates, children’s gatherin gs, 

youth seminars, women’s tea parties, religious forums, study groups and the I -xin private school, 

where the POJ textbook  La̍k -pah jī phian Lô -má -jī chù -kái  六百字編羅馬字註解  (Annotations 

of Six Hundred Romanized Chinese) was taught in the beginning -level educa tional program of 

Chinese writing.  333  POJ was once again used as an auxiliary tool for Chinese cultural studies. 

Learning about Chinese culture was considered the first step in learning the history of Taiwan. 

In addition to increasing literacy rate, I-xi n increased women’s cultural involvement through offering women’s speechmaking classes. 334 Although I-xin was a male-dominated society managed by the Lin family, local native authorities, and outside elite classes, 335 one-third               

> 332 The I-xin Association was founded by Lin Xiantang’s son Lin Panlong. After he traveled back from Europe, the
> Association was initiated in March 19, 1932. It aimed to promote the culture of Wufeng area and make it contribute to the establishment of Taiwan ese culture. Please see Yulan Lee, “Hsien -Tang Lin and Women’s Education — ACase Study of Wufeng I-sin Association,” Research in Taiwan Studies 13 (2012): 102.
> 333 Chinese letter-writing was scheduled in the second level. Hsueh-chi Hsu, “The Foundation and Significance of I-
> sin Association,” Conference Papers of Native Culture in Middle Taiwan (Taichung: Cultural Bureau of Taichung,
> 2000), 9-16.
> 334 The first women association was Changhua Women ’s Cooperative ( zhanghua funu gonglihui ) in 1925. Women were encouraged to learn Chinese characters, Japanese, and POJ, and attend enlightening talks. (See “Changhua founded Women Cooperation, ”Taiwan People’s Newspaper , March 1,1925, 6)
> 335 Yulan Li, “Lin Xiantang and Women Education, ”Research in Taiwan Studies 13 (2012): 93-126.

143 

of their program attendees were female. 336 Lin Xiantang’s open -mindedness on women’s education inspired confidence in his female family members, including his relative’s concubines. 

Lin repeatedly offered lectures and public speaking demonstrations and urged women to talk in public. Women were able to explain their opinions in public spaces. 337 By hosting cultural colloquiums, the association enriched social interactions and individual education. 

Speaking and reading are different skills in the process of cultural participation. Women like Yang Shuixin  楊水心  (1882 -1952), who spoke at I -xin’s Women’s Gatherings ( Kenqin hui 

懇親會 ), dynamically performed in speaking. Their speech making did not necessarily improve 

their participation in reading activities. In I -xin’s reading groups, most of the participants were 

male. They did not exclude female members from reading activities,  but their absence may 

indicate that many women were unable to understand advanced readings of translated works and 

classical Chinese or to lead scholarly discussions. As a result, Lin devised a role for them as 

special members of the reading groups while  they were taking language classes. They had no 

obligation to give a presentation of studies but they were permitted to raise questions and join the 

dialogues about the readings. This worked because the reading group discussion questions were 

not essentia lly related to the reading topics. From 1934 to 1935, the group’s readings studied 

translation and transliteration of works from different languages including  An Introduction of 

Ethics  (by Frank Thilly), the POJ Bible,  The Records of the Grand Historian , and  Purposes of 

Life  (by Hoashi Riichirō). Most of the meetings were organized thematically instead of by book 

title. Fellow members, who all had college degrees except Lin Xiantang (who was well -read in     

> 336 Ibid.
> 337 For instance, Lin’s wife Yang Shuixin gave a prepared talk with the title “How to Eradicate Superstition.”
> Through the process of preparing and giving her speech, she enlightened herself and her audience about how her understanding of superstition had changed. Hsueh-chi Hsu eds., The Diary of Lin Hsien-t'ang vol. 6 (Taipei: Institute of Taiwan History, 2000), 416.

144 

Chinese history), usually studied a selected topic , for instance, “The Individual and Society” (December 27, 1934), “Origins of Civilization and Culture” (August 1, 1935) and “An 

Introduction to Jin Shengtan  金聖嘆 ” (November 7, 1935). 338  Even though some of them gained 

reading and writing skills from public  schools, special members, who were not obligated to 

attend every meeting, might put in strenuous effort to read the materials. However, their reading 

capability would not hinder their participation in non -research based discussions, such as 

“P rohibition a gainst Alcoholic Drinks ” (November 12, 1934). 

Orally transmitting Chinese or Japanese texts through discussion was not the only route for imparting translated foreign works to Taiwanese southern Fujianese language speakers. POJ could serve the same function in written arrangements. Tân Chhing-tiong  陳清忠  (1885 -1960) 

served as one of the most influential campaigners for POJ translation from the 1920s -1940s 

while his periodical  Koà -Chhài chí  芥菜子  (Seeds of Brassica Juncea) was first issued in 

northern Taiwan  in 1925 as a religious journal. 339  After graduation from the Department of 

English at  Doshisha University in  Kyoto,  Tân taught English at Danshui Middle and Girls’ 

Schools in Taipei where he was active in the preparation of English stage plays and talks. I n an 

attempt to interest more students in English studies and literature, he translated a variety of 

literary works including poems, songs, essays, and novels into POJ. 

Translation, in his hands, was typically a reproduction as he had to “speak out” work s in different genres regardless of the length and wording used in the original pieces. This does not mean that POJ, or the southern Fujianese language, was unsuitable for literary composition. But         

> 338 Li-jung Cheng, “Cultural Movement in the local Society: a Case Study on the Reading Society of the Wu -fong I-xin Society (1934-1936),” National Central University Journal of Humanities 36 (2008): 139-84.
> 339 Koà-Chhài chí was a literary periodical that published creative writings, translations, and evangelical pieces from the Bible. Starting from issue 23, it was merged into TCN in 1927.

145 

the issues of meaning that occurred with translating the Bible re-occurred for him. A translator 

has to interpret original ideas in another language. For instance, in his “Gín -ná kap thiⁿ -sài  孩

子” (Chirdren and Angels),  translated from Robert Browning’s (1812 -1889, an English poet and 

playwright) “The Boy and  the Angel,” he had tried his best to literally convert Browning’s every 

word to POJ. However it sounded awkward when read in the  southern Fujianese language . As 

he said, the usage of the language was not natural in translation and mimicked foreigner’s us age 

patterns of the language. The grammar and structure used might be intelligible, but the rhythms 

and cadences of the original piece were lost in the translation. Tân therefore annotated the 

contents and meanings of the poem at the end to aid his stude nts’ understanding. 340  Translation 

from a written to a spoken language highlighted the difficulties of being restrained to a limited 

number of words in the culture and strict formats common to poetry. That, however, did not 

hamper the production of meaning  but the aesthetic flow of the literary creation. 

Tân used POJ transliterations of foreign literature to teach his students the morality that was embedded in Taiwanese culture. He wanted his readers to learn the lessons in the texts rather than reading his translations merely for personal entertainment. 341 Morality, in his understanding, was universal. Therefore Tan used western works for the social education and entertainment of Taiwanese children. For instance, Tân translated Sèng-tàn Koa  聖誕歌  (A

Chris tmas Carol  by Charles Dickens, 1812 -1870) which was a sardonic novella of the Victoria 

era, concerning a miser, Kian -lī (Ebeneezer Scrooge) who hated everything related to 

Christmas. 342  That changed when he saw the ghost of a dead friend at Christmas Eve, w ho urged            

> 340 Tân Chhing-tiong trans.,“ Gín-ná kap thiⁿ -sài ,” Koà-Chhài chí, TCN, April 1925, 22-25.
> 341 Tân was not the only translator in the 1920s, but he was the most productive at translating English works. His Christian colleague in southern Taiwan, Gôo Khó-chiok translated Sun-tāi ê Lâi -lek kap i ē su -siúⁿ (Stories of Sun Da and his thoughts) (Pingtong: Xingshi she, 1927) from the Japanese publication by Andrew Murray (1887-1963).
> 342 Tân Chhing-tiong trans. “Sèng -tàn Koa,” Koà-Chhài chí, July 1925, 25-29; October 1925, 34-38; January 1926, 41-44.

146 

him to examine his past selfishness and change his attitude toward the people around him. The next day, he decided to embrace the blessing of helping people. Tân prefaced Chit tiâu sòaⁿ  一

條線  (The Piece of String  by Guy de Maupassant ) in a similar  way.  343  In his annotation, he 

suggested that this was not merely an entertaining story, but offered practical life lessons.  344 

Tân hoped his translations would stimulate an interest in exploring the significance of morality. 

POJ enabled Taiwanese people to gain cultural enlightenment, get to know Taiwanese language and Chinese culture, and read foreign culture. During the colonial era, private organizations, individuals, and Japanese officers all ramped up their efforts to write the southern Fujianese language. For the Taiwanese, POJ was one of the most accepted writing systems used 

to develop “Taiwanese” identity and culture. It also enabled them to study foreign literature 

without becoming literate in a foreign writing system. POJ played multiple roles in the 

facilitation of Japan’s colonial administration as well as trans -lingual practice. We should not overlook the vicissitudes of POJ across the fifty-year-long colonization, particularly as it was situated in Taiwanese written language debates. 

Taiwanese Written Language Debates in the 1920s-1930s 

The promotion of Taiwanese culture in colonial Taiwan was followed by a series of discussions on the Taiwanese written languages and literacy reform. In the context of cultural movements in Asia, how POJ users described its relationship to nativist literature and the ethnic language is worthy of special attention. In the 1920s-1930s, the Taiwanese elite underwent a period of introspection about what made Taiwan unique and how well its people understood their         

> 343 Tân Chhing-tiong trans. “Chit tiâu sòaⁿ,” TCN , May 1928, 5-17.
> 344 Yet, not all translation was taken so seriously. During the 1950s, his translation of Shakespeare’s ( 1564 -1616)
> works, including Venice ê Seng -í-lâng (The Merchant of Venice), brought the church fun and dynamic Christmas
> holidays via stage p lays.

147 

surroundings and society. Conversations regarding the Taiwanese language in literary compositions crossed national boundaries and geographical borders through press circulation. After defining their culture, Taiwanese intellectuals in Taiwan and Japan worked to define literary genres and language expressions as features of Taiwanese identity. 

While the TCA embarked on cultural campaigns, debates on nativist (xiangtu  鄉土 )

literature (a Taiwanese -style vernacular genre) sprang up in Chinese and Japan ese publications 

between the 1920s -1934 in Taiwan. Defining Taiwanese literature became a hot issue in 

publications such as the  Wuren Newspaper  伍人報 , Shōwa Newspaper  昭和新報 , Taiwan 

People’s Daily Newspaper, Southern Dialects  南音 ’,  and the  Xingao Newspaper  新高新 報.345 

Nativist literature was expected to serve as a bridge linking vernacular Chinese in China and 

proletarian writing  in Taiwan, but it turned into a source of contention in textual battles among 

the China -nostalgic intellectuals. In the field of nativis t literature, “Taiwanese” could use their 

own language to compose literary works and convey opinions. Ideally those works would be 

understood by the general public in Taiwan and China. Nevertheless, selecting a suitable writing 

genre that was intelligibl e to people who spoke different languages when the genre was couched 

in a vernacular format near to spoken communication was difficult. 

In 1930, the urge for the “Taiwanese” to write their own literature was publicly 

discussed. Huang Shihui  黃石輝  (1900 -1945 ), a Taiwanese left -wing writer, was the first 

advocate for nativist literature. His article on “Why don’t we advocate native literature?” 

ostensibly appealed to “Taiwanese” for writing Taiwan’s literature as follows, 

"You are Taiwanese ! (boldface added) Your heads are just underneath the heaven of Taiwan while your toes touch upon the earth of Taiwan. What your eyes reach is    

> 345 Shurong Chen, Taiwan hua wen lun zheng de yu po (The Debates and Fallout of Taiwanese Written Languages) (Taipei: Wunan, 2004), 5-17.

148 

everything of Taiwan. What your ears hear is news of the island. The time you spend on the land is also the experience of Taiwan. What you speak is Taiwanese language. Therefore, your brilliant pens should also write Taiwanese 

literature…What is Taiwanese literature? It is composed of proses, poems, novels, songs and depiction of Taiwan in Taiwanese language…" 346 

In Huang's statement, the "Taiwanese" were the people deeply rooted in Taiwan; their cultural life had no doubt emotionally involved them in what went on the island. Literary compositions created by the people as well as the nativist literature of Taiwan were therefore called 

“Taiwanese literature.” Nativist literature in his explanation was undefined and seemed to be 

interchangeable with Taiwanese literature. 

Nativist literature was expected to embrace the regionalism of Taiwan. Standing in opposition , sneering at Huang Shihui’s ambiguous definition of nativist literature, Huang Deshi 

黃得時  (1909 -1999), a newspaper reporter, proposed that discussion should focus on Taiwanese 

writings rather than the process of defining them. His nativist literature embr aced dance and 

songs, and  Gezi xi  歌仔戲  (a type of traditional Taiwanese opera) that were performed by 

Taiwanese (here he meant Fujianese and Cantonese) and mountain aborigines ( sheng fan  生

蕃). 347 

In fact, the content of writing was adjustable, but how to represent literature in the Taiwanese language in an intelligible way was a complex problem, particularly in Chinese characters. The journal, Tabloid on 3rd, 6th, and 9 th (San Liu Jiu xiao bao  三六九小報 ), had 

supported Taiwanese language literary works and teach ing since the spring of 1931. 348  The chief               

> 346 Shihui Huang, “Zen yang bu tic hang xiangtu wen xue (Why don't we advocate nativist literature?”),” Wuren Newspaper, August 16 to Septembers 1, 1930, from Toshio Nakajima’s A Material Collection of Taiwan’s Nativist
> Literature Debates in the 1930s (Kaohsiung: Chunhui, 2003), 1-6.
> 347 Deshi Huang, “A Discussion of Taiwan’s Nativist Literature,” Collection of Huang Deshi’s Reviews (Taipei: Beixian wenhua, 1993), 64-69.
> 348 Southern Dialects opened a column “Taiwanese Language Writings” as the main public space for intellectual
> discussion on this issue.

149 

editor Lian Yatang  連雅堂  (1878 -1936)  initiated a series of Taiwanese -language lessons through 

his  Taiwan yu jiang zuo  臺灣語講座 ” (Forum on Taiwanese language ) for the general public 

who had to overcome the crucial hurdle  of writing the language. The difficulty of writing the 

southern Fujianese language in Chinese characters hinged on the fact that some of the 

corresponding Chinese phrases for expressions in Taiwanese would not make sense to people 

who did not understand  the southern Fujianese language. For instance, “ 阮厝 ” itself has no 

meaning in Mandarin Chinese but refers to “my house” in the Taiwanese language. At this 

point, the vocabularies used in public instruction reveal that the Taiwanese language by default 

ref erred to the  southern Fujianese language .

Chinese script could not completely replace POJ as long as writings were created that 

detailed Taiwan’s plebeian life. As a major literature and art journal for native culture during 

colonial rule, Tabloid on 3rd, 6th, and 9th called for articles of any genre or language as long as they were about Taiwanese love songs, children's ballads, or folk stories to present pure literature. The journal particularly welcomed those written in POJ with classical or vernacular Chinese as auxiliary commentaries. 349 

The role that writing the Taiwanese language was supposed to play in expressing 

“Taiwanese identity” was discussed but was not well explained in language debates. Participants 

took it for granted that the southern Fujianese language was the Taiwanese spoken language. We lack sufficient evidence to distinguish the context that informed that choice. Hakka and the other 

indigenous languages were obviously excluded from the list of candidates for the “Taiwanese” 

spoken language. Indigenous tribes were racially and linguistically different from the Han. The   

> 349 See SLJXB , December 9, 1930, “Call for Taiwanese love songs, children’s ballads and folk legends— Genres: Classical and vernacular Chinese for languages and romanization all are acceptable. Those Romanized languages
> should add classical or vernacular Chinese as commentaries.”

150 

construction of a “Taiwanese identity” through a language system therefore did not include the 

linguistic identity of the indigenous people. The Hakka chose not to remain linguistically isolated and learned the southern Fujianese language and Japanese. A trilingual Hakka could 

assume a “Taiwanese identity” by speaking the southern Fujianese language. Sources suggest that southern Fujianese language users were targeted in cultural and linguistic promotions since the language functioned as the common language in colonial Taiwan. It made communication possible between the Japanese officers, the Hakka, southern Fujianese language speakers, and a few of the indigeno us tribes. A “Taiwanese language” was invented and its written format for articulating “Taiwanese identity” was fiercely disputed by its speakers. 

POJ as a Taiwanese Written Language 

Writers advocated for the use of POJ again in the 1920s-1930 debates when Taiwanese language reformers looked for a practical written language to represent the southern Fujianese language. The written language needed to be understood by both Chinese and Taiwanese speakers but also accepted by the Japanese government. As early as 1925, Cai Peihuo had published Cha̍p -hāng kóan -kiàn  十項管見  (Ten Essays about Taiwan) in POJ, a work that 

expressed the concerns of contemporary Taiwanese intellectuals. Of the ten essays in the 

volume, chapters 2 and 4 commented on “The relationshi p between the new Taiwan and POJ” 

and “Han ethnicity ( Hanren  漢人 ),” respectively. In his mind, POJ was the best solution for the 

illiterate and a tool for teaching Chinese characters, other languages, and Taiwanese culture. 

Since he was “Taiwanese,” a descendant of the Han people ruled by the Japanese, Cai’s 

plan to make Taiwan better did not include replacing Chinese script with POJ. Rather he wanted for people to learn POJ so that they could transcribe the southern Fujianese language and enable POJ users to learn in Mandarin Chinese and Japanese. In his chapters, he argued that he was 151 

worried about the people’s deficiencies in knowledge and education. He believed that teaching 

the Taiwanese people POJ would help them to learn and to create Taiwanese literature. For Cai, a written language was necessary to differentiate civilization from barbarism. In his words, to save Taiwan from the old ways, the Taiwanese had no choice but to study POJ which would enable to help them advance into the modern era. Out of the 3.6 million people living on the island only about 200,000 went to school, he claimed. Spreading the Taiwanese language was also greatly complicated by the reality that it had no direct linguistic relationship to either Chinese script or Mandarin Chinese. His messages revealed how significant it was to create a written language to combat the disadvantages of recording information via oral transmission. 350 

It was almost impossible to create learning with a spoken language which lacked a written format. Furthermore, in his "Plans and Gist for the Promotion of POJ," he advised islanders that raising literacy rates was the only way to be treated equally by the Japanese. If POJ prevailed on the island, a variety of high-quality publications would become accessible to the masses. Even better, the Japanese could learn the Taiwanese language in the same way. 351 

Cai’s rationale and plan for promoting POJ resembled the rationale that Presbyterian 

missionary’s used to convince people to learn it. They both emphasized that learning POJ could 

provide a person with broad access to knowledge and Chinese studies. 352 The difference 

between Cai’s and the Church’s rationale hinged on Cai’s insistence that Taiwanese POJ users would learn about their culture and understand what it meant to be “Taiwanese.” He believed 

that the Taiwanese should read and write in their own language. Reading cultural materials that            

> 350 Peihuo Cai, “Sin Tâi -oân kap Lô-má-jī ê Koan -hē” (New Taiwan and its Relation with Romanization), ACollec tion of Cai Peihuo’s Works vol. 5 (Taipei: Wushi tushu, 2000), 28-30.
> 351 Peihuo Cai, “ Tui guang baihua zi xhi zhuzhi ji qi jihua (Plans and Gist for the Promotion of POJ),” A Collection
> of Cai Peihuo’s Works vol. 6 (Taipei: Wushi tushu, 2000), 223-25.
> 352 Please refer to the discussion in Chapter Two.

152 

were written in POJ would help the Taiwanese develop a sense of what it mean to be 

“Taiwanese”. The southern Fujianese language could be written in Chinese or Japanese but he 

believed that POJ was the most appropriate script for articulating the Taiwanese language. 

In 1927, the TCA was split into two factions, and the stronger one drove the association to the political left in support of proletarian culture and anti-government. 353 Cai’s departure from the administration of the TCA in 1927 suggests that the TCA’s l eaders were unwilling to support 

Cai’s objective to promote POJ. Since Cai’s life goal was universal literacy, he was especially 

interested in educating village peasants who were deprived of formal education through cultural enlightenment. Yet the cluster of left-wing TCA members who took control of the TCA decided to move the focus of the TCA to political involvement. 354 Moreover, Cai received some sarcastic criticism of his efforts from the left-wingers in the TCA. Anti-POJ TCA members, like Lu Bingding  盧丙 丁 (1901 -1945), twisted Cai’s advocacy of POJ by suggesting that learning 

POJ was anti -Marxist and pro -Christian. 355  Cai chose to withdraw from the TCA and thereafter 

lost his cultural stage and his institutional sponsor for POJ. 

While he was promoting POJ, Cai claimed he received encouragement from his conversations with Izawa Shūji, the Japanese educator who shared Cai’s goal of educating the 

Taiwanese people in the Taiwanese language. However, Izawa did not support the use of POJ because he was conc erned that its use would hinder the Taiwanese people’s ability to learn 

Japanese. He requested that Cai select a different writing system that could also be used to promote Japanese language learning or develop a new writing system. 356 One and a half months          

> 353 Cai lost power in the TCA when its driving force shifted in 1927. See Huang Songying’s Ideas and Activities of Taiwan Cultural Association ,1921-1931 (Taipei: Haixia xueshu chuban she, 2008), 174.
> 354 Peihuo Cai, A Collection of Cai Peihuo’s Works, vol. 1 (Taipei: Wushi tushu, 2000), 22.
> 355 Ibid., 178.
> 356 Ibid., 167.

153 

after their conversation, Cai returned to Taiwan from Japan and revised the POJ spelling system by adding kana to the basic letters of the alphabet in 1931. 357 He imagined that this revision would assist public school graduates in using POJ; thereafter, he held a number of revised POJ study meetings. Unfortunately, this kana version grabbed little attention from POJ and kana users as they were not interested in learning another writing scheme. 358 

Chinese character users also opposed Cai’s efforts to increa se the use of POJ. Reviewing the history of Taiwanese literature movements and POJ promotion in the 1920s-1930s, Huang Shiqiao  黃師樵  (n.d.) shared Cai’s desire to end illiteracy, but thought his efforts lacked 

consideration of the anxiety that losing Chines e characters in daily life would cause people while 

they were learning POJ. Huang’s criticism hinged on the idea that nostalgia for Chinese writing 

would block people’s ability to think and learn in POJ. Huang was concerned that teaching 

people POJ might  contribute to the declining use of Chinese characters even if Cai was not 

interested in replacing Chinese character use with POJ use in Taiwan. 359 

Cai' s advocacy of POJ was considered unsuccessful beyond the church’s intellectual 

circle. Guo Qiusheng  郭秋生  (1904 -1980), an amateur writer who firmly believed in a direct 

relationship between a spoken and written language system ( yan wen yizhi  言文一致 ) in Taiwan,  

> 357

Ibid., 172.  

> 358

From the perspective of the colonial government, writing the southern Fujianese language in a non-kana text 

system was only acceptable if it was an auxiliary tool for Japanese officers’ language learning. Non -Japanese writing, let alone non-character-based systems like POJ, was not welcome in public school education, particularly after 1937 when Japan launched the second Sino-Japanese War (1937-1945). The banning of non-Japanese written language in the public sphere in Taiwan did not target POJ; it was designed to wipe out all writing systems other than Japanese. Chiou Ya-ping’s  邱雅萍  thesis argues that the withdrawal of the Chinese column from the  Taiwan 

People’s Newspaper  in 1937 was meant to remove  the threat from the vernacular Taiwanese -style Chinese writing 

in public space. Chiou states that th e Japanese had lost control of this type of hybrid writing in which Chinese, 

Taiwanese and Japanese grammars all mingled. To justify the abrogation, the government criticized this genre for 

extremely departing from authentic Chinese writing. The withdraw al of the column shows that Chinese articles in 

newspapers were under inspection and they had become unintelligible to Japanese inspectors. See Ya -ping Chiou, 

“A Language Inquiry of Taiwanese Vernacular from the Abrogation of Han -wen Colum on  the Dailies, ” Master 

thesis,  National Cheng Kung University, the Department of Taiwanese Literature , 2007.  

> 359

Shiqiao Huang, “New Literature Movement and POJ Movement,” Taipei Wenwu 3:2 (1954):140-41. 154 

did not agree with Cai’s promotion of POJ. Guo was dissatisfied with POJ, not because POJ 

lacked the direct relationship, but because in his judgment, POJ was simply “a church language unauthorized by the government.” 360 He preferred to base his writing in an existing Chinese character system and add neologisms, if no appropriate words were found in the original. 361 

Nevertheless, Cai was not alone in proposing that POJ become the official Taiwanese written language. Zhang Hongnan (n.d.), one of his supporters, ascribed Cai's failure in POJ promotion in the 1920s-1930s to the following cause: “POJ was misunderstood as a foreign language used only by Christians and Taiwanese illiterates.” 362 Other contemporaries even acc used POJ advocates of mixed usage between two terms “ Baihua zi movement” and “ baihua zi 

(白話字 )”; the former was attached to the May Fourth Movement while the latter referred to the 

Chinese words pronounced as " Pe̍h -oē -jī " (POJ) in the  southern Fujianese lan guage . More 

confusing was that  baihua zi  in Chinese was rarely used to mean POJ. Rather, “romanization” 

(ruoma zi  羅馬字 ) or “church romanization” ( jiaohui ruoma zi  教會羅馬字 ) was often used in 

Chinese to refer to POJ in linguistic and social writings. 363  Regard less of active resistance to the 

adoption of POJ as the written Taiwanese language, Cai persisted in writing the  southern 

Fujianese language  in POJ. He later developed different formats of POJ to promote its increased 

use.                                     

> 360 Qiusheng Guo, “A Proposal of Taiwanese Language Writing,” Taiwan News ,July 7, 1931 , from Toshio
> Nakajima’s A Material Collection of Taiwan’s Nativist Literature Debates in the 1930s (Kaohsiung: Chunhui,
> 2003), 48. He suggested that to establish coherence between written and spoken language, the Taiwanese language
> first should have its own written format.
> 361 Qiusheng Guo ,“Problems on New Words,” Southern Dialects 1:7, May 25, 1932 , from Toshio Nakajima’s A
> Material Collection of Taiwan’s Nativist Literature Debates in the 1930s (Kaohsiung: Chunhui, 2003), 295.
> 362 Hongnan Zhang, “The Misunderstood Romanization (誤解 されだロ―マ ),”Taiwan (1923 ): 49 -54.
> 363 Shiqiao Huang, “New Literature and Baihuazi Movements,” Taipei Wenwu 3:2 (1954): 140-42.

155 

The Taiwanese written language debates did not passively preserve the tradition of Chinese writing. 364 As textual materials reveal, debaters put themselves in a tight spot by seeking an ideal solution in which Han descendants, in both China and Taiwan, plebian or elite, could communicate in an uncomplicated writing form. The central problem they were trying to solve was how people who spoke two different vernacular languages could converse with one 

another in writing. If they could not understand each other’s spoken language, it was ne arly impossible to develop a coherent relationship between the two spoken languages and one written system. The Taiwanese linguistic challenges were also complicated by the reality that some of the Japanese-educated Taiwanese could only participate in debates in the Japanese version of the 

Taiwan People’s Daily Newspaper. They were unable to write in the Chinese character system. 365 

Debating the nature of the Taiwanese language was not just about the task of developing a unified language. For Taiwanese-identified writers, writing their own language and literature was a reflection of their developing Taiwanese consciousness. The proposals for a written Taiwanese language and literature might not be novel, as many of the debaters were bilingual or trilingual and could speak, if not write, Mandarin Chinese and Taiwanese or Japanese. The sense 

of belonging to the “Taiwanese”, however, was developed originally from an understanding of “Taiwanese identity” under the Japanese colonial regime in which the use of Chinese script was 

deemed part of the Taiwanese “cultural heritage.” Within that linguistic context, Taiwanese          

> 364 Zhenghui Lu, Scars in Colony —Issues in Taiwanese Literature (Taipei: Renjian, 2002), 1-17.
> 365 See Toshio Nakajima’s Taiwan’s Nativist Literature Debates in the 1930s (Kaohsiung: Chunhui, 2003). This
> book collects Japanese discussion about in newspapers. For more Japanese materials, please see Song Yijing’s
> Master thesis, “A Study of Taiwa n’s Nativist Literature Debates during Colonial Period ”(Gifu: Gifu Shotoku
> Gakuen University, 2002) .

156 

people spoke Japanese and the southern Fujianese language and the latter was written in multi-writing systems. 

While the above debates included battles over culture, literature, and language, the 

conception of "Taiwanese identity” evolved into an ethnolinguistic concern that was 

disseminated among the Taiwanese intelligentsia journeying between China, Japan, and Taiwan. What we scholars should consider is not the understanding of "ethnic" and "political" Taiwanese 

identity that developed after the 1980s, but how the conception of “Taiwanese identity” was 

constructed and conceptualized under the Japanese colonial government and in light of cultural 

nostalgia for a Chinese identity. The construction of a "Taiwanese identity” in the debates 

unquestionably surpassed what contemporary scholar You Shengguan  游勝冠  (1961 -) indicates. 

He argued that it was a splitting from the China -Taiwan double -ideology  that was pushed into 

the spotlight implicitly by the May Fourth Movement and the successive cultural and literary 

movements. 366  Even though Taiwanese consciousness was developing at this time, it was not 

motivated entirely by the islanders’ dissatisfaction  with being colonized.  367 

Constructing “Taiwanese Identity” in POJ Literary Works 

“Taiwanese” people were portrayed and their identities were constructed in POJ publications. The role of POJ writings in constructing “Taiwanese” identity has been overlo oked because of their comparatively small number and lower visibility in the literary market. They were not as visible because POJ had not been officially recognized as a public written language for the southern Fujianese language. It also existed in the shadow of the Japanese linguistic assimilation policy and Chinese character usage. Most POJ works were written and read by      

> 366 Shengguan You, The Rise and Development of Taiwan Nativist Literary Discours e (Taipei: Qunxue, 2009), 47.
> 367 Ruiming Lin, Taiwanese Literature and its Spirits over Time —A Research of Lai He (Taipei: Yunchen wenhua, 1993), 8.

157 

church communities, private organizations and Japanese officers. Even so, it is our 

responsibility to dig out how “Taiwanese identity” was defined in this written medium, e.g. POJ, 

to rethink the effects in constructing a Taiwanese identity through the most popular native language at the time. 

Author  Tēⁿ Khe -phòan’s  鄭溪畔  (1896 -1951, a Presbyterian Church minister) POJ novel, 

Chhut -sí  sóaⁿ  出死線  (Life on A Line , 1926), and several prose pieces and essays help us 

understand how Taiwanese identities were constructed in POJ literary compositions. In the 

novel  Life on A Line,  Taiwanese people faced a struggle for survival during the interim between 

different political regimes. Tāi -chhoan  大川 , the male protagonist, in August, 1895, was asked 

to serve as a guide for Japanese soldiers traveling to the mountain area of Chēng -shúi  Stream. 

He was chosen because he could speak Japanese and write in Chinese. After walking for a 

while, he informed the army commander that he had to look after his elderly parents and begged 

permission to go home. After receiving his promise to provide  immediate help when the Army 

needed, the commander consented. After Tāi -chhoan returned home, he could not help but cry 

silently, though his wife did not understand what was troubling him. 368  Colonial readers might 

have understood his embarrassing plight i n light of this man’s family obligations. He had to 

silently bear his shame for betraying his comrades and helping the Japanese. Furthermore his 

instinct for survival overrode his desire to behave honorably which seemed morally incorrect. 

Tāi -chhoan’s e xperience might have been read in the context of his identity as a Taiwanese 

native interacting with armed foreign officers. 

The Taiwanese people were in conflict over what made them distinctly Taiwanese, Tāi -

chhoan’s son, Chin -seng  真聲  stated. His middl e-school classmate was insulted when a girls’    

> 368 Tēⁿ Khe -phòan, Chhut-sí sóaⁿ (Life on A Line) (Pingdong: Awakening Society, 1926), 12.

158 

school principal declared that “all middle school students were liars” over the trifling matter of a 

female student forgetting to submit her family letter to the school before sending it out, in accordance with the school rules. Instead, she asked her younger brother to send the letter to their parents. The foreign principal interrogated the girl, and she admitted she had given it to her brother, but her brother denied it. The principal thus called the younger brother and all his schoolmates, liars. Some Seminary students expressed their displeasure at this incident by refusing to attend classes. Chin-seng was offended at being tarred with the same brush as the dishonest younger brother. Worse, he was very disappointed that the seminarians’ strike did not 

last, because the school ministers spoke to each of the strike agitators individually and urged them to take school harmony into account. Chin-seng sighed, “Our unity, as islanders, was 

increasingly destro yed” by the implication that members of the Taiwanese ethnic group only 

cared about their individual feelings. Once they regretted their previous statements, Taiwanese students would give up their planned resistance. As long as the leader of the group was found, 

the rest would immediately fade away. In his opinions, the ministers’ stratagem was, as the Bible says, to “strike the shepherd, and the sheep of the flock will be scattered” (Matthew, 

26:31). 369 

“We islanders are Han people ( hanren  漢人 ).” In his  essays, Cai Peihuo argued that to 

define the people’s ethnicity, it was necessary to observe their “life of the present and the past.” 

Since the Taiwanese people were ethnically linked with the Han Chinese in the past, he believed 

that the Han’s cultural v alues should influence the shape of Taiwanese culture. The Han 

embraced social values such as “loving peace,” which was a legacy of Confucianism, “respecting 

ancestors” because of the practice of filial piety, tolerating differences, and being practical─  

> 369 Ibid., 102 and 109.

159 

making efforts to become wealthy, ensuring the prosperity of one’s descendants, and striving for 

longevity. 370 Cai was not alone in nurturing the concept that “Taiwanese” ethnic identity was 

indelibly linked to the Han ethnic group. 

Both Cai’s and Koa Sia t-Kai’s  柯設偕  (1900 -1990, an educator) accounts of Taiwanese 

identity diverged from the “Chinese” as an ethnicity but were joined to its historical glory. In 

other words, what the Taiwanese inherited from their Han, not Chinese, ancestors persisted in 

Taiw an’s grand culture and civilization. It was clearly stated that “we” Taiwanese were different 

from “they” Chinese (Tiong -kok lâng  中國人 ).  371  Koa,  George Leslie Mackay ’s grandson, 372 

gave Taiwanese and indigenous tribes on the plains a clear definition. He th ought that 

Taiwanese people were Han people who arrived in Taiwan later than the indigenous tribes. The 

indigenous tribes on the plains were the “native” residents (and the “real” Taiwanese) while the 

people who were generally called “Taiwanese” emigrated  from China (Chi -ná  支那 ). Since their 

arrival, Han people encroached on the residential indigenous tribes’ lands and forced the original 

people to scatter. The ethnic identity of the “Taiwanese” whose proponents claimed it was 

constructed through the lite rary movement and written language debates ideologically echoes the 

above definition. 

POJ writers did not consider the Taiwanese indigenous tribes ethno-linguistically 

“Taiwanese.” Instead they classified them as early inhabitants of Taiwan. Tân Chheng -gī’s  陳

清義  (1877 -1942, a minister) ethnographic observations show that the Han people in Taiwan 

sensed their divergence in culture, race, lifestyles, beliefs, marriage values, and education from          

> 370 Chhòa Pôe-hóe, Cha ̍p-Hāng Koán -Kiàn (Ten essays about Taiwan) (Tainan: Tai-Lâm Sin-lâu Chheh-pâng, 1925), 29-44.
> 371 Koa Siat-Kai, “Pîⁿ -po-cho ̍k”(Plains aborigine), TCN , December 1934, 27-29.
> 372 About George Leslie Mackay , please refer to Chapter Two “ Theological Colleges .”

160 

the indigenous peoples. Tân paid a visit to the Hualian  花蓮  har bor in eastern Taiwan. While 

traveling, he took the opportunity to learn more about Lâm -sì -hoan  南勢蕃  (Lâm -sì indigenous 

tribe). The most striking comment he made about them was that he was surprised to discover 

that “their life was similar to human beings. ”373  Tân’s travel notes demonstrate that Taiwanese 

people of this period assumed that the early indigenous residents’ of Taiwan were not fully 

human. They contrasted themselves, the civilized “Taiwanese” people, with the barbaric native 

tribes who were def initively not ethno -linguistically “Taiwanese.” 

Conclusion 

Taiwanese people outside of the island’s Christian community began to use POJ from 

1895 to the 1940s. One of the main drivers for the more widespread adoption of POJ was the Japanese colonial policy. The policy supported assimilation and lower-level Japanese officers’ 

use of POJ to communicate with the Taiwanese people. Initially the government implemented a partial assimilation project through its national language education policy. The ultimate goal of the Japanese language assimilation policy and the activities of the Association of Assimilation in Taiwan was to erase the cultural and racial differences between the “Taiwanese” and the “Japanese.” However, Taiwanese elites developed a serio us conflict with the overall 

assimilation policy. They began to use POJ as a form of resistance to Japan’s imperial rule after 

the Japanese refused to allow them to participate in the political process. 

The development of Title No. 63 was important to the evolution of relations between the 

Japanese empire and Taiwan. It reflected a longstanding conflict within Japan’s colonial policy 

about whether or not to fully assimilate Taiwanese subjects and legally treat them as equal to   

> 373 Tân Chheng-gī, “Lâm -sì-hoan” (Lâm -sì indigenous tribe), TCN , July 1925, 9-11.

161 

their Japanese subjects. Title No. 63 barred the Taiwanese people from legislating their island. It also forced the Taiwanese elites to rethink whether or not assimilation was the best way for 

them to gain political inclusion. A group of Taiwanese elites’ withdrawal of their pet ition to repeal Title No. 63 and repeated petitions to the Japanese Congress for the establishment of a Taiwanese Parliament demonstrated their enthusiastic willingness to become imperial subjects. When the support for assimilation did not earn them political inclusion, some elites began to 

highlight the differences between “Taiwanese” and “Japanese” culture. 

The rise of Taiwanese consciousness was a byproduct of the conflict over assimilation policy in Taiwan. The TCA played a key role in the creation and development of Taiwanese culture and 

therefore in the development of a unique “Taiwanese identity.” A constellation of Taiwanese 

intellectuals made the most of the political moment and attempted to make the use of POJ an ethno-linguistic mar ker of “Taiwanese identity.” Their efforts were not simply prompted by their dissatisfaction with Japan’s assimilation policy. They were also inspired by the worldwide 

awakening of ethnic culture and their historical cultural ties with China. They believed that one language with its own written language/genre should be used to express the life of their unique ethnic group and to understand its culture. During discussions about creating a Taiwanese culture, written language, and literature, POJ was recom mended as one of the “official written languages” which could accurately express the southern Fujianese language. POJ was promoted as an ethnic expression of “Taiwanese identity” and a proper medium for developing Taiwanese 

culture, literature, and language. It was a significant turning point in the Taiwanese 

understanding of POJ as a writing system. While previously it was largely viewed as a “foreign” 

system used primarily by Christians, during the 1920s-1940s, POJ’s use became a symbolic 162 

marker of “Taiwanese” identity. “Taiwanese identity” was fashioned through the use of a native 

language and writing system to create Taiwanese culture and literature. 163 

Chapter 4: R.O.C. Language Policy, the Declaration on Human Rights, and the Inclusion of Pe̍h -oē -jī in Public Education, 1945-1990s 

Under the R.O.C. government, POJ progressed from a forbidden writing system to an authorized part of the curriculum in the compulsory education system. The symbolism of writing in POJ accordingly expanded as well. From 1945 through the 1990s, the use of POJ 

evolved into a symbol of “Taiwanese” national identity for some Taiwanese natives. After the 

inclusion of POJ in public education, using POJ has emblematically become second to using Chinese script because Mandarin is taught as the main school language. The language hierarchy 

has impacted students’ sense of being “Taiwanese.” 

The R.O.C. took over Taiwan from the Japanese at the end of World War II. The Chinese regime mandated the use of Mandarin as a national language in Taiwan and suppressed the use of POJ and non-Mandarin languages. The national language policy was originally created because people across China spoke different dialects/languages that were mutually unintelligible. Therefore, the R.O.C. believed that they needed a national language to govern their territory. After the take-over, R.O.C. leaders decided to enforce the use of Mandarin in Taiwan. Initially Taiwanese people tried hard to learn Mandarin. Their complicity turned into resistance to the new government and its language policy due to a massacre of Taiwanese in the February 28 Incident of 1947. In the wake of the massacre, islanders spoke the Taiwanese language and Japanese to remind the newly-arrived regime of the difference between the 

“Taiwanese” and people who came from mainland China after 1945. In response to these acts of 

resistance, R.O.C. officials outlawed the use of Japanese and they strongly discouraged the use of POJ and other non-Mandarin languages in public settings. 164 

Taiwanese natives and organizations like the Taiwanese Presbyterian Church began to resist the rule of the R.O.C. after the government lost their seats in the United Nations in 1971. In the 1970s, the Church published a series of Declarations that culminated in the 1977 Declaration on Human Rights which called for Taiwanese Independence. These Church leaders were angry about the suppression of the southern Fujianese language and POJ publications. In the wake of the Declaration, Taiwanese social activists requested literary, linguistic and political reforms that were meant to help distinguish Taiwan from China and support the creation of a 

“Taiwanese” national identity. There was a revival of  Taiwanese nativist literature debates, 

debates over Taiwan ese consciousness and written languages, and most significantly, the 

mother -tongue movement. Participants repeatedly emphasized the particularity of “being 

Taiwanese” in order to distinguish it from “being Chinese.” The most prominent political 

marker th ey used was spoken languages and writing systems.  Through their negotiations with 

the Mandarin -promotion movement, advocates for Taiwanese  mother -tongue language 

successfully pushed to include the southern Fujianese language, Hakka, aboriginal languages a nd 

a revised POJ in the curricula of compulsory education in the 1990s. The R.O.C. has 

demonstrated their support for the emergence of a unique ethnic “Taiwanese” identity by 

authorizing the widespread use of POJ ever since. 

Language advocates pressed the government to legalize the teaching of Taiwanese 

mother tongues and POJ in an effort to promote the construction of a “Taiwanese” identity. 

Instead, a well-received language hierarchy developed. The hierarchy reinforced the superiority of Mandarin over other languages in Taiwan. The Nationalist government accepted the cultivation of a multilingual society in Taiwan. Yet it was only acceptable because they imposed a structured hierarchy of language where Mandarin Chinese was the primary language of Taiwan 165 

and the southern Fujianese language and the continuous use of POJ were promoted secondarily. In doing so, the R.O.C. hoped to appease the emergent Taiwanese separationists while also 

making sure that the R.O.C.’s political right to rule Taiwan went unc hallenged. 

Language Policy, Censorship, Suppression 

Conceptions of National Language, Official Language, and Dialect 

Official language ( guan hua  官話 ), national language ( guo yu  國語 ), and dialect, or 

topolect , (fangyan  方言 ) are all relative concepts in the context of Chinese history. Official languages co-existed with dialects in Chinese history until the emergence of a national language. The co-existence of spoken dialects and the united Chinese writing system was considered evidence of the mismatch between the writing system and spoken dialects. In the early 20 th 

century, Chinese intellectuals supported the use of vernacular Chinese as a replacement for the united writing system, a classical format of writing. They supported the use of vernacular Chinese as a national writing system. 

Before the emergence of a national language, an official language served as a common language among areas where several dialects were used. During the time of Confucius (BC 551-480), the Ya language ( yayan  雅言 ) appeared to satisfy the need for a lingua franca for people who spoke different dialects in China. 374 In ancient China, languages used around the central plains were, to some extent, mutually intelligible while the languages popularized in southern China sounded foreign since their pronunciations were  neither close to each other nor to the ones         

> 374 In Shuer Book of the Analects , it writes: “ The Master's frequent themes of discourse were —the Odes, the
> History, and the maintenance of the Rules of Propriety. On all these he frequently discoursed .”(子所雅言，《詩》
> ﹑《書》﹑執禮，皆雅言也。 )

166 

in the central plains.  Thus the section entitled “Royal Regulations” of  The Classic of Rites  (禮

記. 王制 ) states, 

In those five regions, the languages of the people were not  mutually intelligible, and 

their likings and desires were different. To make what was in their minds 

apprehended, and to communicate their likings and desires, in the east, called ji 

(寄); in the south, xiang ( 象); in the west, didi ( 狄鞮 ); and in the north,  yi ( 譯). 375 

Interpreters were in high demand and therefore a common language was necessary so that people from different regions of the Middle Kingdom of China could communicate with each another. 

It is very likely that a Ya language evolved into an official language because it was used formally for ceremonial and official occasions while a variety of other languages were utilized for casual and private conversations. 376 In the Ming Dynasty, or earlier, the official language, which was the common language spoken by the ruling elites, enabled spoken communication between officials and emperors. The difference between the official language and all other dialects was their ease and scope of use. For instance, variants of the official language were used in Chengdu  成都  and Nanjing  南京 . They were  called Xinan  西南  guan hua and Jianghuai  江淮 

guan hua respectively. In fact, every metropolitan area could develop their own version of guan hua for formal and ceremonial uses with distinctive regional linguistic features. 377 

The notion of having a regional variant of the official language  did not gain the  southern 

Fujianese language  a foothold in Taiwan after the R.O.C. government came to pow er. The 

language was the most widely used language among Han Taiwanese, foreign missionaries, and 

plains indigenous tribes. An official language was needed for Taiwan, but the southern 

Fujianese language was not considered for the task. During the Qing  dynasty, Emperor          

> 375 Chapter 5 of The Classic of Rites: 「五方之民，言語不通，嗜欲不同。 達其志，通其欲，東方曰「寄」，
> 南方曰「象」，西方曰「狄鞮」，北方曰「譯」 。」
> 376 Chapter 17 of Shuer Book, The Analects .
> 377 Daan He, “Official Language, Jin Language, and an Investigation of Pinghua,” 385.

167 

Yongzheng (1678-1735) promoted the Beijing dialect as the official language of Taiwan and Japanese was the official language while Taiwan was a colony of the Japanese Empire. For the R.O.C. regime, Mandarin Chinese was the language that was officially allowed for use in the civil service, media, and schools. 

Before the Japanese occupation, many Qing officials who came from China had no knowledge of the  southern Fujianese language  and spoke different dialects and official 

languages. T hey therefore requested native interpreters for assistance in court. 378  Furthermore, 

official language promotion in Taiwan during the Qing periods focused on the Beijing dialect. 

Emperor Yongzheng complained that the oral presentations by officials from Gu angdong and 

Fujian were almost unintelligible due to their strong native accents. He worried whether they 

were competent to rotate to other provinces and if they could make the proceedings of trials 

intelligible to the common people. Officials who relied  on local interpreters or clerks and 

runners ( xu li  胥吏 ), might be given misleading and derivative meanings by their interpreters and malpractice could occur. 379 In 1728, the Emperor Yongzheng founded an official language academy ( zheng yin shuyuan  正音書院 ) in Taiwan  in order to promote the Beijing official 

language.  As he discovered, officials from Fujian and Guangdong read in their native languages 

when studying and preparing for the civil service examinations. They were not speaking the 

official language.  They were using their own regional dialects. In response, he issued another 

edict that scholars who passed the county -level examinations would be banned from taking 

provincial -level examinations if they proved incapable of speaking the official language w ithin 

eight years of passing their county -level examinations. The same regulation applied to these who          

> 378 Liangbi Liu, Revised Gazetteer of Taiwan fu in Fujian Province, vol. 1 (Taipei: Chengwen , years unknown), 127 -
> 210.
> 379 Liangqi Jiang, Xianqian Wang eds. Shier Chao Donghua Lu (Taipei: Wenhai chuban she, 1963), 622.

168 

passed provincial exams. 380 The edict was clear. Provincial administrators had to learn and use the official language to further their careers. 

Even so, the official language did not spread easily simply because its usage was 

required. In the first year of the Qianlong period, the eastern Guangdong area’s scholars were 

granted three more years to learn the official language before they had to pass examinations in it. In addition, the state government also sent extra language faculty from Zhejiang and Jiangxi provinces to work with the Fujianese. 381 However, as Emperor Qianlong commented wearily, since the official language still was not well spoken in Fujian province, the county magistrates would have to serve as teachers once the provincial teachers had returned to the mainland of Fujian. 382 Taiwan, under Fujian province’s jurisdiction, at the time had established four 

language academies at Tainan, Jiayi  嘉義 , Kaohsiung  高雄  and Zhanghua  彰化  of Taiwan. 383 

The emperors’ efforts were fruitless since  oral proficiency tests revealed that the officials were 

not learning the language well. 384  In 1775, the emperor revised written responses to provincial 

requests for official language education. The edict stated that civil examinations should test 

writing proficiency instead of accuracy of pronunciation. If proficiency in speaking the officia l

language was deemed necessary, then teachers who could use the character system but could not 

speak the official language could no longer participate in their professional field. 385  This 

evidence demonstrates, on the one hand, that there was an issue of p otential mutual                 

> 380 Qingding xuezheng quan s hu (Books of The Provincial Director of Education ), vol. 59.
> 381 Tiancheng Liang eds. “School,” Gazetteer of Yongchun County (Beijing: Yuwen chuban she) ,713.
> 382 Book of The Provincial Director of Education, vol. 59.
> 383 Liangbi Liu, “School and Academy,” Revi sed Gazetteer of Taiwan fu in Fujian Province , vol. 11, 1712.
> 384 Hongpo Deng, “Mandarin Academy and Official Language Movement in the Qing Dynasty,” Materials for
> History of Chinese Academy (Hangzhou: Zhejiang Jiaoyu chuban she, 1998). Deng states that when Xu Zonggan
> served as General Supervisory and Military Command of Taiwan and Penghu (1847 -1854), Xu’s examination of
> exam candidates led him to the conclusion that examinees were unintelli gible to the examiner, who therefore wrote
> notes to communicate.
> 385 Books of the Provincial Director of Education , vol. 59.

169 

unintelligibility between the Fujian-Guangdong natives and other language speakers and between authorities and ordinary people throughout the golden age of the Qing. On the other hand, the classical Chinese text was continuously studied in the southern Fujianese language in Taiwan and other areas of Fujian province. 

A national language was invented in order to create a sense of shared national identity among the peoples of the late Qing. In 1909, as Chiang Qian  江謙  (1876-1942), a Chinese linguist, in his report of “ Guan hua phonetic symbols,” states, speaking guan hua was a privilege of officials and it seemed inappropriate for peasants, workers, and merchants to learn it. In 1910 he called for the creation of a textbook of guan hua in order to popularize and transform it into a unified language. He urged the state to compile a national language textbook ( guo yu ke ben  國

語課本 ). 386 Chiang promoted the idea of having a national language to secure the political loyalty and identity of the people during the political transition between the Qing and the R.O.C. 

The R.O.C.’s arbitrary enforcement of a national language encountered issues created by the transition from having official languages to having a national language. The form of Mandarin that the R.O.C. promoted was not the same as the form as the Beijing official language in the Qing period. Before taking Taiwan, the R.O.C. on the mainland held a discussion on the formulation and pronunciation of the national language. T he Commission on the  Unification of 

Pronunciation  called for a meeting  in 1912 to furnish the standard of pronunciation. Seven years 

later they published the  Guo yin zidian  國音字典  (Dictionary of National Pronunciation) in 1919. It was not based on the previous northern official language, i.e., Beijing dialect, but on a convergence of southern and northern sounds that had not been used before. The Commission      

> 386 Chiang Qian, “Zhiwen xuebu fennian chouban guoyu jianyu shuo tie (Integration of the Preparation for Madarin
> Education)” Writte n Language Reforms in the Late Qing (Beijing: Wenzi gaige chuban she, 1958), 116 -18.

170 

created a  new  spoken system of Mandarin Chinese to be the na tional language. In doing so they 

launched a war over the national pronunciation with a cluster of scholars who thought the 

Beijing dialect, an earlier official language, should be the standard for pronunciation  in 

Mandarin. Beijing dialect scholars prot ested against the new system. In the process, they pitted 

the R.O.C. and the National Language Committee against the practice of teaching Mandarin in 

the elementary schools of Jiangsu province. 387 

The selection of a national language  per se  involves an in evitable compromise between 

formality,  fairness , uniformity, and stabil ity.  A national language was not necessarily the same as 

an official language. I n China there were several variants of  guan hua  systems, but only  the 

national language was supported by the political regime.  The group of Jiangsu educators firmly 

insisted that the most efficient way to resolve the conflict was to anoint the Beijing dialect as the 

national language, since it had been used for hundreds of years. They neglected the possibility 

that many areas of  southern China might not benefit from the official promotion of Beijing 

accents. Almost eighty percent of the new national language system came from the Beijing 

dialect. The  Ministry of Education , dodging the heart of the debate, issued a decree which 

cl aimed that the Beijing dialect that was composed of twenty percent of the other dialect’s native 

sounds ( tu yin  土音 ) was an inappropriate choice to popularize throughout China. 388 

After 1945, the R.O.C. promoted Mandarin to replace the Japanese language as the national language in Taiwan. They also encouraged the adoption of Chinese cultural values. The R.O.C. believed it was in Taiwan to re-sinicize Han descendants who had been living under Japanese rule. In the process they aimed to transform them from citizens of the Japanese empire        

> 387 Tianchang Wang ed., Guo yu yungong bai nian shi lue (History of One-hundred-year National Language Movement) (Taipei: Mandarin Daily News, 2012) ,122.
> 388 Tianchang Wang ed., Guo yu yungong bai nian shi lue ,124.

171 

into the people of the Chinese nation ( Zhonghua minzu  中華民族 ). 389 Chinese leaders decided that speaking Mandarin should be a defining feature of the Zhonghua  中華 . In this system, all other languages were reduced to the status of dialects. Dialects were not appropriate to use in school and media broadcasting such as radio, television, and movies. The use of dialects in private conversation  was not a cause for concern, but failing to use Mandarin publicly was akin 

to defying the  Chinese nation. Since then, Mandarin has largely replaced many of the dialects 

previously used in Taiwan. It has also become the default language of the Taiwanese upper class. 

The promotion of Mandarin as the national language of Taiwan was harmed by the lack of a standard pronunciation in schools. In 1946, Chen Yi  陳儀  (1883-1950), the first R.O.C. governor-general, promoted the use of the work, Guoyin biaozhun hui bian  國音標準彙編  (A Collection of Standard National Language), as an official pronunciation guide as a result of revisions from the National Languages Committee. 390 Although the policy of Mandarin promotion had been established in 1909, not all mainlanders who emigrated from China to Taiwan spoke standard Mandarin. Mainland school teachers sometimes confused their students as well as the general public, who had no idea what the standard pronunciation of Mandarin sounded like. Students grumbled that there were six types of the national language, because instructors originated from different provinces of China where regional official languages influenced their pronunciation. 391 The instructors were speaking a corrupt form of Mandarin. Government officers all spoke Mandarin in their own accents in Parliament as well which speaks            

> 389 Liang Qichao (1873 -1929) introduced this concept in 1902, but did not give a clear definition. After the R.O.C.
> regime took over Taiwan, the new government legitimized itself by propagandizing thi s concept. (See Liang Qichao,
> “Essays of Chinese History ( Zhong guo shi xulun ),” in Collection of Yinbing Shi vol. 2 (Taipei: Zhonghua
> Bookstore, 1970), 1 -12.
> 390 “Phonetic Reading Materials s hould Follow Guoyin biaozhun huibian as Standard,” May 30, 1946,
> http://subtpg.tpg.gov.tw/og/image2.asp?f=0350240AKM224 (accessed July 10, 2014) .
> 391 Hsueh-chi Hsu, "Language Problems in Early Period of Taiwan Restoration," Thought and Words 29 (1991): 166.

172 

volumes about the challenges that standard language promoters were facing. If language policy implementers were unable to be role models, ordinary people as social observers would be less cooperative with their policies. 392 The  Taiwan Provincial Administrative Executive Office 

strongly urged Taiwanese inhabitants, including mainlanders, to study standard ways of speaking 

Mandarin through the use of  well -structured auxiliary Mandarin Phonetic Symbols . Thereafter 

all reading materials, if they included phonetic symbols, were to model themselves on this 

officially -promulgated  Collection .

The Rise of Language Standardization and Standard Language 

The campaign to develop a standard form of Mandarin generated struggles of social hierarchy and class in Taiwan. Beginning in 1909, a group of Chinese linguists had launched a movement to develop and teach a standardized form of Mandarin across all of China. Standardization of a language has no norms or definition per se , but it has symbolic power to potentially contribute to the well-being of a large number of users by promoting “efficiency” and “uniformity.” 393 The mainlanders, who came to Taiwan after 1945, already spoke Mandarin, though in their own accents, and they used Mandarin to replace Japanese in their recovered territory. They needed an efficient uniform language to help them govern Taiwan. The R.O.C. deliberately overlooked the fact that the post-colonial linguistic market in Taiwan was more complicated than it appeared at first blush. The Taiwanese did not just fail to speak Mandarin because they lived in a Japanese territory. The bulk of the population was monolingual in Japanese or bilingual in Japanese and the  southern Fujianese language. They generally  did not        

> 392 R.L. Johanesen, “Virtue Ethics, Character, and Political Commun ication” in Ethical Dimensions of Political
> Communication , R.E Denton, Jr. ed. (New York: Praeger, 1991), 69 -91.
> 393 Punya Sloka Ray, “Language Standardization,” Readings in the Sociology of Language (Paris: The Hague, 1972),
> 754.

173 

speak Mandarin, let alone its standardized variant. The Taiwanese might consider Mandarin a language from the motherland, but that does not mean they found it efficient or uniform for daily use just because its use was dictated by the state. Standardization privileged a group of 

Mandarin users and evolved the language situation in Taiwan into a “communication between the central government and its representatives.” 394 In the earl y decades of Taiwan’s restoration, 

that communication defined the group of Chinese elites. 

Post-war stage plays ( Wutai ju  舞臺劇 ) revealed the immediate conflict between usage of 

the national language and the regional dialects. Not only stage shows, but als o Gezi xi  歌仔戲 

and shadow plays ( Piying xi  皮影戲 ) in the  southern Fujianese language  quickly developed in 

Taiwan as it was being restored to China.  395  Nevertheless, folk culture performed in the  dialect 

was not welcome. Mandarin -dominated performance groups  arrived in Taiwan ambitiously 

carrying forward the mission of “de -enslavement”  (qu nűhua  去奴化 ), e.g., decolonization. 396 

The National cultural education from the motherland prioritized any ideological propaganda, 

especially through staged performance art tha t included facial and body language, avoiding the 

barriers of spoken and written communication. 397 

In Taiwan  under the R.O.C. government , art has served as a tool for national language 

promotion via educational entertainment since 1945. The provincial offi ce invited a wave of 

stage -play troupes, such as the Shanghai Audience Performance Company and the New China 

Stage Play Troupe, to Taiwan for the purposes of Mandarin popularization. 398  Presentation of art               

> 394 Bourdieu, Language and Symbolic Power , 47.
> 395 Zhaoying Chen, Taiwanese Literature and Nativist Movement (Taipei: Zhengzhong Bookstore, 1998), 227 -28.
> 396 Governor Chen Yi brought up the criticism in a meeting with middle school principals that Taiwanese comrades took colonized education ( nühua jiao yu ) in the past. They therefore perceived incorrect understanding of political
> status quo (See Renmin Dao Bao , February 10, 1945).
> 397 Jiuge, “How to Promote Taiwanese Drama Movement,” TSSDN ,September 7, 1946.
> 398 Pufeng, “Expansion of Drama Education Movement,” TSSDN , December 18, 1946.

174 

or entertainment became a public exhibition of the new language hierarchy because the Chinese play advocates discriminated against the use of the southern Fujianese language for writing plays. The hostility toward  the southern Fujianese language  was driven by a Sino -centric desire 

to deprive the  southern  Fujianese language  of artistic representation, though bilingual plays in 

the  southern Fujianese language  and Japanese prevailed by 1945. The hierarchical classification 

of language use aggravated divergences in a multilingual society via language policy. 399 

The process of defining the national language was influenced by ideas about language use and the symbolic power of language to create a shared sense of identity. For instance, the debates between standard Mandarin and Beijing dialect were not simply arguments over what the vernacular would be. The debaters believed their language competency increased their social standing and gave them a  charismatic  eloquence in social interactions. Occupying the top tier of 

the official hierarchy of la nguage allowed Mandarin speakers to claim that they were socially 

superior to dialect speakers. With the mantle of political power, Mandarin users, under the guise 

of loyalty to cultural glory, were granted prestige and “ascended to positions of authority ” for the 

future development of the language.  400  As Bourdieu suggests, “promotion of the official 

language to the status of national language gave them a de facto monopoly of politics”  401 

Clusters of national language users did develop a political monopoly  in China even though they 

might enunciate Mandarin with heavy regional accents, as in the case of Taiwan. When “an 

abstract group based on law creates new usages and functions, it is indispensable for the making           

> 399 Chen Dayu (1916 -1985), the director of “Fragrance of Banana” (Xiangjiao xiang , November 1947) states that his
> play made attempts to depict the different life experiences and language barriers between mainlanders and
> Taiwanese. He reconciled misunderstandings caused by the differences and suggested a solution: that love could
> transc end cultural diversity. But it seemed that audience and the government unanimously rejected his agitation for
> the tension between mainlanders and Taiwanese. (See “ ‘Flat Tire’ of Taiwanese Drama Movement,” TSSDN ,
> January, 1948)
> 400 J.E. Joseph, Eloquence and Power: The Rise of Language Standards and Standard Languages (New York: B. Blackwell, 1987), 43.
> 401 Bourdieu, Language and Symbolic Power , 47.

175 

of the nation to forge a standard language .” 402 By law, the national language had to undertake 

the “work of normalizing the products of the linguistic habitus” 403 —for example, in lexicography, the Collection stood for the national standard of the language. Promotion of a standard form of Mandarin was about more than demonstrating model pronunciation. In addition to education and codification, language policies were driven by power relations that influenced social life. As such they are worthy of further attention. 

The Evolution of the R.O.C.’s National Language Policy in Taiwan 

R.O.C. officials believed that forcing the Taiwanese to speak the Mandarin language and adopt Chinese cultural values would break d own the islanders’ sense of being culturally and 

ethnically distinct from the mainland Chinese because of their time as part of the Japanese empire. Linguistic and cultural re-education was crucial to the process of absorbing Taiwanese ethnic identity into Chinese culture. This process also became essential to the continued existence of the R.O.C. after the R.O.C. lost control of mainland China to the P.R.C. in 1949. The R.O.C. could not maintain legitimate political control of Taiwan if the Taiwanese people did not wholeheartedly believe that they were a part of China. Complicating this process was the fact that for Taiwanese who were born during the colonial period, Mandarin Chinese, like Japanese, was a foreign language that lacked roots in Taiwan prior to 1945. 404 

Soon after his posting to Taiwan, Chen Yi, mandated that all primary school teachers and students, government officials, and employees in government-regulated social organizations had to speak Mandarin Chinese and write in the classical or vernacular Chinese character system. 405    

> 402 Ibid., 48.
> 403 Ibid.
> 404 The editorial Committee of National Language was established in this year.

176 

Two months later the governor created the  Mandarin Promotion Council, a division of the 

Taiwan Provincial Administrative Executive Office ( Taiwan sheng xingzheng chang guan gong 

shu  臺灣省行政長官公署 ). In April 1946, the Counc il created rules to help Taiwanese islanders 

learn Mandarin so that it could replace native dialects. 

Out of sympathy for the Taiwanese  people’s unfamiliarity with Mandarin , Wei Jiangong 

魏建功  (1901 -1980), director of the Mandarin Promotion Council, introdu ced four guiding 

principles for the national language policy in Taiwan. The policies were designed to help native 

dialect speakers overcome the difficulties they encountered as they learned to speak Mandarin. 406 

At the same time, Wei also made it clear tha t the use of native dialects in public was only 

acceptable to help the Taiwanese people learn Mandarin faster. The four points included: 

1. Using vocabulary and pronunciation guides from native dialects side-by-side with Mandarin in order to help people learn Mandarin vocabulary and the character writing system, 

2. Teaching people to use the national pronunciations guo yin  國音  for Mandarin instead of the older pronunciation based on Confucian texts Kongzi bai  孔子白  (meaning literary pronunciation, wen du ) because they were easier to pronounce, 

3. Replacing Japanese grammar, which had previously been used in the southern Fujianese language in the process of language contact, with Chinese grammar, and 

4. Utilizing Mandarin Phonetic Symbols to help native Taiwanese learn to read Chinese characters. 

None of these points suggested using POJ to phonetically help the southern Fujianese language speakers learn Mandarin. Instead R.O.C. officials attempted to push the Taiwanese to learn about Chinese culture ( Zhonghua wenhua  中華文化 ) through reading a logographic writing 

system. The policies were designed to help the Taiwanese switch to one national language in 

speaking  語 (yu ), writing  文 (wen ), and sounds  音 (yin ).  Policy makers suggested that the most        

> 405 “Decreed of Taiwan Provincial Administrative Executive Office” no. 1590, February 23, 1946 ,from
> Communique of Taiwan Provincial G overnment .
> 406 “Guo yu, ”TSSDN ,Mandarin Supplement, May 21, 1946.

177 

effective method for teaching the Taiwanese to use Mandarin was to give them texts where the Mandarin Phonetic Symbols were written next to Chinese characters. The Mandarin Council believed that teaching the Taiwanese people to read Mandarin was the first step in information exchange. The ultimate goal was for the Taiwanese to adopt Chinese culture. 

The Guoyu ri bao  國語日報  (Mandarin Daily Newspaper , MDN), which moved from 

Beijing to Taipei in 1948, played a central  role in helping the Taiwanese learn Mandarin more 

easily . Even though the publication started with shabby  facilities, a limited budget, and rushed 

typesetting, the publishers strove to make the paper readable, affordable and practical. 407  Its 

layout includ ed  Mandarin Phonetic Symbols attached to every single character to facilitate 

reading and word recognition (Fig. 13) . As long as readers had a person to explain the guide, 

they could then use the phonetic symbols to read characters. The newspaper was a p articularly 

important resource for Taiwanese people under thirty because Mandarin and Chinese script 

looked unfamiliar to them. 

The MDN existed to promote Mandarin to the general public and popularize the vernacular Chinese writing style. The vernacular writing style was a response to the aftermath of the cultural discussions in the May Fourth Movement (1919) in China and to  Hu Shih’s backing 

of anti -classical Chinese for a vernacular Chinese, a style of Chinese writing which was close to 

spoken  usage. Writers of these two writing styles had created a writing hierarchy in which 

vernacular writings were considered informal and out of the mainstream. Through this style, Hu 

suggested that literature reform could be accomplished as long as works co uld be composed in a 

national language. Such a reform of the writing style  broke down the writing hierarchy so that 

even the classical writers used vernacular language like everyone else. The movement’s    

> 407 “Announcement, ”Mandarin Daily Newspaper , October 25, 1948, 2.

178 

participants helped push the privilege of knowledge and its circulation beyond the elite circles, and urged  the  crème de la crème  to abandon classical writing. They believed that training the 

literate and illiterate in a standard system of Chinese sounds through the newspaper would be 

more beneficial for both groups. 408  The juxtaposition of phonetic symbols with characters was 

an am bitious tool for promoting a unified speaking scheme. It featured an amalgamation of 

ideograms and phonograms in a developing nation -state where every ethnicity would embrace 

the fiction of a shared past as “Chinese” through writing and reading. 

The publi c educational system played a significant role in helping R.O.C. officials 

enforce the use of Mandarin across Taiwan. The Taiwanese Bureau of Education created an 

awards system and discipline committees to support Mandarin’s exclusive use in school 

educat ion. Students were not allowed to use Japanese or Taiwanese dialects in school or in their 

between -class conversations or face  verbal abuse and punishment.  They were permitted to use 

dialects as an auxiliary tool for dialogue with campus visitors who cou ld barely speak Mandarin, 

but speaking Japanese was forbidden. Most strikingly, student’s conduct and deportment grades 

were based on their compliance with the mandated use of Mandarin. 409  The teachers were 

monitored annually to make sure that they were en forcing the government’s language. 410 

The R.O.C. administration diluted the use of the native languages through the promotion of Mandarin Chinese in education. From the start, the Mandarin Promotion Council’s guiding principles secured the use of the  southe rn Fujianese language  as a buffer. They soon betrayed                 

> 408 Shiduo Fang, Fifty-year-history of Chinese Mandarin Movement (Taipei: Mandarin Daily News, 1965), 165-67.
> 409 Xian Li, History of One-hundred-year National Language Movement (Taipei: Mandarin Daily News, 2014 ), 163 -
> 65.
> 410 “Decree of Taiwan Provincial Administrative Executive Office,” October 1, 1946 ,from Communique of Taiwan
> Provincial Government . During colonial period Mo st Chinese newspaper was suspended from 1937 when Japan
> involved in the second Sino -Japanese War. The only newspaper to survive during the interim of political changes
> was the Taiwan New Newspaper (Taiwan xin bao ) and it started to print Chinese issues sta rting in October 1945 but
> was later taken over by the R.O.C. government under the administration of Taiwan Provincial Administrative
> Executive Office and changed name to TSSDN (Taiwan xin sheng bao ).

179 

southern Fujianese language speakers with a new policy that banned speaking the  dialect  in 

elementary schools from 1956 through 1987. 411  Their principles actually remained consistent. 

They worked to ins til the ideology that the national language was the school language. They 

expected that it would become the social language step by step for younger generations. Any 

snippets of dialects, languages, and written formats that might endanger the development  of 

Mandarin should be cleared away. This did not mean that people were not allowed to use the 

southern Fujianese language  and Hakka at home. However, they were downgraded to “dialects,” 

compatible with but inferior to Mandarin, which represented everyth ing superior such as social 

status and networking. 412  The R.O.C. government refused to allow people to speak non -

Mandarin languages in schools in order to create an institutionalized language hierarchy, not to 

destroy the southern Fujianese language. 

Suppression and Censorship of the Southern Fujianese Language and POJ 

Unlike the Japanese, the R.O.C. regime did not facilitate the take-over and administration of Taiwan by pushing Chinese officials to learn Taiwanese languages. Governor General Chen 

Yi’ s intention to linguistically absorb Taiwan into China was evidenced by his declaration that 

Mandarin would replace native languages in Taiwan within four years of the R.O.C.’s 

takeover. 413 This “foreign” regime governed Taiwan by enforcing a “foreign” lang uage. They 

were not concerned enough about the barriers of language communication between the R.O.C’s                                

> 411 Editorial Room of Secretary Office in Taiwan Provincia l Government, Bulletin of Taiwan Provincial
> Government 51 (1956) :628; Bulletin of Taiwan Provincial Government 12 (1957) :192 -94; Bulletin of Taiwan
> Provincial Government 29 (1951) :468; Bulletin of Taiwan Provincial Government 16 (1955) :182; Bulletin of
> Taiwan Provincial Government 75 (1973) :11; Bulletin of Taiwan Provincial Government 41 (1975) :10.
> 412 Qinan Li, Mother Language Education —Policy and Planning (Tainan: Kailang, 2006), 39.
> 413 Anonymous, “ Taiwan Provincial Governor Chen Yi Talks about Guiding Principles in Taiwan, ”Ta Kung Pao ,
> Chongqing ,September 2, 1945.

180 

representatives, who spoke Mandarin, and native dialect speakers, to force their officials to learn to speak the native dialects. 

The R.O.C. spared none of the Japanese legacy in Taiwan after the February 28 Incident of 1947. The 2.28 Incident began when the R.O.C.  Tobacco Monopoly Bureau confiscated 

contraband cigarettes in Taipei. In the process of confiscating the cigarettes, agents of the 

Bureau kill ed a bystander and hurt a woman. The incident upset the native Taiwanese and 

people began to protest the incident, yet they received no response. The R.O.C.’s military forces 

tried to disperse the protestors  but they refused. The violence led to a popul ar uprising among 

the Taiwanese people where they organized and attempted to lessen the control of the R.O.C. in 

Taiwan. The R.O.C.’s military responded with a violent crackdown on the protestors and they 

began a period of martial law marked by kidnapping  and murder of Taiwanese people that lasted 

until 1987 when the Martial Law was lifted. Some people were killed randomly, probably 

because of the language barrier, while some were targeted as communist activists such as Lin 

Mosei and Chen Xi  陳炘  (1893 -1947) , who were former members of the Taiwanese Cultural 

Association. The R.O.C. army was allowed to shoot people for minor infractions including 

curfew violations. Giving mainland soldiers the right of lethal force, even in cases when they 

could not effectiv ely communicate with native Taiwanese people during interrogations, was 

lethally ridiculous. 414  Since they lacked a military, the native Taiwanese resisted the violence of 

the R.O.C.’s army by reviving the Japanese colonial period via dress, music, public s peech, and 

protest signs. Soon after stamping out the 2. 28 Incident, the R.O.C. regime strictly prohibited 

Japanese speaking, publications, and any other post -colonial legacies on the island.  415         

> 414 Bing Gu, “The Entire Story of 228 Incident,” Progress 7 (1984): 8 -10.
> 415 Hsueh-chi Hsu, “Language Problems in Early Period of Taiwan Restoration, ”Thought and Words 29 (1991):155-84.

181 

Since the 2.28 Incident in 1947,  speaking Mandarin has beco me a prominent boundary 

between Chinese mainlanders and Taiwanese. Most of the mainlanders gained social status from 

the national language reform s on the mainland, but Taiwanese had to catch up, though some had 

taught themselves Mandarin before the R.O.C.  administration came to power. On the one hand, 

the corrupt mainland officers and their attitude toward the use of the southern Fujianese language 

disappointed the Taiwanese. 416  In the short run, Taiwanese lost the opportunity to serve in 

public posts, since Mandarin was required in Chen Yi’s hard -line promotion of the language. 417 

One of the most important reasons that  Mandarin was propagandized throughout Taiwan was to 

drive th e Japanese influence out of Taiwan. The R.O.C. also hoped to slowly but surely crush 

the continued use of the southern Fujianese language and other dialects. The reinforcement of 

Mandarin was especially regulated by law,  418  grounded in the rationale of na tional security, in 

the “emergency period” ( feichang shiqi  非常時期  or  Kanluan shiqi  戡亂時期 , 1948 -1991).  419 

Increased enforcement of the Mandarin only policy gradually circumscribed the spaces for speaking the southern Fujianese language. 420 Fishman’s profound u nderstanding of the major  

> 416

Anonymous, “ An Editorial: An Encouragement to Everyone, ” Minpao,  October 1, 1946 . 

> 417

Anonymous, “ Chen Yi’s Lecture,”  TSSDN , February 16, 1946.  

> 418

Zixi Wang, An Outline of the Constitution of the Republic of China (Zhonghua minguo xianfa ga yao) (Taipei: Xiuwei, 2013), 24.  

> 419

Editorial Room of Secretary Office in Taiwan Provincial Government,  Bulletin of Taiwan Provincial 

Government  51 (1950):  772 -73. On April 28, 1950, the Provincial Office of Taiwan announced “Regulation of 

Educational Guiding Prin ciples in Emergency Period” to reinforce the missions of Mandarin promotion in schools 

and set up an inclusive evaluation system for promoters.  

> 420

As  early as the Daoguang and Xianfeng periods of the late Qing dynasty Taiwanese people wrote southern 

Fujianese language in the genre of  Goa -a (a type of song scripts that are composed of five -character or seven -

character rhymed lines in vernacular  southern  Fujianese language ) in Chinese characters.  Goa -a writings captured 

less attention from Chinese censors because they were used to create entertaining lyrics not for political expression. 

The Japanese authorities restricted Chinese -script publications to h inder Chinese cultural influence in Tai wan 

beginning in 1941.  However, works of woodblock printed  Goa -a booklets evaded imperial moral censorship and 

remained available until the late years of Japanization thanks to the distinguishing features of vernacula rism,  the 

genre’  s similarity to oral communication, and its easy accessibility through folk circulation and marketing. 

Dramatic works are considered an e ssential target of censorship.  Before the Japanization Movement in 1941, 

Japanese colonial film examin ers focused on discouraging content that interfered with public secur ity or corrupted 

social mores.  Materials that discussed political opinions or that were not officially approved for pub lication were 

also prohibited.  According to  Misawa  Mamie, by 1916, t he Japanese  Sōtokufu  had no particular regulations for 

films, but as early as 1901, there were regional regulations for theater buildings. Article 18, for example, stipulated 182 

language problems of nationalism is particularly instructive in understanding the R.O.C.’s post -

war ideology in Taiwan. The R.O.C.’s deliberate, yet tough attempts to cultivate the “nationalistic unity, priority” and “superiority of the socio-cultural aggregate” on “language maintenance, reinforcement and enrichment” ring true. 421 Seeing that a number of young R.O.C. citizens in Taiwan could not speak or understand Mandarin, provincial authorities forbade dialects gradually, first banning dialectic song scripts in 1953, 422 then clamping down on using POJ in missions in 1955, and finally a full-scale enforcement of the 1956  Mandarin Speaking 

Movement.  423  In that educational scheme, schools disallowed the  southern Fujianese language 

be cause it would impede the progress of transitioning students to the common ethnicity of 

“Chinese,” through the use of Mandarin. Imposing punishments in schools pushed dialects into a 

tight corner, making non -Mandarin conversations illegal and endangering  students’ identification 

with their mother tongues in the process. The reconfiguration of Taiwan’s nationalistic unity 

was conducted by making laws that worked more aggressively than expostulation and 

encouragement to change the language. 

that movies that included themes of  interference with public security and corrupt ion of social manners were not 

allowed. Those involved politicized opinions and those without permission were prohibited. See  Misawa  Mamie’s 

“Screen” under the Colonization —A Research of Taiwan  Sōtokufu’s Film Policies, 1895 -1942  (Taipei: Qianwei 

chuban sh e, 2002),  52 . These censorship rules, as a matter of fact, are common to most political regimes. Starting 

in 1917, with assistance from the Educational Association in Tokyo, the Police Department laid down extensive 

censorship rules for movies. Movies that had previous ly been approved of could be banned during screening if any 

possible violation of the new rules was found (See  Misawa  Mamie,  “Screen” under the Colonization —A Research 

of Taiwan  Sōtokufu’s Film Policies, 1895 -1942,  55 ). 420  Southern Fujianese language  interp reters (known as  benshi 

辯士  in Japanese) had to reapply every three years for government certification from the Police Department (See 

Molin Wang,  Chinese Film and Drama  (Taipei: Lianya chuban, 1981), 165 ).  An interpreter was responsible for 

explaining the  plots of foreign language movies in case the Taiwanese audience was unable to understand scenarios 

or the langu age the film was presented in.  This job potentially gave interpreters the opportunity to offer their own 

commentaries or opinions on the films.  Interpreters were therefore monitored by  movie inspectors  and the police.  

> 421

J.A. Fishman, C.A. Ferguson, and J. Dasgupta,  Language Problems of Developing Nations  (Hobok en : Wiley, 

1968) , 43.  

> 422

Editorial Room of Secretary Office in Taiwan Provincial Government,  Bulletin of Taiwan Provincial 

Government  16 (1953) : 79 -82.  

> 423

Editorial Room of Secretary Office in Taiwan Provincial Government,  Bulletin of Taiwan Provincial 

Go vernment  12 (1957) : 192 . In addition, the ROC government confiscated POJ Bible in 1957. 183 

The 1963 Broadcasting Act officially suppressed the use of the  southern Fujianese 

language  in media broadcasting. It forbade more than fifty percent of the population from 

publicly using the dialect in the entertainment industries. 424  Unlike the colonial re gime, which 

was relatively tolerant of the use of the native language, the post -colonial rule edged out the 

dialects. Prior to the Act, the  Ministry of Education  had stated in 1959 that movie theaters were 

forbidden to hire  southern Fujianese language  int erpreters for Mandarin movies. 425  Those who 

violated this would be put out of business. The  southern Fujianese language  limped along and 

the dominant language on radio and television was Mandarin. Television programs in dialects 

were not to be shown more  than one hour per day. The yearly statistics from 1962 to 1989 show 

that the proportion of  southern Fujianese language  programs never exceeded twenty percent of 

the total, even lower than the percent of shows in foreign languages such as English. 426  In 196 7, 

at the urging of  the  Chinese Cultural Renaissance Movement, the Provincial Bureau of Education 

even authorized all radio stations and movie theaters to propagandize Mandarin via slogans like 

“Speaking and studying Mandarin is a hallmark of patriotism,” “A model citizen should  speak 

standard Mandarin,” and “Mandarin is the united language to be used throughout the nation.”  427 

Until 1976, the revised Broadcasting Act continued to discourage dialects and propagandize 

standard Mandarin teaching radio, which was an effective channel  for learning spoken Mandarin. 

Japanese -educated scholars, among them Lin Mosei, Du Congming  杜聰明  (1893 -1986 ), and 

Lin Xiantang, attributed their success in Mandarin studies to these broadcasts. 

Censorship limited the people’s access to certain types of co ntent that might endanger the                

> 424 “The 1963 Broadcasting Act ( Guangbo ji dianshi wuxian diantai jiemu fudao zhunze ),”Broadcasting Magazine
> 224 (1964): 17 -18.
> 425 Sh uanfan Huang, Language, Society, and Consciousness of Ethnicity (Taipei: Crane , 1995), 107.
> 426 Sh uanfan Huang, Language, Society, and Consciousness of Ethnicity, 367 -69.
> 427 Editorial Room of Secretary Office in Taiwan Provincial Government, Bulletin of Taiwan Provincial
> Government 17 (1970): 3-4.

184 

authority’s language policy or the behavioural norms that the government imposed on the public 

domain. From the 1950s-1980s, the R.O.C. applied a similar strategy to press and broadcast 

pieces about “public morality” as the J apanese government had before them. 

The R.O.C. regime strictly regulated  Goa -a booklets  and dialect cinema since their 

contents might include the vulgar culture or messages that jeopardized the construction of 

national identity. 428  A number of printed boo klets were confiscated by the Police and Security 

Departments on the grounds that they were  pornographic, superstitious, ridiculous, or absurd. 

Only positive themes, such as filial piety, loyalty, chastity, intermarriage with foreign tribes, 

historical eu logy, and moral models, were approved for print. 429  During the period of 

Communist rebellion (1948 -1991) when the Chinese civil war between the Communists and 

R.O.C. was supposed to be ongoing, historical legends and stories were created to promote the 

idea  that the R.O.C. was the only legitimate government of China and that Taiwan had always 

been a part of China for use in propaganda. As many of the stories from permitted  Goa -a

booklets  lacked verifiable sources to support them, their inclusion in the hist ory of Taiwan was 

arbitrarily decided by policy inspectors. The entertainment industry was enveloped in an 

atmosphere of moral rectitude defined by the R.O.C.’s ideology. Ordinary people’s day -to -day 

life and emotional expression were greatly inhibited b y the R.O.C.’s censorship of leisure 

activities and materials. This censorship also transformed folklore, featured in the practices and 

traditions of subcultures or groups, into a regulated public performance of morality. 

Language, in effect, was not the major concern in film censorship. Dialect cinema was a novel representation of the southern Fujianese language that evolved from the 1950s to the 1970s           

> 428 Martha Boaz, “Censorship” in M. J. M Bates, Mary Niles, Drake Miriam’s Encyclopaedia of Library and
> Information Science (New York: Marcel Dekker, 2003), 469.
> 429 Editorial Room of Secretary Office in Taiwan Provincial Government, Bulletin of Taiwan Provincial
> Government 16 (1953): 179 -82 and Bulletin of Taiwan Provincial Government 12 (1954): 158.

185 

even though provincial decrees limited the number of hours that dialects could be broadcast. From 1956 to the early 1980s there were more than 1,000 southern Fujianese language film titles released. By 1970, southern Fujianese language films exceeded Mandarin movies in number (Fig. 14). Since the R.O.C. government was censoring productions made in the southern Fujianese language, it is important to explain how the filmmakers justified the production of so many films in the dialect through this period. Inasmuch as cinema for a new regime serves an educational purpose,  it also,  as Andrew Higson might suggest, proclaimed the “unique identity” 

of the Taiwanese people. 430  This uniqueness, in Leo Ching’s words, would “exist only in 

specific temporality and spatiality,” which could hardly ever be  read through the movies after the 

mid -1980s, when a rise in nostalgia and melancholy for Taiwan’s colonized past was 

presented. 431  In this regard,  southern Fujianese language  films were granted a certific ate of 

exhibition  as long as their content and ideol ogy corresponded to R.O.C. inspired identities. 

The southern Fujianese language films were accepted when they promoted themes about the connection of Taiwan with Chinese history and morality. 432 In the very beginning, the R.O.C. administration tried to prohibit Gezi xi films but it became clear that this attempted reform was fruitless. The government noticed that Gezi xi films in the Amoy dialect, produced by Hong Kong film companies, or in the southern Fujianese language for the most part                                        

> 430 Andrew Higson, “The Limiting Imagination of National Cinema,” in Mette Hjort and Scott MacKenzie,
> eds., Cinema and Nation (Routledge, 2000 ), 63 -74; “National cinemas, international markets, cross -cultural
> identities,” in Ib Bondebjerg, ed s., Moving Images, Culture and the Mind (Luton :University of Luton Press, 2000 ),
> 205 -14.
> 431 L.T.S. Ching, Becoming "Japanese": Colonial Taiwan and the Politics of Identity Formation , 11.
> 432 The first southern Fujianese language film, Six Talents’ Romance of the West Chamber 六才子西廂記 (1955) did
> not succeed at the box office, due to screening the 16 -mm film on theaters that used 35 -mm film. See Longyan Ye,
> Chunhua fanlu─ Authentic Taiwanese Language Movies (Taipei: Boyang, 1999 ),67. The following year, He
> Jiming’s 何基明 (1917 -1994 )Gezi xi film, Xue Pinggui and Wang Baochuan 薛平貴與王寶釧 ,unexpectedly
> earned him both a reputation and a return in profit .Soon there after, asurge of Gezi xi film ssprang up in the film
> market. See Huang Ren, “The Past and Present of Taiyu Films (Tradition and Rebirth) ,” in Huang Ren e ds., New
> Taiwan Cinema (Taipei: Commercial Press), 98 -103.

186 

propagandized traditional Chinese morals: loyalty, filial piety, constancy, and righteousness. There is no doubt that the continuation of traditional Chinese culture was used to legitimize the 

R.O.C’s power i n Taiwan. 

Since the function of dialect films was to promote the understanding that the Taiwanese were not culturally distinct from mainland inhabitants, it is not surprising that the majority of the southern Fujianese language films were directed by mainland Taiwanese directors. 433 These movies presented cultural diversity and the intersection of messages that mainlanders and Taiwanese delivered in different ways. They also demonstrated that they could work together and learn from each other because they a ll were “Chinese.” 434 For instance,  “Descendants of the 

Yellow Emperor  (Huangdi zisun  黃帝子孫 )” in 1956 by Bai Ke  白克  (1914 -1964), a local 

resident of Amoy who led Taiwan Motion Pictures Studios, characteristically recounted 

Taiwan’s intimate connection with c lassical Chinese history and morals. In the movie, teacher 

Lin taught the history of Taiwan and asked students, “Whose descendants are you?” A male 

student Lin answered, “I am a descendant of my grandpa!” The teacher then said, “This is not 

correct! We ar e all descendants of the Yellow Emperor!” but the student looked confused. After 

class, two students fought about their origins. “You are a mainlander!” “You are just a 

Taiwanese!” Teacher Lin stepped in to stop the fighting and said, “Hey, don’t fight!  Taiwanese 

are all from the mainland.” She later conducted a home visit to student Lin’s house and found 

that student Lin’s grandfather was her father’s distant cousin. Grandfather Lin came to Taiwan in         

> 433 Yingjin Zhang, “Cinematic Reinvention of the National in Taiwan, 1896-1978, ”in Chinese National Cinema
> (New York: Routledge, 2004), 113-47. According to Zhang Yingjin, Taiwanese people were financially and technically unable to independently produce films by 1955.
> 434 A-chin Hsiau, “Language Ideology in Taiwan: The KMT's Language Policy, the Tai -yü Language Movement, and Ethnic Politics, ”Journal of Multilingual and Multicultural Development 18:4 (1997): 302-15. The statistics demonstrated by Hsiau A-Chin show that there was a very small number of Taiwanese working for government
> right after the KMT’s takeover.

187 

the late Qing because the land in his hometown of Fujian province was so barren that many villagers could not make a living. In Taiwan, Grandfather Lin had worshipped Confucius and taught Confucian classics at a private school. He and teacher Lin were delighted to have discovered a family connection. 

This film was shown for free around the countryside of southern Taiwan. It was dubbed in two languages, southern Fujianese language and Mandarin, for the purpose of social education. Free southern Fujianese language historical movies were not only deemed wholesome family entertainment, but were also converted into convenient propaganda materials. 

The ending slogan in films, “ fangong dalu fuxing minzu  反攻大陸  復興民族  (to counterattack 

back to the mainland and rejuvenate the Chinese nation )”  was seen everywhere: s chool walls, 

governmental offices, and large signs on the streets in Taiwan during the 1960s. More 

interestingly, to confirm how Chinese people easily assimilated other groups of people, actors 

usually sang together in Mandarin at the end of the film. 

To justify the use of southern Fujianese language on screen and to survive the national language movement, the southern Fujianese language films had to promote doctrines put forward by the KMT regime. The language of the film was subject to the scrutiny of its content and ideology. The only legitimate reason for speaking in dialect on film was to create more effective 

propaganda pieces for use in Taiwan. Chen Xingqi’s  陳幸祺  thesis further bolsters this 

argument. She notes that most of the R.O.C. censors wer e from China and many of them could 

not understand Taiwanese dialects; hence, the criteria for censoring dialect films had nothing to 

do with language.  435  This explains why on screen some of the spoken Taiwanese dialogue did   

> 435 Xingqi Chen, “A Stud y of Movie Stars in Taiyu Films ”(M.A. Thesis, Taipei National University of the Arts, 2004).

188 

not match the Mandarin subtitles. Film companies perceived the loopholes of the censorship system and took two measures to get around censorship: bribery or editing films after receiving their certificates of exhibition from the KMT government. 

The Ministry of Education censored the use of roman letters in transcriptions of Mandarin and the  southern Fujianese language. 436  Ironically, Mandarin had its own 

romanization system, known as  Guoyu luoma zi  國語羅馬字  (the National Language Romanization). It was invented in Nanjing  南京  in 1928, but received little attention from Mandarin users in mainland China and Taiwan until 1986. In order to cater to more foreign learners, in comparison with the  Wade -Giles, Yale, and Hanyu  pinyin  systems, the  Ministry of 

Education  issued an official romanization of Mandarin in 1986 based on a variant of the 1928 

version. 437  Before this regulation, the Mandarin romanization was not unified, while Wade –

Giles, Yale, and Hanyu  pinyin  were used by foreigners and on street signs. The provincial 

Bureau  of Education even prohibited the publication of  Guoyu luomayin zidian  國語羅馬音字典 

(the Dictionary of Mandarin Romanization ) by Wenjian Publishing in March 1975. According to the Press Regulation during the Period of Communist Rebellion it contained “inappropriate communist wording ( fei wei mingcheng  匪偽名稱 ).”438  In other words, unofficial romanized 

systems for Mandarin were not legally accepted, even though they were sometimes visible under 

the sovereignty of the R.O.C. 

In the 1950s, the Presbyterian Church bit the bullet and grappled with the most                    

> 436 In fact, the officially -sponsored Mandarin Daily Newspaper published romanized southern Fujianese language
> because of its ease of use in wr iting the language, but it was not popularized. See Boyu Chang, Ed., Materials of
> Mandarin Movement in Taiwan (Taipei: Commercial Press, 1974), 88
> 437 Xian Li, History of One-hundred-year National Language Movement, 95-99.
> 438 Editorial Room of Secretary Offi ce in Taiwan Provincial Government, Bulletin of Taiwan Provincial
> Government 58 (1975) :15 and Editorial Room of Secretary Office in Taiwan Provincial Government, Bulletin of
> Taiwan Provincial Government 2 (1975) :3-4.

189 

formidable hurdle of government suppression of POJ. In 1957, the Provincial Bureau of Education enforced a ban on POJ Bibles since they impeded the promotion of Mandarin. The state decided to give a three-year grace period to reduce the use of POJ and to translate the Bible to Mandarin with phonetic symbols. It was very unfortunate that the Police Department confiscated POJ Bibles transcribed in the Tayal  泰雅  (an indigenous tribe) language and the 

southern Fujianese language  version in 1974 and 1975, respectively. T his act shocked the 

United Bible Societies, who pressed the R.O.C. administration to retract the decision. 439  Later, 

the Bible Society of Taiwan applied for permission to publish a bilingual Mandarin -POJ Bible. 

It was permitted on the conditions that only  elderly people who were illiterate in Mandarin and 

foreign missionaries were allowed to use it and that every copy should be numbered. 440  Even 

though it was hard to monitor every Bible user, the government’s disapproval of Taiwanese 

people using foreign tex ts was demonstrated through the surveillance of the number of copies in 

circulation. 

The Church’s Responses to Language Policy:  Negotiation and Adaptability with the State 

Not all state language policies in Taiwan received comprehensive support from the Presbyterian Church. Enforcing the use of the national language in educational social settings in 

Taiwan has been an unpleasant process for the Taiwanese. The church’s responses to state 

policies are indicative of the long-standing unbalanced relationship between native language, or the  southern Fujianese language , and official, or national, languages.         

> 439 From Encyclopedia of Taiwan “ Forbiddance of Romanized Edition Taiwanese Bible. ” Also see Huayuan Xue
> ed s.Freedom of Speech (Taipei County: Academia Historica, 2004), 610 -13.
> 440 Editorial Room of Secretary Office in Taiwan Provincial Government, Bulletin of Taiwan Provincial
> Government 38 (1978 ): 5.

190 

The p romotion of language and writing, by and large, is tightly connected to power and 

politics. After the Qing Empire’s failed promotion of official  language education for provincial 

official candidates in the 18 th  century, the Japanese introduced their own national language, 

Japanese, in Taiwan. Policy enactment and implementation were lenient towards native 

languages and culture. Taiwanese people s tudied Japanese in school as well as Chinese 

characters in private academies or study societies like the I -xin Association in the 1930s. For the 

early colonial period, Chinese character education was even permitted in public and national 

language schools.  Sweeping changes began in 1937, when the Empire of Japan involved itself in 

the Sino -Japanese War, and later in World War II. The revolutionary reforms in many aspects of 

language enforcement are evident in things such as changing the name of church Sun day schools 

to  Jit -iāu Hák -hāu (“Sunday School” written in Japanese and pronounced in the  southern 

Fujianese language ) and banning the dominant church newspaper,  TCN,  in 1942. The Japanese 

colonizers worked to undermine the Taiwanese people’s ethnic identification with China and 

Taiwan by prohibiting the use of Chinese characters in the public domain and the  southern 

Fujianese language  in school education. The govern ment also abolished Chinese -language 

columns in several daily newspapers  and they gradually reduced the use of the  southern 

Fujianese language . They realized the written and oral languages were gaining intellectual 

power for the Taiwanese. 441 

During the interim between the Japanese and Chiang Kai-shek’s governments, POJ 

scholars and  southern Fujianese language  users attempted to revive POJ and adapt POJ into 

Mandarin Phonetic Symbols to gain approval for its continued use from the KMT. Dong 

Dacheng  董大成  (193 7-2008), a graduate from the medical school of the Imperial University in    

> 441 Yaping Qiu, “A Language Inquiry of Taiwanese Vernacular from the Abrogation o f Han -wen Column on the
> Dailies ”(M.A. Th es is , National Cheng -kung University, 2007 ).

191 

Taipei (now National Taiwan University), published a POJ-Mandarin phonetic symbols manual to help Taiwanese and mainlanders learn from each other in 1949. As he stated, the Mandarin Phonetic Symbols were taught in national elementary schools and the church similarly taught 

another type of phonetic symbols, POJ, for studying the “Taiwanese language” (he meant the 

southern Fujianese language ). Since he categorized the  southern Fujiane se language  and 

Mandarin as parts of the same linguistic system, he believed that they must have similar features. 

He suggested presenting their similarities. Through teaching the similarities in phonetic symbols 

while ignoring the differences, children  would be able to learn the symbols and POJ in school, 

and vice versa. In other words, by comparing these two auxiliary language tools, Dong taught 

readers that the sounds of the  southern Fujianese language  that were not included in the 

Mandarin phonetic s ystem should be rendered in POJ. His booklet was simply a comparison of 

the two languages. For example in his lesson 18, his sequential instructions elaborated nothing 

about how the symbols represented the  southern Fujianese language , but how the charact ers were 

pronounced in the  southern Fujianese language  through POJ (Fig. 15). His effort, however, 

demonstrates that Sunday school was an area where teachers made adjustments to the process of 

teaching the  southern Fujianese language.  They used two spell ing systems which functionally 

incorporated POJ into the national education system. 442 

The R.O.C.’s officials were not strongly motivated to learn the southern Fujianese 

language or POJ in the multi-lingual environment of Taiwan. Echoing Professor Dong’s 

flexibility in  southern Fujianese language  studies, Cai Peihuo, a previous cadre of the Taiwanese 

Cultural Association in the 1920s who supported the use of POJ as a Taiwanese written             

> 442 Dong’s revised POJ was only used in Jinan 濟南 Church and other regional chur ches of Taipei. After contacting
> these churches, I could not find church goers who remembered using his version. No matter whether his version was
> popular in Taipei or how users respon ded to learning it, the use of POJ was maintained in the church.

192 

language, invented a set of  phonetic symbols  with seven additional symbol s and tonal markers 

(Fig. 16) to transcribe the southern Fujianese language. His logic, from an R.O.C. member’s 

point of view, deviated from the R.O.C.’s Mandarin policy in press and broadcast media. To 

wipe out linguistic estrangement, Cai proposed that  the party publicize his southern Fujianese 

language phonetic symbols in printed propaganda materials. Owing to their similar spelling 

bases, Mandarin users would have no barriers to acquiring the southern Fujianese language 

variant. Cai’s wishful thinki ng was that this proposal to the headquarters of the KMT would be 

used to train R.O.C. cadres to offer supplementary public education at the regional level. 443  A

key thread of this issue that Cai might have neglected was that the R.O.C. regime, unlike the 

Japanese one, did not attempt to have its officials learn the southern Fujianese language because 

they regarded native languages as dialects inferior to standard Mandarin. 

The popularization of Mandarin in Taiwan was not just a way for the Chinese to claim political power over the island. It also worried  southern Fujianese language  advocates especially 

those from the church. A few months after Dong’s POJ publication, he was concerned that no 

further thought would be given to the future of the church’s language (meaning POJ). His 

anxiety was justified as a survey he conducted revea led that more and more churches used 

Chinese Bibles, particularly in northern Taiwan. From May 15 to July 11 of 1949, out of the 

4729 copies of the Bible that sold in Taipei’s bookstores, 4707 were in characters and only 23 

were in POJ. Southern bookstor es followed the same trend, as the ratio of these two versions 

was 100:20. Dong’s findings made him question what the Taiwanese Presbyterian church’s 

writing was. For him, it was time for the Church to make a decision on this significant matter.  444    

> 443 Pe ihuo Cai, “ Diary on March 3, 1951, ”A Collection of Cai Peihuo’s Works, vol. 6 (Taipei: Wushi tushu, 2000),
> 241 -47.

193 

In 19 49, after calling for a meeting for serious discussion on the church’s written language, the 

Taiwanese Presbyterian Church decided to officially make POJ its writing system. A committee that was designed to have the Taiwan Youth Convention promote POJ was immediately set for 

the following month. They detailed publication plans for children’s and POJ material 

databases. 445 Clearly, church officials sensed that maintaining the use of POJ created an internal crisis for the legions of church readers who preferred reading the Chinese Bible in cooperation with the national language policy. 

It was not until the late 1950s that the church seriously considered the R.O.C.’s language 

policy as a threat to their continued use of POJ and began to develop countermeasures to the prohibition of POJ. The church sued Executive Yuan for the unreasonable ban on POJ Bibles. After granting an extension to the Church for the use of the POJ Bible for three more years in 1958, the government gradually restricted the distribution of mission materials written in romanized letters in mountainous areas. Immediately after receiving these decisions, the church counselling committee in Taichung called a meeting to discuss the ruling. The council members resolved to request that the  Mini stry of Education  withdraw the restriction of POJ materials on 

the grounds of freedom of religion. If necessary, the  presbytery would  present a petition to 

authorities. In the next meeting after some confiscated POJ Bibles were returned, the council 

requ ested more space to use POJ in catechetic booklets and decided to directly converse with the 

Minister of Education about their appeals. 446  POJ was restricted to missions only, and was not 

allowed in church correspondence. For people who could not read in C hinese, the POJ Bible         

> 444 Táng Tāi -sêng, “Thó -lūn Kàu -io ̍k kap Lô -má -jī ūn -tōng ê su -giân” (A discussion of the Preface to 'Education and
> Romanization Movement'), TCN , September 1949, 13.
> 445 Tīⁿ Jî gio ̍k, “T.K.C. Lô -má -jī chhui -hêng Pō -hōe Tiû -pī Úi -oân -hōe” (T.K.C. preparatory committee of
> romanization promotion department), TCN , November 1949, 6.
> 446 Presbytery meeting minu tes , 1958. Sources from National Museum of Taiwan Literature.

194 

granted freedom of access to the church’s message. Beyond the field of religion, the court’s 

sentence stated that Mandarin was the only communication language, with some assistance from dialects. 

Facing manipulation from several departments such as the police and education church affairs consultants chose to negotiate and compromise with the authorities in charge of language education and public security as long as they firmly stood by the bottom line —the free use of POJ for religious purposes. This arrangement explains why the international Christian community was shocked by the  1975 confiscation of POJ Bibles. Confiscation was not a novel 

strategy in Taiwanese politics, but it was the first time it gained international attention.  Protest 

letters and public voices from far and near accused the R.O.C. government of hindering freedom 

of religion. President Chiang Ching -guo  蔣經國  (1910 -1988) was outraged by the confiscation, 

as it hurt the R.O.C.’s reputation internationally. Previousl y working for the Bible Society in 

Taiwan, Rev. Lai Bingtong  賴炳烔  (n.d. ) claimed that Rev. Cai scapegoated the Department of 

Police. The church was forced to release a statement that Lai and Cai handed in their POJ Bibles 

spontaneously and without pressure .447 

The Declaration on Human Rights for Taiwanese Independence in the 1970s 

The fallout from the R.O.C. government’s withdrawal from the United Nations, announced by Chiang Kai-shek on October 26, 1971, demonstrates the role that international politics played in domestic identity construction. 448  Both the R.O.C. and the P.R.C. wanted the  

> 447

Such understanding was from Lai’s statement through interview on September 27, 2013.  

> 448

Chiang’s withdrawal statement accused the  United Nations of violating established charters by considering  the 

Republic of Albania’s proposal to allow the  People’s  Republic of China (P. R.C.) to take over the R.O.C’s seats in 

both the United Nations and the United Nations  Security Council.  On October, 25, 1971,  the G eneral Assembly 

Resolutions in the 1976 th  plenary meeting suggested an alternative. On the subject “Restoration of the lawful rights 

of the P. R.C. in the United Nations,” 76 members supported the recognition:  

> “that the representatives of the Government of the People's Republic of China are the only lawful representatives of China to the
> United Nations and that the People‘s Republic of China is one of the five permanent Members of the Security Council.

195 

diplomatic recognition that holding seats in the United Nations signified. The conflict began in 

1949 when the P.R.C. announced itself as the legitimate government of Ch ina and requested that 

the United Nations cancel the R.O.C.’s illegal possession of their seats.  In 1971, the R.O.C. 

diplomatic delegation gave up their seats prior to a meeting where their seats were going to be 

taken away so that they could oppose the r esolution to invite the P.R.C to take over the R.O.C.’s 

old seats. The Taiwanese people incorrectly concluded that the R.O.C. voluntarily made the 

decision to relinquish their U.N. seats and exit the international community. 

National identity relies partly on recognition from outsiders and is reinforced or undermined through conflict resolution. Being excluded from international society inspired an awareness of human rights issues on the island. The General Secretary of the Presbyterian Church in Taiwan, Gao Junming  高俊明  (1929-), issued a worldwide manifesto on Dec. 29, 1971 stating that the Taiwanese people’s free will and human rights should not be neglected and that they were afraid of being controlled by the communist regime after the R.O.C.’ s withdrawal from the United Nations. 449  Gao’s wording, in effect, encouraged the Taiwanese government, 

namely the R.O.C.,  to admit the diplomatic setback. To some extent, perhaps it was preferable to 

resume relations with the native Taiwanese since the people w ould only consent to reside in a 

nonviolent environment that the P.R.C. could not provide. His sentiments were echoed by allied 

Christian societies such as  Bishop Warner from  Wesley Methodist Church, the Episcopal 

Diocese of Taiwan, and the Taiwan Luthera n Church. But as it turned out, only the Presbyterian     

> Decides to restore all its rights to the People‘s Republic of China and to recognize the representatives of its Government as the only
> legitimate representatives of China to the United Nations, and to expel forthwith the representatives of Chiang Kai-shek (boldface
> added) from the place which they unlawfully occupy at the United Nations and in all the organizations related to it.”

See  Source Materials of One -China Discourse Editorial Group,  Source Materials of One -China  Discourse  (Taipei 

County:  Academia Historica,  2000), 323 -24 and “ Restoration of the lawful rights of the People's Republic of China 

in the United Nations,”  http://daccess -ods.un.org/TMP/4737994.html  (accessed July 27, 2014) . 

> 449

“Statement on our National Fate by the Presbyterian Church in Taiwan, December 29, 1971 ,” 

http://www.laijohn.com/PCT/Statements/1971 -fate -english.htm  (accessed July 27, 2014) .196 

Church signed the manifesto , proving that not every Christian community dared to risk offending 

the authorities.  450  After church leaders introduced the 1971 declaration, their relationship with 

the  R.O.C. got worse because of the church’s disagreement with the R.O.C regime’s decision on 

international diplomacy. 451 

A few months later,  under the pressure of public opinion, especially from Christians, Rev. 

Gao clarified his 1971 manifesto as “ a confessi on of faith,” instead of a call to “political 

action. ”452  As a Christian, he advocated against dodging responsibility to society and the state. 

Based on the confession, he believed that most  orthodox Protestant churches  would encourage 

Christians to become  responsible citizens who “ participate in constructive activities in society 

and politics.” 453  Under  the aegis of the church, Christians should not involve themselves in 

politics except under two circumstances. They are when: 

“political power from withou t violates the nature of the Church and the carrying out of her mission on earth, and when, similarly, political power from without violates human rights, that is, the dignity of human existence .”454 

The nature of the Church and her mission became significant as definitions for each term were 

not given in Gao’s text. Rather, Gao suggested that support for human rights was a justification  

> 450

Junming Gao,  The Road toward The Cross  (Taipei: Wangchun feng, 2001),  229 -30 ; Lianhua  Zhou,  Memoir of 

Zhou Lianhua (Taipei: Lianhe wenxue, 1994),  281 -82.  

> 451

The relationship between the church and the R.O.C. government was important  since the two parties disagreed 

about the church using  POJ  and maintaining  their  membership in the  World Council of Churches  (WCC) . This 

global organization summoned the P .R.C.’s participation in and publicly bolstered the P .R.C. regime’s affiliation 

with  the  United Nations in 1966 -1967  (See “The Seventeen Annual Meeting Minutes of the General Assembly of the 

Presbyterian Chur ch  in Taiwan,” vol. 2, 1970, 59 ).  The Ministry of the Interior in Taiwan thus pressed the church t o

break its ties with the WCC.  Members of  several presbyteries  proposed  withdrawal  from the WCC in March 1970 

(See  Anonymous, “ Tùi Phó -Sè Kàu -Hia ̍p ê Seng -Bêng ” (A statement to  the  World Council of Churches ),  TCN ,

February 1, 1968,  5-7).  Soon after submitting a copy of the meeting minutes to the Ministry of the Interior, the 

church broke away from the WCC in order to side with  the anti -communist government (See  “The Seventeen 

Annual Meeting Minutes of the General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church in Taiwan,” vol.1, 1970, 11 -12 ; Gao 

Junming,  The Road toward  the Cross , 225 .) 

> 452

“Statement on our National Fate—Motivation Base on Faith and Theology,” March  1972 ,

htt p://www.laijohn.com/PCT/Statements/1972 -fate -English.htm  (accessed July 27, 2014 ). 

> 453

Ibid.  

> 454

Ibid. 197 

of his proposal to re-elect legislators. The dignity of human existence, in his understanding, related to the advocacy of re-election, though the logic is not sufficiently clear to associate the former with the latter. Additionally, we have no further knowledge of how a responsible Christian civilian could partake in statements, or activities, during the  rise and fall of n ations, 

without them becoming affiliated with the church.  Gao attempted to rectify a social 

misunderstanding that the church  involved politics  (ganshe zhengzhi  干涉政治 ). As Gao 

explained, his declaration was not a political act but an action that sprung from  his belief in God. 

The nation would be blessed only through reforming its political structure, regaining domestic 

and international respect and eventually saving itself from decline. These two statements, in 

1971 and 1972 respectively, not only won atte ntion from international society but also earned the 

church a reputation for social activism. 

In 1977, the Church issued another statement that was a landmark in the history of church and politics in Taiwan. Before U.S. President Jimmy Carter (1924-) deployed his Secretary of State,  Cyrus  Roberts Vance (1917 -2002),  to China for diplomatic negotiation, the church issued 

an  earth -shattering Declaration on Human Rights. It was shocking because the Church 

pet itioned President Carter to uphold “the principles of human rights while  pursuing the 

‘normalization of Taiwan’s relationship with Communist China’ and they insisted on 

“guaranteeing the security,  independence  (italicized added) and freedom of the people i n

Taiwan. ” 455  The statement demanded that President Carter, Taiwan’s government, and global 

churches endorse their goals and make Taiwan  “a new and  independent  (italicized added) 

country,” based on the will of the people in Taiwan. 456  Regardless of whether  the statement     

> 455 “A Declaration on Human Rights by the Presbyterian Church in Taiwan,” August 16, 1977,
> http://www.laijohn.com/PCT/Statements/1977 -humanrights -English.htm (accessed July 27, 2014) .
> 456 Ibid.

198 

could represent the people of Taiwan, some Taiwanese hoped that the new China-US relations would not lead to any loss of human rights or Taiwanese security. The most effective plan, the church believed, would be to make the island independent from both the P.R.C. and the R.O.C. Taiwan could leave the complex past of the regimes behind. For the groups promoting the manifesto, the concern was not simply dissatisfaction with the governments of China, but crisis. 

An imagined “nation,” composed of 17 million Taiwanese, was generated through the 

declaration when the R.O.C. encountered the international crisis and conflict that the PRC intended to annex Taiwan. The R.O.C. was a nation in crisis after their withdrawal from the United Nations since they had lost international recognition of their right to govern China. The Taiwanese Presbyterian Church transferred their loyalty from the R.O.C. to the newly imagined 

nation of Taiwan because they were concerned by the R.O.C.’s disregard for the fact that the 

Taiwanese people had rights of their own. If the government was incapable of respecting the 

peoples’ decisions, as a parameter of human rights , developing a new nation, if necessary, was a blessing in disguise. The construction of nationhood indeed, as Hastings suggests, could not 

leave behind the influence of ethnicity and religion. Human rights and the land are “gifts bestowed by God” in Chr istianity, not by the law. 457 No matter whether the rights were authorized by law or by God, the declaration stated that the R.O.C. and the people came through crisis, though the former seemingly did less than expected to strike for diplomatic legitimacy. Hence, these appeals in several languages were written to enable the Taiwanese people to communicate with other international like-minded audiences who might sympathize with 

Taiwan’s status quo and not make their case to the R.O.C.  

> 457 Ibid.

199 

A group of people with a shared cultural identity is an ethnicity. Shared cultural identities such as ethnicity were important to the formation of Taiwanese nationalism. Furthermore national identity in Taiwan preceded the formation of the Taiwanese nation as a political entity. The idea of Taiwanese national identity advocated by the Church was expected to encompass the opinions of the 17 million residents of Taiwan. For the past few centuries they had lived in the island and more or less syncretized to one another in language and life 

experience. Unable to give a specific definition of “Taiwanese” ( Taiwan renmin  臺灣人民 ), the 

Church asserted that Taiwan was an imagined political society. A political Taiwanese identity 

was created as it was discussed, called, used, and antagon ized without existing as a distinct 

political entity.  Being “Taiwanese,” as they understood it, overlapped with being Han Chinese. 

They recognized the ethnic Han from China as the common ancestor of two groups of people 

from the mainland before and after  1945 and the Taiwanese languages that came from southern 

China to Taiwan. Identification with the past and the commonalities between the two groups, 

undoubtedly, were changing. 

The formation and construction of a “Taiwanese identity” should be examined t hrough 

the “continual expression and validation,” of that identity instead of the “cultural stuff that it encloses.” 458 There might be “Taiwanese identities” claimed in cultural moments, literature 

movements, and political declarations under different political regimes, but each example might not refer to the same contexts, subjects, markers, ascriptions, or boundaries. That is, if, as Sperber proposes, classification is a cognitive process of human nature, then the process of constructing a national identity through classification would include the social, cultural, even    

> 458 Frederik Barth, Ethnic Groups and Boundaries: The Social Organization of Culture Difference (London, Allen & Unwin 1969) , 15.

200 

political experiences of individuals or a group. 459 No matter if an identity is established in terms of internal impetus or external forces, it is necessary to look into specific sociocultural contexts 

and read through which perspectives define being “Taiwanese” and its identities. It is an oversimplification to explore “Taiwanese identities” through the lens of ethnic perspectives or 

through dating the initiation of a Taiwanese nationalism inasmuch as people in Taiwan do not identify that they are/were a unified group that owns a sense of who they are/were. 

“Taiwanese nationality” and “Taiwanese nationalism" are multi -layered concepts. The Taiwanese had to process how to differentiate themselves from others in various contexts. They 

were also intertwined in a constant process of “expression and validation” of their ethno -cultural 

and political identities. Ethnicity refers to “a set of sociocultural diacritics that define a shared 

identity for members and non-members.” 460 The identity of the Taiwanese people as an ethnic group and political entity in the 1970s was not well integrated into Taiwanese society. In 

Anderson’s words, the people of Taiwan had not conceived of themselves as sharing “a deep horizontal comradeship.” 461 The cultural community of the Taiwanese was not a shared character in a territorial community. In the 1970s, a group of people, backed up by a religious organization, claimed to have a nation based on the human rights granted by God and that owed their loyalty to God instead of to the created nation of the R.O.C. 462 Church officials created a Taiwanese national identity as the basis of their political actions which included striking for welfare, political security, and a hopeful future for the Taiwanese people. However, they neglected to deal with how to transition the population from disparate ethnic groups into a                 

> 459 Dan Sperber, Explaining Culture: A Naturalistic Approach (Blackwell Publishers, 1996 ), 144.
> 460 R. Cohen. “Ethnicity: Problem and Focus in Anthropology,” Annual Review of Anthropology 7 (1978): 379 -403.
> 461 B. Anderson, Imagined Communities: Reflections on the Origin and Spread of Nationalism (Verso, 2006), 7.
> 462 Walker Connor, “A Nation is a Nation, is a State, is An Ethnic Group is a…” Ethnic and Racial Studies 1 (1978):
> 377 -400.

201 

unified nation. The sentiment of political solidarity does not by itself make a nation if a large proportion of the population have not embraced their shared ethnic elements. This ambiguity 

probably confused people in Taiwan who by and large considered themselves “Chinese” from 

southern China or the political centres of China by 1945. Nationalism represented in the political 

identity of “Taiwanese” people could be a substitute for regionalism, communalism, sub -nationalism, or even parochialism. 463 

It is my assertion that the church’s writings, POJ, and the Taiwanese language (mostly 

referring to southern Fujianese language) were important elements in the creation of the 

“Taiwanese” national identity promoted by the Church. Language and writing played essential roles in the imagination and construction of the nation. In Cohen’s elaboration of sociocultural 

diacritics of ethnicity, language is an essential marker of ethnicity. Moreover, Hastings suggests 

that the construction of the nation cannot leave “the literary development of a vernacular and the pressures of the state” alone. My argument relies on Hastings’ brilliant analysis of the evolu tion 

of language from oral to written systems which creates integral elements in the nation’s 

identity. 464 Though he emphasizes the translation of the Bible, he shows that only when the oral 

tradition possesses a literature of its own does a society “feel c onfident to challenge the 

dominance of outsiders.” Hastings firmly argues that the ties between the written language, probably used by the elite, and the oral language that is used by everyone, can create “a linguistically based nationalism.” 465 The self-determination of Taiwan and its people was not       

> 463 Ibid.
> 464 Adrian Hastings, The Construction of Nationhood —Ethnicity, Religion and Nationalism (Cambridge , U.K. :
> Cambridge University Press, 1997), 11 -12.
> 465 Ibid., 31.

202 

wiped out by the R.O.C.’s national language policy. The aftermath of the 1970s Declaration 

suggests that the Taiwanese were aware of the role of language in defining an ethnicity. 

The Mother-Tongue  Movement  and the  Authorization of POJ in National Education 

Fallout from  the 1970s Declaration on Human Rights 

Encouraged by the political atmosphere created by the Declaration for Independence in 1977,  the Taiwanese  witnessed the fallout of public attempts to separate Taiwan from China 

linguistically, culturally and politically. Announcing an attempt to separate themselves from 

China was a milestone in the history of Taiwanese politics, literature, and language.  Ta iwanese 

nativist literature debates during 1977 -78 and Taiwanese consciousness debates in 1983 -84 as  a

follow -up  of the 1970s Declaration  came within debaters’ jurisdiction.  The two clusters of 

debates focused on how the nativist literature in the 1970s w as situated in the relations to 

Chinese culture and  Taiwanization in which the importance of Taiwanese culture, nationality, 

history, and society was highlighted. Participation in literary discourse and the following 

awakening of Taiwaneseness was an atte mpt to draw a clear cut distinction between Taiwan and 

China. 

Similar to the 1930s  nativist literature  debates in Taiwan under the colonial Japanese 

empire, the 1970s debate started with arguments about literary writing style and genres, but 

ended  up being a battle of definitions. One participant, Z hu Xining  朱西甯  (1927 -1998), 

declared that the nativeness of Taiwan risked turning into regionalism. He thus doubted how 

much Taiwanese writers were loyal to a nativist culture of Taiwan after the fifty -year 

colonization. 466  Zhu’s attacks attempted to switch the focus of discussion from literature to        

> 466 Xining Zhu, “Returning Where? How to Return?” Cactus 2 (1977): 151 -71 .

203 

politics. The R.O.C. government involved its representatives in debates and appealed to the literary circles to persist in their support for anti-communist literature. That genre was believed to be an expansion of nativeness in which writers could express their affection towards Chinese ethnicity and the nation. 467  Echoing Zhu’s opinions, Ye Shitao’s  葉石濤  (1925 -2008) proposal 

for the prerequisite of Taiwan’s nat ivist literature in 1977 had stated that Taiwan and its people 

must be the subjects of their own literary narratives. That was what he called Taiwanese 

consciousness ( Taiwan yishi  臺灣意識 ), reflecting the people’s day -to -day life. 468  This 

nativeness tended to  define the expression of affection towards Taiwan and its culture. 

The following debates of Taiwanese consciousness developed out of the Nationalist’s 

control. Disputed in magazines such as Qianjin Weekly  前進  and  Xiachao Forum  夏潮 

sponsored by  dangwai  黨外  (o utside the R.O.C. party) activists, the debates  added fuel to the 

flames of conflicting positions between Taiwan and mainland China.  Chen Fangming  陳芳明 

(1947 -), a participant in the debates, argued correctly that the vigorous development of 

Taiwanese ideol ogy and antagonism towards the P.R.C. (or R.O.C.) were closely associated with 

social events, e.g. the Church’s Declarations. 469  From the sociocultural perspective, Chen’s 

statement is convincing.  On the one hand, in fact, Taiwanese culture and ideology fo und no 

battles to fight with Chinese culture in other fields like education. By the 1990s, textbooks 

neglected everything pertaining to Taiwan. 470  Rather, Taiwanese students were taught the 

Chinese cultural narrative that stressed Chinese culture and its glorification and the hatred of                   

> 467 Bichuan Yang, Dictionary of Taiwan History (Taipei: Qianwei, 1997 ), 335.
> 468 Shitao Ye, “Introduction of Taiwanese Nativist Literature,” Discussion of Nativist Literature (Taipei: Yuanliu,
> 1978), 72 -73.
> 469 Fangming Chen, “Re -forging Affections toward Taiwan,” Zili Night Newspaper, November 2 ,1999.
> 470 Staring from 1977, the subject “Knowing Taiwan” (Renshi Taiwan) was added to the curriculum for first grade
> of junior high schools. (See Huang Chun -min’s dissertation, “Language Education Policies and Practices in
> Taiwan —from Nationism to Nationalism, ”Ph .D .Diss ., Washington University, 1997 ).

204 

communism. Taiwan was almost impossible to locate in a survey of teaching materials from the period. Before the advent of social or political events, ordinary people lacked sources for forging Taiwanese identity  in compulsory education . On the other hand, another result of the 

1977 church declaration was that the development of “Taiwanese” identity was linked to a 

political independence movement. Prior to the Declaration, native Taiwanese people sensed that 

there was a boundary between themselves and mainlanders that went beyond language use, but 

the boundary was not acknowledged in China. After the Declaration, t he development of a 

distinct “Taiwanese” national identity symbolized that the R.O.C. government in Taiwan was 

losing its political legitimacy. At this time, the government had to intervene in social events, 

even in the literature field, to keep the polit ical legitimacy of their government from 

disintegrating. 

To distinguish “being Taiwanese” from “being Chinese,” some individuals in Taiwan 

defined themselves using ethnic markers. One of the most prominent markers was the spoken language. Most of the first and second generations of post-1945 mainlanders, if not sedulously learning, spoke a corrupt form of the languages used in Taiwan, including the southern Fujianese language, Hakka, and indigenous languages. Conversely the native Taiwanese might use heavily accented Mandarin but still be intelligible to Mandarin speakers. Accented Mandarin and unfamiliarity with native languages have become distinguishing indicators of how the Taiwanese (bensheng ren  本省人 ) and mainland Chinese ( waisheng ren  外省人 ) were categorized. 

The revival of the Taiwanese written languages debate from the 1980s-1990s should not 

be a surprise, since a written language can do so much to express a writer’s political leanings as 

well as to preserve the unique oral culture that was missing from Chinese characters. The distinction in speech could not satisfy these linguistic groups anymore. Their requests for their 205 

own writing system and the evolution of its use in literature have encouraged language activists to engage in two tracks of resuscitating speaking and writing Taiwanese languages. They pushed for the development of Taiwanese-language writings from the mid-1980s forward. The second wave of language activism came in education through the mother-tongue movement in the late 1980s. 

The concept of native language in Taiwan primarily referred to the southern Fujianese language before the 1980s. At that time native language users began to use their dialects to emphasize their ethnicity and political identities. Southern Fujianese language, Hakka, and indigenous languages all claimed that their particularities should be promoted for continuous use as mother languages. They initially gained an unfeatured name as a group —nativist languages (xiangtu yuyan  鄉土語言 ). It was a blur ry version of the non -Mandarin languages in Taiwan. 

In 1987 the R.O.C. lifted Martial Law in Taiwan. It was a key turning point in the political life of the nation since political demonstrations and public claims were not suppressed for the first time in decades. Promoters of Taiyu  台語  (southern Fujianese language ), 471  Keyu  客

語 or  Kejia hua  客家話  (Hakka), and  Yuanzhumin yu  原住民語  (indigenous languages) 

attempted to partition the resources for language promotion that were previously monopolized by 

Mandarin Chine se. Starting in 1987, the Taiwanese literature’s name gradually switched from 

nativist to  Taiyu  literature. The switch implied that Taiwanese literary composition was separate 

from Chinese literature. Every linguistic ethnic group was determined to be v isible as  Taiyu       

> 471 In order not to distract readers, the complex process of transitioning from calling southern Fujianese language to calling it Taiyu is not elaborated in the body of this dissertation. Briefly speaking, since the awakening of Taiwanese national identity in the late 1970s, many southern Fujianese language speakers tended to call their language Taiwan
> hua (Taiwanese language). Disputes, however, arose from the Hakka group who thought their language was Taiwanese language too and thus believed that southern Fujianese language speakers monopolized the limelight of ethnolinguistic marker. To avoid conflicts, Taiyu is the term that has been used to exclusively refer to the southern Fujianese language ever since.

206 

literature instead of disguised under the  larger categorization of  “Zhonghua minzu .” The new 

culture and literature, as defined, was to be independently juxtaposed with Chinese culture. 472 

The juxtaposition demonstrated not only a textual boundary from their Chinese counterparts but 

also a rollout of issues in which the “Taiwanese” served as subjects who were legally permitted 

to publish and discuss their own works in the public sphere.  At that point,  a large volume of 

Taiwanese -centered publications blossomed. 473 

In addition to the separation from China, the tougher mission of defining what it means 

to be “Taiwanese” ( Taiwan ren) hinges on the fact that different groups of “Taiwanese” p eople speak different languages. Unifying the spoken and written systems really put linguists to the 

test. The term “Taiwanese” is complex, though it is used generally with regard to ethnicity, 

which is an even more intricate concept than its political dimension. Whether or not Taiwan ren 

is an ethnic category is controversial. It might be easy for a Taiwanese independence activist to claim Taiwan ren is not Chinese ( Zhongguo ren ), if the latter refers to the entity of China (P.R.C. or R.O.C.). The claim becomes ambiguous if the term refers to an ethnic group or groups, as we 

are unlikely to suggest that the “Chinese” have a clear ethnic definition. In Taiwan, particularly after the 1980s, in many cases “being Taiwanese” and “being Chinese” were juxta posed to 

represent users’ different understandings of the relationship between Taiwan and mainland                           

> 472 One of the most influential journals impacted by the 1977-78 Taiwanese nativist literature movement was The New Culture (Taiwan xin wenhua) , initiated in September 1986. A group of writers advocated creating a writing circle where Taiwanese culture, literature, languages, history, politics, art, and education could be discussed. The new culture, as defined, was to independently juxtapose Chinese culture (Fang Yaoqian, Taiyu wenxue shi ji shumu hui bian (History of Taiyu Literature and Bibliography )(Kaohsiung: Taiwan Literary Celebrity, 2012 ),84 -85.
> 473 Such as Taiyu Digest (1989), Yam Poetry Journal (1991), Taiyu Air (1992), Kadong Taibun Monthly (1995), Tai-bun BONG-po (1996), and TGB Communication (1999) .Most noteworthy was the trend of Taiyu publications
> overseas starting in the 1970s. The Centre for the Study Promotion of the Taiwanese Languages in Los Angeles
> launched Taiyu Communication in 1975 a nd founded an overseas branch in Taiwan in 1993 as a headquarters of
> Taiyu promotion through reading classes, broadcasting, and cassettes. See Ruiming Liao, Tongue and Pen —
> Development of Taiwan Mother -Tongue Literature (Tainan: National Museum of Taiwan Li terature, 2013), 79 -83.

207 

China.  For some Taiwanese, the nation -state meant “Taiwan” but being Chinese meant the 

people identified with the R.O.C. government. 

Moreover, the next important issue that would have to be solved would be to choose which language was capable of representing the language of Taiwan ren . The 1980s discussion could not find a satisfactory solution, though scholars like Lin Yangmin  林央敏  (1955 -) and Lin 

Hengtai  林亨泰  (1924 -) drafted a comprehensive agreement to choose the  southern Fujianese 

language  as the language.  474  Taiwan ren  reached no consensus as to  a representative language. 

The indefinable ethnic Taiwanese later in the 1990s changed their focus to defining  individual 

ethnicities. Still, the objectives and aftermath of the 1980s mother -tongue movement defined 

groups of people by means of language based on the right to use mother languages. 

Before we move to the analyses of how the mother-tongue movement lobbied for the official institutionalization of written languages for Taiwanese mother languages, a short, yet 

comprehensive, investigation of the KMT government’s ideology in systematically defining the groups of “Taiwanese ethnicity ” provides a significant base of comparison to the above sociolinguistic perspective. A Taiwanese sociologist,  Wang Fu -chang  王甫昌 , searched into  the 

censuses that were conducted between 1956 and 2000. He discovered that, due to the lifting of 

Martial Law and the second election of legislators, the category of Chinese original domiciles 

(sheng ji  省籍 ) in a household certificate was replaced by the  ethnicities in Taiwan. 475  Taking 

Chinese original domiciles as a dominant category in classifying Taiwanese people in effect had 

the political purpose of favouring post -1945 mainlanders. Originating from different provinces,             

> 474 Hentai Lin, “Criteria of Composing Taiwanese Literature,” Taiwan Chunqiu 2:2 (1988) :336 -38 ; Lin Yangmin,
> History of Taiyu Movements (Taipei: Qianwei, 1996) ,152 -58.
> 475 Fu-chang Wang, “From Chinese Original Domicile to Taiwanese Ethnicity: An Analysis of Census Category
> Transformation in Taiwan,” Taiwan Sociology 9 (2005) :59 -117.

208 

mainland legislators could maintain a privileged minority status in politics inasmuch as most residents in Taiwan were governed by Taiwan, Fujian, or Guangdong provincial offices. In the very first census, in 1956, if the officially interviewed householders could not identify their home 

provinces, officers were authorized to arbitrarily decide what a householder’s home province was based on the languages he spoke. During the 1970s the imposition of a ‘home province’ 

listing for native Taiwanese people became a source of conflict between mainlanders and the Taiwanese. The Taiwanese wanted the practice to end because their actual birth place was not a 

home province. By imposing a ‘home province’ listing on the Taiwanese natives in Census 

Data, the Chinese were attempting to claim that they were just like other mainlanders. In 1992, the practice was discontinued and R.O.C. officials began to list the birthplaces of Taiwanese natives in Census records. 

During his presidency from 1988 to 2000,  Lee Teng -hui, a senior R.O.C. core cadre  and 

previous president , led his people to become  “new Taiwanese” as a novel ethnicity  in order to 

dodge previous ethnic conflicts at the zenith of his power.  476  Lee’s strategy to create the “ Xin 

Taiwan ren  新台灣人  (New Taiwanese )”  ethnicity was a clever technique for ending the 

constructed divergence of Chinese -Taiwanese ethnic  estrangement. “New Taiwanese” was a 

reconciled and unified ethnic group that embraced every individual in Taiwan. It was a product 

of historical accumulat ion. No matter how long ago the residents arrived, they all confirmed 

their identity of loving the land, pursuing common development, and establishing the 

government of their own free will. 477  Moreover the imagined nation -state of Taiwan was not 

recognized  as a political entity by the majority of international society, but it had everything 

well -prepared to become a nation. Lifting Martial Law and later abolishing the  Temporary     

> 476 Teng -hui Lee, Taiwan de zhuzhang (Taipei: Yuanliu, 1999), 249 -65.
> 477 Ibid., 263.

209 

Provisions from the period of the Communist Rebellion symbolized that the R.O.C . regime had 

given up the long -term practices for guarding against Communist intrusion. They also 

relinquished the ambition of recovering territory lost to the P.R.C. The government began to 

regard the people in Taiwan as the main subjects of the nation,  rather than behaving as though 

the Taiwanese were residents of a province in an empire. It was accepted that the construction of 

a new Taiwanese identity was composed of multiple ethnicities. A dilemma thus occurred —how 

could they become a unified ethno -political entity in a society where the public was still aware of 

individual ethnic divergences, especially linguistic variations? 478 

The Mother-Tongue Movement 

The mother-tongue movement of the late 80s was an inevitable outcome  of the 

awakening of multilingual ethnicities and the aftermath of the 1970s Declaration and literary 

debates. For legions of people who were born before the mid -1950s, having Mandarin Chinese 

be the national language was especially impractical. Their fi rst languages, by and large, were the 

ones used to communicate with their families at home, which means, in addition to mainland 

families,  Taiyu , Hakka, and indigenous languages were their mother tongues, not Mandarin. 

These people wanted their own langua ges to stand on an equal footing with Mandarin in Taiwan. 

As early as June 1988, a Hakka writer, Zhong Zhaozheng  鍾肇政  (1925 -) brought up his 

concerns about literature composition in mother tongues. He thought the most important element 

in literature was n ot the written language but the content of writings. His understanding of 

“having Hakka writers but no Hakka literature” suggests at the time that there were no written     

> 478 A-chin Hsiau, “Language Ideology in Taiwan: The KMT's Language Policy, the Tai-yü Language Movement,
> and Ethnic Politics.” I agree with Hsiau’s conclusion on the imbalanced weight between national identity, acting as
> power of cohesion, and ethnic quality. The linguistic case in Taiwan complicates the imbalance by means of the competition between national language and mother tongue s to represent “Taiwanese. ”

210 

forms of these spoken languages like Hakka, the southern Fujianese language (the term he used is Minnan hua  閩南話 ) and  tuyu  土語  (he meant indigenous languages). Writers sometimes 

wrote about their culture in Chinese characters by using particular Hakka terms.  479  Soon 

thereafter, a demonstration with the theme of “Recovering My Mother Tongue,”  organized by 

the Hakka People’s Association, took place in Taipei. They appealed for a revision of the rules 

on dialect in television and radio, establishing multilingual polices, and treating Mandarin and 

mother -tongue education equally. It is intrigui ng that they claimed that the rally was 

symbolically led by Dr. Sun Yet -sen (1866 -1925) since he was a Hakka. 480  Dr. Sun, the 

founding father of the R.O.C., was the winner of China’s democratic revolution in 1911. The 

Hakka protesters believed that with hi s spiritual leading the demonstration would come to a 

successful conclusion. They expected the Hakka language would be included in national 

education since Dr. Sun, who spoke Mandarin with a heavy Hakka accent, was elected the first 

president of China. S oon after this public convention, other dialect advocates asked the 

government to help popularize their languages. 

Starting in the late 1980s, what the mother-tongue movement displayed was not just the 

people’s concern about being able to us e their language in social communication but also their fears that their languages would disappear if they were not taught. The Hakka community received a barrage of criticism from their linguistic comrades that Hakka families were not good examples of family language education, as Hakka was not taught at home. More ironically, their children could speak the  southern Fujianese language  but were usually not proficient in Hakka     

> 479 Zhongming Chiang, “We Have Hakka Writers but Have no Hakka Literature,” United Daily News , June 20, 1988.
> 480 Editor’s Room, “Hakka People Want their Mother Language Back— A Large Demonstration Leading by Dr. Sun Yet-sen,” United Daily News , December 27, 1988.

211 

due to the large proportion of  southern Fujianese language  speakers in Taiwan .481  The Hakka 

group was losing its speakers, which was not unique to them. A few weeks prior to the 1988 

demonstration, nine indigenous tribes hosted a speech competition in their mother tongues. One 

competitor, a college student, broke down in tears, embar rassed at being unable to make a 

complete speech in the Paiwan  排灣  tribal language. Many of the participants were unable to 

speak their mother tongue fluently. Instead they preferred to speak in a  lingua franca, mixing 

their mother tongue and Mandarin; so me even used Mandarin exclusively. Deemed outstanding 

students in national education, these students had left their mountain tribes at early ages to study 

on the plains. With the ban on using dialects in schools, they could barely communicate with 

their  parents and vice versa. In some cases, family interpreters were needed. Lacking a learning 

environment, bilingual persons were in the minority. In order to take care of the younger 

generation, elder tribal people called for Mandarin lessons for the elde rly. 482  The language gap 

between Mandarin and tribal tongues was certainly attributable to the failure of Mandarin 

promotion in mountain areas. A forty -year -long teaching legacy and prohibition on using the 

POJ Bible did not bring the tribes proficiency in  Mandarin. When it came to advertising healthy 

diet habits for lowering the rate of  Hepatitis  A, for example, the government was obliged to use 

tribal languages to ensure that the public could comprehend their instructions.  483 

The grassroots popularization of language came first, and school education would follow. 

Mother tongues were featured as an ethnic identity marker; abandoning one’s language meant losing a part of one’s ethnicity. Some county governors were interested in offering mother-      

> 481 Yuchang Xu, “The Hakka’s Grievances,” United Daily News , January 1, 1989.
> 482 Zhongming Chiang, “The Los ing Languages —Aboriginal Speech Competition,” United Daily News , December 5, 1988.
> 483 Jinxiu Lin, “Hygiene Teaching Materials in Mountainous Areas Distributed in Mother Languages” United Daily Night News , November 27, 1989.

212 

tongue classes on a trial basis. The Wulai  烏來  Junior High and Elementary Schools of Taipei 

County first provided elective Tayal  泰雅  language courses. It was very unfortunate that 

Governor You Ching’s  尤清  (1942 -) subsequent preparations for a dding Taiyu and Hakka into 

bilingual studies were shelved due to a shortage of funds. 484  In the same year, Yilan  宜蘭 

County also introduced  Taiyu  language programs into basic education. 485  The central 

government’s language policy in the early 1990s had not rea ched a consensus to include non -

Mandarin languages in education. The one -language Mandarin policy kept functioning until the 

KMT consented to multilingual education in 1993, though the county -level administration 

reacted earlier. 

The central government’s attitude toward mother-tongue education underwent a revolutionary change in 1993, a breakthrough implemented by the Minister of the Interior,  Wu 

Po -hsiung  吳伯雄  (1939 -).  He argued that the previous policy of discriminating against non -

Mandarin languages was  a mistake. He suggested that the ruling party should respect mother 

tongues. 486  Soon a new national version of the curriculum guided by the  Ministry of Education 

increased the proportion of Taiwan’s history, though textbooks had stressed Chinese culture a nd 

Mandarin.  487  This reform was not sudden but was instead the result of continuous and 

accumulated public pressure. Thanks to the freedom granted by the lifting of Martial Law, 

ethnic groups organized poetry societies and linguistic associations . They w ere the first wave of             

> 484 Mengqian Lee, “Senators Express ed Polar Responses to Mother-Language Education,” United Daily Night News ,November 9, 1990.
> 485 Henning Klöter, “Language Policy in the KMT and DPP Eras,” China Perspectives 56 (2004): 2-11.
> 486 Shuanfan Huang, Language, Society, and Ethnic Ideology, 71.
> 487 Th e Ministry of Education states that “social studies curricula should help students to develop understanding of
> the values of politics, economics, and society in Taiwan. Textbooks should present diverse culture of sociocultural
> groups, particularly those of indigenous people in appropriate ways” See Ministry of Education, National
> Elementary Curriculum Guide (Taipei: Ministry of Education, 1993), 160.

213 

people who advocated the significance of written languages as a necessary marker of an individual group. Their efforts on the proposals and thus the preparation for the systemization of written Taiwanese preceded the age of legitimating mother tongues in the national textbook system. Permission for public use and equal treatment under the law could not satisfy the 

public’s demand to be socio -linguistically different from the  forged  “Chineseness. ” Officially 

educating children could  fundamentally solve the crisis of losing mother tongues as well as 

fostering their sense of belonging of being to a particular ethnicity. 

Having written languages and literary content that was uniquely Taiwanese empowered the people to talk back, to communicate across time, and to eliminate their sense of inferiority. 

“Taiwanese” citizens were unable to gain access to international organizations, and recognition 

for their nation, because R.O.C. officials already occupied the spaces that they could lay claim to. 488 In the domestic field, the Yam Poetry Society ( Fanshu shi she  蕃薯詩社 ) is one of the 

most significant communities because it aims to create features of Taiwanese ethnicity (Taiwan 

minzu ) in literature, advance the quality of  Taiyu  literature and songs, and pursue written and 

literary  Taiyu .489  Native Taiwanese were anxious about writing in  Taiyu  and other native 

languages because the national language policy had made them into linguistic minorities. As 

Monica Heller argues, a langu age minority “makes sense only within an ideological framework 

of nationalism” since language is central to nation -building. It works to construct unity among 

different groups, which was the anticipated outcome of the Mandarin promotion policy, and to 

leg itimize the nation. Linguistic nationalism is logical to minorities as a “way to resist the power         

> 488 For instance, the application from Taiwanese Writing Association to affiliate with the International Writing Association was rejected on the grounds that a R.O.C. Writing Association was already registered, though the former claimed the Taiwanese counterpart targeted the promotion of Taiwanization while the latter centered on Sinicization. See Chen Yaji ’s “Tai wanese Writing Association —from the Local to Connect the International
> Society,” Book Boom Magazine 30 (2005) :60 -61.
> 489 Shuanfan Huang, Language, Society, and Ethnic Ideology, 66.

214 

of the majority.” 490 Language itself has no power, but the authority to use a language encompasses the power to enforce it and to create minorities or majorities in numbers and politics. The political symbolism of  “Taiwan” is  eroding the orthodox base of the Republic of 

China and the People’s Republic of “China.” Yet its mother tongues signify only the linguistic 

markers of different ethnicities, which leave  uncertainty as to whether or not there is a true 

“Taiwanese ethnicity.” 

A Revised POJ in  Compulsory Education 

The history of the official recognition of POJ would be incomplete without an account of its scholarly promotion by the Taiwan Languages and Literature Society  台灣語文學會  (TLLS) 

starting in 1991. The Taiwanese languages include southern Fujianese language and Hakka but 

exclude indigenous languages, as TLLS’s mission and all its activities are related only to those 

two languages. Right after launching  the society, core members called for a meeting to regulate 

the romanization of Taiwanese languages by grounding it in four principles: systemization, 

realism, universalism, and convenience.  POJ was selected as the perfect match.  491  Adopting 

POJ encountered difficulties when members attempted to type tone markers into computers. 

Thus, the fourth and fifth meetings passed resolutions to replace tone markers with numbers, to 

change “ch,” “chh” to “ts,” “tsh” and nasal sounds from “n”  to “nn,” and other nuanced 

revisions. Three months later, a revised romanization system, the  Taiwan Languages Phonetic 

Alphabet  (TLPA, revised POJ ), was finalized. By 1994, POJ was popular enough to be taught in 

counties because at the time the  Ministry  of Education  had not regulated a transcription system 

for  Taiyu  and Hakka. After three years of discussion, the  Ministry of Education  decided to adopt        

> 490 Monica Heller, Linguistic Minorities and Modernity —A Sociolinguistic Ethnography (New York and London: Bloomsbury Publishing, 2006), 6-7.
> 491 In all discussion, POJ was called Jiaohui luoma zi 教會羅馬字 (church romanization) .

215 

TLPA as the official phonetic alphabet for Taiwanese languages, although quite a number of scholars insisted on considering the original form of POJ given its history in Taiwan. In 1998, the  Ministry of Education  promulgated TLPA as the dialectal phonetic alphabet of the  southern 

Fujianese language  and Hakka to be taught in elementary schools. Dissatisfie d with the revision, 

Iûⁿ Ún -giân  楊允言  criticized the political manipulation that had been necessary to alter the 

Ministry of Education ’s decision, because it was so ironic that the  Ministry of Education 

promoted POJ teaching materials in trial classes of Ta iwanese languages by 1997 but then all of 

a sudden changed to TLPA. 492  It was even more dramatic that the  Ministry of Education 

announced in 2001 that the use of TLPA was not required anymore, but suggested, in school 

education. Many controversial comments  were brought up to argue about the disunity of 

phonetic systems while Hakka teaching started to use a revised Hanyu pinyin system, a 

romanization from China that was established in the 1950s. The government thus stated no more 

phonetic systems would be a pproved for mother tongue education programs. 493 

While some linguistic scholars fought the irrational revision of POJ and were reluctant to accept the manipulated result, they neglected the fact that, no matter whether it was POJ, TLPA, or another type of romanization, what the Ministry of Education legitimized or later opened for individual decision was a phonetic alphabetical system ( pin yin  拼音 ).  Disputes over which 

written format was appropriate for writing Taiwanese languages are not novel. But the short 

history above reveals  an unsatisfactory proce ss of legalizing and legitimating revised POJ in the 

aftermath of the independence declaration and the awakening of the ethnic and national identity 

of Taiwanese people. Under the national language policy, the most tolerable revision hinged on    

> 492 Ún -giân Iû n, “Competition of Taiwanese Languages Symbols —a Case Study of POJ and TLPA” (paper presented
> in 2002 Taiwan Romanization Teaching and Research Conference, Taitong, Taiwan, July 14, 2002).
> 493 Ibid.

216 

devising a phonetic auxiliary tool, rather than an independent system for writing the mother tongues. After such a long period of being unaccepted by colonial and post-colonial regimes, it was a triumph for POJ advocates. POJ advocates missed opportunities for reinforcing ethnic identity, which they had been eager to invent through the promotion of an independent writing system. Having an independent writing system was superior to having a spelling tool that helped them translate Taiwanese languages into Mandarin. 

Walter Ong’s notion of literacy is noteworthy for understanding that text presented in a visible space restructures consciousness and, I argue, print reshapes consciousness. 494 In other words, writing in print changes both people’s thoughts and the ways in which they identify with the corresponding oral form. Robert L. Cheng, an advocate of POJ, articulates Ong’s idea in the case of Taiyu and proposes that the cultural particularity of Taiwanese languages will be lost when written in characters. He suggests a Taiyu logocentrism; only when people think through 

Taiyu in terms of its writing can they perceive native authenticity and the reality of the culture. 495 

Reconfiguration of a national education scheme legitimized the ethnicities and their languages and thus protected them from disappearance. It was a great pity that situating the Taiyu 

romanization next to Chinese characters might cause side effects such as digraphia and diglossia, and feeling inferior to the majority of the users in a writing system. 

Language Hierarchy: Digraphia and Diglossia 

Since  the 1980s, digraphia and diglossia have both been important linguistic phenomena 

in Taiwan. In the context of Taiwan, digrap hia refers to the reality that there is more than one 

writing system associated with  Taiyu , the Taiwanese language. Diglossia means that there is        

> 494 W.J. Ong, Orality and Literacy: The Technologizing of the Word , 77-115.
> 495 Robert L. Cheng, “Let our Children Have Opportunity to Read and Write Taiyu, ”Taiwan Literature 136 (1993) :
> 173 -80.

217 

more than one spoken language used in Taiwan. 496 Literary circles of Taiyu writers wrote in their own scripts in individual and mutually-recognized communities. These communities included Chinese character writers, writers who used a mix of romanization and characters, and writers who used POJ or its variants. Digraphia in Taiwan is a significant factor in publication and nationwide internet networking. In addition to classes in some departments of Taiwanese literature and theological colleges, POJ writings appeared in internet-based literature and graduate school theses. Taiyu literary composition writers did not completely adopt the use of POJ. Their works were publicly accepted in characters and a mixture of characters and POJ. Romanized Taiwanese was only officially recognized in 1991. Taiyu speakers in their twenties or older are by and large unfamiliar with POJ, but they might find a mixture of POJ and characters to be more readable (Fig. 17). The mixture of POJ and Chinese characters, to some extent, serves as a type of written lingua franca and will as long as every single word of the Taiwanese languages cannot be expressed in characters. This mixed form is makeshift in phonetic and semantic Taiyu and will not be a completely new writing system unless Taiyu 

become accepted as the national languages or official languages of Taiwan. 497 

Diglossia is typical in a multilingual society . It became increasingly common after the 

establishment of a national language in Taiwan. Spoken and written diglossia has complicated 

language use from the colonial era in which the Japanese dominated school education, 

pu blication, white -collar employment and public administration to the present. In the colonial 

period, Japanese language use and writing  were regarded as prestigious while using other            

> 496 John DeFrancis, “Digraphics,” Word 35 (1984) : 59 -66 ;Charles A. Ferguson “Diglossia” in D. Hymes eds.
> Language in Culture and Society (New York: Harper and Row), 429 -39.
> 497 Hak-khiam Tiu ⁿ, “Writing in Two Scripts :A Case Study of Digraphia in Taiwanese,” Written Language and
> Literacy 1(1998) :225 -47.

218 

languages lacked prestige. 498 In the 1920s and 1930s, Taiwanese language advocates challenged the language hierarchy of Japanese over Taiwanese language by promoting ethnic ideology and vernacular literary movements. Language advocates in Taiwan believed that the Taiwanese language was “capable of becoming an autonomous vehicle of thought” for the Taiwanese people. 499 Taiwanese native language users accepted the imposition of other languages in Taiwan until the 1990s when the mother tongue movement demanded the inclusion of native languages in public education. Prior to this achievement, speaking in a mother tongue, tuhua or fangyan , was socially inferior to speaking Japanese and Mandarin. Under the R.O.C.,  southern 

Fujianese language  speakers had an even lower linguistic status than they did within the Japanese 

empire. The ideo logy of decolonization not only saddled islanders with Mandarin education, but 

also tended to remove the  adherence to Japanese language use. 500  Under the lens of the newly -

founded regime, people who were bilingual in the southern Fujianese language and Jap anese 

were considered slaves who lacked the cultural competence to use highly codified Mandarin. 

Digraphia and diglossia inevitably result in a language hierarchy. Attitudes toward language varieties are important if they can explain how language use shapes self-identification and social relationships. Three recent research projects have examined how the use of Taiyu and Mandarin reflected  Taiwanese ethnolinguistic identity in practice. These studies do not simply 

display the unequal treatment that pe ople in Taiwan experienced based on their language usage. 

They also suggest that people have claimed Taiwanese identity based on whether or not they 

were required to learn to speak  Taiyu.          

> 498 Joshua Fishman, “Bilingualism with and without diglossia; diglossia with and without bilingualism,” Journal of Social Issues 23 (1967): 29-38.
> 499 Ann Heylen, “The Legacy of Literary Practices in Colonial Taiwan. Japanese -Taiwanese -Chinese: Language
> Interaction and Identity Formation,” Journal of Multilingual and Multicultural Development 26 (2005) :496 -508.
> 500 Jiuge, “How to Promote Taiwanese Drama Movement,” TSSDN , September 7, 1946.

219 

Taiyu writing systems and education were challenged by several different groups. In the aftermath of the national language policy, language advocates have struggled with the challenge of convincing people to esteem the use of mother tongues as highly as they esteem the use of Mandarin. Karl-Eugen Feifei’s often-cited research is the first comprehensive analytical study to investigate how sociopolitical changes impacted language attitudes in Taiwan. In Feifei’s definition, the attitudes, which are learned, create automatic associations that affect people’s beliefs about  “judging not the language, but the person  who is speaking. ”501  They are thus useful 

for the measurement of “social convention and the prestige of certain language varieties in 

speech communities.” 502  This evaluation provides us with a different perspective ab out language 

use and attitudes in Taiwan. According to Feifei’s discussion of experimental designs and 

interviews with over 600 respondents, before lifting Martial Law, people in Taiwan’s attitudes 

about language use were hierarchical. Being able to spea k Mandarin was rated best, speaking 

the southern Fujianese language was second (he called it  Minnan hua ), and speaking Taiwanese -

Mandarin (Mandarin with heavy southern Fujianese language accents like  Taiwan guoyu ) was 

the worst. 503 

Ten years later, inspired by Feifei, Brian Lee Brubaker’s thesis argued that the post-Marital Law era made no significant change in attitudes toward Mandarin and the southern Fujianese language and that the hierarchy remained the same. His study included breakthrough evidence that, echoing previous research by J. Hsu, 504  “Taiwanese -Mandarin may  already be an 

identity marker of the Taiwanese natives ” since it is a language variant that is unique to Taiwan.            

> 501 Karl-Eugen Feifei, Language Attitudes and Identity in Taiwan —A Social Evaluation of Language in Social Change (Taipei: The Crane Publishing Co., 1994), 55.
> 502 Ibid., 56.
> 503 Ibid., 214.
> 504 J. Hsu. “A Sociolinguistic Survey of Language Attitudes in the Taipei Area.” In A. Bramkamp, Y. -C. Fu, A.
> Sprenger & Venne ,eds., Chinese -Western Encounter: Studies in Linguistics and Literature (Taiwan: Chinese
> Materials Center Publications , 1987) .

220  

> 505

Many Taiwanese were aware that their Mandarin was different from those on the mainland in word selection and pronunciation. Even though it sounded like corrupt Mandarin, they knew that the Taiwanese would mix the southern Fujianese language and Mandarin in a sentence or within a conversation, but Fujianese mainlanders would not. In other words, at the turn of the century, being Taiwanese was not identified with speaking the southern Fujianese language alone but rather with the diglossia which used elements of the language and Mandarin. His participants believed that parents who supported Taiwan’s independence would expect their children to speak the southern Fujianese language. 506 

If many Taiwanese parents were not teaching mother tongues at home, the maintenance and use of mother tongues, orally or literarily, would be restricted to scholars. Another ten years later, in the 2010s, Chung-Yin Tsai  蔡仲茵  examined the language attitudes of college students in southern and northern Taiwan. 507  Taiwanese -Mandarin a s koine , common language,  still 

existed, but the southern students showed more interest in and believed more in the positive 

values of  Taiyu  than their northern counterparts. Overall, the northern students tended to speak 

Mandarin instead of  Taiyu . The s tudents were bilingual, but they chose Mandarin as their major 

spoken form of communication. Shifting the language hierarchy and increasing the use of native 

languages was not only tricky, but unusual. In Paulston’s theory, “the norm for groups in 

prolon ged contact within one nation is for the subordinate group to shift to the language of the 

dominant group,” e.g. Mandarin. 508  She, however, admitted that shifts vary and are based on             

> 505 Bria n Lee Brubaker, “Language Attitudes and Identity in Taiwan ,”M.A. Thesis, University of Pittsburgh, 2003,
> 67.
> 506 Ibid., 73 -75.
> 507 Chung -Yin Tsai, “ Language Attitudes toward Mandarin and Taiwanese in Taipei and Kaohsiung Metropolitan
> Areas, ”M.A. Thes is ,National Taiwan Normal University, 2014.
> 508 Christina Bratt Paulston, “Linguistic Consequences of Ethnicity a nd Nationalism,” in B. Spolsky eds. ,Language
> and Education in Multi -Lingual Settings (San Diego, CA: College -Hill Press, 1986), 121.

221 

incentives including economic advantage and social prestige. Her theory is demonstrated by Taiwanese parents’ concern about their children’s language education. Ruo-ping Mo’s study results mesh with Paulston’s theoretical framework. Implementing mother-tongue education met with resistance from parents. Parents were reluctant to allow their children to spend time on non-Mandarin studies because it might distract students from test-based subjects. If leisure time was allowed, parents preferred to have their children learn other languages like English and Japanese for social and economic advancement instead of native languages. 509 

Language education comes with the teaching of writing. The attitudes toward written Taiyu 

were heavily impacted by the economic advantage and public school education as Chinese characters were the dominant writing system in the job market and the education system. Taiyu 

writings developed in the shadow of the promotion of Mandarin. Surveys show that from 1999 to 2003, interviewees felt that Chinese characters was the most acceptable and friendly format for writing Taiyu . 510 Although a romanized Taiyu writing format received the lowest rating of preference to read in 1999, it was the most prestigious written form in the 2003 survey.  Tiuⁿ Hak -

khiam’s interpretation suggests that POJ users were regarded as  cultivated, modern, smart, reliable, 

and having high social standing.  He believes that this is because POJ and English both are 

romanization and the latter is  a high prestige  language in Taiwan. Most of the Taiwanese have established a stereotype that a romanization like English is not easy to handle. Unlike Chinese writing, they think they have to learn POJ additionally, and it takes time. The language and writing hierarchy in this multilingual society originated from the standardization of language and is a result       

> 509 Ruo -ping Jean Mo, "Taiwan on the Brink of Reversing Language Shift: Its Current Devel opment and
> Contributory Factors, "Ph. D Dissertation, Purdue University, 2000,
> http://search.proquest.com/docview/304616309?accountid=14553 (accessed August 12, 2014), 10 7-08.
> 510 Chiung, Wi-vun Taiffalo, “Languages and Attitudes towa rd Taibun the Written Taiwanese, ”Master Thesis, University of Texas at Arlington, 1999; Tiu ⁿ Hak -khiam and Chang Yamin, “Sociolinguistic Analysis of Taiwanese Written Language,” presented in 2 003 International Conference of Taiwanese Written Languages.

222 

of compulsory education in Mandarin. 

Conclusion 

Under the R.O.C. the use of POJ in Taiwan dramatically changed. The R.O.C. leaders initially suppressed the use of POJ but later added it to the national education curriculum. In the early years of their regime,  the R.O.C. government not only enforced Mandarin as a national 

language but also restricted the use of all non -Mandarin languages on the island.  The 

Presbyterian Church in Taiwan, serving as the main sponsor of POJ, attempted to ada pt the use 

of POJ to the national language policy. After 1971, the government’s failure to maintain seats in 

the United Nations motivated Church leaders to declare Taiwan’s independence based on the 

human rights that were given to all people by God. 

In r esponse to the Church’s Declaration, the people revived  Taiwanese nativist literature, 

Taiwanese ideological and written languages debates, the mother -tongue movement, pushed for 

the  inclusion of POJ in national education, and other sociolinguistic phenome na. Native 

language advocates debated the role of language in creating an ethnicity. They argued that the 

Taiwanese people should not assume that Taiwan should be subordinate to China. In order to 

support Taiwan’s independence they demanded the creation  of a Taiwanese literature and written 

language that was ideologically separated from Chinese characters and Taiwan’s historical 

relations to China. Advocates of “Taiwanese identity” emphasized the role of language use in 

forming individual identities. Co nsequently they believed they had a right to include mother 

tongues in public education. As mother -tongue education has been implemented in the national 

education system, the prestige of using revised POJ has increased because of the growing 

number of stu dents in public school who have been taught to use it. The increasing number of 

POJ users has changed the social perception of POJ literacy. Previously people characterized 223 

POJ as a writing system that was not used outside of the Church. It was later understood as a set of state-regulated phonetic alphabets whose users were not automatically associated with religious communities. 

Since the late 1980s, the use of POJ has started to be closely associated with mother-tongue education. Language use during the process of constructing ethnicity and nationalism cannot be disregarded. Using mother tongues has helped the Taiwanese construct a unique sense of ethnic identity. Yet speaking their own languages is not enough; they must have their own writing systems as well. Regrettably,  the national language policy created a cultural and 

linguistic hierarchy in Taiwan and reshaped the ident ity of people who spoke native languages. 

The government views POJ as a phonetic alphabet, subordinate to Chinese character writing, 

instead of seeing it as the exclusive written language for the  southern Fujianese language . POJ 

was officially taught in  compulsory education, but it was not recognized by the R.O.C. State as a 

political marker of “Taiwanese identity.” Students from different age groups exhibited different 

attitudes toward studying mother tongues and POJ. They were aware of the symbolic 

si gnificance of mother tongues, but they were also not inspired to study them because their 

academic schedules were already overloaded and priority was given to learning Chinese 

characters. Young students are only bilingual  orally . Language hierarchy was u navoidably 

reinforced in the negotiation between ethnic maintenance and national unity. 224 

Conclusion 

Foreign Text, Taiwanization, Identity Construction 

My dissertation  is a history of the use of POJ that bears witness to  a process of identity -

making in eva ngelism, Chinese studies, Christian and secular education, understanding and 

developing “Taiwanese culture,” anti -Chinese nationalism, and finally “Taiwanese nationalism.” 

The story of how POJ has been utilized in Taiwan demonstrates the Taiwanese people’ s need for 

a distinctive writing system to articulate their life experiences and their own understandings of 

who they are. Having that writing system would enable them to develop a variety of self -

designated identities. 

POJ became relevant to identity-making in Taiwan between the 1860s and the 1990s. This is because the language that POJ is primarily used to transliterate, the southern Fujianese language, was used continuously through that time period. The majority of the Taiwanese population speaks the language as their main language but it was not officially taught through 

Taiwan’s public education system until the late 1980s. Many speakers take it for granted that the 

southern Fujianese language is the most widely used language in Taiwan. They are less concerned about how its writing system, and specifically its lack of a unique writing system, 

influences the people and the wider world’s understanding of what it means to be “Taiwanese.” 

The public’s lack of concern about the fact that their prima ry language does not have its own writing system is an outgrowth of the reality that for multiple generations they have been subjugated culturally, politically, and linguistically by foreign regimes. The Sinkan script, the earliest extant writing system in Taiwan, was used by small numbers of the southern plains aboriginal tribes until the early 19 th century. It was not used by southern Fujianese language speakers. Before the Japanese colonial rule, most Taiwanese residents could not read or write 225 

Chinese characters. That is the main reason why Presbyterian missionaries utilized an easier written language, POJ, to help  Taiwanese converts read Christian writings, Chinese classics, and 

western texts.  After 1895, the Japanese and Nationalist governments bo th tried to invent a sense 

of national identity for the residents of Taiwan through top -down, enforced national language 

programs. These programs were largely designed to assimilate the native populations into 

“foreign” cultures via the forced adoption of  “foreign” languages and cultural values. Taiwanese 

natives responded to the imposition of “foreign” cultural identities through the ongoing use of a 

missionary -imported writing system in this period. POJ played a central role in the emergence of 

identit y construction in the immigrant society of the island. Yet it has not attracted substantial 

attention in the studies of Taiwanese history. 

Scholars who have studied Taiwan’s history have heavily relied on Chinese character 

source materials or on Japanese sources. Sources written in POJ are considered supplementary or only of interest to foreign scholars who cannot read Asian languages. The most frequent 

explanation for why scholars have neglected these sources is that since POJ is a “foreign” 

writing system associated with the Presbyterian Church in Taiwan, documents in POJ cannot accurately reflect the experiences of the people they describe. Additionally, scholars have 

assumed that ‘real’ Taiwanese people were not using a “foreign,” or religious writi ng system to write about their experiences. Since Taiwan is and has been a multilingual society, it seems wise 

to question the assumption that POJ should be treated as a ‘foreign’ text. Is it logical to assume 

that POJ is foreign simply because it is not written in characters, and therefore that sources which were written in POJ are also irrelevant to the history of Taiwan and its people? 

Messages and Knowledge through a Foreign Text 226 

Documents written in POJ to communicate the southern Fujianese language were more eye-catching than sources written in Chinese characters. Using a different writing system 

changed the process of knowledge making. A knowledge system includes a person’s worldview 

which influences his/her thinking in different languages and cultures. In order to develop a Chinese worldview, a person must develop the ability to read and write in Chinese characters, a comprehensive familiarity with the classics, and receive training in formal and genre writing. Knowledge systems can only be created when a society has people who can learn to read, write 

and speak a language. A “foreign” text, which serves as a transliteration of a native language, 

can change more than the oral language used to convey information. Reading a document translated in to a “foreign” writing system in a native language can shift a user’s worldview. 

Reading literacy has not always been a sine qua non , but it has been required to enable cross-cultural exchanges. For Christians, the legacy of the Tower of Babel was a worldwide mission to translate the Bible into different languages. 511  Taiwanese Christians,  in the 19 th 

century were primarily interested in becoming literate so that they could  read the Bible and know 

the truth of God’s words. By comparison, many of their peer s pursued Chinese literacy so that 

they could prepare for civil service examinations. 

Transliterating the Bible in Taiwan was slightly different from translating the Bible in China from the outset. In the 1810s, the first Chinese translation of the New Testament was published by the Scottish missionary Robert Morrison (1782-1834). He started his translation career with a Chinese translation because he perceived a need for a Chinese Bible for Chinese readers. This was a dangerous undertaking at a time when spreading Christianity in China was      

> 511 The Tower of Babel is a reference to Genesis 11:6 -7 i nNew International Version : “If as one people speaking the
> same language they have begun to do this [i.e., having the arrogance to build a tower that rea ches to the heavens],
> then nothing they plan to do will be impossible for them. Come, let us go down and confuse their language so they
> will not understand each other.”

227 

illegal. Using the Chinese Bible was not practical in the Taiwanese mission. In their first two decades of service, Presbyterian missionaries in Taiwan targeted people who were illiterate in Chinese script, particularly plains indigenous tribes who could communicate in the southern Fujianese language. The missionaries believed that the Han Taiwanese who had been immersed in Confucian education had deep-rooted beliefs in ritual practices and Chinese-style moral codes of conduct and therefore that they would not be easy to convert. Since they mostly were targeting members of the plains indigenous tribes, who could speak the language but lacked formal writing systems of their own, the missionaries found POJ was the most appropriate writing system to use to facilitate conversion. They proceeded to translate the Bible, for use in Taiwan, into POJ and they used POJ as the writing system for the Church as a whole. Soon many Chinese immigrants were attracted by the protection and assistance they could receive from the Christian community. In order to facilitate religious participation converts had to learn to read the POJ Bible as a prerequisite for baptism. 

POJ was designed to give Taiwanese natives access to knowledge and the capacity to read the Bible. Mirroring the successful mission in Amoy, POJ in Taiwan, (or Formosa, as the missionaries knew it) helped facilitate a golden age of conversion in the late 19 th and early 20 th 

centuries. As an independent writing system, POJ also helped its users learn Chinese characters. The first POJ newspaper, Taiwan Church News, publicly encouraged the use of POJ to learn information, knowledge, and later Chinese writing. Indeed, a significant number of Taiwanese Christians were completely unfamiliar with Chinese characters. Texts that included POJ beside characters helped readers translate Chinese characters. First, readers learned what characters sounded like in the southern Fujianese language which would help them learn to pronounce the characters themselves. Then they could annotate the meanings of certain words and summaries 228 

of the classics in POJ. A community of people who read POJ printed materials developed in this period and may have included some readers who were engaged in the traditional sphere of Chinese studies. POJ educators and promoters did not think of POJ as a replacement for the Chinese writing system. Rather, their ambition was to make the Bible readable at home and to broadly publicize knowledge in order to advance the Christian cause. 

Using POJ was not considered a marker of a distinct ethnic identity in its early years. Initially, the linguistic diversity in Taiwan created problems in missionary work. Even though POJ can be used to transcribe the southern Fujianese language, Hakka, and other indigenous languages, those spoken languages were not mutually intelligible. To overcome this problem, variants of the POJ Bible were transliterated for different linguistic groups. Even though Taiwan was a multilingual culture, the southern Fujianese language seemed to be the lingua franca that even acculturated indigenous tribespeople could speak. There was no societal demand for a unified language system in late 19 th century Taiwan. Most people were fine as long as they could read in POJ and possibly in characters. Even though people used POJ in Taiwan, being literate in POJ was not a marker of belonging to a particular ethnic group. Ethnicity attached to a written language in these periods was understood ambiguously, though language groups certainly existed. 512 Though it was not a distinct marker of ethnic identity yet, POJ provided an alternative point of access to Chinese knowledge which was a system that had not previously been open to non-character users. POJ users felt that reading and writing in POJ made them members of a reading and writing community affiliated with the Christian church in Taiwan.  

> 512 Being literate in Chinese script was not a feature that clearly differentiated Han people from non-Han. Some plains indigenous people could write well enough in characters to use them on contracts or other official documents, in commerce, etc.

229 

, In the 1920s  POJ shifted from being a tool for religious proselytism to an agent for 

breaking down the configuration of the established class structure, receiving a general education 

or becoming a Western medical specialist without the pr erequisite of Chinese literacy. Such 

groundbreaking changes challenged the traditional Taiwanese understanding that school 

education and professional training could only be conducted in Chinese script. 

The Presbyterian Church mission in Taiwan broke wit h that tradition. Any interested 

individual, rich or poor, male or female, had a chance to become part of the literate community 

through Church sponsored school education or medical training. Educational programs 

sponsored by the Presbyterian Church guar anteed that the educational philosophy of the 

Reformed Church was enacted worldwide. 

Although POJ can be used to translate other languages, it seems to have only been used to transliterate the southern Fujianese language to create school teaching materials. It is likely that the schools were also teaching students to speak the southern Fujianese language at school even though some students might have spoken other languages at home. Even though some Christians may not have spoken the southern Fujianese language, the school teaching council could not afford the time, energy, and money to produce different language editions of textbooks. The same constraints guided the choice to compose medical references and dictionaries solely in the southern Fujianese language. Students who were growing up in 

Taiwan’s multi -lingual environment had to consent to using the southern Fujianese language and POJ to attend the Presbyterian schools because the schools had to pick one language to facilitate teaching. 

Professionals have the power to transform knowledge through formal education systems. Taiwanese Christian schools created an arena where westerners could influence the worldview of 230 

Taiwanese students through transcribed texts.  The  school curricula in Western gener al 

education, including subjects such as physiology, physics, arithmetic, and gymnastics that were 

taught in POJ, had a different symbolic value than the information conveyed in POJ newspapers. 

Making POJ the language of the Presbyterian education system  provided students with formal 

knowledge that was designed by missionary teachers. Moreover, schools were regulated venues 

for learning when teachers established westernized administrative principles in their classrooms. 

For school -aged students, studying  textbooks in POJ and class subject activities guided them to 

develop a Westernized worldview with a more or less stereotyped conception of modernization. 

POJ was also a language for Western medical knowledge acquisition. The medical mission in Taiwan was short of laborers. Lacking medical specialists was a particular predicament because Taiwan at the time had not initiated medical education programs. Chinese traditional doctors learned by themselves or from senior doctors. They qualified themselves by establishing a record of successful service to their patients. Missionary doctors found it difficult to hire local professionals to help with surgery and prescribing medications. Since bringing over medical personnel from Europe was expensive, the missionaries decided to open a medical training program that was operated by a mission hospital. In keeping with the rest of their educational system, the medic al training program’s administrators required all of their students 

to be literate in POJ. Since the southern Fujianese language was the language that doctors used to communicate with their patients and student interns, the students were required to study medical textbooks and references written in POJ. POJ medical publications were the only way for them to obtain the professional certificates that were issued by missionary doctors. School education and medical training and practices that were conducted in POJ gave school and intern 231 

graduates social mobility. They worked as professionals mostly within the Christian community without having to learn to master Chinese script. 

Colonialism and Taiwanese Consciousness 

Prior to the colonial period, POJ was a linguistic tool used for education by the Presbyterian Church. The meaning of POJ literacy changed after Taiwanese elites adopted it to create a Taiwanese body of literature and language. This literature was symbolically designed to function as a way for spreading a distinct Taiwanese culture. Japanese colonial authorities in Taiwan went through various strategies to incorporate Taiwan into the Japanese empire. Initially they did not intend to fully assimilate the Taiwanese into Japanese citizens. Full assimilation, if it were ever to happen, was something they conceived of as a gradual process. So they encouraged officers and policemen serving in Taiwan to learn POJ and the Southern Fujianese language to help them communicate with native Taiwanese. 

The early assimilation strategy was also practiced in the Japanese national language 

education program.  Their goal was to ethno -linguistically and culturally integrate the Taiwanese 

people into the Japanese empire. Yet their use of the southern Fujianese  language and POJ and 

enforcement of national language education did not overcome all of the native Taiwanese 

resistance to assimilation. Furthermore, they also chose to stratify the political status of citizens 

within their empire based on their capacity  to speak Japanese. Thereafter, only Taiwanese elite 

who became fluent in Japanese were eligible to participate in public service. 

Japan’s switch to a full “assimilation” under the policy of extending mainland statutes in 1919 and their unwillingness to offer the Taiwanese elite a significant role in governing Taiwan led to resistance from the Taiwanese. Some of the Taiwanese elite, who were typified by members of the Association of Assimilation in Taiwan, promoted the adoption of Japanese in 232 

Taiwan in the 1910s. They wanted to be entirely assimilated into the Japanese empire and given the right to govern the island. Their understanding of Taiwanese ethnic identity lay in the 

Taiwanese people’s unique ability to unify Japan and China’s cultures against W esternization. They developed a Taiwanese consciousness after they were denied the right to help govern 

Taiwan. These elites began to highlight the differences between the “Taiwanese” and the “Japanese” cultures. This marked a shift in their strategy to gain political inclusion. They went from claiming political rights on the basis of their support for assimilation to claiming political 

rights on the basis of their ‘unique’ Taiwanese identity. It is also likely that their acts of 

resistance were designed to force the Japanese empire to pay attention to their demands for political inclusion. 

POJ transitioned from a writing system primarily associated with Presbyterian missionaries, to a tool for Westernized education and medical training, to a significant factor in 

the ethnolinguistic identity of the “Taiwanese” people. Another group of Taiwanese elite, who were typified by The Taiwanese Cultural Association and its supporters like Cai Peihuo and Lin Xiantang advocated for the development of a unique “Taiwanese culture” that was politically 

subordinate to the Japanese. They hoped that using the southern Fujianese language and POJ 

would become a marker of “Taiwanese” ethnolinguistic identity. In the 1920s, elites from this 

group encouraged the use of PO J to create Taiwanese literature and awaken the “Taiwanese culture.” Their advocacy for the use of POJ in Taiwan led to a dramatic expansion of the 

community of POJ users under Japan’s colonial regime. The use of POJ was stimulated by 

colonial circumstan ces, the stream of worldwide awakening of ethnic culture, and Taiwan’s 

historical ties with China. 233 

POJ was chosen to express the Taiwanese literati’s responses to colonial assimilation 

policy and the Asian intellectual discourses of the 1920s. 513 Sources indicate that they felt a sense of longing for a written language of their own as an ethnic group, a sentiment that arose from the conflicts caused by sociopolitical changes. POJ campaigners believed that using POJ 

could distinguish them as “Taiwanese” fr om within the Japanese empire. 

From Indigenization to Taiwanization 

Under the domination of the Japanese empire, POJ literacy shifted from a foreign device used in evangelism, school education, and western medical learning to a marker of indigenous culture. In the 1970s, its symbolic meanings shifted again from being associated with the 

development of a unique “Taiwanese culture” as a resistance to Japanese assimilation to a marker of political Taiwanese identity. At this point, POJ, a “foreign” writing system, was 

localized and using it became a contributor to the process of defining Taiwan as a “nation.” 

Throughout a century-long simmering social practice, POJ was used to indigenize foreign texts and re-conceptualize the native culture. While Taiwan was a Japanese colony, a narrative of an ethnogenesis of the people in Taiwan was developed to explain the difference 

between the “Taiwanese” and the “Japanese.” Taiwanese cultural advocates like Cai Peihuo 

strongly urged his compatriots to develop Taiwan ’s reading culture by raising POJ literacy rates 

on the island. Cai hoped that by increasing the POJ literacy rates he would enable island-born people to learn more about the island and become more complete participants in society. Writing        

> 513 The Taiwanese elites believed that having an independent writing system, like POJ, was a powerful “weapon” in
> their efforts to develop Taiwanese culture and effective device for connecting with others. For instance, the goal of
> Cai Peihuo’s POJ campaign was to immediately link Taiwan to the world without passing their ideas through
> Japanese translation. See Cuilian Chen, Taiwan ren de dikang yu rentong, 1920-1950 (The Taiwanese's Resistane
> and Self-Identity in 1920-1950) (Taipei: Yuanliu, 2008), 73 and Peihuo Cai, “My Experience before the Retrocession of Taiwan,” A Collection of Cai Peihuo’s Works, vol. 1 (Taipei: Wushi tushu, 2000), 69-81.

234 

guides in POJ  that taught people how to write in the formal  southern Fujianese language  flooded 

the publishing market. POJ therefore evolved into a symbolic repository for the  southern 

Fujianese language  and its culture inside and outside of Taiwan. 

The 1970s  Declaration on Human Rights to claim Taiwanese independence signifies that 

the Presbyterian Church in Taiwan had become an indigenous institution. 514  The series of 

declarations stating the church’s stand in Taiwan’s relations with the P.R.C. and the world w as a 

hallmark of its status as an indigenous institution.  515  Yet the Declaration was not just a sign that 

the Church had become indigenous, it was also a sign that the Church had become a political 

actor in the struggle for an independent Taiwan. The deve lopment of a Taiwanese political 

identity got off to a good start with the convergence of ethnic and national Taiwanese identities. 

The Taiwanese chose this auspicious moment to switch their strategy for gaining political 

autonomy. They went from focusin g on the dichotomy between foreigners and indigenous 

residents of Taiwan to focusing on the differences between the Taiwanese national identity and 

the Chinese national identity. The Church’s choice to remove their political support for the 

R.O.C. was a  wake -up call to the R.O.C. about domestic and worldwide political conflicts. In 

addition, the Church’s role in promoting Taiwanese independence is associated with the 

development of Taiwan as a democracy and an independent nation. Developing a Taiwanese 

national identity has become synonymous with rejecting the rule and political legitimacy of the 

R.O.C. to govern Taiwan.  POJ has symbolically become indigenous and thus Taiwanized        

> 514 According to Wu Wenxiong, the 1970s was the turning point of the Church’s indigenization in Taiwan. His
> statement, however, is heavily associated the completion of indigenization with political independence as a manner of local involvement (see his “A Stu dy of Indigenization in the Presbyterian Church in Taiwan,” Journal of
> Theology in Taiwan 9 (1987): 62 -66 ).
> 515 Zheng Yangen has a clear argument in relating the historical experience of the Church’s indigenization to the
> 1970s. Similar to Lee Teng -hui’s und erstanding of New Taiwanese, Zheng expands to defining the experience as a
> Taiwanese consciousness that regarded Taiwan as the homeland and its people as a community. See his The
> Indigenized Christianity in Taiwan (Tainan: Ju zhen Tang, 2005), 227 -44.

235 

because it has been endorsed by the Church, and the Church has been a propon ent of Taiwanese 

independence. 

Compulsory Education and Identity Construction 

The inclusion of the southern Fujianese language and POJ in Taiwan’s education system 

has ritualized the use of the native language and its formality after an unpleasant history of marginalization. The history of the southern Fujianese language demonstrates how its supporters have helped it to survive linguistically through changing political regimes. Using the southern Fujianese language has occurred in relationship to ot her ‘official’ languages from the Qing 

Empire forward. The pre-Qing use of the  southern Fujianese language  and some types of 

romanization, on which I elaborate in Chapter two, suggests that the conception of an official 

language had not been popularized w ith Han travelers, indigenous tribes, and foreign occupiers. 

In other words, without an official language policy, the people did not follow any linguistic 

regulations, except in formal documents and in communication between two different linguistic 

groups  of people. Intra -group communication created an important need for translators and 

interpreters. Beyond these formal interactions, individual language communities retained their 

own languages until outsiders imposed language regulations on them. Qing e mperors 

complained about the unintelligibility of the Fujian and Guangdong governors in edicts which 

brought the issue of language regulation to the attention of imperial officials. Compelling 

governors and examiners to learn to speak the official languag e was an attempt to solve the 

problems of spoken communication in a multilingual society. Making officials speak the same 

language was important even though they might have no difficulty understanding each other 

through the unified use of Chinese writing.  During the late Qing period, the use of the native 236 

language was not acceptable in official domains, although the southern Fujianese language was still heavily used for the private conversations of daily life in Taiwan. 

When the political status quo shifted, one-language education, in Japanese or Mandarin Chinese, became required. The Japanization policy led the Presbyterian schools to drop the requirement that middle school students be literate in POJ in order to attend their schools. Some classes may h ave been taught using POJ, but most school curricula were subject to the state’s inspection and learning in Japanese was required. In contrast to Japan’s leniency, the  R.O.C.’s 

national language policy suppressed POJ and the southern Fujianese language be cause the 

nationalist regime’s officials did not see a reason to learn the language. Mandarin Chinese and 

Chinese script was the only authorized set of national language and writing until the promotion 

of mother tongue education. 

Social practices and national school education nurture certain forms of identity 

construction. A government’s choice to promote the use of mother tongues in  compulsory 

education can also encourage students’ sense of identity through language use. Echoing Michael 

Apple’s finding s, Taiwanese social movements that promoted democratization and social 

equality worked together to institutionalize the knowledge of the  southern Fujianese language . 

> 516

Movement participants convinced the R.O.C. regime that native languages and POJ should 

be included in Taiwan’s body of official knowledge so that the education system could represent 

and preserve the identities of various ethnic groups. The 1970s -1980s  social and political 

movement representatives believed that each ethnic group in Taiwan should have their languages 

preserved equally through education. In actual practice, powerful groups struggled to “make 

their knowledge legitimate, to defend or increa se their pattern of social mobility, and to increase     

> 516 Micha el Apple, Official Knowledge: Democratic Education in a Conservative Age (New York: Routledge,
> 200 0), xi.

237 

their power in the larger social arena.” 517 Movement supporters hoped to help native students 

construct new identities as “Taiwanese” people by teaching them native languages in school. In 

spite of the fact that the mother tongues were included in the public education system, their uses have not become more widespread in Taiwan as a result. They have not grown in popularity among the Taiwanese people because there is a language hierarchy that shapes Taiw an’s 

education system. Speaking Mandarin and writing in characters is still the primary language system for education in Taiwan. Including mother tongues in public education was meant to help people adopt new identities. Their identities are currently constructed under the state-regulated hierarchy that stipulates that mother tongues and their writings are not applicable for formal documents, official examinations, and the job market. 

***** 

This dissertation deals with POJ literacy associated with the changing identities in Taiwan. I also investigate the continued use of POJ as a supporting tool for the transmission of the  southern Fujianese language . Although POJ can be used to transliterate other languages, in 

the modern context it is indelibly attac hed to the  southern Fujianese language. Similarly,  the 

southern Fujianese language  can be transliterated in other types of auxiliary written forms and 

has been since the late Ming. The transliteration of the southern Fujianese language in other 

written f orms has occurred as Taiwan has been governed by nations with other writing systems. 

For instance, even though POJ has been identified with the church, Church members have not 

always reinforced the Church’s original goal for the language of creating a shar ed written 

channel for Christians. The Church started to use the Chinese Bible in the 1950s in order to 

accommodate the church’s administration to the R.O.C.’s regime.    

> 517 Michael Apple, Official Knowledge: Democratic Education in a Conservative Age, 9.

238 

Working to retain the use of POJ is important because it preserves the  southern Fujia nese 

language  and vice versa. Yet preserving POJ and the southern Fujianese language is not logical 

if they are not used in social communication and they do not help preserve a sense of group 

identity for their users. Since the 1970s, Taiwan’s residents  have had a high literacy rate in 

Chinese script so involvement with the Chinese literary world through POJ is not practical 

anymore. Languages that are not used and taught will die. Currently, there are two main groups 

in Taiwan who used POJ to help them  learn native languages: students who are studying mother 

tongues and foreigners whose native languages use the Roman alphabet.  The R.O.C. took over 

the role of teaching the native languages to the next generation after POJ’s supporters convinced 

the R.O. C. that it was their rights to have children educated in mother tongues.  The top -down 

institutionalization of POJ guaranteed the southern Fujianese language’s survival but it survives 

under a language hierarchy where Mandarin is preferentially used instea d of the mother tongues. 

Official recognition of the native languages did not give power or privileges to native language 

speakers. It also did not create sweeping changes to the mindset that was created by the 

Mandarin - and character -centered society of  Taiwan .239 

Maps and Figures 

Map. 1 

Outline of Formosa in 1625 by Jacob IJsbrandtsz Noordeloos. Officer Noordeloos was requested to draw the coastline of Formosa after traveling around the beautiful island. The small island in right side was Insula Maurysy (Green Island) 

Source from map database: http://ithda.ith.sinica.edu.tw/formosalook/kohana/index.php/images/page/3/class/%E8%87%BA %E7%81%A3%E5%B3%B6%E5%9C%96. 

Downloaded on October 29, 2013 240 

Map. 2 

Carte de L'Isle Formose aux Costes de la Chine in 

[1730] 1763 by Jacques Nicolas Bellin 

Source from map database: http://ithda.ith.sinica.edu.tw/formosalook/kohana/index.php/images/page/3/class/%E8%87%BA %E7%81%A3%E5%B3%B6%E5%9C%96 

Downloaded on October 29, 2013 241 

Map. 3 

Huangyu quanlan tu (The Imperial Territory, 1714) completed by missionaries J.B. Regis, Jos.de Mailla, and R.Hinderer. 

Source from map database: The Map and Remote Sensing Imagery Digital Archive Project. 

http://gis.rchss.sinica.edu.tw/mapdap/?p=2874&lang=zh-tw 

Downloaded on October 29, 2013 242 

Fig. 1 

Miscellaneous Living Expenses. Source from Paul Jen-kuei Li’s Studies of Sinkang Manuscripts (Taipei: Institute of Linguistics, 2010), 710. 243 

Fig. 2 

Orthographic alternations in POJ 

Source from Henning Klöter, "The History of Peh-Oe-Ji," in 2002 International Conference of Taiwan's Peh-Oe-Ji Teaching and Studies (Taidong: National Taitung University, 2002), 9244 

Figs. 3 and 4 

Rev. Walter Henry Medhurst ‘s Dictionary of the Hokkeen Dialect of the Chinese Language, 

published in Macao by the East India Company Press in 1832. The arrangement of the layout demonstrated that this dictionary was codified for English, Mandarin Chinese, and Fujianese language users. Source from https://archive.org 245 

Figs 5 and 6 

Elihu Doty’s Anglo-Chinese Manual with Romanized Colloquial in the Amoy Dialect (1853) 

and Carstairs Douglas’s Chinese English Dictionary of Vernacular or Spoken Language of Amoy (1873). Source from Hong, Wei-Jen. Annotated Bibliography of Taiwan Historica--Language . Taipei: National Taiwan Library, 1996, 34 and https://archive.org 246 

Fig. 7 

The Messenger and Missionary Record April 1, 1881. 247 

Fig. 8 

Sam-jū-keng sin-chōan pe̍k -ōa chù -kái (三字經新篡白話註解 , 1894, by George Ede  余饒理 )

in which Chinese characters, POJ, and transcribed annotations were printed  side -by -side 

in columns. Source from the Central Library in Taiwan. 248 

Fig. 9 

Permission of registration for “ 私立臺南長老教會高等學校 ” by  Sakuma Samata (1844 -

1915),  the 5 th  Governor -General of Taiwan. Source from  Chang Rong zhongxue bai nian 

shi, 1885 -19 85  (One -Hundred -Year History of Private Chang Jung Middle School, 1885 -

1985 ). Tainan: Chang Jung Middle School, 1991,  61. 249 

Fig. 10 

Anonymity, “ Uí -lô Pó -siû -chiap ” (Weilao nutriment),  TCN , February, 1937, 31. 250 

Fig. 11 

Iwasaki Keitarō’s  岩崎敬太郎  (1880? -1934)  Dictionary of Taiwanese Language  臺灣語典 

(Taihoku: Taiwan Goten Hokkojo, 1925), 47. Source from the Central Library in Taiwan. 251 

Fig. 12 

Zhang Hongnan, A Self-Study of POJ (Taipei: Mori Bun Sha, 1922), 2. Source from the Central Library in Taiwan. 252 

Fig. 13 

First issue of Mandarin Daily Newspaper , October 25, 1948, 2. The announcement states that the newspaper aims to  make itself readable, affordable and practical. 

Source from Academia Sinica in Taiwan. 253 

Fig. 14 

Amount of Mandarin and SFD Films, 1949-1995 

Quoted from Cai Yuanlong’s “The Changes of Ideologies of the 1940s -1950s Taiwan 

Cinema,” Journal of Internet Sociology 55 (2006). http://mail.nhu.edu.tw/~society/e-j/55/55-07.htm. Accessed on July 27, 2014. 

# 0

# 50 

# 100 

# 150 

# 200 

> 1949
> 1953
> 1957
> 1961
> 1965
> 1969
> 1973
> 1977
> 1981
> 1985
> 1989
> 1993
> Amount

# Years 

# Mandarin 

# SFD 254 

Fig. 15 

Dong Dacheng’s POJ Textbook (Taipei: Jinan Church, 1949). Source from private 

collection. In his preface, Dong states that the Sunday school could teach the different sounds between Mandarin Chinese and the southern Fujianese language through POJ and their similarities in Mandarin phonetic symbols. 255 

Fig. 16 

Cai Peihuo’s Comparison between Mandarin phonetic symbols and SFD phonetic symbols 

Source from Collection of Cai Peihuo’s works, volume six. 256 

Fig. 17 

Mixed POJ and Chinese characters. Source from Tâibûn Thong-sìn Bong-pò 244 (2014):3. 257 

Acronyms 

POJ Pe̍h -oē -jī (roma nized southern Fujianese language; 

Church romanized letters) 

TCN Tâi-oân-hú-siâⁿ k àu-hōe -pò (Taiwan Church News) 

EPM The English Presbyterian Messenger 

MSPCT Minutes of the Synod of Presbyterian Church in Taiwan 

TCA Taiwanese Cultural Association 

TPN Taiwanese People's Newspaper 

TPDW Taiwan People’s Daily Newspaper 

TSSDN Taiwan Shin Sheng Daily News 

SLJXB Tabloid on 3rd, 6th, and 9th 258 

Glossary 

POJ or Japanese (J)  Hanyu pinyin 

Chinese Character  English 

Âng Io̍k  An, Yu  安育 

Asahi Shimbun (J)  Da ban zhao ri  大阪朝日  Asahi News 

Bîn chèng tiú -koa sûn 

Tiong -ôh 

Minzheng 

chang guan xun 

zhongxue 

民政長官巡中 

學

The Head of C ivilian 

Affairs at Taiwan Sōtokufu 

Inspected the Middle 

School 

Bûn Iok -hān kì‒ê  Wen Yuehan ji de  文約翰記的  reported by Wen Yuehan 

Bûn -bêng kap iá -bán ê 

hun -piat 

Wen ming han ye 

man de fen bie 

文明和野蠻的 

分別 

The Differences between 

the Civilized and 

Barbarian 

Cha̍p -Hāng Koán -Kiàn 

Shi xiang guan 

jian  十項管見  Ten E ssays about Taiwan 

Chheⁿ -hoan lōe -tē koan -

kong 

Shengfan nei di 

guan guang  生番內地觀光  Raw Aborigine's 

Sightseeing in Japan 

Chhî sian -siⁿ Chhun -ki ê 

sió -tōan 

Xu xiansheng 

chunzhi de xiao 

zhuan 

徐先生春枝的 

小傳  Biography of Mr. Xu 

Chunzhi 

Chhòa Pôe -hóe  Cai, Peihuo  蔡培火 

Chhut -sí sóaⁿ  Chu si xian  出死線  Life on a line 

Chiang –choân Sèng -hōe 

pò 

Zhang quang 

sheng hui bao  漳泉聖會報  Zhuan -quan Church News 

Chiang -hòa Lé -pài -tn̂g 

Lo̍k -sêng 

Zhanghua libai 

tang luo cheng 

彰化禮拜堂落 

成 Inauguration of Zhanghua 

Church 

Chiú kap Kiān -khong  Jiu ka jiankang  酒佮健康  Alcohol and health 

Chūi -keng -tông  Cui jing tang  萃經堂 

Chú -ji̍t -o̍h  zhuri xue  主日學  Sabbath school, Sunday 

school 

Chū -tin -tông  Ju zhen tang  聚珍堂 

Dictionario de la lengua 

Chincheo 

Fujian fangyan 

zidian  福建方言字典 

Dictionary of the Hok -

këèn Dialect of the 

Chinese Language, 

according to the Reading 

and Colloquial Idioms 

E-mng im e Jitian 

Xiamen yin de 

zidian  廈門音的字典  Dictionary of Amoy 

Dialect 259 

E-mng -im Sin Ji -tian 

Xiamen yin xin zidian  廈門音新字典 

A Dictionary of the Amoy 

Vernacular Spoken 

throughout the Prefectures 

of Chin -chiu, Chiang -chiu 

and Formos 

Fukuin Shinpo (J)  Fu yin xin bao  福音新報  Evangelical News 

Gân Chín-seng  Yan, Zhensheng  顏振聲 

Go -en (J)  Yu yuan  語苑  The Language Collection 

Gōng Thng  Han tang  憨湯  Stupid alcohol 

Gôo kuah  Wu, Ge  吳葛 

Hí iú-sêng  Xu, Youcheng  許有成 

Hô Hi-jîn  He, Xiren  何希仁 

Hontō jin (J)  ben dao ren  本島人  people of the island 

Huē -tô jī -bú  Hui tu zi mu  繪圖字母  Illustrated letters 

Hū -jîn-lâng  Fu renren  婦人人  women 

Hū -jīn -lâng ê Hok -im  Fu ren de fu yin  婦人的福音  Evangelism for women 

Ia̍p Hàn -chiong  Ye, Hanzhang  葉漢章 

I-Koán ê Kò -péh 

Yiguan de gao bai  醫館的告白  News from hospital 

Iûⁿ Hûn -liông  Yang, Yunlong  楊雲龍 

Iûⁿ Liân -hok  Yang, Lianfu  楊連福 

Jit-iāu Hák -hāu  Riyao xuexiao  日曜學校  Sunday school 

kàu -hōe ê siat -sit  Jiaohui de xiaoxi  教會的消息  News from churches 

Káu -io̍k ê Hó -hoat  Jiaoyu de hao fa  教育的好法  Good methods of 

education 

kàu-tshâi  jiao cai  教材  textbook, teaching materials 

Khai -siat Lú -o̍h  Kai she nü xue  開設女學  Launching a Girls' School 

Khai-ūi Kāin -pī -oân 

Kai wei jian pi wan  開胃健脾丸  Pills to increase appetite 

Khó Têng-hong  Xu, Tingfang  許廷芳 

Khóng-chú-jī  Kongzi zi  孔子字  Chinese characters 

Ki -tok -kàu Bûn -bêng Sú -

koan 

Jidu jiao wen ming shi guan 

基督教文明史 

觀 A Historical Review of 

Christian Civilization 260 

Ko Kim-seng  Gao, Jinsheng  高金聲 

Ko Thian-sù  Gao, Tiansi  高天賜 

Koa Siat-Kai  Ke, Shejie  柯設偕 

Koku go (J)  guo yu  國語  national language 

Kong chiòng  gong zhong  公眾  the public 

Lāi gōa kho khàn hō ha̍k 

Nei wai ke kan hu xue  內外科看護學  The Principles and 

Practice of Nursing 

Lák-Pah-Jī Phian Lô -má-

jī chù -kái 

Liu bai zi bian luoma zi zhujie 

六百字編羅馬 

字註解 

Annotations of Six 

Hundred Romanized 

Chinese 

Lâm Tāi Tâi -Lâm Sīn -lâu I-īⁿ 

Nantai tainan Xinlou yiyuan 

南台台南新樓 

醫院  Tainan Xinlou Hospital 

Lâm -pō Kàu -hōe I -liâu 

Thoân -tō -sú 

Nanbu jiaohui yiliao chuandao shi 

南部教會醫療 

傳道史 

History of Medical 

Mission in southern 

Church 

Lâm-sì-hoan  nan shi fan  南勢番  Aborigines in Nanshi 

Lâu Bō͘ -chheng  Liu, Maoqing  劉茂清 

Lâu Suīsan  Liu, Ruishan  劉瑞山 

Lē -lú -ha̍k  Li nü xue  勵女學  Encouraging Girls' 

Education 

Liāu Tit  Liao, De  廖得 

Lī -ik gín -ná ê lūn  Lun liyi ertong  論利益兒童  Essays on B enefi ts for 

Children 

Lí -ke Iàu -Lio̍k  Li jia yao lue  理家要略  Principles of Family 

Management 

Lîm Bō -seng  Lin, Maosheng  林茂生 

Lîm Ha̍k -kiong  Lin, Xuegong  林學恭 

Lîm Iàn-sîn  Lin, Yanchen  林燕臣 

Liông -Bo̍k Pö  Liang mu bao  良牧報  Pastoral News 

Lô Hoa Kái -Tsō Thóng -

it Su -han -bûn 

Luo hua gai zao tong yi shu han wen 

羅華改造統一 

書翰文  Standard Letter Writing of 

Romanized Chinese 

Lô Khiân-ek  Luo, Qianyi  羅乾益 

lōe -chō  nei zhu  內助  a better half of married couples 261 

Lôⁿ I -sing  Lu yisheng  盧醫生 

Lūn koo -niû  Lun gu niang  論姑娘  Essays o n Female 

Missionaries 

Lūn Lú -chú ê tāi -chì 

Lun nüzi de shi qing  論女子的事情  Views of Women's 

Positions 

Lūn siat -li̍p tiong -o̍h 

Lun she li zhongxue  論設立中學  Essays on Foundering a 

Middle S chool 

Lūn -kàu Thoân -Tō ê bē -

io̍h híng -i

Lun dao chuandao mai yao xing yi 

論到傳道賣藥 

行醫  Essays on Selling Drugs 

for M ission 

Nâ hōo  Lin, Hou  林後 ?

Naichi jin (J)  nei di ren  內地人  people of the mainland 

Naitai yuwa (J)  neitai ronghe  內台融和  merging of the Taiwanese and the Japanese 

N̂g Goa̍t -tek  Huang, Yuede  黃月德 

N̂g Sìn -kí  Huang, Xinqi  黃信期 

Nihon go (J)  Riben yu  日本語  Japanese language 

nüshu  nü shu  女書  female language 

Ô Tiāu -ki  Hu, Yaoji  胡肇基 

Ōe -seng kap chhù  Weisheng ka cuo  衛生佮厝  Hygiene and home 

Ông Chiap-thôan  Wang, Jiechuan  王接傳 

Ông Siú-ióng  Wang, Shouyong  王守勇 

Pa To-má  Ba, Keli  巴克禮  Thomas Barclay 

Pa̍k -kha ê iàu -lūn 

Bang jiao de yan lun  綁腳的要論  Views on F oot -binding 

Pák-kha Lūn  Bang jiao lun  綁腳論  Views on foot -binding 

Pe̍h -oē -jī  baihua zi  白話字  romanized southern Fujianese dialect 

Phian-chíp-sek  Bian ji shi  編輯室  room of editor 

Phoaⁿ bêng -chu  Pan, Mingzhu  潘明珠 

Phoaⁿ Bûn -bêng chò‒ê 

Pan Wenming zuo de  潘文明做的  done by Pan Wenming 

Phoaⁿ Hoān -chiong  Pan, Huanzhang  潘煥章 

Phoāⁿ Tō -êng  Pan, Daocheng  潘道成 

Pîⁿ -po -cho̍k  pingpu zu  平埔族  plains aborigine 262 

Pò -tō tio̍h chái -iūⁿ? 

Bu dao ying zenyang  怖道應怎樣 ? How should We Conduct 

Mission? 

Sām jū keng  San zi jing  三字經  Three Character Classic 

Seng -jū kóng -hùn 

Sheng yu kuang xun  聖諭廣訓  The Sacred Edict 

Shinkoku jin (J)  qingguo ren  清國人 

Shōwa Shinpo (J)  Zhao he xin bao  昭和新報  Shōwa Newspaper 

Shūshin (J)  xiu sheng  修身  morals 

siá ⁿ-sū chō -hóan lâi chhú-chōe 

Sha shi zaofan lai quzui 

啥事造反來取 

罪 Why did he/her rise in rebellion as a crime 

Siat -sit  Xiaoxi  消息  News 

Sina jin (J)  zhina ren  支那人  People from China 

Sin -thé -lí ha̍k  Shen ti li xue  身體理學  Physiology 

T.K.C. Lô-má-jī chhui -

hêng Pō -hōe Tiû -pī Úi -oân-hōe 

T.K.C. luomazu tuixing buhui choubei weiyuan hui 

T.K.C. 羅馬字推 

行部會籌備委 

員會 

T.K.C. preparatory committee of romanization promotion department 

Tāi -bêng Jîn Hào Hông-

hō Lōe -hùn 

Da ming ren xiao huang hou nei xun 

大明仁孝皇后 

內訓 

Internal Principles by 

Queen Renxiao of the 

Ming Dynasty 

Tāi -hōe ê kí -lio̍k  Da hui de ji lu  大會的記錄  News from Synod 

Tâi -Lâm I -Koán  Tainan yiguan  台南醫館  Tainan Hospital 

Tâi -lâm Pīⁿ -īnⁿ  Tainan bingyuan  台南病院  Tainan Hospital 

Tâi -oân ê bîng -chhing 

Taiwan de ming cheng  台灣的名稱  Names of Taiwan 

Tâi-ôan ōe/Bân -lâm-gú/ Bân-lâm ōe 

Taiwan hua/minnan yu/minnan hua 

臺灣話 /閩南語 /

閩南話  southern Fujianese language 

Tâi -oân -hú -siâⁿ Kàu -

hōe -pò 

Taiwan fucheng jiaohui bao 

台灣府城教會 

報 Taiwan Church News 

Tâi -pak ê kì -lio̍k  Taipei de ji lu  台北的記錄  Records of Taipei 

Tâi -tó siat -sit --Phiàn -su̍t 

Tai dao xiao xi pianshu  台島消息  騙術  News of Taiwan, trick 

Taiwan Doukakai (J) 

Taiwan tong hua hui  臺灣同化會  Association of Assimilation in Taiwan 263 

Taiwan Minpao  Taiwan min bao  臺灣民報  Taiwan People’s 

Newspaper 

Taiwan Nichinichi 

Shimpo (J) 

Taiwan riri xin bao  臺灣日日新報  Taiwan Daily Newspaper 

Taiwangogaku Zasshi (J) 

Taiwan yu xue zazhi  臺灣語學雜誌  Taiwanese Language 

Magazine 

Tâm -Lâm Chiang -Hòa 

Tiú -Ló -Kàu Kong -iōng ê 

Io̍h -Hng 

Taiwan Zhanghua changlao jiaohui yong de yaofang 

臺灣彰化長老 

教會用的藥方 

The Pharmacopeia of the 

Tainan and Shoka 

Hospital of the English 

Presbyterian Mission 

Formosa 

Tēⁿ Khe -phòan  Zheng, Xipan  鄭溪泮 

The Tāioān Chheng Liān  Taiwan qingnian  臺灣青年  Taiwan Youth 

Thoân -Tō bē -io̍h ê chó -

gāi 

Chuan dao mai yao de zu ai 

傳道賣藥的阻 

礙 Barrier to Selling Drugs 

for M ission 

Thó -lūn Kàu -io̍k kap Lô -

má -jī ūn -tōng ê su -giân 

Taolun jiaoyu ji luomazi yundong de xuyan 

討論「教育及 

羅馬字運動」 

的序言 

A Discussion of the 

Preface to 'Education and 

Romanization M ovement' 

Tiō Sî -hôe  Zhao, Shihui  趙時回 

Tiong-kok lâng  zhongguo ren  中國人  Chinese 

Tiong -óh ê Khó  Zhongxue de ke  中學的課  Courses in Middle S chool 

Tiong -ôh ê Kò -péh 

Zhongxue de gao bai  中學的告白  News from Middle S chool 

Tiong -óh khah hó á -si 

Jit -pún óh khah hó 

Zhongxue jiao hao hai shi riben xuexiao jiao hao 

中學較好還是 

日本學校較好 

Taiwanese Middle School 

is Better or Japanese 

Public School is B etter? 

Tiuⁿ Ki -chôan  Zhang, Jiquan  張基全 

Tn̂g -oē Hoan -jī Chho͘ -

ha̍k 

Tanghua fanzi chu xue  唐話番字初學  Romanized Amoy Dialect 

for Beginners 

Tōa -siā ê I -Koán  Dashe de yiguan  大社的醫館  Dashe Hospital 

Tsú -ji̍t sîn -liông  Zhuri shenliang  主日神糧  The Lord of the Havest 

Tùi Phó -Sè Kàu -Hia̍p ê 

Seng-Bêng 

Dui pu shi jiaohui de shengming 

對普世教會的 

聲明  A Statement to the World 

Council of Churches 

Uí-lô Pó-siû-chiap 

Weilao pu shou zhi  偉勞補壽汁  Weilao nutriment 264 

jiaohui ruoma zi  教會羅馬字  Church romanized letters 

Taiwan ren  臺灣人  Taiwanese 

xiangtu wenxue  鄉土文學  nativist literature 

dangwai  黨外  outside the party 

Zhongguo shibao  中國時報  Chinatimes 

shu tong wen  書同文  writing the same writing system 

Wen xin diao long  文心雕龍  The Mind of Literature 

and Carving Dragons 

Penglai Dao  蓬萊島  Penglai Island 

Liuqiu  流球 

Beigang  北港 

Dongning  東寧 

Keelung  雞籠 

Tyowan  台灣  /大員 

Hai dong zhu guo ju  海東諸國紀  Chronicle of the C ountries 

of Eastern Asia 

Gu, Zuyu  顧祖禹 

Du shi fang yu ji yao  讀史方輿紀要 

Notes on Reading the 

Geography Treatises in 

the Histories 

Taiwan fu zhi  台灣府志  Taiwan Prefecture 

Gazetteer 

Shen yu wan guo quan tu  坤輿萬國全圖  A Map of the Myriad 

Countries of the World 

Dong fan ji  東番記  An Account of the Eastern 

Barbarians 

Chen, Di  陳第 

Taiwan-fu  臺灣府 

Ji, Qiguang  季麒光 

Yan, Siqi  顏思齊  Pedeo China 

Xingang wen shu  新港文書  Sinkan Manuscripts 

Taiwan wen xian cong kan  台灣文獻叢刊  Historiography of Taiwan 265 

Sinkan she  新港社 

Soulang she  蕭壟社 

Mattau she  麻豆社 

Teopan she  大歐龐社 

Tifulukan she  帝福鹿社 

Taffakan she  大化港社 

Bakloan she  目加溜社 

Tefurang she  大武壟社 

Kulang yu  鼓浪嶼 

Huwei  虎尾 

Tuku  土庫 

Baozhong  褒忠 

Shi wu yin  十五音  Fifteen Sounds 

Zhongguo cong bao  中國叢報  The Chinese Repository 

Fanyi ying hua xia qiang yuhui 

翻譯英華廈腔 

語彙 

Anglo -Chinese Manual 

with Romanized colloquial 

in the Amoy Dialect 

Xia ying da cidian  廈英大辭典 

Chinese English 

Dictionary of Vernacular 

or Spoken Language of 

Amoy, with the Principal 

Variations of the Chang 

chew and Chin chew 

Dialects 

Qian zi wen  千字文  The Thousand Character 

Classic 

Zheng, Jing  鄭經 

Yongli datong li  永曆大統曆  United Calendar of Yongli 

Period 

huguan  戶官  the office of Revenue during Koxinga period 

Wu, Fengtai  吳鳳胎 

Songyun Xuan  松雲軒 266 

Lu, Congyu  盧崇玉 

Taichan bi du  胎產必讀  A Must -read for 

Childbirth 

Cui sheng fu jue  摧生符訣  Symbol F ormula of 

Augmentation 

sishu  私塾  private academy 

Shi xin yue kan  使信月刊  The English Presbyterian 

Messenger 

Zhuluo xian zhi  諸羅縣志  Zhuluo County Gazetteer 

Shexue  社學  public academy 

Yixue  義學  private academy 

Jiao wu zai zhi  教務雜誌  The Chinese Recorder 

Taiwan wen hua xiehui  臺灣文化協會  Taiwanese Cultural Association 

Taiwan xin min bao  臺灣新民報  Taiwanese New People's 

Newspaper 

Gaosha qingnian hui  高砂青年會  Takasago Youth Association 

Xin min hui  新民會  New People Association 

Weren bao  伍人報  Wuren Newspaper 

nan yin  南音  Southern Dialects 

Xin gao xin bao  新高新報  Xingao Newspaper 

Taiwan jingcha xiehui zazhi 

臺灣警察協會 

雜誌  Magazine for Taiwan 

Police Association 

Taiwan romazi zi zi xiu shu 

臺灣羅馬白話 

字自修書  A Self -Study of POJ 

xin xin  新新  Xin xin 

Taiwan wen hua xie jin hui 

臺灣文化協進 

會 Association of Promoting Taiwanese Culture 

Cheng huai yuan chang he ji  澄懷園唱和集  Poems Singing in 

Huaicheng Garden 

Da gong bao  大公報  Ta Kung Pao 

Taiwan xin bao  臺灣新報  Taiwan New Newspaper 267 

Taiwan xin sheng bao  台灣新生報  Taiwan Shin Sheng Daily 

News 

Guoyu ri bao  國語日報  Mandarin Daily 

Newspaper 

guan hua  官話  official language 

min bao  民報  Minpao 

San liu jiu xiao bao  三六九小報  Tabloid on 3 rd , 6 th , and 9 th 

Shi jing  詩經  Book of Songs 

Taiwan guo feng  台灣國風  Songs of the State in Taiwan 268 

Bibliography 

Archives and Government Publications: 

Archive of Taiwan Memory, Academia Sinica 

Bulletin of Taiwan Provincial Government (Taiwan sheng zhengfu gong bao) 

Communique of  Taiwan Sōtokufu  (Taiwan Zongdufu fubao) 

George Leslie Mackay’s diary (1844 -1901) 

Minutes and reports of the Foreign Mission Committee (FMCPCC, 1860-1960) 

Minutes of the Presbyterian Church in Taiwan (1912-1942) 

Minutes of the Presbyterian Church in Southern Taiwan (1931-1956) 

Memory of Written Taiwanese, the Cerntal Library in Taiwan 

Southern Fujianese language films (1950s to 1980s) 

Taiwan wenxian congkan (Historiography of Taiwan) 

The Presbyterian Church Records (1860-1960) 

The Presbyterian Church of England Foreign Mission Archives (PCEFMA, 1847-1950) 

Magazines and Newspapers: 

Taiwan Church News (TCN, 1885-2002) 

The Chinese Recorder and Missionary Journal (1867-1941) 

Taiwan Youth (1920-1922) 

Journal of Language (1909-1931) 

The Messenger (1850-1947) 

Taiwan People’s Newspaper (Taiwan Minpao) 

The Chinese Repository (Zhongguo cong bao) 

Zhuan-quan Church News 

Secondary Sources: 

Abdelal, R., Y.M. Herrera, A.I. Johnston, and R. McDermott. Measuring Identity: A Guide for Social Scientists . Cambridge University Press, 2009. 

Agha, Asif. Language and Social Relations . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2007. 

Allee, M.A. Law and Local Society in Late Imperial China: Northern Taiwan in the Nineteenth Century . Stanford University Press, 1994. 

Alvarez, Jose Maria. Xibanya Ren Zai Taiwan, 1626-1642 (Spanish in Taiwan, 1626-1642). Translated by Wu Mengzhen and Li Yuzhong. Nantou: Taiwan Historica, 2006. 

Anderson, B. Imagined Communities: Reflections on the Origin and Spread of Nationalism .Verso, 2006. 

Andrade, T. How Taiwan Became Chinese: Dutch, Spanish, and Han Colonization in the 269 

Seventeenth Century . Columbia University Press, 2008. 

Andrade, Tonio. "Pirates, Pelts, and Promises: The Sino-Dutch Colony of Seventeenth-Century Taiwan and the Aboriginal Village of Favorolang." The Journal of Asian Studies 64 (2005): 295-321. 

Ang, Kaim. "Portuguese and Formosa--with a Discussion of the Shipwreck in 1582." Historical Monthly 220 (2006): 72-79. 

——— . "Yam-Shaped Taiwan: Study of 16th and 17th Century Taiwan Maps." In New Perspectives on Geographic Space: International Symposium on Historical Cartography .Taipei: National Palace Museum, 2008. 

Ankerl, G. Coexisting Contemporary Civilizations: Arabo-Muslim, Bharati, Chinese, and Western: A Scientific Essay . Geneva: INU Press, 2000. 

Arnold, D. Colonizing the Body: State Medicine and Epidemic Disease in Nineteenth-Century India . CA: University of California Press, 1993. 

Association of Taiwan Education ed. Taiwan Jiaoyu shi (History of Taiwan Education) Taipei: Nantian Publisher 1939. 

Babcock, Barbara A. "Reflexivity: Definitions and Discriminations." Semiotica 30 (1980): 1-14. 

Band, Edward. Barclay of Formosa. Taipei: Ch'eng Wen Publishing Co., 1972. 

——— . Working His Purpose out, the History of the English Presbyterian Mission, 1847-1947 

Taipei: Che'ng Wen Pub. Co., 1972. 

Barclay, G.W.  Colonial Development and  Population in Taiwan . Washington : Kennikat Press, 

1972. 

Barth, Frederik. Ethnic Groups and Boundaries: The Social Organization of Culture Difference .London, Allen & Unwin 1969. 

Bai, Chengzhi ed. Posthumous Works of Chiang Weishui. Taipei: Wenhua chuban she, 1950. 

Baynham, M. Literacy Practices: Investigating Literacy in Social Contexts . Longman, 1995. 

Bays, D.H. Christianity in China: From the Eighteenth Century to the Present . Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1999. 

Bentley, Carter. "Ethnicity and Practice." Comparative Studies in Society and History 29, no. 1 (1987): 24-55. 

Berg, M. E. van den.  "Ethnolinguistic Identities and Accommodation across Generations in 270 

Taiwan." Journal of Asian Pacific Communication 3, no. 1 (1992): 145-164. 

——— . "Language Planning and Language Use in Taiwan: Social Identity, Language Accommodation, and Language Choice Behaviors." International Journal of the Sociology Language 59 (1986): 97-115. 

Blussé, L., N. Everts, and E. Frech. The Formosan Encounter: Notes on Formosa's Aboriginal Society: A Selection of Documents from Dutch Archival Sources . Taipei: Shung Ye Museum of Formosan Aborigines, 1999. 

Bonnett, A. The Idea of the West: Politics, Culture and History . London: Palgrave Macmillan, 2004. 

Bourdieu, P.  Language  and Symbolic Power: The Economy of Linguistic Exchanges . Cambridge :

Polity Press, 1991. 

Boaz, Martha “Censorship” in M. J. M Bates, Mary Niles, Drake Miriam’s Encyclopaedia of Library and Information Science . New York: Marcel Dekker, 2003. 

Brooker, P. A Glossary of Cultural Theory . New York: Bloomsbury Academic, 2003. 

Brown, M.J. Is Taiwan Chinese? The Impact of Culture, Power, and Migration on Changing Identities . CA: University of California Press, 2004. 

——— . Negotiating Ethnicities in China and Taiw an . Routledge:  Taylor & Francis Group, 

1996. 

Brown, Melissa J. "Reconstructing Ethnicity: Recorded and Remembered Identity in Taiwan." 

Ethnology 40 (2001): 153-64. 

Brubaker, Brian Lee. "Language Attitudes and Identity in Taiwan." MA Thesis. University of Pittsburgh, the Department of History, 2003. 

Brugger, B., and K. Hannan. Modernisation & Revolution . London: Croom Helm, 1983. 

Bryce, T.G.K., and W.M. Humes. Scottish Education: Post-Devolution . Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 2003. 

Bullock, T. L. "Formosan Dialects and Their Connection with the Malay." China Review 3(1874): 38-46. 

Chi, Mingshang. "Zhanhou Taiwan de yuyan zhengce (1945-2008) (the Taiwanese Language Policy During the Post-War, 1945-2008 —from the Mandarin Movement to the Mother Tongue Movement." Mater Thesis. National Chung Hsing University, 2009. 

Campbell, W. Formosa under the Dutch: Described from Contemporary Records, with Explanatory Notes and a Bibliography of the Island . Kegan Paul, 1903. 271 

——— . Handbook of the English Presbyterian Mission in South Formosa . Hastings: F.J. Parsons, 1910. 

——— . Sketches from Formosa . Taipei: Ch'eng Wen Publishing Company, 1972. 

——— . trans. The Sacred Edict--Translated into the Vernacular of the Bible Used Throughout Chinchew, Changchew and Formosa. Amoy: The Poe-Bun-Tsai Press, 1908. 

Cai, Peihuo, “Taiwanese Movements during Colonial Period,” Taiwan Wen Xian 16, no. 2 

(1965): 176. 

——— . A Collection of Cai Peihuo’s Works . Taipei: Wushi tushu, 2000. 

Cao, Yonghe. Taiwan zao qi lishi yanjiu xu ji (Studies of Early Taiwan's History, Vol.2). Taipei: Lianjing chuban she, 2000. 

Chang, Boyu ed. Materials of Mandarin Movement in Taiwan. Taipei: Commercial Press, 1974. 

Chang, Houji. One-Hundred-Year History of Private Chang Jung Middle School, 1885-1985 .Tainan: Chang Jung Middle School, 1991. 

Chang, Hsiu-Jung ed. A Chronology of 19th Century Writings on Formosa. Taipei: Ts'ao Yung-ho Foundation for Culture and Education, 2008. 

Chang, Lung-chih. "From Island Frontier to Imperial Colony: Qing and Japanese Sovereignty Debates and Territorial Projects in Taiwan, 1874-1906." Ph. D Dissertation. Harvard University, 2003. 

Chang, Miao-Chuan. "Rizhi qianqi Taiwan nanbu zhanglao jiaohui de zhurixue jiaoyu, 1895-1926 (Sabbath School Education by the Presbyterian Church in Taiwan During Early Japanese Rule,1895-1926)." Chung-Hsing Journal of History 22 (2010): 79-104. 

Chang, Yuhong. Baihua zi ji ben lun (Introduction to POJ). Taiwan: SMC publishing Inc., 2001. 

Chang, Ya-min. "Xuxing xuexi baihua zi dhi duxie y anjiu” (An Investigation of Women’s 

Lite racy of Pe̍H -Oē -Jī)." MA Thesis. Taidong University, 2008. 

Chen, Cuilian. Taiwan ren de dikang yu rentong, 1920-1950 (the Taiwanese's Resistane and Self-Identity in 1920-1950). Taipei: Yuanliu, 2008. 

Chen, Chung-min, Chuang, Ying-chang, and Huang Shu-min ed. Ethnicity in Taiwan: Social, Historical and Cultural Perspectives . Taipei: Institute of Ethnology, Academia Sinica, 1994. 

Chen, Lin. "Jindai Fujian Jidujiao chuban shiye zhi yanjiu (A Study of Fujian Christian 272 

Publishing, 1842-1949)." Ph. D Dissertation. Fujian Normal University, 2006. 

Chen, Meiling. "An Introduction of the Principles and Practice of Nursing." Changhua Christian Hospital News 19, no. 5 (2002): 22-24. 

Chen, Muzhen. "Taiyu Baihuazi shuxie zhong de wenming guan —yi Taiwan fucheng jiaohui bao wei zhong xin (1885-1942) (Views on Civilization in Romanized Taiwanese Literature —Centering on ‘Taiwan Prefectural City Church News, 1885 -1942." MA Thesis. National Cheng Kung University, 2006. 

Chen , Pei-feng The Different Intentions behind the Semblance of Dōka . Taipei: Chengbang, 2006. 

Chen, Shurong. Yi jiu san ling niandai xiangtu wenxue: Taiwan hua wen lun zheng ji qi yupo (A Study of the Written Form of Taiwanese). Tainan: City library, 2004. 

Chen, Xiaochong. "Ri ju shidai Taiwan hua wen yun dong lun shu (A Discussion of Taiwanese Dialect during Japanese Occupation)." Taiwan Research Quarterly 76 (2002): 54-58. 

Chen, Xingqi. “A Study of Movie Stars in Taiyu Films.” MA Thesis. Taipei National University 

of the Arts, 2004. 

Chen, Zhaoying. Taiwan wenxue yu bentuhua yundong (Taiwanese Literature and the Movement of Indigenization). Taipei: National Taiwan University Press, 2009. 

Chen, Yaji . “Taiwanese Writing Association —from the Local to Connect the International 

Society.”  Book Boom Magazine  30  (2005): 60 -61. 

Chen, Z., Y. Zhuang, and S. Huang. Ethnicity in Taiwan: Social, Historical, and Cultural Perspectives . Taipei: Academia Sinica, 1994. 

Cheng, Li-jung “Cultural Movement in the local Society: a Case Study on the Reading Society of 

the Wu-fong I-xin Society (1934-1936).” National Central University Journal of Humanities 36 (2008): 139-84. 

Cheng, Robert L. “Let our Children Have  Opportunity  to Read and Write Taiyu. ” Taiwan 

Literature  136 (1993):  173 -80. 

Cheung, Yat-Shing. "The Form and Meaning of Digraphia: The Case of Chinese." In 

Sociolinguistics Today: International Perspectives , edited by K. Bolton and H. Kwok: London: Routledge, 1992. 

Ching, Leo. "Tracing Contradictions: Interrogating Japanese Colonialism and Its Discourse." CA: University of California, San Diego, 1994. 

Ching, L.T.S. Becoming "Japanese": Colonial Taiwan and the Politics of Identity Formation .273 

CA: University of California Press, 2001. 

Chiou, Ya-ping. "Cong ri kan baozhi hanwen lan feizhi tan jiu Taiwan shi baihua wen de mianmao (A Language Inquiry of Taiwanese Vernacular from the Abrogation of Han-Wen Column on the Dailies." MA Thesis. National Cheng Kung University, 2007. 

Chiung, Wi -vun Taiffalo. Language, Identity, and Decolonization . Tainan: National Cheng Kung University, 2005. 

——— . Language, Literature, and Reimagined Taiwanese Nation . Tainan: National Cheng Kung University, 2007. 

——— . "Romanization and Language Planning in Taiwan." The Linguistic Association of Korea Journal 9, no. 1 (2001): 15- 43. 

——— .“Languages and Attitudes toward Taibun the Written Taiwanese.” MA Thesis. 

University of Texas at Arlington, 1999. 

Chow, K.W. Publishing, Culture, and Power in Early Modern China . Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press, 2004. 

Clark, K. Civilisation, a Personal View . New York: Harper & Row, 1969. 

Cohen, Myron. "Being Chinese: The Peripheralization of Traditional Identity." In The Living Tree: The Changing Meaning of Being Chinese Today , edited by Tu Wei-ming. Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press, 1991. 

Constable, Nicole "Christianity and Hakka Identity." In Christianity in China: From the Eighteenth Century to the Present , edited by Daniel Bays, 158-73. Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press, 1999. 

Cohen, R. “Ethnicity: Problem and Focus in Anthropology.” Annual Review of Anthropology 7

(1978): 379-403. 

Crossley, Pamela Kyle. "Thinking About Ethnicity in Early Modern China." Late Imperial China 

11, no. 1 (1990): 1-35. 

Connor, Walker  “A Nation is a Nation, is a State,  is  An Ethnic Group is a….”  Ethnic and Racial 

Studies  1 (1978):  377 -400. 

Crowley, D.J.,  and P. Heyer.  Communication in History: Technology, Culture, Society . Boston :

Pearson Allyn & Bacon, 2007. 

Daisaku, Ihara “Taiwanese Language Textbooks Used During the Early Period of Japanese Rule: 

An Historical Analysis. ” Compilation and Translation Review 6:2 (2013): 67-98. 274 

Dai, Wenfeng. "Medical Reports of the Chinese Imperial Maritime Customs Service and Diseases." Thoughts and Words 33, no. 2 (1995): 157-211. 

Davis, Natalie Zemon. “Decentering History: Local Stories and Cultu ral Crossings in a Global World. ” History and Theory 50 (2011): 188-202. 

Dale, Ian R.H. "Digraphia." International Journal of the Sociology of Language 26 (1980): 5 –13. 

Daniels, P.T., and W. Bright.  The World's Writing Systems . Oxford:  Oxford University Pres s,

1996. 

DeFrancis, John. "How Efficient Is the Chinese Writing System?" Visible Language 30, no. 1 (1996): 6-44. 

——— . “Digraphics. ” Word  35 (1984): 59 -66. 

Denis, Guy Denhiere and Michel. "The Processing of Texts Describing Spatial Configurations." In Knowledge Acquisition from Text and Pictures , edited by Heinz Mandl and Joel R. Levin, 249-61. North Holland: Elsevier, 1989. 

Deng, Hongpo. “Mandarin Academy and Official Language Movement in the Qing Dynasty.” 

Materials for History of Chinese Academy . Hangzhou: Zhejiang Jiaoyu chuban she, 1998. 

Diamond, J.M. Guns, Germs, and Steel: The Fates of Human Societies . W.W. Norton, 1997. 

Dikötter, F. Sex, Culture and Modernity in China: Medical Science and the Construction of Sexual Identities in the Early Republican Period . London: Hurst & Co., 1995. 

Donaldson, G. The Scottish Reformation . Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press, 1960. 

Dong, Fangyuan. "The Historical Positions of Taiwanese Romanization." Taiwan Wen Xian 55 no. 2 (2004): 289-324. 

Douglas, Carstairs. Chinese-English Dictionary of the Vernacular or Spoken Language of Amoy: With the Principal Variations of the Chang-Chew and Chin-Chew Dialects . London: Trubner & Co., 57 & 59 Ludgate Hill, 1873. 

Du, Jianfeng. "Formosa from the Perspective of East Asia: The Origin and Transformation of the 

Taiwanese Identity." Ph. D Dissertation. National Cheng Kung University, 2011. 

Duranti, A. ed.  A Companion to Linguistic Anthropology . Hoboken , N.J. : Wiley , 2008. 

Eskildsen, R. Foreign Adventurers and the Aborigines of Southern Taiwan, 1867-1874: Western Sources Related to Japan's 1874 Expedition to Taiwan . Taipei: Academia Sinica, 2005. 

Eichler, E. R. "The K'uen Shi Wan or, the Practical Theology of the Chinese." The China Review 275 

11(1882): 94-95. 

Evan, Dawley. "Constructing Taiwanese Ethnicity: Identities in a City on the Border of China and Japan." Ph. D Dissertation. Harvard University, 2006. 

Fagg, J.G. Forty Years in South China the Life of Reverend John Van Nest Talmage . Whitefish: Kessinger Publishing, 2004. 

Fang, Shiduo Fifty-year-history of Chinese Mandarin Movement . Taipei: Mandarin Daily News, 1965. 

Feifel, K.E. Language Attitudes in Taiwan: A Social Evaluation of Language in Social Change .Taipei: Crane Publishing Company, 1994. 

Fernández-Armesto, F. Civilizations . London: Pan Macmillan Australia Pty, Limited, 2000. 

Ferguson, Charles A. “Diglossia” in D. Hymes eds. Language in Culture and Society, 429-39. New York: Harper and Row, 1964. 

Fishman, J.A., C.A. Ferguson, and J. Dasgupta. Language Problems of Developing Nations .Hoboken, N. J.: Wiley, 1968. 

——— . “Bilingualism with and without diglossia; diglossia with and without bilingualism,” 

Journal of Social Issues 23 (1967): 29-38. 

Forbes, S.H. Holistic Education: An Analysis of Its Intellectual Precedents and Nature . Oxford: University of Oxford, 1999. 

Fu, Dawei. Ya xi ya de xishenti: xinbie, yiliao, yu jindai Taiwan (Asia's New Body: Gender, Medical Treatment, and Contemporary Taiwan). Taipei: Qianxue Chuban, 2005. 

Gates, Hill. "Ethnicity." In The Anthropology of Taiwanese Society , edited by Emily Martin and Gates Ahern, Hill ed. 241-380. Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1981. 

Gao, Junming. The Road toward the Cross . Taipei: Wangchun feng, 2001. 

Gold, Thomas. "Civil Society and Taiwan’s Quest for Identity." In Cultural Change in Postwar Taiwan , edited by Stevan Harrell and Huang Chun-chieh. Boulder: Westview Press, 1994. 

Gong, Pengcheng. Yi jiu jiu yi wenhua pinglun (Cultural Remarks of 1991) Taipei: Sanmin Bookstore, 1992. 

Griffin, Robert J. "Anonymity and Authorship." New Literary History 30, no. 4 (1999): 877-95. 

Gu, W., K.W. Ying, and K. De Ridder. Authentic Chinese Christianity, Preludes to Its 276 

Development: Nineteenth & Twentieth Centuries . Cornell: Cornell University Press, 2001. 

Gu, Bing  “The Entire Story of 228 Incident,”  Progress  7 (1984): 8 -10. 

Guo, Chengkang. History of Yuan and Qing Dynasties . Taipei: Wunan Books Inc., 2002. 

Gustafson, S.M. Eloquence Is Power: Oratory and Performance in Early America . North Carolina: University of North Carolina Press, 2000. 

Hall, S. Representation: Cultural Representations and Signifying Practices . C.A.: SAGE Publications, 1997. 

Harrell, S., and J. Huang.  Cultural C hange in Postwar Taiwan . Boulder:  Westview Press, 1994. 

Hastings, A. The Construction of Nationhood: Ethnicity, Religion and Nationalism . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1997. 

Heller, M. Linguistic Minorities and Modernity: A Sociolinguistic Ethnography . New York: Bloomsbury, 2007. 

Hermanson, Hildur  Zhuo Banghong trans., “My Life.”  in  An  Anniversary Issue —The One 

Hundred and Fifth Year of  Mackey Memorial Hospital , 287. Taipei: Mackey Memorial 

Hospital , 1985. 

Heylen, Ann. "Cai Peihuo and the Romanisation Movement in Colonial Taiwan." In An Anthology of POJ Teaching and Research International Conference , edited by Taiwanese Romanization Association: Taipei: Taiwanese Romanization Association, 2002. 

——— . "The Historical Meaning of the Taiwan Romanisation." In The 1st Conference for Young Scholars on Taiwanese Romanization , 9-21: Tainan: Kailang, 2008. 

——— . "The Legacy of Literacy Practices in Colonial Taiwan. Japanese –Taiwanese – Chinese: Language Interaction and Identity Formation." Journal of Multilingual and Multicultural Development 26, no. 6: 496-511. 

——— . "Missionary Linguistics on Taiwan: Romanizing Taiwanese: Codification and Standardization of Dictionaries in Southern Min (1837-1923)." In Authentic Chinese Christianity: Preludes to Its Development (Nineteenth and Twentieth Centuries) , edited by W. Ku & K. de Ridder, 135-74: Leuven, Belgium: Leuven University Press, 2001. 

——— . "Helan yuyan zhengce yu yuanzhumin shizi nengli de yijin, 1624-1662 (Language Studies under the Church in Dutch-Controlled Formosa-Dutch Language Policy and the Literacy of Native People)." Taipei Historical Documents 125 (1998): 81-119. 

Higson, Andrew.  “The Limiting Imagination of National Cinema,” in Mette Hjort and Scott 277 

MacKenzie, eds.  Cinema and  Nation , 63 -74. London: Routledge, 2000. 

——— .“National cinemas, international markets, cross -cultural identities,” in Ib Bondebjerg, 

ed.,  Moving Images, Culture and the Mind , 205 -14. Luton: University of Luton Press, 

2000. 

Hong, Wei-Jen. Annotated Bibliography of Taiwan Historica--Language . Taipei: National Taiwan Library, 1996. 

——— . Taiwan fangyan zhi lu (A Journey of Taiwan's Dialects). Taipei: Qianwei chubanshe, 1992. 

——— . Taiyu wen xue yu taiyu wenzi (Literature and Written Language in Taiwanese Dialect). Taipei: Qianwei chuban she, 1992. 

——— . "Ri ju shidai de taiyu jiaoyu (the Education of Fujianese Languge under Japanese Rule)." The Taiwan Folkways 42 (1992): 49-84. 

Hong, Youxi, and Chen, Lixing. Xiansheng ma, chanpo, yu fuchanke yishi (Xianshengma, Midwives, and Obstetrician-Gynecologists ). Taipei: Qianwei chuban she, 2002. 

Houston, R.A. Scottish Literacy and the Scottish Identity: Illiteracy and Society in Scotland and Northern England, 1600-1800 . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2002. 

Hsiau, A-chin. "Language Ideology in Taiwan: The KMT's Language Policy, the Tai-Yü Language Movement, and Ethnic Politics." Journal of Multilingual and Multicultural Development 18 (1997): 302-15. 

Huang, Chaoqin. Wo de hui yi (My memory). Taipei: Longwen chuban she, 1989. 

Huang, Chi-wen. "Qing mo nüxue yanjiu (the Study of the Education for Women in the Last 

Years of Ch’ing Dynasty." MA Thesis. Tamkang Univers ity, 2009. 

Huang, Dianquan Zheng chenggong shishi yanjiu (Studies of the History of Koxinga) .Taipei: Commercial Press, 1996. 

Huang, Maoqing. Ninety-Year History of Thài-Pêng-Kéng Maxwell Memorial Church. Tainan: Thài-pêng-kéng Maxwell Memorial Church, 1988. 

Huang, Ren ed. New Taiwan Cinema . Taipei: Commercial Press, 2013. 

Huang, Shuanfan. "Language, Identity, and Conflict: A Taiwanese Study." International Journal of the Sociology of Language 143 (2000): 139-49. 

——— . Language, Society and Ethnicity . Taipei: Crane, 1995. 

——— ."Cong shehui xue kan Taiwan yuyan xue de bentuhua (Localization of Taiwan 278 

Linguistics —a Perspective of Sociology)." Taiwan Historical Materials Studies 1 (1990): 7-22. 

Huang, Wenda. "Dangdai (1896-2008) taiyu xiaoshuo kap neidi de Taiwan yishi yanjiu (Research on Taiwanese Fiction During 1986-2008 and the Taiwanese Consciousness Inside." MA Thesis. National Chung Cheng University, 2010. 

Huang, Xiuzheng, Zhang Shengyan, and Wu Wenxing. Taiwan Shi (History of Taiwan). Taipei: Wunan Tushu, 2002. 

Huntington, S.P. The Clash of Civilizations and the Remaking of World Order . New York: Simon & Schuster, 2007. 

Hsu, C.H. and Cheng, L. M. ed. A Centennial History of the Presbyterian Church of Formosa, 1865-1965 . Tainan: Presbyterian Church of Formosa centenary publication committee, 2000. 

Hsu, J.  “A Soci olinguistic Survey of Language Attitudes in the Taipei Area.”  In A. Bramkamp, 

Y. -C. Fu, A. Sprenger & Venne ed . Chinese -Western Encounter: Studies in Linguistics 

and Literature , 385 -409.  Taiwan: Chinese Materials Center Publications, 1987. 

Hsu, Wen-hsiung. "From Aboriginal Island to Chinese Frontier: The Development of Taiwan before 1683." In China’s Island Frontier: Studies in the Historical Geography of Taiwan ,edited by Ronald G. Knapp. Honolulu: University Press of Hawaii, 1980. 

Hsu, Hs ueh -chi ed.  The Diary of Lin Hsien -t'ang  vol. 6 . Taipei: Institute of Taiwan History, 

2000. 

——— ."Language Problems in Early Period of Taiwan Restoration." Thought and Words 29 

(1991):155-84. 

Iu ⁿ, Un-gian. "Taiwanese Symbols in Competition: POJ versus TLPA as a Case Study." In 

Proceedings of the 2002 Conference on the Teaching and Research of Taiwanese Romanization , edited by Proceedings of the 2002 Conference on the Teaching and Research of Taiwanese Romanization. Taitong: National Taitung Teachers College, 2002. 

Iwasaki, Keitaro . Dictionary of Taiwanese Language . Taihoku: Taiwan Goten Hakkojo, 1922. 

Jiang, Canteng and Chen Zhengmao. Xin Taiwan shi (New History of Taiwan). Taipei: Dongda tushu gongsi, 2008. 

Jiang, Kanghu. Tai you shui ji (Notes of Travel in Taiwan). Shanghai: Zhonghua Shuju, 1935. 

Johanesen, R.L.  “Virtue Ethics, Character, and Political Communication” in  Ethical Dimensions 

of Political Communication , R.E Denton, Jr.  ed. 69 -91. New York: Praeger, 1991. 279 

Johns, A. The Nature of the Book: Print and Knowledge in the Making . Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2000. 

Johnston, James. China and Formosa . New York: Fleming H. Revell Company, 1898. 

Joseph, J.E. Eloquence and Power: The Rise of Language Standards and Standard Languages .New York: B. Blackwell, 1987. 

Katz, P., and M. Rubinstein. Religion and the Formation of Taiwanese Identities . New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2003. 

Katzner, K.  The Languages of the World . Routledge:  Taylor & Francis Group, 2002. 

Kloter, Henning. Written Taiwanese . Harrassowitz Verlag, Gottingen: Hubert & Co, 2005. 

——— . "The History of Peh-Oe-Ji." In 2002 International Conference of Taiwan's Peh-Oe-Ji Teaching and Studies : Taidung: National Taitung University, 2002. 

——— . "Language Policy in the KMT and DPP Eras." China Perspectives 56 (2004): 1-11. 

Knapp, R.G., and Association of American Geographers. China's Island Frontier: Studies in The historical Geography of Taiwan . Hawaii: University Press of Hawaii: Research Corp. of the University of Hawaii, 1980. 

Kroskrity, P.V.  Regimes of Language: Ideologies, Polities, and Identities . Santa Fe : School of 

American Research Press, 2000. 

Kubo, Yoshizō. Educational Policies in Emperor System Nation-State . Tōkyō : Keisō shobō, 

1979. 

Ku, Wei-ying and Koen De Ridder ed.  Authentic Chinese Christianity: Preludes to Its 

Development, Nineteenth and Twentieth Centuries.  Leuven: Leuven University Press: 

Ferdinand Verbiest Foundation, K.U. Leuven, 2001. 

Kuo, Sai-Hua. "Multilingualism, Multiculturalism, and Multiple Identities Analyzing Linguistic Hybridization in Taiwanese Newspaper Headlines." Journal of Asian Pacific Communication 19, no. 2 (2009): 239-58. 

Kwock-Ping Tse, John. "Language and a Rising New Identity in Taiwan." International Journal of the Sociology of Language 143 (2000): 151-64. 

Kyōikukai, Shinano ed.  Isawa Shūji senshū  (Anthology of Isawa Shūji).  Nagano: Shinano 

Kyōikukai, 1958 .

Landsborough, Marjorie. Stories from Formosa & More Stories from Formosa . Tainan: Church News Publisher, reprint, 2004. 280 

Lee, Chia-jaan. Shiqi shiba shiji quzhou wenxian dangan zhi fuermosha wenxue kao (A Scholarly Research of European Literatures & Archives Concerning Formosan Literature in the 17th-18th Centuries). Taipei: Tangshan chuban she, 2007. 

Lee, eng -hui.  Taiwan d e zhuzhang  (Taiwan’s  New Advocacy).  Taipei: Yuanliu, 1999. 

Lee, Weicheng. "Taiwan Jidu Changlao jiaohui yu zhanhou Taiwan minzu zhiyi (A Tale of Two World)." MA Thesis. National Tsing Hua University, 2009. 

Leith, J.H. An Introduction to the Reformed Tradition: A Way of Being the Christian Community .Atlanta: John Knox Press, 1981. 

Levinson, D. and Melvin Ember, eds. Encyclopedia of Cultural Anthropology . New York: Henry Hott, 1996. 

Lewis, M.E. Writing and Authority in Early China . State University of New York Press, 1999. 

Lai Hsin-yi’s “The Taiwanese Teaching Materials during the Japanese Governance --A Case study 

on “Taiwanese Textbook.”  Master Thesis . National Taiwan Normal University , 2011. 

Li, Paul Jen-Kuei. "Interpretations on Newly-Discovered Fifteen Pieces of Sinkan Manuscripts." 

Studies of Taiwan History 9, no. 2 (2002): 1-68. 

——— . Studies of Sinkang Manuscripts . Taipei: Institute of Linguistics, Academia Sinica, 2010. 

Li, Yu-Lan. "Cai Peihuo yu Taiwan baihua zi yundong (Tsai Pei-Huo and Vernacular Taiwanese Characters Movement)." Modern China 155 (2003): 23-47. 

——— .“Lin Xiantang and Women Education.” Research in Taiwan Studies 13 (2012): 93-126. 

Li,  Qinan  and Weiren Hong. “ A Language has no  Name?”  Journal of Taiwan Literary  Studies 15 

(2007): 36-41. 

Li, Qinan. Mother Language Education — Policy and Planning . Tainan: Kailang, 2006. 

Li, Xian. History of One-hundred-year National Language Movement.  Taipei: Mandarin Daily 

News, 2014 .

Liao, Jenn-wang. "'The Meaning of the Emperor' on Protestant Missionaries' Publishing and Understanding of the Sacred Edict in 19th Century China." Chinese Studies 26, no. 3 (2008): 225-62. 

Lin, Bowei. Taiwan Wenhua xiehui cangsang (The Hardship of Taiwan Cultural Association). Taipei: Taiyuan wenhua jijinhui, 1993. 281 

Lin, Chritine Louise. The Presbyterian Church in Taiwan and the Advocacy of Local Autonomy 

Sino-Platonic Papers. ed. by Victor H. Mair. Vol. 92. PA: Univ. of Pennsylvania, 1999. 

Lin, Hentai.  “Criteria of  Composing Taiwanese Literature.”  Taiwan Chunqiu  2:2 (1988): 336 -38. 

Lin, M. Public Education in Formosa under the Japanese Administration: A Historical and Analytical Study of the Development and the Cultural Problems . New York: Columbia University, 1929. 

Lin, Jiaying. “Taiwan jidu changlao jiaohui zhuri xuexiao fanzhan zhi yanjiu (Study of the Development of Sunday School in Presbyterian Church in Taiwan.” Master Thesis. 

National Taiwan Normal University, 2006. 

Lin, Ruiming. Taiwanese Literature and its Spirits over Time —A Research of Lai He . Taipei: Yunchen wenhua, 1993. 

Lin, Qiyang.  Shuxie yu pintu  (Writing and Mapping: a Study of Phenomenon of the Literary 

Communication in Taiwan) . Taipei: Maitian, 2001. 

Lin, Qingxun. Taiwan minna yu gai lun (A Summary of Taiwan Min-Nan Language). Taipei: Xinli Chuban she, 2001. 

Lin, Shi-Hao. "Funiang zai bei Taiwan Zhanglao jiaohui xuanjiao huodong de dingyi yu yiyi (Initiatively Treat of the Orientation and Meaning of the Female Missionaries of the North Presbyterian Church’s Mission Movement)." Master Thesis. Tamkang University, 2006. 

Lin, Zhiping ed. Taiwan Jidujiao shi (History of Christianity in Taiwan--a Review of 

Historiography). Taipei: Yuzhouguang, 1998. 

Lin, Changhua, "The Founder of the Dutch Reform ed Church in Formosa‒Rev. Georgius 

Candidius." The Messenger (2008): 35-41. 

Lin, Yangmin. History of Taiyu Movements. Taipei: Qianwei chuban she, 1996 .

Lingle, W.L., and J.W. Kuykendall.  Presbyterians: Their History and Beliefs . Atlanta:  John 

Knox Press, 1978. 

Liu, Chih-Chun. “Rentong, shuxie, tashe: yi jiu ba ling diandai yilai Hanren yuanzhumin shuxie (Identity, Writing, and the Other: Han People’s Writing on Aborigines since 1980s)." 

Ph.D Dissertation. National Cheng Kung University, 2011. 

Liu, Ningyan. Second Edition of Gazetteer of Taiwan Prefecture, Vol. 6. Taipei: Academia Historica, 1994. 

Liu, Liangbi. Revised Gazetteer of Taiwan fu in Fujian Province, vol. 1. Taipei: Chengwen, 282 

years unknown. 

Liu, Shi-yung. "Sanitation, Hygiene, and Publics Health: Changing Thoughts of Public Health in Colonial Taiwan." Taiwan Historical Research 8, no. 1 (2001): 41-88. 

Lo, M.C.M. Doctors within Borders: Profession, Ethnicity, and Modernity in Colonial Taiwan .CA: University of California Press, 2002. 

Loudon, I. Western Medicine: An Illustrated History . Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2001. 

Lu, Guangcheng. Taiwan minnan yu gai yao (A Summary of the Southern Fujianese Dialect in Taiwan). Taipei: Nantian, 2003. 

Lu, Chi-ming "Ri yan xuexiao yu huangminhua yundong —yi Taiwan jidu changlao jiaohui de zhuri xue jiaoyu wei zhongxin, 1937-1945 (Sabbath School and Japanization--Centering on the Sabbath School by the Presbyterian Church in Taiwan, 1937-1945)." Research in Taiwan Studies 11 (2011): 33-58. 

Lu, Zhenghui Scars in Colony —Issues in Taiwanese Literature . Taipei: Renjian, 2002. 

Lu, H.Y. The Politics of Locality: Making a Nation of Communities in Taiwan . Routledge: Taylor & Francis, 2002. 

Ide, Kiwata Taiwan Chisekishi . Taipei: Taiwan Daily Newspaper, 1937. 

——— . Administration in Taiwan . Taipei: Nantian, 1937. 

Ivanič , Roz.  Writing and Identity:  The Discoursal Construction of Identity in Academic Writing. 

Philadelphia: John Benjamins Publishing, 1998. 

Mackay, George Leslie Macdonald J. A., and ed. From Far Formosa. The Island, Its People and Missions . New York and Chicago: F.H. Revell Co., 1896. 

Macleod, Duncan. The Island Beautiful. Toronto: Presbyterian Church in Canada, 1923. 

MacLeod, R.M., and M.J. Lewis. Disease, Medicine, and Empire: Perspectives on Western Medicine and the Experience of European Expansion . London and New York: Routledge, 1988. 

Mair, Victor H. “What Is a Chinese ‘Dialect/topolect’? Reflection on Some Key Sino— English 

Linguistic Terms. ” Sino-Platonic Papers 29 (1991): 1-31. 

Maitland Club, Glasgow, A. Macdonald, J. Dennistoun, and J. Robertson. Miscellany of the Maitland Club: Consisting of Original Papers and Other Documents Illustrative of the History and Literature of Scotland . Edinburgh: Maitland, 1840. 283 

Makeham, J., and A. Hsiau. Cultural, Ethnic, and Political Nationalism in Contemporary Taiwan Bentuhua . New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2005. 

Manson, Patrick. Report of the Amoy Chinese Hospital for the Year 1873. Amoy: A. A. Marcal, 1874. 

Mamie,  Misawa . “Screen” under the  Colonization —A Research of Taiwan  Sōtokufu’s Film 

Policies, 1895-1942 . Taipei: Qianwei chuban she, 2002. 

Masini, F. The Formation of Modern Chinese Lexicon and Its Evolution toward a National Language: The Period from 1840 to 1898 . Hong Kong: Journal of Chinese Linguistics, 1993. 

Mateo, J.E.B., and Chiang Ching-kuo Foundation for International Scholarly Exchange. Spanish Experience in Taiwan 1626-1642: The Baroque Ending of a Renaissance Endeavour .Hong Kong: Hong Kong University Press, 2009. 

Matsuda, Kyoko. "Ino Kanori's ‘History of Taiwan: Colonial Ethnology, the Civilizing Mission 

and Struggles for Survival in East Asia." History and Anthropology 14 (2003): 179-96. 

Miao-Chuan, Chang. Kaiqi Xinyan-Taiwan fucheng jiaohui bao yu zhanglao jiaohui de jidutu jiaoyu (Open Your Eyes and Minds-Taiwan Church News and the Christian Education of Presbyterian Church). Tainan: Presbyterian Church in Taiwan Press, 2005. 

Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Japan ed. Minutes of Titles 63, 31, and 3 in Taiwan . Tokyo: 

Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Japan, 1966. 

Mittler, B. A Newspaper for China? Power, Identity, and Change in Shanghai's News Media, 1872-1912 . Cambridge: Harvard University Asia Center, 2004. 

Moody, Campbell N. The Heathen Heart: An Account of the Reception of the Gospel among the Chinese of Formosa . Taipei: Ch'eng Wen Publishing Co., reprint, 1973. 

Mo, Jean Ruo -ping. "Taiwan on the Brink of Reversing Language Shift: Its Current 

Development and Contributory Factors." Ph. D Dissertati on . Purdue University,  2000. 

Murakami, Naojiro. "Sinkan Manuscripts." In Memoirs of the Faculty of Literature and Politics, Taihoku Imperial University : Formosa: Taihoku Imperial University, 1933. 

Nakajjima, Toshirô. Yi jiu san ling niandai Taiwan xaingtu wenxue lunzhan ziliao hui bian (A Collection of the Materials of Taiwan Nativist Literature of the 1930s in Taiwan). Taipei: Chunhui, 2003. 

Neder, C., and I.S. Schilling. Transformation! Innovation? Perspectives on Taiwan Culture .Wiesbaden, Germany: Harrassowitz, 2003. 284 

Ong, W.J. Orality and Literacy: The Technologizing of the Word . New York: Routledge, 1982. 

Pan, Wei-Hsin. "Rizhi shiqi taiyu baihua shuxie yu wenzi pingyin xitong guanxi zhi yanjiu--yi yuyuan, Taiwan fucheng jiaohui bao wei zhongxin (Relationship between Taiwanese Vernacular Writing and Writing Symbols During Japanese-Occupied Period ─Centering 

on Specialized Taiwanese Education Magazine and Taiwan Prefectural City Church News)." MA Thesis. National Taipei University of Education, 2010. 

Paulston, Christina Bratt.  “Linguistic Consequences of Ethnicity and Nationalism.” in B. 

Spolsky ed.  Language and Education in Multi -Lingual Settings , 121.  San Diego, CA: 

College -Hill Press, 1986. 

Pennycook, Alastair. Critical Applied Linguistics: a Critical Introduction . New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc., 2001. 

Phillips, Stephen. "Between Assimilation and Independence." In Taiwan: A New History , edited by Murray Rubinstein, 275-319. Armonk: N. Y. Sharpe, 1999. 

Pickering, W.A. Pioneering in Formosa: Recollections of Adventures among Mandarins, Wreckers, & Head-Hunting Savages . London: Hurst & Blackett, 1898. 

——— . Pioneering in Formosa: Recollections of Adventures among Mandarins, Wreckers, & Head-Hunting Savages . London: Hurst & Blackett, 1898. 

Powell, B.B.  Writing: Theory and History of the Technology of Civilization . Hoboken:  John 

Wiley & Sons, 2012. 

Power, John Carroll. The Rise and Progress of Sunday Schools: A Biography of Robert Raikes and William Fox. New York: Sheldon & Company, 1863. 

Pratt, M.L. Imperial Eyes: Travel Writing and Transculturation . New York: Routledge, 1992. 

Ray, Punya Sloka.  “Language Standardization.”  Readings in the Sociology of Language . Paris: 

The Hague, 1972. 

Renn, Jürgen, Robert Schlögl, Bernard F. Schutz ed. The Globalization of Knowledge in History 

Germany: Epubli, 2012. 

Ritchie, Hugh. "Notes of a Journey in East Formosa." The Chinese Recorder and Missionary Journal 6 (1875): 206-11. 

Robinson, Andrew. "The Origins of Writing." In Communication in History: Technology, Culture, Society , edited by David Crowley and Paul Heyer. Boston: Allyn and Bacon, 2003. 

Rogaski, R. Hygienic Modernity: Meanings of Health and Disease in Treaty-Port China . CA: 285 

University of California Press, 2004. 

Rogers, H.  Writing Systems: A Linguistic Approach . Hoboken:  Wiley, 2004. 

Rubinstein, M.A. The Other Taiwan: 1945 to the Present . Armonk: Sharpe, 1994. 

Sandel, Todd L., Wen-Yu Chao, and Chung-Hui Liang. "Language Shift and Language Accommodation across Family Generations in Taiwan." Journal of Multilingual and Multicultural Development 27, no. 2: 126-47. 

Schieffelin, B.B., K.A. Woolard, and P.V. Kroskrity. Language Ideologies: Practice and Theory: Practice and Theory . Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1998. 

School, Chang Jung Girl's Senior High. The One-Hundred-Year History of Private Chang Jung Girl's Senior High School, 1887-1987 . Tainan: Private Chang Jung Girl's Senior High School, 1987. 

Scotland, Church of, and J.K. Cameron. The First Book of Discipline [of the Church of Scotland] . Edinburgh: St. Andrew Press, 1972. 

Shepherd, John. "From Barbarians to Sinners: Collective Conversion among Plains Aborigines in Qing Taiwan, 1859-1895." In Christianity in China: From the Eighteenth Century to the Present , edited by Daniel H. Bays, 120-79. Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1996. 

Shepherd, J.R. Statecraft and Political Economy on the Taiwan Frontier, 1600-1800 . Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1993. 

Shūji, Izawa. Selected Collection of Izawa Shūji's Works . Nagano: Shinano Kyōikukai, 1958. 

Shih, Shouqian ed. Ilha Formosa —the Emergence of Taiwan on the World Scene in the 17th 

Century . Taipei: National Palace Museum, 2003. 

Shih, F.L., S. Thompson, and  P.F. Tremlett.  Re -Writing Culture in Taiwan . Routledge:  Taylor & 

Francis Group, 2008. 

Shiquan, Han . Liushi hui yi (Memory at the Sixties). Tainan: Gaochang yinshu ju, 1956. 

Simon, Scott. "Learning and Narratives of Identity: Aboriginal Entrepreneurs in Taiwan." 

Taiwan Journal of Anthropology 2 (2004): 93-117. 

Smith, Anthony D. "Chosen Peoples: Why Ethnic Groups Survive." Ethnic and Racial Studies 

15, no. 3 (1992): 436-56. 

Smith, Roger "Identities, Interests, and the Future of Political Science." Perspectives on Politics 

2, no. 2 (2002): 301-12. 286 

Sommer, M.H. Sex, Law, and Society in Late Imperial China . Stanford: Stanford University Press, 2000. 

Sperber, Dan.  Explaining Culture: A Naturalistic Approach . London: Blackwell Publishers, 

1996. 

Steere, J.B. Formosa and Its Inhabitants Taipei: Academia Sinica, 2002. 

Street, B.V. Cross-Cultural Approaches to Literacy . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993. 

Su, C. The Printing Presses of the London Missionary Society among the Chinese . London: University of London, 1996. 

Su, Hsi-Yao. "Reconstructing Taiwanese and Taiwan Guoyu on the Taiwan-Based Internet." 

Journal of Asian Pacific Communication 19, no. 2 (2009): 313-35. 

Su, Ya-Chen. "Ideological Representations of Taiwan’s History: An Analysis of Taiwan’s 

Elementary Social Studies Textbooks, 1978-1995." Curriculum Inquiry 37, no. 3 (2007): 205-36. 

Sung, C. S. ed. Self-Determination: The Case for Taiwan . Tainan: Taiwan Church Press, 1988. 

Swinhoe, Robert. "Narrative of a Visit to the Island of Formosa." Journal of the North China Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society 1 (1858): 145-64. 

Tabouret-Keller, A. Vernacular Literacy: A Re-Evaluation . Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1997. 

Tamanoi, Mariko Asano. "Knowledge, Power, and Racial Classification: The "Japanese" in Manchuria." The Journal of Asian Studies 59, no. 2 (2000): 248-76. 

Tan, Shzr Ee. "Returning to and from "Innocence: Taiwan Aboriginal Recordings." Journal of American Folklore 121, no. 480 (2008): 222-35. 

Teng, E. Taiwan's Imagined Geography: Chinese Colonial Travel Writing and Pictures, 1683-1895 . Cambridge: Harvard University Asia Center, 2004. 

Tierney, R.T. Tropics of Savagery: The Culture of Japanese Empire in Comparative Frame . CA: University of California Press, 2010. 

Tiuⁿ, Hak -khiam and Chang Yamin. “Sociolinguistic Analysis of Taiwanese Written Language.” 

Presented in 2003 International Conference of Taiwanese Written Languages. 

Unpublished paper, 2003. 

Tiuⁿ , Hak-Khiam. "Writing in Two Scripts. A Case Study of Digraphia in Taiwanese." Written Language and Literacy 1 (1998): 225-47. 287 

——— . “Pe̍h -oē -jī and the Modernization of Taiwanese Written Language, ” In  An Anthology of 

International Conference on Taiwanese Romanization in 2004, 1-17. Tainan: National 

Taiwan Literary Museum, 2004. 

Phoāⁿ, Tō -êng. Chú-Ji̍T O̍H Tiong -Sim Ê Būn -Tê (Essential Issues of Sabbath Schools in Taiwan). Tainan: Sinlau Bookstore, 1926. 

Tsai, Shih-Shan Henry. Maritime Taiwan: Historical Encounters with the East and West .Armonk: M.E. Sharpe, 2008. 

Tsai, Chung -Yin. “ Language Attitudes toward Mandarin and Taiwanese in Taipei and 

Kaohsiung Metropolitan Areas, ” Master  Thesis.  Na tional Taiwan Normal University ,

201 4. 

Tsurumi,Yūsuke  Autobiography of Gotō Shinpei, Vol. 1.  Tokyo:  Taiheiyō Kyōkai Shuppanbu, 

1943 .

——— . Autobiography of Gotō Shinpei, Vol. 2 . Tokyo: Sanshusha, 1937. 

Tsao, Feng-Fu. "The Language Planning Situation in Taiwan." Journal of Multilingual and Multicultural Development 20 (1999): 328-75. 

Liu, Ts'ui-jung. "Han Migration and the Settlement of Taiwan: The Onset of Environmental Change." In Sediments of Time: Environment and Society in Chinese History , edited by Mark Elvin and Liu Ts'ui-jung, 165-99. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998. 

Turner, Victor. "Dramatic Ritual/Ritual Drama: Performative and Reflexive Anthropology." The Kenyon Review 1 (1979): 80-93. 

Van den Burg, Marinus. "Ethnolinguistic Identities and Accommodation across Generations in Taiwan." Journal of Asian Pacific Communication 3 (1992): 145-64. 

Wang, Fu-chang.  “From Chinese Original Domicile to Taiwanese Ethnicity: An Analysis of 

Census Category Transformation in Taiwan.”  Taiwan Sociology  9 (20 05): 59 -117. 

Wang, Molin. Chinese Film and Drama. Taipei: Lianya chuban, 1981. 

Wang, Tianbin. Taiwan bao ye shi (History of Taiwanese Newspaper). Taipei: Ya tai chuban she, 2003. 

Wang, Tay-Sheng. Legal Reform in Taiwan under Japanese Colonial Rule, 1895-1945 . Seattle and London: University of Washington Press, 2000. 

Wang, Tianchang ed. History of One-hundred-year National Language Movement. Taipei: Mandarin Daily News, 2012. 288 

Wang, Zixi. Zhonghua minguo xianfa ga yao (An Outline of the Constitution of the Republic of China). Taipei: Xiuwei, 2013. 

Watson, William Henry. The History of the Sunday School Union . Cambridge: The Union, 1853. 

Weinstein-Shr, G. "Literacy and Social Process: A Community in Transition." In Cross-Cultural Approaches to Literacy , edited by B. Street, 272-93. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993. 

Whiteman, M. Farr ed.  Writing: The Nature, Development, and Teaching of Written 

Communication , vol. 1.  Hillsdale, N.J: L. Erlbaum Associates, 1981. 

Williams, Peter. "Healing and Evangelism: The Place of Medicine in Late Victorian Protestant Missionary Thinking." In The Church and Healing: Papers Read at the Twentieth Summer Meeting and the Twenty-First Winter Meeting of the Ecclesiastical History Society , edited by W.J. Sheils. UK: Ecclesiastical History Society, 1982. 

Wiseman, R.L., and J. Koester. Intercultural Communication Competence . CA: Sage, 1993. 

Wolf, E.R., and T.H. Eriksen. Europe and the People without History . CA: University of California Press, 2010. 

Wolf, M. Women and the Family in Rural Taiwan . Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1972. 

Woolard, Kathrym A. and Schieffelin, Nambi B. "Language Ideology." Annual Review of Anthropology (1994): 55-82. 

Wu, Hsin-Yang. " Taiwan Jindai xing guojia yuyan faling zhi xingcheng yu yanbia n (The Formation and Development of Language Policy in Contemporary Taiwan)." Master Thesis. National Taiwan University, 2004. 

Wu, Wenxing. Rizhi shiqi Taiwan de shihui lingdao jieceng (The Social Leading Elites during the Japanese Colonial Rule) . Taipei: Wunan, 2008. 

Xie, Ximing. Gengxin Yu Chengzhang-Zhuri Xue Jiushi Zhounian Shi (Renovation and Growing--the Ninety-Year History of Sabbath Schools). Taipei: The Presbyterian Church in Taiwan, 1979. 

Xin, Guangwei. Taiwan chuban shi (History of Publishing in Taiwan). Shijiazhuang: Hebei jiaoyu chuban she, 2001. 

Xu, Changan ed. Minnan Baihuazi (Minnan Vernacular Script). Beijing: Yuwen chuban she, 1992. 

Xu, Zhuoyun. Wo zhe yu ta zhe (We and others). Hong Kong: Chinese University of Hong Kong 289 

Press, 2009. 

Xu, Xiqing “Regulations of Taiwan Public General High School,” in Taiwan Jiaoyu yange zhi, 

348-51. Nantou: Academia Historica, 2010. 

Xue, Huayuan ed. Freedom of Speech . Taipei County: Academia  Historica, 2004. 

Yang, Yongzhi. Mingqing shiqi Taiwan chuban shi (Publishing History during the Ming-Qing Periods of Tainan) . Taipei: Taiwan xue sheng shu ju, 2007. 

Yang, Yunyan ed. Taiyu wen yundong fangtan ji shiliao hui bian (Historiography and Interviews of Written Taiwanese Dialect Movement). Nantou: Taiwan Historica, 2008. 

Yang, Zhaojia . Yan Zhaojia hui yi lu (Memoir of Yan Zhaojia). Taipei: Sanmin Bookstore, 2004. 

Yang, Bichuan  Dictionary of Taiwan History . Taipei: Qianwei,  1997 .

Ye, Longyan. Chunhua fanlu (Authentic Taiwanese Language Movies). Taipei: Boyang, 1999. 

Ye, Shitao. Discussion of Nativist Literature. Taipei: Yuanliu, 1978. 

Yip, J., R. Chow, H. Harootunian, and M. Miyoshi. Envisioning Taiwan: Fiction, Cinema, and the Nation in the Cultural Imaginary . Durham: Duke University Press, 2004. 

You, Shengguan. The Rise and Development of Taiwan Nativist Literary Discourse . Taipei: Qunxue, 2009. 

Young, Russell L. "Language Maintenance and Language Shift in Taiwan." Journal of Multilingual and Multicultural Development 9, no. 4 (1988):323-38. 

Young, Theron Kue-Hing. "A Conflict of Professions: The Medical Missionary in China, 1835-1890." Bulletin of the History of Medicine 47 (1973): 250-72. 

Yu, Chien-ming. The Women Education in Taiwan under Japanese Rule (1895-1945) . Taipei: Institute of History, National Normal Univerdity, 1988. 

Zang, Dingheng. Taiyu shumian hua yanjiu (A Study of Written Taiwanese) . Taipei: Qianwei chuban she, 1996. 

Zeng, Xubai. Zhongguo xinwen shi (History of Chinese News).  Taipei: Sanmin Bookstore, 1984. 

Zhang, Maogui ed.  Nation and Identity —Perspectives of Some “Waishengren.”  Taipei: Qunxue 

chuban she, 2010. 

Zhang Ziwen ed. Taiwan Lishi Renwu Xiaozhuan (Bibliography of Historical Characters in Taiwan). Taipei: National Library, 2003. 290 

Zhang , Yaoren. "The Constitution of ‘Taiwan’ : Taking the Strategy of Propaganda and Discourse of the Propaganda Committee of Taiwan Provincial Administrative Executive Office." Journal of Chinese Communication Society (2007): 1-28. 

Zhang, Yingjin. “Cinematic Reinvention of the National in Taiwan, 1896 -1978.” In Chinese National Cinema , 113-47. New York: Routledge, 2004. 

Zhou, Lianhua. Memoir of Zhou Lianhua . Taipei: Lianhe wenxue, 1994. 

Zheng, Yangen. "Lun jianada jiaohui lianhe yundong ji qi dui Taiwan jiaohui de yingxiang (a Discussion of the United Movement in Canada and Its Impact on Christian Church in Taiwan)." In Dinggen bentu de Taiwan jidujiao (The Rooted Christianity in Taiwan), 30-33. Tainan: Renguang, 2005. 

——— . "Sugelan qimeng yundong dui zaoqi Taiwan jidujiao de yingxiang (the Influence of Scottish Enlightenment on Early Christianity in Taiwan)." Taiwan wen xian 63, no. 4 (2012): 137-64. 

Zheng, Yangjun. "Zheng Chenggongsiyin kao (An Investigation of the Cause of Death of Koxinga)." Kaohsiung: Gaoyuan University Press 12 (2004): 211-88. 

Zhu, Zhenyi. “ Dr.  George  Gushue -Taylo .,” Taiwan Medical Journal  51 (2008):358 -62. 

Zhu,  Xining.  “Returning Where? How to Return?”  Cactus  2 (1977):151 -71.
