Title: 

URL Source: https://www.lsu.edu/vetmed/publications/la_veterinaire_2020.pdf

Published Time: Thu, 01 Sep 2022 16:47:35 GMT

Markdown Content:
The Magazine of the Louisiana State University School of Veterinary Medicine 

Winter 2021 

# La Vet erinaire Photo by Fusion Medical Animation on Unsplash 

# Confronting COVID-19 We Teach 

# Contents 1 Letter from Our Dean 

2 Student Affairs has New Leadership 

6 LSU Confers 88 DVM Degrees in May 2020 

10 Justin Addison Memorial Scholarship Assists First-year Students 

We Heal 

16 Meet Miracle Dog, Beau, and His Biggest Fan, Vicki 

18 Committed to Caring for Wildlife: Dr. Gregory and Renee Rich Establish the Wildlife Hospital of Louisiana Animal Support Fund 

We Discover 

24 River Road Testing Lab: Answering the Call 

We Protect 

36 Remembering Hurricane Katrina 

Our Faculty 

38 New Faculty 

39 Faculty Promotions 

Our Alumni 

40 Distinguished Alumnus Award: 

Dr. John Kelley (LSU SVM 1984) 

42 DVM Alumna Profile: 

Dr. Jenny Sones (LSU SVM 2008) 

44 Ph.D. Alumnus Profile: 

Dr. Srinivas Sriramula (LSU SVM 2010) 

12 Dr. Mary Boudreaux-Class of 1979 Scholarship eases student financial burdens 

14 Class of 2024 by the Numbers 

20 Meet Jeanie, Famous Three-legged Therapy Dog and Cancer Survivor 

22 Sunstrom Cardiology Hardship Support Fund Makes Treatment Accessible 

27 LSU Researchers to Test Campus Wastewater for COVID-19 Cases 

28 LSU SVM Collaborating to Produce and Test Coronavirus Vaccines and Possible Treatments 

30 For the Love of Horses and More: Tynewald Foundation Supports Equine-focused Regenerative Medicine Research 

32 Cardi’s Warriors: A Dog Used for Fighting Goes from Broken to Healed and a Forever Home on Martha’s Vineyard La Veterinaire is the LSU SVM’s award-winning magazine and is published annually by the LSU School of Veterinary Medicine. 

Contributors and Editors 

Ginger Guttner, APR, Communications Manager Celia Ordoyne, Outreach Coordinator Thomas Rooney, Director of Strategic Communications Sandra Sarr, Communications Coordinator The Louisiana State University School of Veterinary Medicine is a diverse and inclusive community that will become a top tier leader in Veterinary Medicine, Biomedicine, Agriculture, and animal health and welfare through innovative teaching, cutting edge research, and exceptional service. We teach. We heal. We discover. We protect. Follow us on Facebook, Twitter, Instagram, YouTube and LinkedIn. La Veterinaire Winter 2021 1

# Letter from Our Dean 

I do not need to tell you that 2020 has been a year unlike any other. We have all learned to adjust to a new reality while working together to keep our friends, family members, and neighbors safe during the coronavirus pandemic. Your LSU School of Veterinary Medicine is uniquely qualified to maintain its mission to teach, heal, discover, and protect, even during these difficult times, as we have exceptional infectious disease knowledge and medical expertise. Our researchers worked with local human hospitals to provide COVID-19 testing last spring, and we continue to do COVID testing at the Louisiana Animal Disease Diagnostic Laboratory for the undergraduate campus. Other researchers are continuing to work on a vaccine and are working with LSU Engineering to monitor wastewater to track the virus on campus. Like other colleges on campus, we moved classes online to protect our faculty and students. I am proud of our faculty and the Office of Veterinary Education and Student Affairs for their hard work adjusting to a new teaching format. Our students have also shown patience and resilience as they had to accommodate a new learning environment on short notice. Our Veterinary Teaching Hospital had to make two major adjustments: 1) continuing to treat patients under COVID-19 restrictions and 2) moving the hospital lobby in order to accommodate new construction of the Stephenson Pet Clinic. Our faculty, staff, and students greet clients in the parking lot, essentially offering “curbside pickup” for our patients. It means more work for us, but our clients have been receptive and appreciative of our efforts. Our hospital has remained open 24/7 during this pandemic, though we did switch to emergency-only cases for a short time. We will continue to provide the best, most compassionate care for our patients while working diligently to keep our clients, patients, faculty, staff, and students safe. As an infectious disease expert, I am most proud of how our team has followed protocols to keep us all safe. To date, while we have had a few cases pop up, none of those originated in our building or caused an outbreak amongst our population. We must all continue to wear masks, wash our hands, and limit contact. With the promising information coming out about vaccines, it appears that things will get much better in 2021; however, this disease will continue to be a part of our lives, much like the flu. We must all continue to work together for the common good. Our Development Team has worked tirelessly to raise the private funds necessary to support our mission. In 2020, we started construction on the Stephenson Pet Clinic after many years of planning. This will provide much needed treatment and teaching space, and enable us to expand services within our hospital. They have also raised funds in support of shelter medicine and student scholarships. This summer, I will step down as dean. It has been my great honor to serve in this role. When I first came to LSU in 2014, I set goals to increase diversity (both in awareness and numbers of underrepresented groups), move the research program forward, and increase the caseload and faculty numbers in the hospital. Award-winning strides have been made in both the research and diversity areas, and the hospital caseload has gone from 23,000 to over 29,000. All of these efforts are because of the hard work of the faculty, staff, and students. I will remain on faculty as a professor in Pathobiological Sciences. LSU is currently recruiting a new dean for the LSU SVM. I am proud of what we have accomplished together, and I look forward to seeing what else we can achieve. Best, Joel D. Baines, V.M.D., Ph.D. Dean and Kenneth F. Burns Chair in Veterinary Medicine 2 La Veterinaire Winter 2021 We Teach 

Associate Dean for Student and Academic Affairs 

Bonnie Boudreaux, DVM, DACVIM , professor of veterinary medical oncology, has been named associate dean of student and academic affairs at the LSU SVM effective July 1, 2020. Dr. Boudreaux is responsible for overseeing curriculum, orientation, class scheduling, conflict resolution, counseling, and wellness. “I am excited about the opportunity to serve LSU and the School of Veterinary Medicine in this new position. I look forward to building upon the existing, solid foundation of excellence in education, enhancing student learning through an innovative and dynamic curriculum, and supporting an outstanding student experience,” Dr. Boudreaux said. In addition, Dr. Boudreaux will manage the LSU SVM Ross University and St. George’s University exchange programs, which make it possible for veterinary students in their final year at these other schools to attend the LSU SVM for their final clinical year of study. She’ll also be responsible for student clubs, student clinical rotation scheduling, career advising, and a computer-based testing application that enables test creation, secure test administration, exam scoring, and assessment. “Dr. Boudreaux has championed problem-based learning and several other aspects of the existing curriculum for many years. As a clinician, she understands the challenges and opportunities involved in training practice-level veterinarians in a competency-based format. I look forward to working with her as she collaborates with the faculty to re-invent the veterinary curriculum,” said Joel Baines, VMD, Ph.D., dean. Dr. Boudreaux is also a professor of veterinary medical oncology in the Veterinary Clinical Sciences department. She received her B.S. in 2002 and DVM in 2005 from Mississippi State University, and her M.S. in 2009 from Auburn University. She is a Diplomate of the American College of Veterinary Internal Medicine. She joined the faculty at the LSU SVM in 2009. 

Associate Dean for Accreditation and Academic Affairs 

Joseph Taboada, DVM, DACVIM , joined the faculty of the LSU SVM in 1988. In 2001, Dr. Taboada was named associate dean for student and academic affairs, and in 2018, he was named associate dean of accreditation and academic affairs. Dr. Taboada oversaw our accreditation visit by the AVMA Council on Education and prepared the materials necessary to make that visit a success. Dr. Taboada is also a professor of small animal internal medicine in VCS. He received his B.S. from Georgetown University in 1980 and his DVM from Virginia/Maryland Regional College of Veterinary Medicine in 1984. He is a Diplomate of the American College of Veterinary Internal Medicine. Dr. Taboada plans to retire in 2021. 

# Student Affairs has new leadership 

Boudreaux 

Taboada La Veterinaire Winter 2021 3We Teach 

Assistant Dean of Admissions and Recruitment 

Jenifer Godfrey, J.D. , was promoted to assistant dean of admissions and recruitment effective August 1, 2020. Godfrey joined the LSU SVM on April 24, 2017, as director of admissions and enrollment. In addition to overseeing admissions, she teaches a course on ethics and jurisprudence. As assistant dean, Godfrey is responsible for leading all aspects of recruitment, selection, and enrollment of DVM candidates. This involves the execution of short- and long-term admissions strategies and maintaining a positive team culture for her direct reports and the doctors involved in the SVM admissions process. Godfrey received her B.A. in Political Science in 2006 and her J.D. in 2009, both from West Virginia University. She is a member of both the American Bar Association and the Maryland State Bar Association, as well as the Association for the Study of Higher Education and the Louisiana Association of College and University Student Personnel Administrators. Immediately prior to joining the LSU SVM, Godfrey worked at the Louisiana Community & Technical College System Office in an educational policy role focused on Title IV and Title IX of the Higher Education Act. However, she spent the vast majority of her higher education career working in law school admissions in roles ranging from associate director to assistant dean. “My top priority is always to ensure that navigating the admissions process is a positive experience for applicants,” said Godfrey. “Because of this, my goals center around ensuring that our process is operated professionally, which to me means it is data-informed, rooted in policy and best practices, and marked by friendly and empathic customer service.” “I look forward to working with Ms. Godfrey to facilitate the admissions process for the LSU School of Veterinary Medicine,” said Dean Baines. “She comes with unsurpassed energy and state-of-the-art ideas on improving the admissions process for applicants.” 

Counselor and Associate Professor 

Stephanie Johnson, M.S.W., LCSW , associate professor and counselor, joined the SVM in 1992. She provides personal counseling services for LSU SVM students and provides consultation and resources to faculty and staff. She also offers grief counseling services to clients of the VTH as well as surrounding areas of Louisiana. Stephanie also teaches communication skills, the human animal bond, ethics and grief and loss throughout the curriculum. Johnson received her B.A. in 1990 from Louisiana Tech and her M.S.W. in 1992 from LSU. She is licensed by the Louisiana State Board of Social Work Examiners. She is also a founding member and part of the leadership of the Academic Veterinary Wellbeing Professionals (AVWP) within AAVMC. “Most of my social work colleagues have had many different positions by now and wonder why/how I have stayed so long at the LSU SVM,” said Johnson. “I really do enjoy my position and my work here. Being here as long as I have, I’ve been able to witness and have had the privilege of being a part of the many changes that have occurred. Every day is different. From counseling with students to bringing Sulley [her long-haired Dachshund] to pet therapy visits, to working with VTH clients, I consider myself lucky to have “landed” here so many years ago.” 

Godfrey 

Johnson 4 La Veterinaire Winter 2021 We Teach 

Director of Education 

Heidi Banse, DVM, Ph.D., DACVIM , assistant professor of equine medicine and director of education, joined the faculty in 2017. In September 2020, she was appointed director of education. She spends 50 percent of her time in that role and 50 percent on her clinical duties, teaching, and equine research. As director of education, Dr. Banse is responsible for leading the curricular revision efforts and implementation of competency-based veterinary education (CBVE), assisting with development of the “We Teach” component of the strategic plan, promoting faculty engagement in professional education development, leading and promoting educational research; assisting with development and coordination of Education Day, and leading the Teaching and Learning Academy. “With respect to plans for the curriculum, we are looking to use the competency-based veterinary education framework to guide us in our curricular redesign,” said Dr. Banse. The LSU SVM is currently working on revising the curriculum with the changes set to take place in Fall 2022. Dr. Banse received her BS in 2004 and her DVM in 2007, both from Washington State University. She received her Ph.D. in 2013 from Oklahoma State University. She is a Diplomate of the American College of Veterinary Internal Medicine (Large Animal). 

Registrar 

Stephanie Willis is the registrar for the LSU SVM. Her primary role is to maintain secure student records and manage course/student enrollment. She is also the primary administrator for E-Value, the system the LSU SVM uses for student, faculty, and course evaluations, the clinical grading process, and for keeping track of students on externships. She also provides academic counseling for students in their clinical year and clears graduates for degree conferral. “One change coming this year is that we are moving away from the homegrown clinical scheduling program our office has used for almost 20 years and switching over to E-Value,” said Willis. “This will be a major change for our area and will help to automate and modernize our clinical scheduling process. It will centralize all of our clinical processes into one system.” 

Student Affairs Coordinator 

Brandon Ash joined the LSU SVM staff in July 2018. He serves as an academic advisor responsible for scheduling Years I - IV, including the clinical rotations, and coordinating 5010 courses. Brandon also coordinates the LSU SVM externship program, so he maintains the externship database, sends externship information to the students, manages externship travel grants, and coordinates students coming to the LSU SVM for externships. He helped create the peer tutoring program, but hands that over after December 2020. Starting in January 2021, he will start focusing on career preparation; he already assists with a career fair and shares job opportunities with students. “The work that I am most proud of during my time at the LSU SVM is growing academic support,” said Ash. “I saw a need to support students who struggled in anatomy and was able to address that need by offering veterinary students teaching assistant (VSTA) review sessions. My next project in the coming months is to create a forum to better prepare students for interviews and contract negotiations.” 

Ash 

Willis 

Banse La Veterinaire Winter 2021 5We Teach 

Admissions and Recruitment Coordinator 

Karena Hanert is responsible for student advising, recruitment fairs and assisting DVM candidates throughout the application process. She also works closely with both our incoming DVM students as well as our non-matriculating students to make sure they have a smooth transition over to the LSU SVM. She will also assist with coordinating Student Affairs events such as the White Coat Ceremony, the Blue Coat Ceremony, and Commencement. She joined the staff in September 2018. “Applying to vet school can be an intimidating process, so I love being able to help applicants reach their goal,” said Hanert. “Each year I’ve been really excited to meet the new class I’ve been a part of creating and advising along the way.” 

Student Affairs Coordinator 

Stephanie James joined the staff in Fall 2018. Her primary responsibilities include serving as the ExamSoft Administrator for computer-based assessment, which includes exam administering, training faculty and staff on system usage, and coordinating and scheduling make-up assessments, and coordinating student accommodations. She also helps coordinate SVM major events such as the Blue Coat Ceremony, the White Coat Ceremony, and Commencement. Stephanie also serves as the primary liaison for the LSU SVM clubs and coordinates the faculty evaluation process. “With Dr. Bonnie Boudreaux recently named as the Dean of Academic and Student Affairs, the team is streamlining job roles and responsibilities,” said James. “I will now focus more on coordinating and monitoring academic activities. I will also now manage the first alert system for students who need additional resources to improve their study skills or understanding of specific content area.” “I am most proud of my work to fully implement our computer-based assessment software throughout the school,” continued James. “Because of this work early on, we were able to seamlessly transition to virtual and remote testing during the COVID-19 quarantine, and we are still utilizing this technology in a away that ensures exam integrity and are able to quickly review student outcomes and provide feedback.” 

Diversity, Faculty, and Student Affairs Coordinator 

Donnie Watkins joined the LSU SVM staff in February 2018 as the admissions coordinator. Later that year, he transitioned to a new position as the coordinator for Diversity, Student, and Faculty Affairs. His primary duties are to implement and facilitate the diversity, equity, and inclusion (DEI) programs and initiatives outlined in the LSU SVM strategic plan. “My goal is to engage as many people as possible to show them what inclusion could look like,” said Watkins. “I think we all want to be accepted and to feel good about ourselves. My role in that is to equip people with the right tools, language, and best practices for interacting and engaging in dialogue with others around them. I am most proud of our success in increasing and retaining the number of underrepresented students. The students are the heart of the school. When the students change and grow, the whole school changes and grows with them. There are still minor setbacks, but I believe the best in people and that they also want to build a place for everyone to feel welcome.” In the future, Watkins plans to take a more active role in the student curriculum training for DEI. Most of the students have attended training through the National Coalition Building Institute (NCBI). “Now, I want to see how the students connect what we learned in NCBI with how they envision their time at the SVM and how they can develop into strong leaders,” said Watkins. “We are developing skilled, culturally competent leaders who will leave the SVM and make a positive difference in the world.” 

Hanert 

James 

Watkins 6 La Veterinaire Winter 2021 We Teach 

The LSU SVM conferred 88 Doctor of Veterinary Medicine degrees in an online ceremony at its 44th annual Veterinary Medicine Commencement on May 11. The ceremony can be viewed online on the LSU SVM’s YouTube channel. Mark Mitchell, DVM, Ph.D. (LSU SVM 2001), DECZM, professor and [then] director of the Veterinary Teaching Hospital at the LSU SVM, gave the commencement address. Joel Baines, VMD, Ph.D., dean, presided over the ceremony, and Mary Leach Werner, representing the LSU Board of Supervisors, conferred the degrees. Rachel Pool (Class of 2020) opened the ceremony with the invocation. Program speakers also included Thomas C. Galligan, Jr., J.D., LLM, interim president of the LSU System; and Amanda Perkins, DVM, president of the Louisiana Veterinary Medical Association. Jordan Peters, DVM (LSU SVM 2020) gave the benediction. Students who received Doctor of Veterinary Medicine degrees, senior awards, and internships and residencies are listed below alphabetically by state/country, hometown, and then last name: 

Arkansas 

Kristen Michelle Whitson , of Benton, Ark., received the Companion Animal Medicine and Surgery Certificate of Merit Award and has accepted a position with a small animal practice in Benton, Ark.; 

Holly Robyn Myshelle Dodson , of Fort Smith, Ark., received the American Association of Feline Practitioners Proficiency Award and the Oncology Certificate of Merit, and she has accepted a position with a feline practice in New Orleans, La.; 

Sarah Lynn Cooper , of Imboden, Ark., received the Robert B. Lank, DVM, Memorial Scholarship and is interested in food animal medicine; 

Taylor Christine Howell , of Little Rock, Ark., received the Companion Animal Medicine and Surgery Certificate of Merit Award and will begin a rotating internship in small animal medicine and surgery at Coral Springs Animal Hospital (Florida); 

Zachary Allen Reyna , of Little Rock, Ark., received the Merck Veterinary Manual Award, the Companion Animal Medicine, the Surgery Certificate of Merit Award, and the Arkansas Veterinary Medical Foundation Jack R. Redman and Elizabeth G. Redman Outstanding Student Award, and he will begin a small animal rotating internship at MedVet New Orleans; 

Mikayla Dawn Shedd , of Manila, Ark., has accepted a position with a mixed animal practice in Gosnell, Ark.; 

Whitney Paige McGregor , of Monticello, Ark., has accepted a position with a mixed animal practice in Poplar, Mo. 

Sara Rebeca Guillen , of Siloam Springs, Ark., and is interested in small animal medicine. 

Florida 

Rachel Elizabeth Pool , of Orlando, Fla., received the Nutramax Companion Animal Award and has accepted a position with a small animal practice in Las Vegas, N.V. 

Illinois 

Alyssa Rose Hannon , of Palatine, Ill., has accepted a position with a small animal practice in St. Louis, Mo. 

Kendell Teal Cowell , of Waterloo, Ill., has accepted a position with a small animal practice in Belton, Mo. 

Louisiana 

Madilyn Nicole Garcia , of Abita Springs, La., received the Merck Veterinary Manual Award and the American College of Veterinary Internal Medicine Certificate of Clinical Excellence (Small Animal), and she has accepted a position with a small animal practice in Lake City, Utah; 

Elizabeth Dawn Burton , of Albany, La., has accepted a position with a small animal practice in Las Vegas, N.V.; 

Chloe Elizabeth Accardo , of Baton Rouge, La., has accepted a position with a small animal practice in Erwinville, La.; 

Elise Danielle Barras , of Baton Rouge, La., will begin a laboratory animal residency at the LSU School of Veterinary Medicine; 

Sydney Elise Copeland , of Baton Rouge, La., received the Oncology Certificate of Merit and has accepted a position with a small animal practice in Monroe, La.; 

Robert “Tré” Vincent Gildersleeve, III , of Baton Rouge, La., received a plaque honoring his service as one of two veterinary student caretakers for Mike VII, LSU’s live tiger mascot, the Planche 

# LSU confers 88 DVM degrees in May 2020 La Veterinaire Winter 2021 7We Teach 

Mike the Tiger Caregiver Scholarship, and the Jill and Roger Jenkins Scholarships for Mike the Tiger’s Caregivers, and he has accepted a position with a small animal practice in Veneta, Ore.; 

Mackenzie Allain Gremillion , of Baton Rouge, La., received the Merck Veterinary Manual Award and the Companion Animal Medicine and Surgery Certificate of Merit Award, and she has accepted a position with a small animal practice in Baton Rouge, La.; 

Lauren Elizabeth Hubicz , of Baton Rouge, La., received the Boehringer-Ingelheim Community Practice Award, Merck Veterinary Manual Award, and the Oncology Certificate of Merit, and she has accepted a position with a small animal practice in Nashville, Tenn.; 

Julia Winters McDuffie , of Baton Rouge, La., received the Merck Veterinary Manual Award and the American Academy of Veterinary Dermatology Award, and she has accepted a position with a small animal practice in Austin, Texas; 

Allison Claire Poche , of Baton Rouge, La., received the Merck Veterinary Manual Award and has accepted a position with a small animal practice in LaPlace, La.; 

Nadia Lorraine Richmond , of Baton Rouge, La., received the Merck Veterinary Manual Award, the Companion Animal Medicine and Surgery Certificate of Merit Award, the American College of Veterinary Pathology Awards of Excellence (one for diagnostic pathology and another for clinical pathology), the Clinical Pathology Award of Excellence, the Dechra Award for Excellence in Dermatology, the Oncology Certificate of Merit, and the Louisiana Veterinary Medical Association Outstanding Student Award, and she will begin a small animal rotating internship at MedVet New Orleans; 

Jaclyn Jennifer St. Croix , of Baton Rouge, La., has accepted a position with a small animal practice in Valley Stream, N.Y.; 

Kristen Reneé Wade , of Blanchard, La., has accepted a position with a small animal practice in Shreveport, La.; 

Olivia Rachel Lex , of Bossier City, La., has accepted a position with a small animal practice in Sandy Springs, Ga.; 

Mallory Alicia Garcia , of Burnside, La., has accepted a position with a small animal practice in Texas City, Texas; 

Aubrey Anne Traina , of Chalmette, La., has accepted a position with an exotic/avian practice in Satellite Beach, Fla.; 

Elizabeth Lynne Dwyer , of Covington, La., received the Merck Veterinary Manual Award the IDEXX Proficiency in Companion Animal Medicine Award, and she will begin a rotating internship at the University of Pennsylvania School of Veterinary Medicine; 

Morgan Ashley Byrd Richard , of Elton, La., is interested in food animal medicine; 

Ellen Ruth Leichty , of Ethel, La., has accepted a position with a small animal practice in Gap, Pa.; 

Tanner Dwayne Hernandez , of Flora, La., received the Merck Veterinary Manual Award, the Companion Animal Medicine and Surgery Certificate of Merit Award, and the Oncology Certificate of Merit, and he will begin a shelter medicine internship at the LSU SVM; 

Bianca Thao Le , of Gretna, La., has accepted a position with a small animal practice in Pearland, Texas; 

Alicia Nicole Bailey , of Haughton, La., will begin an internship in Fort Belvoir, Va.; 

Lauren Alyce Feliciano , of Haughton, La., received the Companion Animal Medicine and Surgery Certificate of Merit Award, and she is interested in small animal medicine; 

Cheyene Elyse Blanchard , of Houma, La., received the Edward Lloyd Mitchell Memorial Award and the Companion Animal Medicine and Surgery Certificate of Merit Award, and she has accepted a position with a small animal practice in Poulsbo, Wash.; 

Macy Jean Tullos , of Jena, La., has accepted a position with a mixed animal practice in Trout, La.; 

Megan Elise Wilson , of Kenner, La., received the Merck Veterinary Manual Award and has accepted a position with the USDA in Bay Springs, Miss.; 

Caroline Elizabeth Martin , of Lake Charles, La., is interested in small animal medicine; 

Katelyn Boudreaux Frischhertz , Lawtell, La., has accepted a position with a small animal practice in Baton Rouge, La.; 

Rebekah Leigh Joyner , of Mandeville, La., received the Merck Veterinary Manual Award and the Oncology Certificate of Merit, and she will begin a rotating internship in small animal medicine at the Cummings School of Veterinary Medicine at Tufts University; 

Katherine Anne Lamont , of Mandeville, La., received the Merck Veterinary Manual Award and will begin a residency in laboratory animal medicine at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill; 

Laurel Ann Upton , of Mandeville, La., received the Merck Veterinary Manual Award and the Robert Rosenthall Senior Student Award for Proficiency in Clinical Oncology, and she will begin a small animal rotating internship at MedVet New Orleans; 

From left, Dr. Mark Mitchell and Dean Joel Baines conduct the virtual commencement. 8 La Veterinaire Winter 2021 We Teach 

Laura Claiborne Germany , of Marrero, La., has accepted a position with a small animal practice in St. Louis, Mo.; 

Jeanne Michel Beck , of Metairie, La., received the Audrey Engelhart Scholarship in Shelter Medicine and the American College of Veterinary Surgeons Proficiency Award, and she has accepted a position with a small animal practice in Mandeville, La.; 

Kaitlin May Chauvin , of Metairie, La., has accepted a position with a mixed animal practice in Rayne, La.; 

Tristan Michele Doyle , of Metairie, La., has accepted a position with a small animal practice in Groves, Texas; 

Jack Michael Ferro , of Metairie, La., has accepted a position with a small animal practice in Metairie, La.; 

Maegan Elizabeth Pela , of Metairie, La., received the Merck Veterinary Manual Award and has accepted a position with a small animal practice in New Orleans, La.; 

Claire Elizabeth Zotkiewicz , of Metairie, La., received the Merck Veterinary Manual Award and is interested in small animal medicine in New Orleans, La.; 

Josephine Lynn Cormier , of Monroe, La., is interested in equine medicine; 

Sarah Ainsworth Hendry , of Napoleonville, La., received the Merck Veterinary Manual Award, the Louisiana Cattlemen’s Association Clinical Proficiency Award, and the American College of Veterinary Internal Medicine Certificate of Clinical Excellence (Large Animal), and she is interested in mixed animal medicine; 

Sarah Genest Bonin , of New Iberia, La., has accepted a position with a small animal practice in Hammond, La.; 

Abigail Elizabeth DeRouen , of New Iberia, La., will begin a small animal rotating medicine and surgery internship at BluePearl Veterinary Partners San Antonio; 

Elizabeth Aimeè Gravette , of New Orleans, La., received the Merck Veterinary Manual Award and the Companion Animal Medicine and Surgery Certificate of Merit Award and is interested in small animal medicine in Dallas, Texas; 

Tiffany Marie Mavromatis , of New Orleans, La., received the Companion Animal Medicine and Surgery Certificate of Merit Award, the Arizona Equine Medical & Surgical Centre Award, and the Theriogenology Clinical Proficiency Award, and she is interested in equine medicine; 

Alison Marie Mikes , of New Orleans, La., will begin an internship in small animal medicine and surgery at Animal Medical Hospital; 

Christian Joseph Pellegrin , of New Orleans, La., has accepted a position with a small animal practice in New Orleans, La.; 

Blakeley Michele Ramirez , of New Orleans, La., received the Merck Veterinary Manual Award and the Companion Animal Medicine and Surgery Certificate of Merit Award, and she has accepted a position with a small animal practice in Gretna, La.; 

Kayla Michelle South , of Patterson, La., has accepted a position with a small animal practice in St. Louis, Mo.; 

Sidney Guillory Batson , of Rosedale, La., has accepted a position with a small animal practice in Morgan City, La.; 

Mary Morgan Phillips , of Ruston, La., received the Companion Animal Medicine and Surgery Certificate of Merit Award and has accepted a position with a small animal practice in Little Rock, Ark.; 

Christopher Louis Barlow , of Shreveport, La., has accepted a position with a small animal practice in Shreveport, La.; 

Erin Renee Smith , of Shreveport, La., received the Merck Veterinary Manual Award, the Texas Equine Veterinary Medical Association Scholarship, the Heartland Veterinary Partners Business Award, the American College of Veterinary Internal Medicine Certificate of Clinical Excellence (Small Animal), and the Bayer Excellence in Communication Award, and she has accepted a position with a small animal practice in Shreveport, La.; 

Alexandra Brehon Williams , of Shreveport, La., received the Merck Veterinary Manual Award and has accepted a position with a small animal practice in Harvey, La.; 

Alexis Lane Caillouet , of Slidell, La., received the LSU Animal Sterilization Assistance and Cat Haven Award, and she has accepted a position with a small animal practice in Ponchatoula, La.; 

Paige Elaine Hymel , of Slidell, La., received the Hershey Comeaux Memorial Award of Excellence and the Dr. Rickey Broussard Award for Excellence in Clinical Practice, and she has accepted a position with a small animal practice in Mandeville, La.; 

Dallas Melena Wynn Rice , of Slidell, La., has accepted a position with a small animal practice in Slidell, La.; 

Brittany Burnham McClendon , of St. Francisville, La., has accepted a position with a small animal practice in Denham Springs, La. 

From left, Dr. Olalekan Ogundele, Dr. Kirk Ryan and Dean Joel Baines participate in the virtual commencement. La Veterinaire Winter 2021 9We Teach 

Rayna L. Campos , of Terrytown, La., is interested in equine medicine. 

Michigan 

Nicholas Lawrence Fleissner, of Dearborn, Mich., received a plaque honoring his service as one of two veterinary student caretakers for Mike VII, LSU’s live tiger mascot, the Companion Animal Medicine and Surgery Certificate of Merit Award, the Planche Mike the Tiger Caregiver Scholarship, the Jill and Roger Jenkins Scholarships for Mike the Tiger’s Caregivers, and the Gordon Pirie Zoological Medicine Award, and he will begin a rotating internship program in small animal specialty and emergency at BluePearl Veterinary Partners Michigan. 

Vanessa Nicole Wolf , of Troy, Mich., has accepted a position with a small animal practice in Las Vegas, N.V. 

Nevada 

Mara Emilie Wanderer , of Las Vegas, N.V., received the Merck Veterinary Manual Award, the Companion Animal Medicine and Surgery Certificate of Merit Award, and the American College of Veterinary Radiology Award, and she will begin an internship in small animal clinical sciences at the Texas A&M University College of Veterinary Medicine. 

New York 

Michael Hitt , of Altamont, N.Y., received the Merck Veterinary Manual Award and the American College of Veterinary Surgeons Proficiency Award, and he will begin a small animal internship at the Cornell University College of Veterinary Medicine; 

Tess Marie Alecksynas , of Argyle, N.Y., received the Boehringer Ingelheim Outstanding Food Animal Student Award and the Oncology Certificate of Merit, and she has accepted a position with a small animal practice in Gansevoort, N.Y.; 

Jessica L. Seifert , of Freeport, N.Y., received the Merck Veterinary Manual Award, the Companion Animal Medicine and Surgery Certificate of Merit Award, the Oncology Certificate of Merit, and the LSU Animal Sterilization Assistance and Cat Haven Award, and she will begin a small animal medicine and surgery internship at the LSU School of Veterinary Medicine. 

North Carolina 

Darla Jo Ingerson , of South Mills, N.C., received the Companion Animal Medicine and Surgery Certificate of Merit Award and has accepted a position with a small animal position in Chesapeake, Va. 

Pennsylvania 

Lyndsy Helen Gazda , of Freedom, Pa., received the Merck Veterinary Manual Award and the Companion Animal Medicine and Surgery Certificate of Merit Award, and she will begin a small animal medicine and surgery internship at the Virginia-Maryland College of Veterinary Medicine. 

Jordan W. Peters , of Pittsburgh, Penn., received the Kaytee Outstanding Senior Award in Avian and Exotic Animal Medicine and will begin a special dentistry internship at Salem Valley Veterinary Clinic (Connecticut). 

Puerto Rico 

Karina Michelle Butler-Pérez , of Ponce, Puerto Rico, will begin an internship in Tampa, Fla. 

Nicolás Agustin García-Abarca , of San Juan, Puerto Rico, received the American College of Veterinary Ophthalmologists Award and will begin a rotating internship in small animal medicine, surgery, and emergency at VCA Veterinary Care Animal Hospital and Referral Center. 

South Carolina 

Sarah Elizabeth Mercer , of Mt. Pleasant, S.C., received the Merck Veterinary Manual Award and the Companion Animal Medicine and Surgery Certificate of Merit Award, and she has accepted a position with a small animal practice in Eugene, Ore. 

Tennessee 

Kathryn Paige Spivey , of Murfreesboro, Tenn., received the LSU Animal Sterilization Assistance and Cat Haven Award and will begin a small animal medicine and surgery rotating internship at BluePearl Franklin (Tennessee). 

Texas 

Kortney Alexa Kuhl , of Argyle, Texas, received the Merck Veterinary Manual Award and has accepted a position with a small animal practice in Arlington, Texas; 

Colleen Nicole Phelan , of Flower Mound, Texas, received the LSU Animal Sterilization Assistance and Cat Haven Award and has accepted a position with a small animal practice in Flower Mound, Texas; 

Mark Feuquay Turbeville , of Fort Worth, Texas, has accepted a position with a zoological medicine/wildlife practice in Mason, Texas; 

Lacy Anderson Ballis , of Houston, Texas, has accepted a position with a small animal practice in Austin, Texas; 

Yi Gu , of Plano, Texas, has accepted a position with a small animal practice in New Castle, Del. 

Crystal Lynn Kroes , of Wichita Falls, Texas, is interested in small animal medicine. 10 La Veterinaire Winter 2021 We Teach 

The Justin Addison Memorial First-Year Recruiting Scholarship has been established with gifts totaling $60,000 over five years from Ellen and Jay Addison, DVM (LSU SVM 1983), and The Benjamin S. Brupbacher Jr. and Lois Weil Brupbacher Family Foundation, named for Ellen’s parents. The endowed scholarship of $2,000 per year will be used to recruit first-year veterinary students. It will be awarded each year to one student with financial need. Jay and Ellen created the scholarship in memory of their son, Justin, who was killed by a car while riding his bicycle on the Tammany Trace between Abita Springs and Covington on January 22, 2013. Justin, whose mother is Martina Mahly, DVM (LSU SVM 1988), was 16 when he died. He was their only child. “I am incredibly grateful for this award. It will allow us to recruit deserving students into our program, and through the selection of these students, we will have the privilege of helping to honor the memory of Justin. It is opportunities like these that give deep meaning to my work,” said Jenifer Godfrey, J.D., assistant dean of admissions and recruitment. Justin founded the Holy Rollers, a campus cycling organization, at St. Paul’s School in Covington. He was an honors student known for his passion for cycling. He shared a love of photography and hiking with his mother, and they took many trips to national parks throughout the western United States. “Losing a child is the most difficult thing a parent could experience. You never get over it. It means a lot to us to honor Justin’s memory by doing good things for others,” Jay said. Jay is an equine veterinarian whose career focuses on racehorses and helping clients know the health status of the thoroughbreds 

# Justin Addison Memorial Scholarship Assists First-Year Students 

Sandra Sarr, Communications Coordinator 

Jay, Ellen and Justin Addison La Veterinaire Winter 2021 11 We Teach 

they are interested in purchasing throughout Louisiana, Kentucky, Florida, New York, and Wyoming. The Addisons send their own horses to the LSU SVM when they need specialized treatment. “Jay loves mentoring students from the vet school. He has an intern at the racetrack every year. Not having Justin—it’s hard. We’re still interested in helping young people. It means a lot to us to keep Justin’s name out there so others know about him,” said Ellen, owner and CFO of Cembell Industries, Inc., serving the petrochemical industry. Jay, a founding member and CEO of the Land Trust for Louisiana, has created a conservation easement on land he owns on their Pine Knoll Farm, alongside the scenic Tangipahoa River. He has named it Justin’s Woods. “One of the reasons we purchased the farm was for Justin to have a natural place to explore with his friends. He loved the land and being outdoors. We have dedicated the area to him. It was Justin’s special place,” Jay said. “He grew up out there,” Ellen said. “We wouldn’t talk much out in nature; we’d just be together. He was a good soul. He was kind, empathetic, and had the heart of a warrior. He had his dreams. This scholarship honors Justin and helps others realize their dreams of becoming a veterinarian,” said Martina, who is a veterinarian at Northshore Animal Hospital in Mandeville. Justin had considered going into veterinary medicine but changed his direction when he saw the long hours both of his parents worked as veterinarians. He became interested in mechanical engineering, often accompanying Ellen to work at Cembell, being around a fabrication shop from the time he was four years old. Justin accompanied her to a convention in San Francisco, exposing him further to the industry. “He was interested in robotics and building things. He would think of new ideas for building bicycles. He was funny, smart, he was our life. Everyone who ever met him loved him,” Ellen said. 

Martina Mahly and Justin Addison 12 La Veterinaire Winter 2021 We Teach 

The Dr. Mary Boudreaux-Class of 1979 Scholarship, a new endowed graduate scholarship, eases financial hardships for veterinary students and commemorates Dr. Boudreaux’s LSU SVM 1979 graduating class. The scholarship holds personal meaning for Mary, and the impulse to create it has roots in her own experience as an aspiring veterinarian. “I can very much relate to the stress of barely having enough money to survive while attending school,” said Mary. She received her Ph.D. from a joint program sponsored by Cornell University and the Wadsworth Center for Laboratories and Research in Albany and practiced veterinary medicine in California. She joined the faculty at the Auburn University College of Veterinary Medicine in 1986 and retired from Auburn in 2016. Recognizing the increasing debt that veterinary students incur, Mary established the scholarship with the hope that it will help students offset financial hardships while obtaining their veterinary education. Recipients of the scholarship must be full-time second-, third-, or fourth-year veterinary students with financial need. “Even with loans, current students face the dilemma of owing thousands of dollars the day they graduate and spend years just paying off their debt. If I can do even a small part in alleviating that stress it would mean the world to me,” said Mary, who worked 

## Dr. Mary Boudreaux-Class of 1979 Scholarship Eases Student Financial Burdens Dr. Mary Boudreaux with two of her research subjects, Ribeye and Smoke 

Sandra Sarr, Communications Coordinator La Veterinaire Winter 2021 13 We Teach 

nights and ate a lot of peanut butter sandwiches throughout most of her time as a veterinary student. Mary’s capacity to overcome obstacles and pursue her dreams led her to become world-renowned for her hemostasis research, while teaching veterinary students and graduate students for nearly 30 years. “I realized that in order to keep up with the ever-evolving science, I either needed to find a molecular biologist to do the molecular work or learn to do it myself. I chose the latter, and it was a great decision,” she said. She formed and directed a hemostasis laboratory that evaluated animal platelets at the functional, biochemical, and molecular level, which she believes is the only one of its kind in the country and possibly the world. On any given day she received emails and phone calls from people all over the world looking for assistance diagnosing inherited bleeding disorders in multiple species. Although she is no longer actively conducting research, her expertise remains highly sought after. “If it were not for the LSU SVM giving me the opportunity to be part of the Class of 1979, none of the wonderful years of achievement and success that followed would have happened. I will forever be grateful for their faith in me,” Mary said. Mary grew up with five siblings in Japan and Germany, where her father was stationed with the Air Force during the 1960s. In Germany, she explored the outdoors, catching lizards and snakes and other critters. At night she read books in bed and taught herself a lot, especially about history and animals. “I loved animals but was not allowed to own a dog because we were overseas. Dad made the mistake of telling my mother that if I could catch it, I could keep it. My bedroom always had some wild critter in it,” Mary said. When the family returned to the states they landed at Sheppard AFB in Texas. When Mary’s father retired, they moved to his home in St. Mary Parish in south Louisiana, where she found herself viewed as an outsider and where academics were lacking compared to what she had known overseas. She decided to go to college, major in zoology, and go on to veterinary school. “I knew how competitive it was to get into vet school and that the required pre-veterinary science courses were going to be challenging, especially without having any kind of curriculum-based science education coming out of high school,” said Mary. “Teaching myself became my salvation when I started pre-veterinary classes at the University of South Louisiana in 1973,” said Mary, who refused to believe an academic counselor when he said she would never be admitted because she was female and too young. “I was accepted and attended the LSU SVM the next fall,” she said. When she entered the SVM she was 19 years old and did not have a car. She rode a bike to class. Her first year was overwhelming and classes were difficult. “The stress was incredible. I worked at part-time jobs for three of the four years I was in vet school in order to have enough money to survive. During my junior year, I attended class in a trailer next to the vet school construction site from 8 to 5. From class, I immediately went to work doing inventory at whatever store the inventory service had scheduled that evening and worked until after midnight. On my way home I stopped at the grocery store to buy something to eat. My diet consisted of peanut butter sandwiches, milk, and macaroni and cheese. I was back in class the next morning at 8,” Mary said. She could not continue working while on clinics during her senior year. She was finally old enough to qualify for student loans and borrowed money during her junior and senior years. With the current veterinary medicine building construction competed in 1978, her class was the first senior class to occupy the new LSU SVM building when it opened. After graduation she moved to California and practiced in the San Francisco Bay area for six months. That is where she met her husband and best friend, Calvin Cutshaw. Shortly after they married, Mary joined a practice near Fullerton, California, and stayed for 18 months. “I was not happy in practice. There were still so many scientific questions out there that needed to be answered. I loved figuring things out and wanted to help animals by doing research that would ultimately help them and people, as well,” she said. Mary was accepted into a clinical pathology residency program at Cornell University in 1981 with the intent to obtain a Ph.D. The head clinical pathologist asked Mary to teach the hemostasis courses. “I knew nothing about hemostasis. She said neither did she, that’s why she wanted me to teach that part of the course. The more I read, the more fascinated I became with the subject. How could people not love this? I especially fell in love with platelets,” she said. Cornell offered her a three-year assistantship to pay for her Ph.D. She ended up at the Wadsworth Center for Laboratories and Research in Albany, and a scientist there was a platelet expert from whom she learned much. Eventually, she interviewed for a faculty position at Auburn University and off she and Cal went to Alabama. “It was a phenomenal experience, a wonderful career, and it could not have happened if I had not been accepted into the LSU SVM in 1975. I hope my stories will inspire others to follow in my footsteps and that my gift will help make it possible,” said Mary, 2006 Distinguished Alumna of the Year. 14 La Veterinaire Winter 2021 We Teach 

# Class of 2024 by the Numbers 

# 158 

APPLIED 

# 66 

ENROLLED 

LOUISIANA 

# 868 TOTAL APPLICATIONS 

# 115 

TOTAL ENROLLED 

# 99 FEMALE MALE 

# 86% 

# 16 14% 3.81 

REQUIRED COURSE GPA 

# 3.80 

LAST 45 CREDIT HOUR GPA 

# 304 

GRE AVERAGE 

# 82 WHITE 

# 14 HISPANIC 

# 6 BLACK 

# 6 TWO OR MORE 

# 4 ASIAN 

# 2 AMERICAN INDIAN/ ALASKA NATIVE 

# 1 UNKNOWN/ DECLINED TO ANSWER 

# 22 (20 to 36) 

AVERAGE AGE La Veterinaire Winter 2021 15 We Teach 

# 52 

APPLIED 

# 9

ENROLLED 

ARKANSAS 

# 658 APPLIED 40 

ENROLLED 

OTHER STATES 

# 3.95 

REQUIRED COURSE GPA 

# 3.91 

LAST 45 CREDIT HOUR GPA 

# 309 

GRE AVERAGE 

# 3.76 

REQUIRED COURSE GPA 

# 3.73 

LAST 45 CREDIT HOUR GPA 

# 309 

GRE AVERAGE 

# 306 GRE AVERAGE ENTIRE CLASS AVERAGES 

# 3.79 REQUIRED COURSE GPA 

# 3.77 LAST 45 CREDIT HOUR GPA 16 La Veterinaire Winter 2021 

Beau was 8 weeks old when Vicki Hubbard first brought him home. Her daughter had encouraged her to get the miniature schnauzer as a remedy for a broken heart, and Beau did not disappoint. He was her constant sidekick and even went to work with her. In December 2019, Beau, now 5, was hit by a car. Hubbard rushed him to her Baton Rouge veterinarian, who told her to spend time alone with him because he was dying. Yet, each time Hubbard entered the examination room, Beau perked up. The veterinarian noticed and advised her to take the dog to the LSU SVM Emergency and Critical Care Service to see if his life could be saved. “I brought him to LSU on a Friday. Three doctors came out right away to take care of him. They said, ‘We’ll do what we can for him,’” Hubbard said. Virginie Wurlod, Dr.med.vet., DACVECC, assistant professor and head of the LSU School of Veterinary Medicine’s Emergency and Critical Care Service, was on duty when Beau arrived. 

# Meet miracle dog, Beau, and his biggest fan, Vicki 

Sandra Sarr, Communications Coordinator 

Vicki Hubbard and Beau La Veterinaire Winter 2021 17 We Heal 

“He was unstable, in critical condition. He had traumatic brain injury, a collapsed lung, internal bleeding, and wounds,” Dr. Wurlod said. Her team went to work monitoring his heart rate, inserting a urinary catheter, supplementing his oxygen, and delivering fluid and antibiotics through an IV. They inserted a chest tube so that a machine could suction air from the chest cavity allowing Beau’s lungs to expand and function. The team devised a plan that Jamie Hui, DVM, internal medicine resident, presented to Beau’s owner. One option was to remove a lung. The other option: to inject Beau’s own blood into his chest. Hubbard chose the second option, the least invasive. “The whole afternoon was a blur. I was so afraid I’d get a call after I left saying he’d passed away in the night,” Hubbard said. When she returned to see Beau Saturday morning he wasn’t standing or walking. She crouched down and talked to him. “You have to be strong. You have to pull through this, I told him,” Hubbard said. When she returned Saturday afternoon, Beau stood up in his kennel. “Everyone was shocked,” she said. Beau’s clinical team advised her not to return on Sunday because Beau became overly excited when he saw her. The critical care team spends days and nights with injured or diseased animals to ensure they are doing well and to adjust treatments as necessary. “When I couldn’t be there, the veterinarian at LSU sent me a video, and it touched my heart. I cried and smiled at the same time watching it. Beau stumbled a few times, but I knew he was going to be okay,” Hubbard said. Without seeing her constant companion for 24 hours, Hubbard became determined to take Beau home. She returned on Monday with her husband and mother as reinforcement. However, Beau’s doctor said she wanted to keep him for one more day, and Vicki agreed. She brought him home Tuesday. “He wasn’t 100 percent neurologically normal when discharged after four days, but we knew he would be seen by his regular veterinarian for follow up,” Dr. Wurlod said. At home, Beau slept a lot for the first few weeks. “I knew his body was still healing,” she said. Now, Hubbard says Beau is 98 percent back to his normal self. He hops in her car every morning and accompanies her to work at Steve Hubbard Floor Coverings, the Baton Rouge business her family has owned for 35 years. Beau guards the house when Hubbard and her daughter, an LSU senior studying Human Resources, Leadership, and Development, attend LSU football games. “Beau is an example of how an animal with trauma can arrive in a horrible state, often recover well, and have a great quality of life,” Dr. Wurlod said. 

“Beau is an example of how an animal with trauma can arrive in a horrible state, often recover well, and have a great quality of life,” Dr. Wurlod said. 18 La Veterinaire Winter 2021 

Dr. Gregory and Reneé Rich have created a $350,000 legacy gift through their estate to establish the Dr. Gregory and Reneé Rich Wildlife Hospital of Louisiana Animal Support Fund at the LSU SVM. Greg owns the Avian & Exotic Animal Hospital of Louisiana, the only practice throughout the state exclusively devoted to exotics. The fund will be used to provide additional student training opportunities by providing funding to the LSU SVM’s Wildlife Hospital for medical supplies, medicine, food, rehabilitation, and other costs of providing care and treatment of injured wildlife. The Riches, inaugural Dean’s Circle members, live a life deeply rooted in their shared passion for Louisiana, as evidenced by their love of Louisiana wildlife, Mardi Gras traditions, Louisiana State University, and the LSU SVM. He earned Bachelor of Science degrees in environmental health in 1977 and in medical technology in 1980 from LSU. He earned his DVM from the LSU SVM in 1985. Renee Rich graduated from the University of Texas at Austin, with a degree in psychology and membership in Phi Beta Kappa honor society. She has served as a business manager for an endodontist for 30 years. Greg and Renee have been married for 35 years. “We enjoy our relationship with the LSU SVM. We refer cases and exchange information about medical and surgical techniques regularly. Sometimes I need that extra bit of knowledge and expertise,” Greg said. He sends his wildlife patients to the school’s Wildlife Hospital of Louisiana several times a year, particularly if they’re in need of an MRI, CT scan, chemotherapy, or radiation therapy. “Rehabilitating wildlife to release back into the wild is not a cheap effort. There are no owners to pay for the cost of their care. That’s why I want to provide financial assistance for the program,” Greg said. The program relies on private donations. The costs to provide care vary based on species and type of injury and can range from $50 for basic care to more than $3,000 for orthopedic surgery. Clinicians treat about 1,000 wildlife cases a year, and about 50 percent of those cases are released back into the wild. 

# Committed to Caring for Wildlife 

Dr. Gregory and Reneé Rich Establish the Wildlife Hospital of Louisiana Animal Support Fund 

Sandra Sarr, Communications Coordinator 

Renee and Greg Rich with Mike VI La Veterinaire Winter 2021 19 We Heal 

“We are very excited to receive this most gracious gift from Greg and Renee! They have both been huge supporters of Louisiana, the SVM, and wildlife for more than three decades. It has been a real joy for me personally to get to know them and work with Greg on so many cases. It has truly been like working with my brother to help ensure the success of both these cases and the future prospects of Louisiana wildlife,” said Mark Mitchell, DVM, MS, Ph.D. (LSU SVM 2001), DECZM. With board-certified specialists available in many areas of veterinary medicine, clinicians in our Wildlife Hospital are uniquely positioned to deliver stellar care for wild animals. Plus, students gain hands-on experience in the practice of veterinary medicine. “For the vet school to be involved with the care of wildlife is extremely important. We’re proud to have a wildlife program at the SVM that has a hospital, flight cages, and an outreach program to teach young students. If we can care for, heal, preserve, and sustain our wildlife, we are helping mother nature maintain a balance,” said Greg, who took a course in avian and exotics while studying at the SVM and parlayed his fascination into a fulfilling profession. “At lunchtime I’d go back to the school’s exotics ward. The first time I opened the door, there was a scarlet macaw. I was born and raised in Pensacola, Florida, and I’d never seen anything like that. It was thrilling to open that door and see creatures I’d never seen in my life. I wanted to learn about them,” Greg said. The first birds Greg ever touched were eagles and owls, which required him to learn how to care for animals who didn’t feel comfortable around humans. “I realized I was doing a service for them,” Greg said. Sheldon Bivin, DVM, Ph.D., DACLAM, professor emeritus of laboratory animal medicine, helped him secure an internship at Busch Gardens in Tampa, Fla., and his career trajectory was set. “At the SVM, I helped start the raptor program and build the first flight cages. Now, 35 years later, the program is going strong. It feels amazing to be a part of that process,” Greg said. He believes the desire to help animals is innate to humans and that every practicing veterinarian will be asked by a neighbor, child, relative, friend, or stranger who finds injured wildlife to help, underscoring the importance of the services the Wildlife Hospital provides. “People don’t like to see wildlife hurt, it doesn’t matter if it’s a mockingbird, pigeon, or a French Quarter rat. Humans enjoy wildlife—not necessarily in our living rooms, but technically, we’re in their living room,” he said. For Greg, the thrill of being a veterinarian is figuring out what is wrong with an animal. “Animals don’t have a voice to say, ‘Please help me.’ We’re going to help them regardless,” said Greg, who recalls, as a student, caring for an injured owl for six weeks until it was rehabilitated. “To see that owl fly off, I can’t describe the joy. It’s the best feeling in the world! Now, 35 years later, I get to pay it forward so that others can experience that zest. I am blessed to go to work every day and be happy about it. You can’t put a dollar amount on passionate work. I am passing that passion on,” Greg said. 

“To see that owl fly off, I can’t describe the joy. It’s the best feeling in the world! Now, 35 years later, I get to pay it forward so that others can experience that zest. I am blessed to go to work every day and be happy about it. You can’t put a dollar amount on passionate work. I am passing that passion on,” Greg said. 20 La Veterinaire Winter 2021 

“She helped me feel better when I faced losses. Her gentle, calm demeanor made her a natural to become a therapy dog,” Lydia said. 

Embracing a motto that four legs are overrated, Jeanie, a three-legged dog, has made a life of helping others overcome hardships. For her efforts, she was crowned the 2019 Hero Therapy Dog in a national competition that culminated with a red-carpet event at the Beverly Hilton Hotel and appearances on The Today Show, Hallmark Channel, and MTV, to name a few. “Jeanie’s got more friends than I do,” quipped Lydia Crochet, Jeanie’s owner. Jeanie is the star of children’s books, Jeanie the Three-Legged Dog: I Don’t Need Four Feet , and Jeanie the Three-Legged Therapy Dog , which won author Lydia the Louisiana Literacy Award and the Louisiana Reading Association Award, and her likeness appears on T-shirts and backpacks. There’s even a Jeanie Plush Toy available on her website. A portion of all product sales goes to support shelter animals in Jeanie’s hometown, Lake Charles, La. The subject of numerous articles, Jeanie has been featured twice in Woman’s World and other magazines and newspaper articles. On social media, she has amassed followers: 44,000 on Facebook, 15,300 on Instagram, and she is gaining momentum on TikTok. The 13-year-old Pomeranian-Yorkie-Poodle-Papillon mix didn’t start out famous in life. She was born with a deformed front foot, which was amputated after she was rescued. For nearly a decade, up until the pandemic began, she visited schools, libraries, hospitals, nursing and veterans’ homes, where she’s especially a comfort to other amputees as a member of the Dr. Dog’s Pet Therapy Team. More recently, Jeanie has served at the Children’s Advocacy Center in Lake Charles, bringing peace to children undergoing questioning by forensic experts in abuse cases. In June, Lydia felt a lump in Jeanie’s neck. Martha Briley, DVM, Jeanie’s primary care veterinarian, performed a fine-needle aspirate and cytology or analysis of cells under a microscope, which indicated the mass was cancerous. Dr. Briley referred Lydia and Jeanie to the LSU Veterinary Teaching Hospital, and Lydia brought Jeanie to Baton Rouge the very next morning. 

# Meet Jeanie, Famous Three-Legged Therapy Dog and Cancer Survivor 

“I thought it was swollen glands. When I heard our resilient little hero had cancer, I thought, ‘No! It can’t be!’” Lydia said. Lydia, who had lost several family members to cancer and underwent prophylactic treatments herself to increase the odds of keeping cancer at bay, was devastated when she received Jeanie’s diagnosis. Informing Jeanie’s fans amplified the difficult news. When Jeanie got sick, Lydia said some fans wrote to say, “I can’t tell my child Jeanie has cancer.” The three-legged dog’s illness offered yet another opportunity to teach about resilience in coping with life’s challenges. On June 30, 2020, Jeanie was admitted to the Soft Tissue Surgery Service at the LSU VTH, under the care of Rebecca Csomos, VMD, Ph.D., DACVS, assistant professor of small animal surgery and the attending faculty member on Jeanie’s surgical team; and Daniel McCarthy, DVM, small animal surgery resident. She underwent a right thyroidectomy (removal of her right thyroid gland) and removal of the associated tumor. Given the precarious location, adjacent to critical arteries, veins, and nerves, the surgical procedure required meticulous dissection and care of the regional anatomy. “We were able to excise the tumor without complication, and we were very happy with how Jeanie did intra- and post-operatively. 

Jeanie with her owner, Lydia Crochet 

Sandra Sarr, Communications Coordinator La Veterinaire Winter 2021 21 We Heal 

A ‘boring’ and straightforward surgery and recovery are what we aim for,” said Dr. Csomos. “She was in good hands throughout the entire process. I was impressed with the whole team: Drs. McCarthy, Reabel, Merkle, Csomos, and also Kirstin, and Caitlyn, who took such good care of her and communicated with me regularly,” Lydia said. Jeanie remained in the ICU recovering for one night after surgery, and Lydia brought her home to Lake Charles the next day, returning to LSU for her suture removal and periodic checkups. “I am honored to have had the opportunity to care for Jeanie. We consider our patients’ unique needs when tailoring our care to ensure the best outcomes. As with every case, Jeanie reminds me of why I joined this profession: to help others in need,” said Dr. McCarthy who oversaw Jeanie’s hospitalization and care. Clinicians saw no evidence of cancer in the lymph nodes, and she did not undergo radiation or chemotherapy. Lydia held faith that Jeanie would recover. After all, Jeanie had bounced back from her rough start in life. Nameless, homeless, and lacking use of a leg, Jeanie was only 6 months old when found running the streets with other dogs. A Good Samaritan brought the dog to a Lake Charles veterinarian’s office. Lydia first saw her posted on a rescue website 13 years ago and adopted her the same day. “When I saw her little face, I knew I had to have her,” Lydia said. When Lydia went to pick her up, Elton John’s song, “Little Jeannie,” was playing on the car radio. Jean is also Lydia’s middle name. “She helped me feel better when I faced losses. Her gentle, calm demeanor made her a natural to become a therapy dog,” Lydia said. Managing Jeanie’s career has become an unexpected and fulfilling full-time job for Lydia, who credits Jeanie with being her muse. “She opened a creative portal for me. I quit my job with the Calcasieu Parish District Attorney’s Office. Jeanie’s way more fun than criminal investigations!” Lydia said. Lydia recounts a case at the Children’s Advocacy Center in Lake Charles involving a 5-year-old who did not speak after witnessing the murder-suicide of her parents. The girl saw one of the Jeanie books at the Center and, when asked, indicated she’d like to meet the dog. Lydia brought Jeanie to the Center, and, with Jeanie beside her, the girl began to talk. Jeanie may be known for her gentleness, but she is fierce when needed. She saved her family’s cockatiel from a life-threatening hawk attack. “We put the caged bird in our yard every day. One day, Jeanie ran out the back door, barking, and charged the cage. We hadn’t heard what was going on, but Jeanie did, and we followed her. A hawk had attacked our bird through the cage. The hawk’s talon put a hole in our bird’s chest, and surgery was necessary,” Lydia said. Thanks to Jeanie, the cockatiel survived and is now 30 years old. In 2016, Jeanie gained a “sister” named Pippa, also a three-legged dog with an exceptionally energetic disposition. Lydia adopted her from a New Orleans shelter after Pippa had been hit by a car and severely injured. Pippa has been described as “the world’s fastest three-legged dog” by the likes of the New York Post , Yahoo News , and MSN News . Despite their opposite temperaments, Jeanie accepts and enjoys Pippa for who she is. “Jeanie helps everyone she meets. I am so grateful for her caregivers and that she has recovered,” Lydia said. 

Jeanie with Dr. Daniel McCarthy, surgery resident 

JEANIE’S MEDICAL TEAM 

Rebecca Csomos, VMD, Ph.D., DACVS, assistant professor Daniel McCarthy, DVM, surgery resident Jennifer Merkle, DVM, radiation oncology resident Stephanie Reabel, DVM, anesthesia resident Caitlin Birky, fourth-year veterinary student Kirstin Schaal, fourth-year veterinary student 22 La Veterinaire 2020 

Eric and Meg Casper Sunstrom have established the Sunstrom Cardiology Hardship Support Fund at the LSU SVM with a gift of $70,000. Now, clients whose pets need cardiology services but cannot afford them will have an opportunity to access treatment. The Sunstroms have longstanding connections to LSU. Eric, founder and president of The Chesapeake Group, representing business and trade associations, holds a bachelor’s degree in political science from LSU. Meg, deputy commissioner for strategic communication with the Louisiana Board of Regents, holds a B.A. in journalism from LSU’s Manship School of Mass Communication. The Sunstroms were inspired to support the LSU Veterinary Teaching Hospital Cardiology service after they brought their critically ill Doberman, Kaiser, for treatment in 2019. “I woke up in the middle of the night and heard Kaiser panting. At 6 in the morning I said to Eric, ‘I think we need to load him up and go,’” Meg said. Eric called the veterinarian he had used for 25 years. Phillip Cancilleri, DVM (LSU SVM 1990), ran some tests on Kaiser and told them to take him to the LSU School of Veterinary Medicine immediately, which they did. As they sat in the waiting room, they worried and discussed their good fortune in having access to expert veterinary care just three miles from their home in Baton Rouge. “Our veterinarian was so connected to the vet school that he knew that’s where we needed to be. I don’t think we would’ve gotten that level of care or that level of insight into what was happening with Kaiser without the vet school being nearby,” Eric said. At the LSU SVM they learned that Kaiser had an aortic aneurysm. He had a tumor on his heart that had become invasive, and he was 

# Sunstrom Cardiology Hardship Support Fund Makes Treatment Accessible Eric and Meg Sunstrom 

Sandra Sarr, Communications Coordinator La Veterinaire Winter 2021 23 We Heal 

filling up with fluid. Clinicians explained that they could fix where the tumor had caused a rupture, but that they didn’t know how quickly it would happen again. The tumor could not be removed. “That’s when hard decision making had to come into play. I was so impressed with their professionalism, their willingness to talk us through it in a scientific way, but also in a compassionate way. While our hearts were breaking, the facts they imparted to us were extremely important in making the best choice for Kaiser. In the end, we knew that we had tried everything we could. We’d given him the best level of care we could. We found the root cause of his illness,” Meg said. “The only way to tell something was wrong was when it was too late. What hit us is that he was young, only 8, and it seemed like he had several more years to live. He had been doing figure-eight laps around the yard a week before he died,” said Eric, who first brought Kaiser home when he was just 8 weeks old and remembered Kaiser taking to Meg immediately when they met in 2013. Once the initial shock of losing Kaiser had worn off, the Sunstroms realized they wanted to give back to the LSU SVM out of a desire to show gratitude to the clinicians, a feeling of benevolence toward pet owners with limited resources, and a desire to further veterinary education. “You say goodbye to your pet and walk out the door. You rarely get that chance to come back to the people that helped you to say thank you. For us, it’s a sincere thank you to everybody who walked us through that moment,” Meg said. Their gift is also a way to help others who might not be able to afford to give their pets the level of care the Sunstroms could give Kaiser. When they received an estimate of what Kaiser’s treatment would cost, Eric told them to do what they needed to do. “Our first bill was over $2,000. We were able to handle that, but some people couldn’t. I can’t imagine hearing the cost and having to say, ‘We really can’t do that, we’ll just put him to sleep or take him home and see what happens.’ That’s what we want to help people avoid,” Eric said. The Sunstroms also recognized that if cost is a limiting factor, veterinary students might have limited exposure to work on certain types of cases. “We hope our gift will provide more opportunities for students to learn from certain animals because they were able to get treated. When a rare illness happens for your pet, we understand it’s unusual for doctors to see those cases. Students expressed that treating Kaiser was a real learning experience. Kaiser was truly one of a kind,” Meg said. 

Hera and Kaiser (right) 24 La Veterinaire Winter 2021 24 La Veterinaire 2020 We Discover 

# River Road Testing Lab La Veterinaire Winter 2021 25 We Protect 

As COVID-19 cases began growing exponentially across the U.S., medical facilities, including some that might surprise you, began to respond. Because of a dire need for more rapid test processing in south Louisiana, on March 23, 2020, the River Road Testing Laboratory at the LSU School of Veterinary Medicine began processing COVID-19 tests for some Louisiana medical facilities and first responders. Led by Stephania Cormier, Ph.D., adjunct professor of Comparative Biomedical Sciences, and Rebecca Christofferson, MApSt, Ph.D. (LSU SVM 2011), assistant professor of Pathobiological Sciences, the lab processed almost 4,000 tests before closing on May 15, as local hospitals began processing their own tests. The River Road Testing Lab was set up in the LSU SVM because it houses a lab designated to handle highly infectious agents, and because of the expertise of the faculty, staff, and graduate students. Dr. Cormier is a respiratory immunology and toxicology expert, and Dr. Christofferson is an infectious disease and emerging viruses expert. The idea for the lab began in March, when Dr. Hollis “Bud” O’Neal Jr., LSU Health Sciences professor and medical director of research at Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center in Baton Rouge, contacted LSU SVM virologists to see if they could provide the viral transport medium required to process COVID-19 tests. The LSU SVM could provide the medium, as well as run the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) testing required to detect genetic components of coronavirus. Working with local hospital officials, the LSU SVM was able to create the River Road Testing Lab, with Beverly Ogden, MD, medical director of the Pathology Department at Woman’s Hospital Baton Rouge, serving as the lab’s medical director. At its peak, the lab served 18 medical facilities. The routine was carefully choreographed. Once the 10-person team arrived at the lab, one group started receiving samples while other team members set up seven 96-well plates, which were used to inactivate the virus and extract the viral RNA for amplification by RT-PCR (real-time PCR). The extraction plate needed to be ready for the specialized team working in a BSL-3 lab, and the other plates were loaded onto a robot to extract the RNA. The PCR team set up the reagents and programmed a robot to set up the 384-well PCR plate. The plate was usually on the PCR machine in just over an hour, and the PCR then ran for two hours. The team then communicated the results to the physicians. 

# Answering the Call 

Cormier 

Christofferson PHOTOS CLOCKWISE FROM TOP LEFT: An automated liquid handler used to prepare reagents for PCR testing. Tube of Gentamicin/Amphotericin solution, which was used to make the 6,500 viral transport media tubes for hospitals. Christine Walsh, MS student in Dr. Rebecca Christofferson’s lab, assists in preparation of COVID-19 tests to send to area hospitals. La Veterinaire Winter 2021 25 Handly Mayton, Ph.D. student in Dr. Rebecca Christofferson’s lab, prepares reagents for COVID-19 testing. Dr. Luan Vu, post-doctoral researcher in Dr. Stephania Cormier’s lab, prepares reagents for COVID-19 testing. Dr. Luan Vu prepares COVID-19 test kits to send to area hospitals. 26 La Veterinaire Winter 2021 We Discover 

In addition, the team supplied much-needed COVID-19 testing kits. This effort required a team member to produce liters of viral transport media that was pipetted into tubes, which then had to be labeled and placed into a labeled bag along with a Centers for Disease Control-approved swab and a biohazard bag for distribution to hospitals and other testing sites. One of the reasons the LSU SVM was able to process samples of highly infectious agents is the presence of a BSL-3 facility on-site. A biosafety level (BSL), or Pathogen/Protection level, is a set of biocontainment precautions required to isolate dangerous biological agents in an enclosed laboratory facility; the CDC specifies the levels, which range from the lowest biosafety level 1 (BSL-1) to the highest at level 4 (BSL-4). Biosafety level 3 is appropriate for work involving microbes that can cause serious and potentially lethal disease via inhalation. Dr. Christofferson explains, “The BSL-3 facility allows us an extra layer of protection not only for ourselves and our team, but to everyone. The equipment and other lab space that we have available to us by virtue of being faculty and virologists here means we have the capability to scale up as we did.” Adds Dr. Cormier, “The LSU SVM does a tremendous amount of human biomedical research, specifically in the area of respiratory tract infections and lung biology. It is the perfect place to have set up this testing lab.” LSU and more specifically the LSU SVM had the personnel, expertise, materials, and facility to process COVID-19 tests rapidly. “We did this because we were capable, and there was a need,” said Dr. Cormier. “First for COVID-19 testing kits, and then for running the tests, when the turnaround for test results at the time went from days to over a week. The need to provide the hospitals with rapid information grew quickly as personal protection equipment (PPE) grew limited. Our median turnaround time from collection to results was 1.58 days. For example, at one local hospital, on average, for every patient in isolation, 23 gowns, glove sets, and masks (PPE) are used daily. In other words, for every negative patient we were able to identify, the hospital could get that patient out of isolation and conserve very limited PPE.” In addition to the team at the LSU SVM, the lab would not have been possible without collaboration and cooperation with Baton Rouge-area hospitals Our Lady of the Lake, Baton Rouge General, and Woman’s Hospital. Additional support was provided by the LSU President’s Office and the LSU Office of Research and Economic Development, the Baton Rouge Area Foundation, and the offices of both Senator Bill Cassidy and Senator John Kennedy. While the lab has closed, the work continues for Drs. Christofferson and Cormier. Said Dr. Christofferson, “With any new virus you have to respect that you know nothing. And that’s how I approach these emerging viruses. Because it’s easy to convince yourself that you have learned something when you aren’t arguing with false dogma. We have learned a lot, and we are still learning. I’m hoping we can continue to learn about this virus and inform treatment and preventative measures. The transmission patterns of the virus hasn’t been unexpected, and I’m hoping we can use our experience as a model for future responses to pandemics.” La Veterinaire Winter 2021 27 We Protect 

For the last several months, researchers from the LSU College of Engineering and School of Veterinary Medicine have tested wastewater in various areas around East Baton Rouge Parish to track cases of coronavirus. What they have found, thus far, is that cases increased soon after Louisiana moved into Phase 2 and dropped after the city-parish instituted a mask-wearing mandate. Now they will implement that research on the LSU campus to help determine numbers and location of cases. “This innovative project is yet another example of how we’re putting the cutting-edge research of LSU faculty into action to help monitor and contain COVID-19, and it will be a great supplement to the many other preventative measures we’re taking to ensure our campus is as safe as it possibly can be for our students, faculty, and staff,” said LSU Interim President Thomas C. Galligan Jr. The first step in the process is taking the flow-composited wastewater sample and pasteurizing it, followed by performing an RNA extraction. A reverse transcription is then conducted to obtain cDNA, followed by the qPCR detection of SARS-CoV-2, the official name for coronavirus. The testing is conducted at the GeneLab, a multi-faceted core laboratory directed by the Division of BioMMED at the LSU School of Veterinary Medicine that engages in specific research and training projects. For the LSU campus project, the researchers have designed a new sampling network that will target 350-500 students with each sample. The locations differ depending on the on-campus residence but will be scattered throughout campus. Samplers at the two large off-campus pumping stations are running and will continue to be analyzed to determine the total of amount of virus circulating on the campus. “We will be testing every on-campus residence [dormitories and on-campus apartments],” said LSU Environmental Engineering Professor John Pardue. “Initially, we will monitor every location once per week. It takes two days to process each sample, so we will have the data the same week the samples are taken. We will continue indefinitely until the campus has the information 

# LSU Researchers Test Campus Wastewater for COVID-19 Cases 

Article courtesy of Josh Duplechin, LSU College of Engineering needed. We will transmit the results to the campus team managing the pandemic response with recommendations based on the amount of virus detected. “If there are elevated levels measured in the sewage, we can intervene with a more extensive individual testing program so students can be isolated to prevent the spread in any one location. We have months of experience measuring SARS-CoV-2 in Baton Rouge wastewater, so we understand the significance of the numbers that we measure using this technique. Since we are measuring everywhere, we will be able to determine the relative amount of infected students at each location. While we can estimate the number of infected students as one or five or 10 based on literature values, we really are doing the testing to support LSU’s individual medical testing plan.” Pardue is joined on the project by LSU Veterinary Medicine Professors Konstantin “Gus” Kousoulas, Ramesh Subramanian, and Vladimir Chouljenko; and LSU Civil and Environmental Engineering Professors William Moe and Samuel Snow. LSU Facility Services also helped plan the on-campus network locations. 28 La Veterinaire Winter 2021 We Protect 

LSU SVM and Tulane collaborate on possible vaccine 

LSU SVM researchers, as part of the LSU-Tulane Center for Experimental Infectious Disease Research, are performing significant research on coronaviruses with the goal of producing a vaccine for testing that could soon be used for prevention of human cases of the virus. Coronaviruses are a large family of viruses that exist in both humans and animals, producing symptoms that include respiratory and enteric disorders and persistent infections. Vaccination against animal and human coronavirus is a major approach to contain and prevent these infections. The new human pathogen SARS-CoV-2 (severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2) appeared in late 2019 in the 

# LSU SVM collaborating to produce and test coronavirus vaccines and possible treatments La Veterinaire Winter 2021 29 We Discover 

Members of Dr. Kousoulas’ lab (from left): Konstantin G. Kousoulas, Ph.D., head; Ramesh Subramanian, Ph.D., assistant professor; Vladimir Chouljenko, Ph.D., associate professor; and Nithya Jambunathan, Ph.D., post-doctoral fellow. 

urban center of Wuhan in China. The virus has a 75 to 80 percent similarity to the genetic sequence of SARS CoV, a similar virus that caused severe acute respiratory disease syndrome (SARS) in a human outbreak in 2003. The Division of Biotechnology & Molecular Medicine (BioMMED) at the LSU SVM has extensive experience with animal coronavirus research. Konstantin “Gus” Kousoulas, Ph.D., head of the Department of Pathobiological Sciences (PBS) and director of BioMMED, has performed significant studies on bovine coronaviruses (BCoV), including their association with cattle lung disease and investigations on the structure of function of both BCoV and SARS viral proteins. BioMMED Associate Director and Research Associate Professor Vladimir Chouljenko, Ph.D., conducts research involving analysis of viral genomes and the cloning of the SARS-CoV-2 Spike (S) glycoprotein to investigate its structure and function, considered a key step in understanding viral pathogenesis (how the virus develops) and protective immune responses. These investigations are carried out in collaboration with the Tauber Bioinformatics Research Center at the University of Haifa, Israel (Leonid Brodsky, Ph.D., Director) and Pine Biotech, Inc. in New Orleans. The extensive biomedical research conducted at the LSU SVM, including the presence of the Lung Biology Center, led by Samithamby “Jey” Jeyaseelan, PhD., professor in Pathobiological Sciences, and Rhonda Cardin, Ph.D., associate dean for research and advanced studies, and recently funded by the National Institutes of Health, National Institute of General Medical Sciences as a Center for Biomedical Research Excellence, provides an accelerated pathway to a vaccine that could be used for both human and animal infections by coronaviruses. The goal, according to Kousoulas, is to have a human vaccine ready for testing as soon as possible. Testing of these experimental vaccines will be performed in collaboration with the Tulane National Primate Research Center (TNPRC) located in Covington, La., which has secure facilities for handling this and other high-containment pathogens. Bapi Pahar, DVM, MVSc, Ph.D., MBA, associate professor at Tulane University School of Medicine, will test the vaccines. Funding for this work is currently sought from the National Institutes of Health and other sources. The LSU SVM collaborates with TNPRC as part of the LSU-Tulane Center for Experimental Infectious Disease Research, which has been funded by the National Institutes of Health since 2004. 

LSU SVM collaborates with ULM on HIV drug as possible treatment 

During a lecture on the Molecular & Cell Biology and Immunopathogenesis of coronaviruses attended virtually by more than 125 people, Dr. Kousoulas revealed that the drug Nelfinavir mesylate (NFV, brand name Viracept), holds exceptional promise in limiting COVID-19 infections. Viracept was developed as a protease inhibitor in the treatment of the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). The work revealed that Viracept inhibited the ability of a key protein of the virus, the Spike Glycoprotein that protrudes from the surface of the virus and is also found on the surface of infected cells, to facilitate membrane fusion of adjacent cells. Membrane fusion is crucial for virus entry into cells and spread of the virus from one cell to adjacent cells escaping the extracellular spaces and neutralizing antibodies. Viracept was able to inhibit membrane fusion at levels that are typically used in human patients to combat Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) infections. Molecular modeling by Professor of Pharmacy Seetharama D. Jois, Ph.D., and graduate student Achyut Dahal, both with the University of Louisiana Monroe College of Pharmacy, showed that Viracept may directly bind to the viral S glycoprotein. These results strongly suggest that Viracept should be investigated for ability to prevent virus spread especially during early stages of SARS-2 CoV infections. Also contributing to this work with Dr. Kousoulas are colleagues Vladimir Chouljenko, Ph.D., Farhana Musarrat, PhD., and Rafiq Nabi, Ph.D. The University of Louisiana Monroe is a member institution of the Louisiana Biomedical Research Network supported by the National Institutes of Health, National Institute of General Medical Sciences, IDeA Network of Biomedical Research (NIH:NIGMS INBRE) program. LSU’s INBRE, named the Louisiana Biomedical Research Network (LBRN), was established in September 2001 with a $18.5 million grant matched by a $1.2 million supplement from the Board of Regents. This grant has been renewed every five years since 2001. LBRN provides infrastructure support, education, training, and research opportunities for students and faculty at primarily undergraduate institutions and fosters connections of primarily undergraduate institutions (PUIs) with biomedical research intensive universities and institutes within the state. Dr. Kousoulas is the Principal Investigator for LSU’s LBRN. 30 La Veterinaire Winter 2021 We Discover 

Sandra Sarr, Communications Coordinator Kathleen Clucas’ involvement in Tennessee’s horse community led her to first connect with the LSU SVM in 2005. She had learned that the SVM had come to the aid of animals in the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina and that donations were needed to support the effort. Then a resident of Nashville, she began to send annual contributions. A visit from an LSU SVM development officer traveling in her area gave her a broader perspective of the research being conducted at the school, and she was impressed. The two visited again a few years later and she viewed architectural drawings of the SVM’s new Stephenson Pet Clinic. She decided to support the clinic with a gift that named the building’s Community Practice area and traveled to Baton Rouge for the first time for the SPC’s groundbreaking event in October 2019. “People who love animals come out when the need arises and do what’s necessary. Animals were my family,” she said. In addition to supporting the LSU SVM’s disaster relief efforts and the SPC, Clucas also established the M. K. Clucas Equine Scholarship. Now, Kathleen’s Tynewald Foundation Regenerative Medicine Fund will provide $330,000 in unrestricted support of the Laboratory for Equine and Comparative Orthopedic Research, or LECOR, within the Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences (VCS) and its teaching and research activities, including but not limited to support for equipment, faculty, and students. The Tynewald Foundation is named in honor of Kathleen’s great grandfather, who emigrated from the Isle of Man located in the Irish Sea. Tynewald encompasses the laws, tradition, culture and parliament of the self-governing Isle. Kathleen had a horse who suffered from laminitis, a painful condition involving a disruption of blood flow to the laminae structure that connects the hoof wall to a bone within. Laminitis can cause permanent structural damage in horses’ feet and can lead to the horse’s death. “When I was at the SPC groundbreaking, I met with Dr. Mandi Lopez regarding her laminitis research and got the gist of how her research has progressed since 2012. I’m very hopeful about her work, knowing how debilitating laminitis is and how little can be done once it reaches a certain point. It cuts short their capacity to enjoy life and humans’ ability to enjoy them,” said Kathleen, who had to stop riding her 12-year-old mare due to irreversible damage. 

# For the Love of Horses and More 

Tynewald Foundation Supports Equine-Focused Regenerative Medicine Research La Veterinaire Winter 2021 31 We Discover 

“It was a thrill to meet Ms. Clucas in person! We are genuinely humbled and honored by her generosity. She is clearly dedicated to the health and welfare of furry family members and has a deep understanding of the impact that innovative therapies can have on their quality of life. We are deeply and truly grateful for her gift that will have a lasting impact on therapeutic innovation and hope to share our most recent findings with her in person sometime soon,” said Mandi Lopez, DVM, Ph.D., professor in Veterinary Clinical Sciences, whose research focus is on tissue regeneration with stem cells. Kathleen had been looking for an equine-related project to support. She had seen veterinarians operate in critical situations and had the utmost respect for what they did. She was well aware that there were veterinary schools in Tennessee, where she lived, and in Missouri, where she grew up and currently resides. However, she chose to support the LSU SVM after reviewing a research publication describing various projects and becoming familiar with its community service. “We need veterinarians who are well equipped to care for animals. I noted the SVM had a substantial equine program, and the light bulb started going off for how I wanted to contribute,” said Kathleen. Kathleen is heartened to know that a researcher is exploring laminitis and is working toward a medical intervention. “The remedy may not happen in my lifetime, but I’m hopeful one will be found,” Kathleen said. 

ABOVE: Mandi Lopez, DVM, Ph.D., DACVS, in her lab LEFT: Kathleen Clucas 32 La Veterinaire Winter 2021 We Protect 

This is a story about a dog desperate for a home, an inmate-caretaker who believed in her, and friends and strangers who bonded around their common cause and wouldn’t give up. In April 2020, LSU SVM donor Connie Frank Soong received a call for assistance from high school friend, Melissa Cloutier, of Natchitoches, La., about a dog named Cardi found in their hometown wandering, emaciated, burned, tail mutilated. It was June 2018, and she was just one year old. “Cardi had endured the most unimaginable abuse at the hands of humans. She was physically and mentally broken. She healed. Still, nobody wanted her. It broke my heart,” Connie said. Connie had already demonstrated tremendous generosity and compassion for animals with a $2 million estate gift, which established the Connie Soong Good Samaritan Fund at the LSU SVM. An alumna of the LSU E. J. Ourso College of Business, she had personally experienced the effectiveness of the LSU SVM, bringing her family pets for treatment. “I knew nothing about rescuing animals, but there was something special about Cardi, and I wanted to help her when no one wanted her,” Connie said. Cardi loved people, but she had shown aggression towards other dogs, likely because she had to fight to survive. Paige Brewton found Cardi dragging a broken chain around her neck. She named her after Cardi B., a singer who’d overcome hardships and made a strong comeback. Paige kept her for several months while her burns partially healed, and eventually asked Juanita Murphy, president of the Natchitoches Humane Society (NHS), if she could take her in. After consulting local authorities for help in finding the abusers, Juanita agreed to take Cardi and placed her at Happy Tails, the small, outdoor shelter the NHS had established within the Natchitoches Parish Detention Center. “We had her spayed, got her up to date on vaccines, rabies, microchipped, treated her heartworms. We had been trying to get her adopted ever since. Cardi had been living in an outdoor shelter, alone for 16 hours a day,” said Juanita, who Connie credits with mentoring her in rescue work. Cardi had two short-term fosters, including a month-long stay with Robert and Karn Richoux, but consistent efforts to find her a home fell through again and again. Jeff, an inmate at the Detention Center, where the NHS built 12 outdoor kennels and a treatment room “staffed” by inmates, noticed Cardi was starting to shut down in that setting, despite the progress he’d helped her make. “Even at the few adoption events we were able to take her to, we had to be so careful because of her dog aggression. It was a challenge. She always loved the people’s attention and made lots of friends, but nothing serious ever happened for her,” Juanita said. 

# Cardi’s Warriors 

A dog used for fighting goes from broken to healed and a forever home on Martha’s Vineyard 

Sandra Sarr, Communications Coordinator La Veterinaire Winter 2021 33 We Protect 

Concerned, inmate-caretaker, Jeff, wrote a two-page letter on Cardi’s behalf and gave it to Juanita. “Cardi was just existing. Jeff asked me to do more for her, sparking the start of Cardi’s Warriors,” Juanita said. Jeff worked daily to socialize and train her over the nearly two years she lived at Happy Tails in the Detention Center. Jeff wrote, “Today, Cardi is house-trained, great on a leash, loves her chew toys, and enjoys playing fetch. We are talking about a terrific little dog who absolutely loves people and lives to please, despite the torture she suffered at the hands of humans. There is one drawback with Cardi. She is not dog or cat friendly and is better suited for a single-pet household. Please help us accomplish the mission and find the ideal match for Cardi so she can brighten up someone’s life with her love.” Juanita shared Jeff’s letter with Melissa, who had fostered dogs for Juanita and the NHS. “It was a call to action for me,” Melissa said. That’s when she decided to reach out to her former school mate, Connie. She knew Connie was a doer and cared deeply about the wellbeing of animals, particularly those suffering abuse, injury, and homelessness. Despite sustained and vigorous efforts to find Cardi a home, prospects were looking bleak. “I could hear the weariness in their voices, and I’d say, ‘We can’t give up,” said Connie, who drew upon the persistence she’d honed in pharmaceutical sales. “Giving that gift to the LSU SVM for homeless and injured animals was important, but it was never enough to fulfill my passion to help animals in need,” she said. Connie’s passion to do more led her to overcome the emotional turmoil she felt when seeing images and stories of abused, injured, and homeless animals. Eventually, she was able to find strength in the words of her husband: You have to be able to face the problem in order to help the problem. Connie set out to do what she once thought was impossible for her. She was ready to spring into action when the call came about Cardi. The following day, Connie phoned Juanita. “With Juanita’s guidance, I began mega-networking to find either a foster or a permanent home for Cardi,” said Connie, who stepped up to help champion Cardi just when the dog’s chances for a permanent home looked bleakest. “Connie was a major player and inspiration. Her boots-on-the-ground, in-the-trenches, never-give-up rescuer for a dog she never even met was amazing,” Juanita said. Connie began networking, making calls, writing letters, answering Facebook posts, and generally expanding awareness of Cardi in search of a perfect match. She uncovered three promising leads, but each one fell through because Cardi would need to be the only pet in a new home. “This was a huge obstacle for us. We were running out of options,” Connie said. A return to the Detention Center’s shelter seemed imminent— and unacceptable to Connie, who says persistence is one of her strongest attributes. “Cardi was so frightened by rain, thunder, and lightning at the Happy Tails outdoor shelter. She would not come out of her igloo the next day. We stressed out every time there was a storm to the point where we lost sleep at night worrying about Cardi suffering,” Connie said. Through a national network of animal rescuers, Juanita connected with Jean Hruschak of Ohio. Jean and Holly Smith of Metairie championed Cardi with outreach communications, including high-engagement social media posts. Jean said, “We will get her to Ohio before we’ll let her go back to that shelter. I will foster her until we find her a home.” Jean arranged for Cardi’s emergency transport from Natchitoches to Ohio. Melissa drove Cardi the first two legs of the trip, starting in her hometown to Mississippi. Melissa spoke to Cardi as they crossed the Louisiana-Mississippi state line. “I told her, ‘I want you to know that we are leaving the place where people did horrible things to you, and for every minute 

Connie Soong with her dogs Sophie and Bailey 34 La Veterinaire Winter 2021 We Protect 

of abuse you suffered, there were also warriors there fighting for you,’” Melissa said. “While current events were troubling and the world felt like it was falling apart, Cardi brought us together to save her. She gave us purpose,” Melissa said. Even as Cardi was en route to Jean in Ohio, an adopter of another one of Juanita’s shelter dogs reached out to say someone she knew was interested in adopting a dog, and that Cardi could be the one. Holly had arranged for Animal Rescue of New Orleans (ARNO) to post Cardi’s story and pictures on their social media. Juanita assigned Connie networking tasks on Cardi’s page on ARNO’s rescue site. It was a former ARNO adopter who told Juanita that Kim Baker on Martha’s Vineyard was interested in Cardi. Kim called Juanita the next morning. She wanted to meet Cardi. Once Juanita knew Kim was serious about adopting Cardi, she shared the news with the rest of Cardi’s team. They held their breath that this time, Cardi would find her home. After only days in Ohio, where she got further medical and dental treatment, Cardi was off on a two-day trip with Jean and Cardi supporter, Linda Skonieczny, from Ohio to Kim on Martha’s Vineyard. “I got off the ferry to meet them, and Cardi came right to me and wrapped her paws around my neck. It was like she knew. It feels so good to have her in my life. She’s like a celebrity here,” said Kim, who had looked at hundreds of dog pictures seeking her perfect match, and when she looked into Cardi’s eyes, she knew she needed to look no further. “It was a journey for us all. Prayer made the miracle. Kim and Cardi were a perfect match. They saved each other. I can’t imagine it could be any better,” Connie said. Kim, a cook at a charter school, serves Cardi daily homemade meals of beef, turkey, chicken, vegetables, rice, and beans simmered in a crockpot. “We have a steady routine. I run her, get her focused for training, go on walks, let her sniff to her heart’s content. I introduced her to boating, the ocean, the horse barn. She’s figuring out this is her forever home. She’s been here for five months. We celebrate every 17th of the month, the day of the month she arrived. We have a pretty tight bond,” said Kim. Jeff’s words were prophetic. Cardi’s Warriors did “find the ideal match for Cardi so she can brighten up someone’s life with her love.” Witnessing Cardi’s Warriors at work, Connie’s husband, Herman Soong observed, “The intricacies and connections from initial rescue to forever homes are very fascinating and intriguing to watch with steps that are both planned and fortuitous that says some higher power has their benevolence and blessing encompassing the animal, the people, and the process. It makes you wonder who really benefited from His benevolence. Lives, hearts and spirits have been uplifted to towering heights by one dog cowered by lightning, alone in a cage, in a prison, now has become the lightning bolt that caused us all to aspire to things greater than ourselves.” Adopter Kim says Cardi has given her a purpose, and she credits Cardi’s Warriors for finding the dog she knows was meant for her. “It’s satisfying when I’m able to help change the course of a dog’s life,” said Connie, who is now working to re-home the seventh dog she’s helped since starting with Cardi. 

# 2,269 animal shelter organizations in the U.S. 

# 3.6 million 

animals taken in by shelters 

# 48.4% are strays, the most common source of intakes, followed by owner relinquishments 

# 51.5% are dogs 

# 48.5% are cats 

# 60.7% of cats are adopted 

# 53.5% of dogs are adopted 

# 11.5% of dogs euthanized 

# 6.9% of cats euthanized 

2019 statistics from Shelter Animals Count (shelteranimalscount.org) La Veterinaire Winter 2021 35 We Teach 

DOCTOR OF PHILOSOPHY 

Sean Perry, DVM , from Irvine, Calif., received his Ph.D. from the Veterinary Clinical Sciences department. His dissertation was entitled “Can Assisted Reproductive Technologies Help Conserve 300 Million Years of Evolution? A First Attempt at Developing Assisted Reproductive Technologies for Male Reptiles,” and his major advisor was Professor Mark Mitchell, DVM, Ph.D. (LSU SVM 2001), DECZM. Dr. Perry is now searching for a full-time position in the veterinary field. 

Harriet Hammond, BS, MS , from New Roads, La., received her Ph.D. from the Comparative Biomedical Sciences department. Her dissertation was entitled “Murine Exposures to Waterpipe Tobacco Smoke: Adult Lung Immune Responses and Prenatal Susceptibility to Allergen-Induced Asthma,” and her major advisor was Professor Arthur Penn, Ph.D.. Dr. Hammond is pursuing a position in the private sector and/or science communication. 

Yawen Hu, BMed, M.S. , from Hefei, Anhui, China, received a Ph.D. from the department of Comparative Biomedical Sciences (CBS). Her dissertation was entitled “Effects of Alcohol and Adenylyl Cyclase Type 7 on Innate Immune System.” Dr. Hu’s major advisor was Associate Professor Masami Yoshimura, BSc, MSc, DSc. Dr. Hu is pursuing a postdoctoral position. 

Razia Sultana, BVSc & A.H., MVSc , from Nangal, Punjab, India, received her Ph.D. from the Comparative Biomedical Sciences department. Her dissertation was entitled “Neural, Behavioral and Molecular Alterations in Mouse Models of Schizophrenia,” and her major advisor was Associate Professor Charles Lee, Ph.D.. Dr. Sultana is now a post-doctoral fellow at Johns Hopkins School of Medicine. 

MASTER OF SCIENCES 

Carlos Aguilar, DVM , from Obregon, Mexico, received his M.S. degree from the Veterinary Clinical Sciences. His thesis was entitled “In Vitro Analysis of Equine Platelet Rich Plasma and In Vivo Effect of Cytokines after Repeated Intra-Articular Injections in Osteoarthritic Joints,” and his major advisor was Associate Professor Laura Riggs, DVM, Ph.D., DACVS. In July, Dr. Aguilar is will begin a combined large animal surgery residency/Ph.D. program at the Atlantic Veterinary College at the University of Prince Edward Island in Canada. 

Kerin Cahill, B.S. , from Long Island, N.Y., received her master’s degree from CBS. Her thesis was entitled “The Effects of In Utero Exposure to Aerosols Generated by Electronic Nicotine Delivery Systems in Neonatal and Adult Offspring.” Her major advisor was Assistant Professor Alexandra Nöel, Ph.D. Cahill is currently working as a research associate at the Pennington Biomedical Research Center in Dr. Krisztian Stadler’s lab. 

Anke Stohr, Vet.med. , from Freiburg, Germany, received her M.S. degree from the Veterinary Clinical Sciences department. Her thesis was entitled “Establishment of Laboratory Methods to Assess the Application of Blood Transfusions in Reptiles,” and her major advisor was Professor Javier Nevarez, DVM, Ph.D. (LSU SVM 2001, 2007), DACZM, DECZM. Dr. Stohr will complete her zoological medicine residency at the LSU SVM in July 2020. After that, she plans to return to Germany to work as a small animal exotic pet practitioner and sit for the examination for board certification as a Diplomate of the European College of Zoological Medicine. 

Pengju Wang, BSc , from Henan, China, received his M.S. degree from the department of Veterinary Medical Sciences. His thesis was entitled “Novel Information About the Kinetic Effects of Equine Shoe Modifications and Kinematic Effects of Human Digital Devices for Improved Performance in Both Species.” His major advisor was Professor Mandi Lopez, DVM, Ph.D., DACVS. He is pursuing a second MS degree in computer science at LSU. 

CERTIFICATE IN VETERINARY MEDICAL & BIOMEDICAL SCIENCES 

Derek Forrester, B.S., from Prairieville, La., received the Certificate in Veterinry Medical and Biomedical Sciences. The certificate program is designed to further develop the scientific knowledge and problem-solving abilities of the student. In this non-research certificate program, students expand their knowledge of the physiological sciences that comprise the core curriculum. Related sciences through advanced elective courses complete the program. Forrester plans to attend medical school. 

# LSU SVM conferred eight advanced degrees and a certificate in 2020 36 La Veterinaire Winter 2021 

# Remembering Hurricane Katrina We Protect La Veterinaire 2020 37 We Protect 

Photos on opposite page, clockwise starting with top left: Veterinary students care for a dog found in a house in New Orleans. The arena floor of the LSU AgCenter John M. Parker Coliseum, which served as an animal shelter for 45 days. This shelter housed animals dropped off by their owners, while the animal shelter at the Lamar Dixon Expo Center in Gonzales, La., housed animals rescued from areas affected by the storm. Assistant Professor of Anesthesiology Dr. Claudio Natalini and veterinary student Trinka Adamson (Class of 2007) examine a cat in the triage room at the Parker Coliseum. Veterinary student Piper Norton (Class of 2007) examines a dog in Parker Coliseum. Katrina volunteer Dr. Jay Addison (LSU SVM 1983) and another volunteer rescue a horse. Veterinary students, staff, and faculty worked countless hours providing care for animals affected by Hurricanes Katrina and Rita. The LSU Veterinary Teaching Hospital tripled its caseload in the months following the storms. Tortoises were just some of the more unusual pets to come through the animal shelter on the LSU campus. There were also ducks and chickens. Above: A volunteer rescues a horse. Below: Volunteers pass out supplies on the arena floor at the Parker Coliseum. Approximately 2,000 animals stayed on LSU’s campus following Hurricanes Katrina and Rita. Another 8,000 animals were housed at the Lamar Dixon Expo Center. Hundreds of people volunteered from across Louisiana and the country. 38 La Veterinaire Winter 2021 Our Faculty 

Henry W. Green III 

Associate Professor of Veterinary Cardiology Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences Hire Date: March 1, 2020 BS, University of New Orleans, 1994 DVM, LSU, 1999 Diplomate, American College of Veterinary Internal Medicine (Cardiology) 

Duane Jeansonne 

Assistant Professor (Research) Department of Pathobiological Sciences Hire Date: June 15, 2020 BS, LSU, 1999 Ph.D., Tulane University, 2007 

Hayley Paradise 

Assistant Professor of Diagnostic Imaging Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences Hire Date: August 1, 2020 BS, University of Florida, 2011 DVM, North Carolina State University, 2016 

Green Jeansonne Paradise New Faculty and Promotions Our Faculty Joseph Francis, BVSc, MVSc, Ph.D., Everett D. Besch Professor in Veterinary Medicine, has been named associate dean of faculty affairs at the LSU SVM, effective July 1, 2020. Dr. Francis is responsible for matters that directly affect the LSU SVM faculty, including promotions and tenure, professional development, mentoring, retention and recruiting, academic policies, and faculty-related HR issues, as well as administering an online system that allows faculty to keep track of their academic and professional activities. He received his veterinary degree and master’s in veterinary virology and immunology from Madras Veterinary College in India. He received his Ph.D. in neuroimmunoendocrinology from Kansas State University. Dr. Francis began working for the LSU SVM in June 2003. 

Tammy Dugas , Ph.D., has been named head of Comparative Biomedical Sciences (CBS) at the LSU School of Veterinary Medicine, effective March 1, 2020. Dr. Dugas is responsible for overseeing the CBS department’s extensive biomedical research programs and advanced (MS and Ph.D.) degrees. She received her BS in biochemistry and her Ph.D. in chemistry from LSU in 1992 and 1996, respectively. Dr. Dugas completed a post-doctoral fellowship at Drexel University College of Medicine in Philadelphia, Pa., in 1998 and another post-doctoral fellowship at the University of Texas Medical Branch in Galveston, Texas, in 2001. Her first faculty position was at the LSU Health Science Center Shreveport. She joined the faculty of the LSU SVM in September 2014. Dr. Dugas is active in the Society of Toxicology and served as president of the Cardiovascular Toxicology Specialty Section for 2016-2017. She joined the LSU SVM faculty in September 2014. 

Konstantin “Gus” Kousoulas , Ph.D., has been named Head of Pathobiological Sciences (PBS) at the LSU School of Veterinary Medicine, effective February 20, 2020. Dr. Kousoulas is responsible for overseeing the PBS department’s extensive biomedical research programs and advanced (MS and Ph.D.) degrees. Dr. Kousoulas is a professor of virology and biotechnology in PBS and director of the Division of Biotechnology and Molecular Medicine (BioMMED). He is also the director of the NIH-funded Center in Experimental Infectious Disease Research and the Principal Investigator of the NIH-funded Louisiana Biomedical Research Network (LBRN). Dr. Kousoulas received his BS in Physics from Fairleigh Dickinson University in Teaneck, N.J., and his MS and Ph.D. degrees from Pennsylvania State University in Biophysics and Molecular Cell Biology, respectively. He received postdoctoral training at the University of Chicago working in Dr. Bernard Roizman’s laboratory and at the University of California at San Francisco with Dr. Lenore Pereira, where later he was promoted to research assistant professor. He joined the LSU SVM in 1988 and became full professor in 1994. 

Jayme Looper, DVM (LSU SVM 1997), DACVR and 

Colin Mitchell , BVMS, MS, DACVS have been named director of Small Animal Services, and director of Large Animal Services, respectively, effective July 1, 2020. Drs. Looper and Mitchell are responsible for ensuring the hospital operates at the highest level of professionalism and continues to provide cutting-edge medical and surgical care for all patients; they also oversee faculty, staff, house officers (residents and interns) and students in the hospital among many other responsibilities. Dr. Looper is associate professor of Veterinary Radiation Oncology in the Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences. She received her veterinary degree from the LSU SVM and is a Diplomate of the American College of Veterinary Radiology. Dr. Looper began working for the LSU SVM in 2016. Dr. Mitchell is professor of Equine Surgery in the Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences. He received his veterinary degree from University of Edinburgh and his master’s from University of Minnesota. He is a Diplomate of the American College of Veterinary Surgeons. Dr. Mitchell began working for the LSU SVM in 2005. 

Francis 

Dugas 

Looper 

Kousoulas 

Mitchell 40 La Veterinaire Winter 2021 Our Alumni 

The LSU SVM is pleased to announce the 2019 Distinguished Alumnus, John Kelley, DVM (LSU SVM 1984). The LSU SVM presented the award to Dr. Kelley, graduate of the Class of 1984, at the Louisiana Veterinary Medical Association (LVMA) Alumni and Friends Reception hosted as part of the LVMA’s Winter Meeting in Shreveport, La., on February 1, 2020. The Distinguished Alumnus Award was established to recognize LSU SVM alumni for outstanding professional accomplishments, personal achievements, and contributions to the community through public service. “Dr. Kelley’s contributions to our school, his communities, and veterinary medicine make a lasting difference,” said Joel D. Baines, VMD, Ph.D., dean of LSU School of Veterinary Medicine. Dr. Kelley is the founder of Lower Cape Veterinary Services, a four-hospital practice in Eastham, Mass. He was instrumental in developing Cape Animal Referral and Emergency Center in S. Dennis, Mass. He is a member of American Veterinary Medical Association, Massachusetts Veterinary Association, and American Animal Hospital Association. Dr. Kelley also holds a MS degree in theriogenology. 

# LSU SVM honors 2019 Distinguished Alumnus 

Dr. John Kelley, LSU School of Veterinary Medicine 2019 Distinguished Alumnus La Veterinaire Winter 2021 41 Our Alumni 

Dr. Kelley’s work with animal welfare groups is varied and extensive. He serves on the board of Wild Care, which helps sick, injured, and orphaned wildlife in the Eastham, Mass., area. He is also active with the Animal Rescue League of Brewster, Mass., and CASAS in Provincetown, Mass. Dr. Kelley obtained his veterinary license to practice in Puerto Rico so that he could expand his volunteer work with the Vieques Humane Society on Vieques, an island seven miles off the eastern coast of Puerto Rico. He travels there four times a year to perform much-needed veterinary services, mostly surgery. His work helps to control animal overpopulation on the island, where it’s not unusual to see large groups of wild horses foraging for food. Closer to home, Dr. Kelley has participated for 25 years in the Pan-Mass Challenge, raising funds for life-saving cancer research and treatment at Dana-Farber Cancer Institute through an annual two-day, 192-mile bike-a-thon that crosses Massachusetts. He has raised more than $100,000 for various causes with this and other rides. He not only has a passion for fundraising but an incredible knack for it. He led the LSU SVM Class of 1984 in a drive to raise more than $40,000 to endow an annual scholarship for a second-year veterinary student. Classmates say that he led by example with his characteristic good-natured approach and an offer to match their donations. Since establishing the scholarship in 2017, Dr. Kelley has continued to advocate for support for this fund and other programs for the school. This year, the scholarship fund reached $90,000, putting the Class of 1984 as the leader among all alumni classes in giving in both the amount and the percentage of those giving. Dr. Kelley’s efforts are directly responsible for the commitment of his graduating classmates’ support of the school. Dr. Kelley’s devotion to the LSU SVM is apparent whenever one speaks with him. He greatly values his education and experiences at the school and is an unfailing ambassador for it. “Graduating from LSU School of Veterinary Medicine has opened doors for me. If it weren’t for the school, I wouldn’t be doing what I’m doing. I would’ve been an electrician like my father was,” Dr. Kelley said. 

Previous Distinguished Alumnus 

Award Recipients Dr. Robert Lewis (LSU SVM 1977), Elgin, Texas, 1990 recipient; Drs. Larry McCaskill (LSU SVM 1981), Oscar, La., Mark Mikelonis (LSU SVM 1988), Covington, La., and Jim Floyd (LSU SVM 1987), Pittsboro, N.C., 1991 recipients; Dr. Allen J. Roussel (LSU SVM 1977), College Station, Texas, 1992 recipient; Dr. Mike Strain (LSU SVM 1983), Covington, La., 2003 recipient; Dr. Alfred Stevens (LSU SVM 1979), Baton Rouge, La., 2004 recipient; Dr. Gregory Rich (LSU SVM 1985), Kenner, La., 2005 recipient; Dr. Mary Boudreaux (LSU SVM 1979), Auburn, Ala., 2006 recipient; Dr. Robert D. Simmons (LSU SVM 1977), Martinsville, N.J., 2007 recipient; Dr. Debra Sellon (LSU SVM 1983), Pullman, Wash., posthumously, Dr. Mary Louise Martin (LSU SVM 1982), 2008 recipients; Dr. William James (LSU SVM 1980), Dale City, Va., 2009 recipient; Dr. Sherril Green (LSU SVM 1985), Palo Alto, Calif., and Dr. J. Trenton McClure (LSU SVM 1989), Charlottetown, Canada, 2010 recipients; Dr. Rick Alleman (LSU SVM 1980), Alachua, Fla., 2011 recipient; Dr. Thomas Tully (LSU SVM 1986), Baton Rouge, La., 2012 recipient; Dr. Carol Foil (LSU SVM 1978), Satsuma, Fla., 2013 recipient; Dr. Egeenee Daniels (LSU SVM 1986), Fort Worth, Texas, 2015 recipient; Dr. Kelley Dunn (LSU SVM 1997 & 2003), Nashville, Tenn., 2016 recipient; and Dr. Kenneth Arceneaux (LSU SVM 1993), Covington, La., 2017 recipient; Dr. George Robinson (LSU SVM 1981), Chicago, Illinois, 2018 recipient. *No award was given in 2014. 

If it weren’t for the school, I wouldn’t be doing what I’m doing. I would’ve been an electrician like my father was,” Kelley said. 42 La Veterinaire Winter 2021 

JENNY SONES, DVM (LSU SVM 2008, PHD, DACT ASSISTANT PROFESSOR OF THERIOGENOLOGY, LSU SVM HONORED BY BATON ROUGE BUSINESS REPORT AS PART OF THE 2020 CLASS OF FORTY UNDER 40 Our Alumni La Veterinaire Winter 2021 43 

What made you want to be a veterinarian? 

When I started college I was a pre-med major. I began doing biomedical research at the LSU vet school between my sophomore and junior years. I quickly felt a calling to help animals. I observed patients in the Veterinary Teaching Hospital and I was struck at how dependent they were on us to help them, determine their pain, and relieve their suffering. I decided then to change majors and commit my life to helping those that can’t help themselves, animals. 

How did the LSU SVM prepare you for your career? 

I was mentored at the LSU vet school as an undergraduate student researcher, then as a veterinary student for four years. Here I learned the value of mentorship, the appreciation for team work, and the joy of always learning even past graduation. 

What was the LSU SVM like when you attended (e.g., what’s changed since you graduated)? 

The LSU vet school has always felt “cozy” to me! I love how the different services in the Veterinary Teaching Hospital closely interact and engage their students in collaborative medicine. This hasn’t changed since graduation. Physically, the LSU SVM is expanding, but I’m sure it will still be cozy! 

What does the LSU SVM mean to you? 

The LSU SVM is my family! Members of the LSU vet school may come and go, but we always have a connection as Tigers! 

What have you been doing since you graduated from the LSU SVM? 

I’ve been in private equine practice in southwest Louisiana before relocating to upstate New York to pursue advance training in reproductive medicine at Cornell University. There I completed a Ph.D. in reproductive physiology, a postdoctoral fellowship in equine reproductive immunology, and residency training in theriogenology (veterinary reproductive medicine). Finally, I made it back to Louisiana as an assistant professor of theriogenology at LSU SVM. I received the Zoetis Award for Research Excellence in 2020. Zoetis presents an honorarium and inscribed plaque to a faculty member who has excelled in veterinary medical research during the past two years. Dr. Sones’ research focuses on comparative pregnancy physiology, preeclampsia and fetal growth restriction, and equine plancentitis. 

Fun Fact 

A classmate, Evan Sones, DVM (LSU SVM 2008), introduced me to his brother (now my husband) in 2005 during my first year of veterinary school at an LSU SVM crawfish boil. We married in my fourth year of veterinary school. 

Dr. Jenny Sones 

• Assistant Professor of Theriogenology at the LSU SVM 

• Joined faculty in 2015 

• BS from LSU in 2004 

• DVM from LSU in 2008 

• Hometown: Baton Rouge, Louisiana 

• Pets: Minnie, 14-year-old female, spayed Labrador Retriever. She was a hit by car when Dr. Sones was a veterinary student in 2007, and she adopted her. Mia, 14-year-old female, spayed, domestic shorthair cat. Trinity, 12-year-old female, spayed, three-legged, domestic shorthair cat. Dr. Sones had to amputate one of her legs after Trinity was attacked as a kitten. Our Alumni 44 La Veterinaire Winter 2021 

SRINIVAS SRIRAMULA, PHD ASSISTANT PROFESSOR, DEPARTMENT OF PHARMACOLOGY AND TOXICOLOGY, EAST CAROLINA STATE UNIVERSITY BRADY SCHOOL OF MEDICINE Our Alumni La Veterinaire Winter 2021 45 

Dr. Srinivas Sriramula 

• Assistant Professor in the Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Brody School of Medicine at East Carolina University 

• Bachelor of Veterinary Science and Animal Husbandry (BVSC&AH; equivalent to DVM) in 2001 and Master of Veterinary Science (MVSc) in 2004 from Acharya N.G. Ranga Agricultural University, India. 

• Ph.D. from the LSU SVM Comparative Biomedical Sciences in 2010. 

• Completed post-doctoral fellowship at the LSU Health Sciences Center-New Orleans in 2015. 

• Originally from Vempet, Telangana, India 

• Currently resides in Winterville, North Carolina Our Alumni 

What is your current title, place of employment, and how long have you been there? 

I am an assistant professor in the Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Brody School of Medicine at East Carolina University. I have been at ECU since August 2017. Prior to that I worked as a postdoctoral fellow (2010-2015) and instructor-research (2016-2017) at the Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center-New Orleans. 

What are your job responsibilities? 

As an assistant professor, I am responsible for conducting research and publishing papers in academic journals, teaching and supervising undergraduate and graduate students, writing proposals to secure funding for research, and making an effective contribution to teaching, research, and service goals of my department and ECU. 

What made you pursue a career in scientific research? 

My interest in the life sciences and passion for animals led me to take up veterinary medicine during my undergraduate years. While studying veterinary medicine, I became interested in biomedical research as another way to understand the complex pathophysiology of human and animal diseases at a much broader level. Leveraging my training as a veterinary doctor, I chose to study human cardiovascular diseases using animal models for my research. 

Do you still conduct research? 

Hypertension or high blood pressure remains a global health concern despite significant advancements in its treatment in recent years. My research is focused on understanding the bidirectional communication between the central nervous system and the immune system in regulation of blood pressure. My research project addresses a highly novel role for kinin B1R signaling in neuro-immune interactions of blood pressure regulation that will advance our fundamental understanding of neurogenic hypertension. I believe that understanding the mechanisms by which kinin B1 receptor contributes to pathogenesis might lead to a novel framework for mechanism-based treatment of hypertension and target organ damage. I hope that my research is able to improve outcomes related to high blood pressure and cardiovascular disease in the future. 

How did the LSU SVM prepare you for your current position? 

My experience as a student at the LSU SVM had a huge impact on my life in and laid the foundation for my academic career. I learned here that the discipline and hard work will always be rewarded. My Ph.D. mentor, Dr. Joseph Francis, played an instrumental role in my current academic success. Many of the faculty, staff, and fellow students have made a huge impact on my graduate life and prepared me for the challenges ahead in my profession. 

What is a memorable moment or story from your time at LSU? 

I have many great memories from conducting experiments in the lab and publishing first author research papers to attending LSU football games and visiting Mike the Tiger. 

Honors and Awards 

I have received the notice of funding from the National Institutes of Health. This RO1 grant is for a total of expected award of $1.8 million in funding from August 2020 to July 2025. 46 La Veterinaire Winter 2021 

> Non-Profit Org. U.S. Postage PAID Permit No. 733 Baton Rouge, LA

Louisiana State University Baton Rouge, Louisiana 70803 

lsu.edu/vetmed 

# Fast Facts 

• The LSU SVM is one of only 32 veterinary schools in the United States. • The LSU SVM is the only veterinary school in Louisiana. • The LSU SVM’s Veterinary Teaching Hospital sees more than 29,000 cases each year and is open 24/7, 365 days a year. • The LSU SVM is a premier biomedical research facility with researchers investigating both human and animal diseases and injuries. • The LSU SVM’s Wildlife Hospital provides free care for more than 1,000 wildlife cases each year at no cost to the Good Samaritans who bring them to us. • The LSU SVM was the 19th veterinary school established in the U.S. and graduated its first class in 1977. Since then it has granted more than 3,200 DVM degrees. • The LSU SVM also offers M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in three academic departments: Comparative Biomedical Sciences, Pathobiological Sciences, and Veterinary Clinical Sciences. • The LSU SVM provides advanced training for veterinarians who work as interns and residents in our Veterinary Teaching Hospital. • The LSU SVM provides veterinary and daily care for Mike VII, LSU’s live tiger mascot. 

# TEACH · HEAL · DISCOVER · PROTECT
