Title: 

URL Source: https://trumpwhitehouse.archives.gov/sites/whitehouse.gov/files/docs/comments-received-june-29-through-july-11-2017.pdf

Published Time: Mon, 28 Aug 2017 21:13:27 GMT

Markdown Content:
From: Dave Huff     

> To: FN -OVP -Election Integrity Staff
> Subject: Enormous concern with last 4 social
> Date: Thursday, June 29, 2017 2:02:32 PM
> Importance: High

Dear Sir or Madam, 

I noted with alarm that you are requesting "...last four digits of social security number if available," 

followed by the statement that “please be aware that all documents will be made available to the 

public” 

So, when you call the bank, do they ask for your full social or just the last 4? So if someone wanted 

access to my bank account information, the address, full name, dob and last four social is EXACTLY 

what they would need. You will open up the entire voting population to a massive amount of fraud if 

this data is in any way released. Please do NOT release this information. 

Best regards, 

David Huff From: 

To: 

Beau McElhattan 

FN -OVP -Election Integrity Staff 

Subject: integrity... 

Date: Thursday, June 29, 2017 2:25:49 PM 

Hi, I voted in all 50 states. Just wanted you to know. 

Love, 

Beau in Oklahoma From:   

> To:
> soibangla
> FN -OVP -Election Integrity Staff
> Subject: you are not about voting integrity
> Date: Thursday, June 29, 2017 2:43:24 PM

you are all about voter suppression to rig elections. you are evil. pray there is no hell. 

"I don't want everybody to vote...As a matter of fact, our leverage in the elections quite 

candidly goes up as the voting populace goes down" — conservative activist Paul Weyrich, 

August 1980 

After the election, former Florida GOP chairman Jim Greer told The Palm Beach Post that the 

explicit goal of the state’s voter -ID law was Democratic suppression. “The Republican Party, 

the strategists, the consultants, they firmly believe that early voting is bad for Republican 

Party candidates,” Greer told the Post. “It’s done for one reason and one reason only ... 

‘We’ve got to cut down on early voting because early voting is not good for us,’” he said. 

Last spring, for example, Pennsylvania House Majority Leader Mike Turzai told a gathering 

of Republicans that th eir voter identification law would “allow Governor Romney to win the 

state of Pennsylvania.” 

"I’m going to be real honest with you" Tea Party leader Ken Emanuelson said at a Dallas 

County Republican Party event on May 20. "The Republican Party doesn’t wa nt black people 

to vote if they are going to vote 9 -to -1 for Democrats." 

A News21 analysis of 2,068 alleged election -fraud cases since 2000 shows that while fraud 

has occurred, the rate is infinitesimal, and in -person voter impersonation on Election Day, 

which prompted 37 state legislatures to enact or consider tough voter ID laws, is virtually non -

existent. 

In an exhaustive public records search, News21 reporters sent thousands of requests to 

elections officers in all 50 states, asking for every case of fraudulent activity including 

registration fraud, absentee ballot fraud, vote buying, false election counts, campaign fraud, 

casting an ineligible vote, voting twice, voter impersonation fraud and intimidation. 

Analysis of the resulting comprehensive N ews21 election fraud database turned up 10 cases of 

voter impersonation. With 146 million registered voters in the United States during that time, 

those 10 cases represent one out of about every 15 million prospective voters. 

On July 29 the Fourth Circui t Court of Appeals, long considered one of the most conservative 

of the Circuit courts, struck down North Carolina's voter -ID law, one of the strictest in the 

nation. The judges found that the provisions "target African Americans with almost surgical 

precision." 

"New evidence that voter ID laws ‘skew democracy’ in favor of white Republicans": 

https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/wonk/wp/2016/02/04/new -evidence -that -voter -id -

laws -skew -democracy -in -favor -of -white -republicans/ From:   

> To:
> Charlie Ticotsky
> FN -OVP -Election Integrity Staff
> Subject: This commission is a sham
> Date: Thursday, June 29, 2017 4:07:53 PM

This commission is a sham and Kris Kobach has been put on it expressly to disenfranchise 

minority voters. I am ashamed that my taxpayer dollars are being used for such purposes. From:   

> To:
> Ann Onymous
> FN -OVP -Election Integrity Staff
> Subject: voting integrity
> Date: Thursday, June 29, 2017 5:59:36 PM

heard you guys needed voter info and stuff, here's mine http://goatse.info/ 

## goatse - Eh 

goatse.info 

The goatse.cx lawyer has informed us that we 

need a warning! So.. if you are under the age 

of 18 or find this photograph offensive, please 

don't look at it. From:    

> To:
> NoFlt Wlt
> FN -OVP -Election Integrity Staff
> Subject: Election fraud
> Date: Thursday, June 29, 2017 6:45:32 PM

My reading of news releases indicates that you should interview the following people for in -person voter fraud. 

Ann Coulter 

Steve Bannon 

Liz Cheney's husband 

and some Wisconsin up -state representative who was shacked up with his girl friend and living in a county other 

than where he cast his ballot. 

All republicans 

We are all Americans with one nation to protect and uphold and GOPer seem hell bent on running it into the ground. 

Remember, the worm always turns and they will come after you someday no matter how much you soil yourself in 

support of GOPers. From:   

> To:
> Lynn Adams
> FN -OVP -Election Integrity Staff
> Subject: view on the federal election process
> Date: Thursday, June 29, 2017 6:53:40 PM

To: Kris Kobach, Vice Chair 

I'm glad you asked for the opinion of the American public. Here's my 

two cents: 

1) Voting districts need to be drawn up by a non -partisan state committee 

in order to stop gerrymandering. 

2) Our government is supposed to be of the people, by the people, for the 

people. Corporations are NOT "people" as envisioned by our founding 

fathers. Ergo, the Citizens United decision needs to be reversed in order 

to get corporate money out of our politics. 

3) We need open primaries so that we can all vote for who we feel is the 

best candidate. 

4) The electoral college is an outdated dinosaur of a system and needs to 

be abolished. Whoever gets the majority of the vote needs to be in office, 

not the loser, and unfortunately we've been stuck twice now in my lifetime 

with the loser. 

5) Stop the voter roll purges. 

6) Make election day a holiday so that everyone can vote. There were a few 

times when I was working two -three jobs when I didn't have time to go vote. 

7) Stop charging exorbitant fees for identification cards. When you only have 

$5 to feed yourself and your child for a week you can't afford to pay $150 for 

a voter id card! 

Sincerely, 

L. Adams From:    

> To:
> Bob Worobec
> FN -OVP -Election Integrity Staff
> Subject: request for voter information
> Date: Thursday, June 29, 2017 7:06:49 PM

I wholeheartedly support California's decision not to send you the voter data you requested. Your lack of integrity 

and refusal to acknowledge basic facts undermines our democracy. 

Robert Worobec 

Pacifica, CA From:   

> To:
> Stephen Lehew
> FN -OVP -Election Integrity Staff
> Subject: Attention: Kris Koback
> Date: Thursday, June 29, 2017 7:26:49 PM

Mr. Kris Koback 

Vice Chair 

Presidential Advisory Commission on Election Integrity 

Dear Mr. Koback, 

The only thing undermining American citizens' "confidence in the 

integrity of federal election processes" is you and this sham commission. 

The American Public is watching you! Any one who believes that 3 million 

or more Californian's votes are false is to be highly mis -trusted. 

Any one who supports an antiquated electoral college system allowing 

minority rule is suspect. 

You have no right t o my voting record or anyone else's; and to use it to 

eventually suppress voting is unconscionable in American Democracy. 

We saw what you did in Kansas and we are now watching you more 

fervently. 

Sincerely, 

Stephen Lehew 

New Yorker and 

American Citizen From: Ken     

> To: ElectionIntegrityStaff@ovp.eop.gov.
> Subject: Fox in the Henhouse!
> Date: Thursday, June 29, 2017 8:10:12 PM

This is just one example of Trump and his minion's hideous policies? Why does GOOD always have 

such an uphill battle against BAD???????? 

Ken Bachtold 

REDACTED From: 

To: 

CB 

FN -OVP -Election Integrity Staff 

Subject: Piece of Shit, you are. Yoda 

Date: Thursday, June 29, 2017 8:11:04 PM 

Just fuck off already you shit -stain on democracy. From:   

> To:
> Simon Delongo
> FN -OVP -Election Integrity Staff
> Subject: Go Fuck Yourself Kobach & Co.
> Date: Thursday, June 29, 2017 8:17:27 PM

Please go fuck yourself, Kris. You're a disgusting fraud with no moral bearing whatsoever. 

And any staff person reading this should really look for a decent job and not be a co -conspirator on behalf 

of President Pussygrabber and his white "Christian" henchmen. 

Best wishes, 

Simon From:   

> To:
> Jennifer Larsen
> FN -OVP -Election Integrity St aff
> Subject: Just one last thing
> Date: Thursday, June 29, 2017 8:20:21 PM

Dear Glorious Overlords, 

Per your terrifying letter that makes it sound like you are creating super Big Brother, I have 

some concerns that I would like to share with you. 

If you gather my "full first and last names of all registrants, middle names or initials if 

available, addresses, dates of birth, political party (if recorded in your state), last four digits of 

social security number if available, voter history (elections voted in) from 2006 onward, 

active/inactive status, cancelled status, information regarding any felony convictions, 

information regarding voter regis tration in another state, information regarding military status, 

and overseas citizen information" and make it "available to the public" you will likely get 

sued. 

Many people will get their identity stolen, which will harm the economy. 

Perhaps there is a safer, better way to go about your jousting at windmills? 

Sincerely, 

Jennifer Larsen From:   

> To:
> Sherrill Lawrence
> FN -OVP -Election Integrity Staff
> Subject: Election Fraud
> Date: Thursday, June 29, 2017 8:32:28 PM

Dear Mr. Kobach, 

I am not a Secretary of State, but as a citizen, I am very concerned about 

the "...laws, rules, policies, activities, strategies, and practices 

that...undermine the American people's confidence in the integrity of..." 

elections in general. For your information, I am a white senior citizen, 

native -born American, and retired educator with a daughter retired from 

the military after 20 years of service, one an elementary school teacher, 

and two adult children in the computer industry. I am not a violent radical, 

just a humane Christian who believes in honesty, integrity, and kindness. 

One practice of Republicans is to gerrymander districts i n order to 

guarantee their continued selection over the will of the possible opposing 

majority of the citizens of their state. 

Investigation into the last presidential election found almost no illegal 

ballots. They also found that most of the questionable behavior was 

committed by avid Republican supporters, such as: going to the polls with 

open carry weapons, filling out mail -in ballots for people by recommending 

only the Republican candidates, and closing polling places while people 

were still in line to vote, to name a few. 

Another practice by our Republican president, that no Republican in any 

level of government has sought to censure, refute, or rein -in, as far as I 

can see, is the constant refrain that our elections are easily rigged. 

Consider, if th at were true, then the only reason Trump won was because 

he and the Republican party cheated. 

I will only trust your committee if it is truly bi -partisan and is clearly trying 

to get the vote to every single citizen of this country - not just the safe 

Rep ublican supporters. 

S. Lawrence From:    

> To:
> Jeff Woodson
> FN -OVP -Election Integrity Staff
> Subject: You might want to secure your email before asking for PII data
> Date: Thursday, June 29, 2017 8:44:33 PM

Read the article and maybe hire some IT people who know what they're doing: 

http://gizmodo.com/trumps -election -fraud -commission -asked -states -to -send -s-1796535568 

---

This email has been checked for viruses by Avast antivirus software. 

https://www.avast.com/antivirus From:    

> To:
> Cheryl Schenk
> FN -OVP -Election Integrity Staff
> Subject: Views on the laws, rules, policies, activities, strategies and practices of our election process
> Date: Thursday, June 29, 2017 8:52:40 PM

Kris Kobach 

Vice Chair 

Presidential Advisory Commission on Election Integrity 

Dear Mr. Kobach: 

I am an American citizen and have voted in every election but that should not be any of your business. What you 

should be addressing is the ability of foreign nationals to hack into our election servers and not only try to change 

the registrations but possibly change the actual vote. You should be worried about how each state secures the votes 

and the voter registrations. Your job, as part of the Commission on Election Integrity, is to make sure our election 

process - be in local, state, or national - is the most safest way for every American citizen to have their voices heard. 

********* 

Cheryl Schenk 

USA From:   

> To:
> Antony Hughes
> FN -OVP -Election Integrity Staff
> Subject: No
> Date: Thursday, June 29, 2017 8:55:29 PM

Dear Mr. Kobach, 

As a private citizen I must tell you that your request for voting information from the states is 

completely inappropriate. It is none of your business or the President's how I vote, for whom I 

vote, and whether I vote. Such information in the hands of any administrati on would be open 

to all kinds of manipulation for nefarious purposes, which I believe, you and Mr. Trump are 

up to. 

I have watched your activities in Kansas trying to suppress voters on the basis of fraudulent 

claims of massive voter fraud for which there is absolutely no evidence. Your new agency is 

preparing, it seems, to rig elections. You, sir, are the fraud and neither you nor our President 

are to be trusted. Mr. Trump's claims that millions of fraudulent votes were cast against him is 

the ravings of an egomaniac who can't stand to lose. 

I hope and pray that you fail. 

Fr. Antony Hughes From:   

> To:
> REDACTED
> FN -OVP -Election Integrity Staff
> Subject: Reply to your request re: voting reform and integrity.
> Date: Thursday, June 29, 2017 9:14:45 PM

Kris Kobach Vice Chair 

Presidential Advisory Commission on Election Integrity 

Dear Sir, 

Since you asked, here are a few reasons my confidence in the integrity of our election process 

has been undermined for some years. 

When Republicans conspire to deprive voters of their right to vote just because their name 

matches the name of another citi zen in another state 500 or 1000 miles away, it looks 

politically and ethnically motivated. Perhaps you've noticed that some hispanic names are 

more often represented for historical, cultural or linguistic reasons. I know a man named 

Antonio Romero. I bet you could find several in every state in the country. Did you remove 

any John Smiths or James Andersons from voter roles? Did you remove any Lois Jones or 

Emma Browns from the roles? No? I thought not. Yet, the phenomenon of people double 

registered - reg istered in more than one place - is documented. Perhaps you heard - Jared 

Kushner, Steven Bannon, and other members of the current administration are/were registered 

in more than one state. I heard no uproar about voter fraud from you and your party about that! 

Did you give those with "duplicate" names a fair chance to show that they were a legitimate 

citizen/voter? I read that you didn't even verify middle names so you could remove Antonio 

Juan Romero AND Antonio Jose Romero with no further investigation. Did you remove them 

from roles of registered voters without notice, leaving the voter to find out at the polls that 

they no longer could vote? 

When a black senior citizen who has lived in the same community all her life, now has to 

prove her identity despite living in a corner of her community where paperwork wasn't 

common when she was born in 1922 or 1932. How will she find a birth certificate? Now that 

she is living in a adult assisted living facility how will she have the money to get the 

documentation? Now that Mississippi, among others, have closed Departments of Motor 

Vehicles all over the state (particularly in the parts of the state wher e blacks live in larger 

numbers), how will she get to a DMV to register? How will she pay for the birth certificate? 

How will she pay for all the other documents? You know she doesn't drive. Fear not 

Republicans! Buy a gun and that is sufficient document ation to be registered in Texas! 

How can I have confidence in the electoral process in this country when major Republican 

figures own the companies that manufacture the voting systems? How can I have confidence 

in the electoral system when Diebold and the rest claim the privilege of industrial secrecy and 

proprietary rights to avoid sharing the methods used to count the results or have the methods 

and results verified by an unbiased auditor? How can I have confidence in the results in the 

electoral process when there is no paper trail? How can I have confidence in the results in the 

electoral process when the systems have been shown to be easily hackable, yet independent 

verification is denied citing industrial secrets? How can I have confidence in our elections when the richest 0.1% of citizens can influence the 

outcome with a out -sized monetary contribution to the winner? What favors are expected in 

return? 

How can I have confidence in our elections when gerrymandering is pervasive? When the 

percentage of Republican voters in a recent election in Pennsylvan ia was less than 50%, yet 13 

out of 18 districts sent a Republican Representative to Washington, I no longer have any 

confidence in the electoral process. When a Republican state representative in Pennsylvania is 

filmed bragging about "voter registration (suppression) to elect Romney, Done!", how can I 

have confidence in the integrity of the electoral system? 

When the country's founding relic, and original sin, of slavery is the reason for the Electoral 

College, and three million more people voted for th e Democrat than for the Republican, how 

can I have confidence in the electoral system seeing the Republican contestant in the White 

House? 

No, I have no confidence in our electoral system and what Republicans in state houses and at 

federal level (Supreme Court, Department of Justice, and more) are doing is making me less 

confident by the day! 

Thank you for the opportunity to give feedback. 

Charles Utt From: Andrew Bucko     

> To: Feedback@s os.nj.gov
> Cc: FN -OVP -Election Integrity Staff
> Subject: Presidential Advisory Commission on Election Integrity
> Date: Thursday, June 29, 2017 9:49:49 PM

Dear Lt. Governor Guadagno, 

Media reports today have revealed that Kris Kobach, Vice Chair of the Presidential Advisory 

Commission on Election Integrity, has sent letters to the Secretary of State in all fifty states 

requesting that “all available voter roll data” including “full first and last names of all 

registrants, middle name or initials if available, addresses, dates of birth, political party, […] 

last four digits of social security number, voter history (elections voted in) from 2006 

onward”, among other information. The letter also states that any information provided to the 

Commission is to be made public. 

This request is very concerning. The federal government is attempting to get the name, 

address, birth date, political party, and social security number of every voter in the country. 

This appears to be a significant overreach by the federal government into state voter 

registration matters. The signer of the letter, Kris Kobach, has made several unsubstantiated 

claims that large numbers of undocumented immigrants voted in the recent elections. 

I strongly oppose any participation in th is request by New Jersey. I urge you to decline and not 

hand over any voter registration data for this or any similar requests. 

Sincerely, 

Andrew Bucko   

> REDACTED From:
> To:
> Kellee Richards
> FN -OVP -Election Integrity Staff
> Subject: Your Request for Voter Records
> Date: Thursday, June 29, 2017 9:49:49 PM

Mr. Kobach, 

Does the term "secret ballot" mean anything to you? Nobody is fooled - you're out to suppress 

liberal -leaning voters. If you want to know what "undermines [our] confidence in the integrity 

of federal elections processes," take a look in the mirror. 

Sincerely, 

Kellee Richards 

Citizen and Voter 

P.S. My state told you to take a hike. From: 

To: 

Joel Hamburg 

FN -OVP -Election Integrity Staff 

Date: Thursday, June 29, 2017 9:57:59 PM 

Attachments: kobach.png 

Joel Hamburg 

Chandler AZ, 85286 From: 

To: 

Marcia Mccarthy 

FN -OVP -Election Integrity Staff 

Subject: Election integrity 

Date: Thursday, June 29, 2017 10:15:05 PM 

Mr. Kobach, 

Fuck off. 

Sincerely, 

Marcia McCarthy 

Sent from my iPad From: 

> To:

REDACTED    

> FN -OVP -Election Integrity Staff
> Subject: Input on the Federal Election Process
> Date: Thursday, June 29, 2017 10:18:48 PM

Dear Mr. Kobach: 

I know you are looking for ideas from the public on ways to “undermine the American people’s confidence in the 

integrity of the federal election process.” Your panel sounds like a good way to start. Frankly, I think we could learn 

a lot from how other countries do that. Poll taxes, complex constitutional law tests, or simply whittling down a few 

voters here and there may not always work —what you need is to let anyone vote, but then you do the counting. It 

has worked every time in Zimbabwe and elsewhere. And, I’m sure that President Trump picked up a few pointers on 

elections when he visited Saudi Arabia, like there’s no need for an election to be king. I am concerned that, as 

President Trump told us (and the media would not), 3 to 5 million illegals voted last year, and I am afraid they will 

do so again on America’s Got Talent. 

A Concerned Voter 

----

Sent using Guerrillamail.com 

Block or report abuse: https://www.guerrillamail.com//abuse/? 

a=ZE1xBhkJTLo8hhqx92wWZg30WcuW1Pdf0bQMedDmRQMxTw%3D%3D From: 

> To:

REDACTED   

> FN -OVP -Election Integrity Staff
> Subject: Integrity of Federal Election Processes
> Date: Thursday, June 29, 2017 10:43:22 PM

Dear Mr. Kobach, 

I hope you will consider my input as an American citizen as you gather input from various 

Secretaries of State in our great nation. I am indeed concerned about the integrity of 

federal elections; here are my reasons: 

1. Voter ID laws designed to make it difficult for elderly, low -income and minority voters to 

vote. 

2. Gerrymandering by state legislatures which tends to favor one party over another (most 

of these gerrymandered states are in Republican -majority states). 

3. Electronic voting machines which are potentially vulnerable to attack by a foreign state or 

other entity; paper ballots would go a long way to boosting my confidence in our voting 

system. 

4. An electoral college in which individual votes are not weighed equally (Wyoming voters 

get more weight than voters in Texas or California) and in which a candidate can be elected 

without receiving the majority of the popular vote. 

5. Did I mention the voter ID laws? How many documented cases of voter fraud have there 

been? And how many people (mostly elderly, low income, minorities, etc. ---mainly 

Democratic voters) have been turned away from the polls by these oppressive laws? 

6. Super PACs. Our elections have become a farce. The people do not run this country ---

the special interests do. Overturn Citizens United and I might have a little more faith in our 

election process. 

7. In short, my faith in the integrity of Federal election processes and, by extension, our 

very democracy, is thrown into question by corporate -funded politicians such as yourself 

who seem to be so vehemently opposed to giving all people an equal voice by passing 

egregious laws to suppress the vote in the name of the essentially non -existent threat of 

voter fraud. 

I hope you will consider my comments, and I hope the people will one day take our 

democracy back from corporate special interests in the interest of true public service for the 

sake of the betterment of all ---not for the just for betterment of the wealthy. 

Sincerely, 

Matthew Flinner 

Nashville, TN From:     

> To:
> Mary Beth Hilburn
> FN -OVP -Election Integrity Staff
> Cc: Margo Waring ;cynthia demeter ;

REDACTED  

> Date: Thursday, June 29, 2017 10:45:11 PM

We have a president that is trying to delegitimize the USA in the international community. We need to get some 

REAL integrity vs. Kris Koback’s fevered dreams of multitudes of brown people coming for our votes. Not enough 

people are involved in the electoral process right now. You seem only interested in keeping poor, minority voters 

from getting to the ballot boxes and in solving a non -existent problem. We have real problems in our country, and 

this is not one of them. 

If you must be involved in looking into polling practices please make our polling places hack free (and I mean that 

in every sense of the word). Get the Russian government out of our electoral business. 

Do the right job, not a hack job. From:    

> To:
> JoAnn Farmer
> FN -OVP -Election Integrity Staff
> Subject: Voter Suppression
> Date: Thursday, June 29, 2017 10:57:21 PM

How DARE you bully our states into giving you our.voter rolls!! You want to ensure fair 

voting? Address these: 

A president who frequently expresses his distaste for bleeding women but has 

yet to express his opposition to RUSSIAN interference in American elections 

Massive purges of voter registration rolls without due process 

Legislators, like you, who craft gerrymandered redistricting maps enabling 

politicians to choose their voters rather than the reverse 

The Supreme Court's decision in Shelby County v Holder, gutting the 

protections of the Voting Rights Act under the obviously false rationale that 

America is today a post -racial society 

Voter suppression efforts targeted at voters of color, the working poor, and 

students - oh, yeah, and those suspected of being Democrats 

Antiqua ted voting systems vulnerable to state -sponsored tampering and 

conveniently producing no auditable paper trails 

A Federal Elections Commission - our democracy's watchdog - that is toothless 

by design 

The Supreme Court's decision in Citizens Unite d v FEC, granting the wealthy 

few a louder voice in political campaigns than all other citizens combined 

An antiquated Electoral College system that enables minority rule 

An advisory committee on election integrity led by a notorious champion of voter 

suppression 

Fix these first. Then we can talk about voter registration. 

Sincerely, 

JoAnn Farmer   

> REDACTED From:
> To:
> Paul DeMarco
> FN -OVP -Election Integrity Staff
> Subject: Voter data
> Date: Thursday, June 29, 2017 11:31:15 PM

You are stupid fucks. And mean. And assholes. 

Stupid mean fucking assholes. 

http://gizmodo.com/trumps -election -fraud -commission -asked -states -to -send -s-1796535568 From:   

> To:
> Robert Schober
> FN -OVP -Election Integrity Staff
> Subject: Elections
> Date: Thursday, June 29, 2017 11:46:44 PM

Mr. Kobach --

You have asked for opinions on what makes me and others question the integrity of our 

electoral process. Here are mine: 

1. Way too much money in the political system, thanks to Citizens United; our system is mere 

fraud, and to cleanse it all campaigns for the House, Senate and President should be publicly 

financed. 

2. I'm a conservative at heart and I completely, distrust Trump and his motives. This 

"investigation" seems to be his need to counteract the actual fact that he lost the popular vote. 

3. Republicans, and you, Sir, tout the need for integrity of our elections, but where is your's or 

your party's proposal to spend money to upgrade the country's voting apparatu s to prevent 

hacks and provide a paper receipt to each voter? 

4. Gerrymandering by both parties undermines fair elections and the "one man, one vote" 

principle. The process must be taken out of the hands of the parties and placed under the 

responsibility of n on -partisan committees in each state. 

5. Multiple studies have show that voter fraud is extremely rare. months ago, North Carolina 

election officials announced that perhaps one or two instances of attempted voter fraud 

occurred in about 4.8 million votes cast . This investigation, and your recent $1000 fine for 

voter shenanigans, call into question this entire project and undermines my confidence that 

future elections will be above board. 

Robert N. Schober 

Bellingham, WA From: 

To: 

Eric Olson 

FN -OVP -Election Integrity Staff 

Subject: Voter data 

Date: Friday, June 30, 2017 12:03:52 AM 

Go fuck yourself. From:     

> To:
> Andrew Sayre
> FN -OVP -Election Integrity Staff
> Subject: election integrity request
> Date: Friday, June 30, 2017 12:57:48 AM

Mr. Kobach, 

How friggin' stupid do you think people in this country are? You care 

about election integrity about as much as Trump cares about anything he 

doesn't see in a mirror. This is about voter suppression and everyone 

knows it. If Secretary Rosado of New York gives you my or any other NY 

state resident's information, then she's a sap who I will work very hard 

to get removed from her office before she gives a Nigerian prince my 

state's treasury. 

I mean, are you really this lazy? You want to disenfranchise voters do 

your own grunt work. 

Andrew Sayre From:   

> To:
> Regina Dwyer
> FN -OVP -Election Integrity Staff
> Subject: Electoral concerns
> Date: Friday, June 30, 2017 1:02:51 AM

Dear Commissioners: 

I am concerned about the integrity of our elections. 

The intelligence community’s discovery of hacking into state and local election boards is 

frightening and the ultimate threat to democracy. Foreign actors must be prevented from 

interfering in our elections. 

I think one way to help insure confidence in our elections is to provide local boards with 

assistance with computer security. The federal government needs to provide funds and 

guidance to local boards so that they can stay up to date with the latest technology to prevent 

intrusions. A paper trail should be required so that if there are any questions about voting 

fraud the results can be checked. 

In addition, great care must be taken to make sure that hackers aren’t able to purge voters 

from the rolls. That is as great a danger as the ability to tamper with votes. 

I hope you will focus on these concerns. 

Thank you for your time and consideration. 

Regina Dwyer From:   

> To:
> REDACTED
> FN -OVP -Election Integrity Staff
> Subject: Republican Rolls in U.S.
> Date: Friday, June 30, 2017 1:09:06 AM

Republican County Constable Larry Dale Floyd was arrested on suspicion of soliciting 

sex with an 8 -year old girl. Floyd has repeatedly won elections for Denton County, 

Texas, constable. 

Republican judge Mark Pa zuhanich pleaded no contest to fondling a 10 -year old girl 

and was sentenced to 10 years probation. 

Republican Party leader Bobby Stumbo was arrested for having sex with a 5 -year old 

boy. 

Republican teacher and former city councilman John Collins pleaded g uilty 

to sexually molesting 13 and 14 year old girls. 

Republican campaign worker Mark Seidensticker is a convicted child molester. 

Republican Mayor Philip Giordano is serving a 37 -year sentence in federal prison for 

sexually abusing 8 - and 10 -year old girl s. 

Republican Mayor John Gosek was arrested on charges of soliciting sex from two 15 -

year old girls. 

Republican County Commissioner David Swartz pleaded guilty to molesting two girls 

under the age of 11 and was sentenced to 8 years in prison. 

Republican legislator Edison Misla Aldarondo was sentenced to 10 years in prison for 

raping his daughter between the ages of 9 and 17. 

Republican Committeeman John R. Curtain was charged with molesting a teenage 

boy and unlawful sexual contact with a minor .

Republican anti -abortion activist Howard Scott Heldreth is a convicted child rapist in 

Florida. 

Republican zoning supervisor, Boy Scout leader and Lutheran Church president 

Dennis L. Rader pleaded guilty to performing a sexual act on an 11 -year old girl he 

murdered. 

Republican anti -abortion activist Nicholas Morency pleaded guilty to possessing child 

pornography on his computer and offering a bounty to anybody who murders an 

abortion doctor. 

Republican campaign consultant Tom Shortridge was sentenced to t hree years 

probation for taking nude photographs of a 15 -year old girl. 

Republican racist pedophile and United States Senator Strom Thurmond had sex with 

a 15 -year old black girl which produced a child. 

Republican pastor Mike Hintz, whom George W. Bush commended during the 2004 

presidential campaign, surrendered to police after admitting to a sexual affair with a 

female juvenile. 

Republican legislator Peter Dibble pleaded no contest to having an inappropriate 

relationship with a 13 -year -old girl. 

Republi can advertising consultant Carey Lee Cramer was charged with molesting his 

9-year old step -daughter after including her in an anti -Gore television commercial. 

Republican activist Lawrence E. King, Jr. organized child sex parties at the White 

House during t he 1980s. 

Republican lobbyist Craig J. Spence organized child sex parties at the White House 

during the 1980s. Republican Congressman Donald "Buz" Lukens was found guilty of having sex with a 

female minor and sentenced to one month in jail. 

Republican fundraiser Richard A. Delgaudio was found guilty of child porn charges 

and paying two teenage girls to pose for sexual photos. 

Republican activist Mark A. Grethen convicted on six counts of sex crimes involving 

children. 

Republican activist Randal David Ankeney pleaded guilty to attempt ed sexual assault 

on a child. 

Republican Congressman Dan Crane had sex with a female minor working as a 

congressional page. 

Republican activist and Christian Coalition leader Beverly Russell admitted to an 

incestuous relationship with his step daughter. 

Re publican Judge Ronald C. Kline was placed under house arrest for child 

molestation and possession of child pornography. 

Republican congressman and anti -gay activist Robert Bauman was charged with 

having sex with a 16 -year -old boy he picked up at a gay bar. 

Republican Committee Chairman Jeffrey Patti was arrested for distributing a video 

clip of a 5 -year -old girl being raped. 

Republican activist Marty Glickman (a.k.a. "Republican Marty"), was taken into 

custody by Florida police on four counts of unlawful se xual activity with an underage 

girl and one count of delivering the drug LSD. 

Republican legislative aide Howard L. Brooks was charged with molesting a 12 -

year old boy and possession of child pornography. 

Republican Senate candidate John Hathaway was accus ed of having sex with his 12 -

year old baby sitter and withdrew his candidacy after the allegations were reported in 

the media. 

Republican Committee Chairman Jeffrey Patti was arrested for distributing a video 

clip of a 5 -year -old girl being raped. 

Republi can activist Marty Glickman (a.k.a. "Republican Marty"), was taken into 

custody by Florida police on four counts of unlawful sexual activity with an underage 

girl and one count of delivering the drug LSD. 

Republican legislative aide Howard L. Brooks was ch arged with molesting a 12 -

year old boy and possession of child pornography. 

Republican Senate candidate John Hathaway was accused of having sex with his 12 -

year old baby sitter and withdrew his candidacy after the allegations were reported in 

the media. 

Republican preacher Stephen White, who demanded a return to traditional values, 

was sentenced to jail after offering $20 to a 14 -year -old boy for permission to perform 

oral sex on him. 

Republican talk show host Jon Matthews pleaded guilty to exposing his ge nitals to an 

11 year old girl. 

Republican anti -gay activist Earl "Butch" Kimmerling was sentenced to 40 years in 

prison for molesting an 8 -year old girl after he attempted to stop a gay couple from 

adopting her. 

Republican election board official Kevin Coa n was sentenced to two years probation 

for soliciting sex over the internet from a 14 -year old girl. 

Republican politician Andrew Buhr was charged with two counts of first degree 

sodomy with a 13 -year old boy. Republican politician Keith Westmoreland was arrested on seven felony counts of 

lewd and lascivious exhibition to girls under the age of 16 (i.e. exposing himself to 

children). 

Republican anti -abortion activist John Allen Burt was found guilty of molesting a 15 -

year old girl. 

Republ ican County Councilman Keola Childs pleaded guilty to molesting a male child. 

Republican activist John Butler was charged with criminal sexual assault on a 

teenage girl. 

Republican candidate Richard Gardner admitted to molesting his two daughters. 

Republic an Councilman and former Marine Jack W. Gardner was convicted of 

molesting a 13 -year old girl. 

Republican County Commissioner Merrill Robert Barter pleaded guilty to 

unlawful sexual contact and assault on a teenage boy. 

Republican City Councilman Fred C. S meltzer, Jr. pleaded no contest to raping a 15 

year -old girl and served 6 -months in prison. 

Republican activist Parker J. Bena pleaded guilty to possession of child pornography 

on his home computer and was sentenced to 30 months in federal prison and fined 

$18,000. 

Republican parole board officer and former Colorado state representative, Larry Jack 

Schwarz, was fired after child pornography was found in his possession. 

Republican strategist and Citadel Military College graduate Robin Vanderwall was 

convicte d in Virginia on five counts of soliciting sex from boys and girls over the 

internet. 

Republican businessman Jon Grunseth withdrew his candidacy for Minnesota 

governor after allegations surfaced that he went swimming in the nude with four 

underage girls, i ncluding his daughter. 

Republican director of the "Young Republican Federation" Nicholas Elizondo 

molested his 6 -year old daughter and was sentenced to six years in prison. 

Republican president of the New York City Housing Development Corp. Russell 

Harding pleaded guilty to possessing child pornography on his computer. 

Republican Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld authorized the rape of children in 

Iraqi prisons in order to humiliate their parents into providing information about the 

anti -American insurgency .

Republican serial killer Ted Bundy was hired by the Republican Party 

Republican activist Matthew Glavin, who preached family values, was caught 

masturbating in public and fondling an undercover park ranger 

Republican Party Chairman Sam Walls, who is married, was urged to drop his 

candidacy for Congress when it was found he likes to dress up in women's clothing 

Republican Congressman Edward Schrock resigned from Congress after he was 

caught searching for sex on a gay telephone service 

Republican Mayor Jim West Republican voter Timothy McVeigh bombed Oklahoma 

City championed an anti -gay agenda, but was later found to be gay himself 

Republican preacher Jimmy Swaggart preached fidelity, but cheated on his wife with 

a prostitute 

Republican Congressman Bob L ivingston was about to vote for impeaching President 

Clinton for sexual improprieties until it was disclosed he was an adulterer 

Republican Congressman Henry Hyde denounced President Clinton's extramarital 

affair, but was later found to be an adulterer him self Republican Party leader Paul Ingram pleaded guilty to six counts of raping his 

daughters and served 14 years in federal prison. 

Republican benefactor of conservative Christian groups, Richard A. Dasen Sr., was 

found guilty of raping a 1 5-year old girl. Dasen, 62, who is married with grown 

children and several grandchildren, has told police that over the past decade he paid 

more than $1 million to have sex with a large number of young women. 

Republican city councilman Mark Harris, who is described as a "good military man" 

and "church goer," was convicted of repeatedly having sex with an 11 -year -old girl 

and sentenced to 12 years in prison. 

Republican anti -abortion activist Howard Scott Heldreth is a convicted child rapist in 

Florida. 

Repub lican County Commissioner David Swartz pleaded guilty to molesting two girls 

under the age of 11 and was sentenced to 8 years in prison. 

Republican judge Mark Pazuhanich pleaded no contest to fondling a 10 -year old girl 

and was sentenced to 10 years probat ion. 

Republican anti -abortion activist Nicholas Morency pleaded guilty to possessing child 

pornography on his computer and offering a bounty to anybody who murders an 

abortion doctor. 

Republican legislator Edison Misla Aldarondo was sentenced to 10 years i n prison for 

raping his daughter between the ages of 9 and 17. 

Republican Mayor Philip Giordano is serving a 37 -year sentence in federal prison for 

sexually abusing 8 - and 10 -year old girl. 

Republican campaign consultant Tom Shortridge was sentenced to thr ee years 

probation for taking nude photographs of a 15 -year old girl. 

Republican racist pedophile and United States Senator Strom Thurmond had sex with 

a 15 -year old black girl which produced a child. 

Republican pastor Mike Hintz, whom George W. Bush comme nded during the 2004 

presidential campaign, surrendered to police after admitting to a sexual affair with a 

female juvenile. 

Republican legislator Peter Dibble pleaded no contest to having an inappropriate 

relationship with a 13 -year -old girl. 

Republican activist Lawrence E. King, Jr. organized child sex parties at the White 

House during the 1980s. 

Republican lobbyist Craig J. Spence organized child sex parties at the White House 

during the 1980s. 

Republican Congressman Donald "Buz" Lukens was found guilty of having sex with a 

female minor and sentenced to one month in jail. 

Republican fundraiser Richard A. Delgaudio was found guilty of child porn charges 

and paying two teenage girls to pose for sexual photos. 

Republican activist Mark A. Grethen convicted o n six counts of sex crimes involving 

children. 

Republican activist Randal David Ankeney pleaded guilty to attempted sexual assault 

on a child. 

Republican Congressman Dan Crane had sex with a female minor working as a 

congressional page. 

Republican activist and Christian Coalition leader Beverly Russell admitted to an 

incestuous relationship with his step daughter. 

Republican governor Arnold Schwarzenegger allegedly had sex with a 16 year old girl when he was 28. 

Republican congressman and ant i-gay activist Robert Bauman was charged with 

having sex with a 16 -year -old boy he picked up at a gay bar. 

Republican preacher Stephen White, who demanded a return to traditional values, 

was sentenced to jail after offering $20 to a 14 -year -old boy for per mission to perform 

oral sex on him. 

Republican talk show host Jon Matthews pleaded guilty to exposing his genitals to an 

11 year old girl. 

Republican anti -gay activist Earl "Butch" Kimmerling was sentenced to 40 years in 

prison for molesting an 8 -year old girl after he attempted to stop a gay couple from 

adopting her. 

Republican Party leader Paul Ingram pleaded guilty to six counts of raping his 

daughters and served 14 years in federal prison. 

Republican election board official Kevin Coan was sentenced to two years probation 

for soliciting sex over the internet from a 14 -year old girl. 

Republican politician Andrew Buhr was charged with two counts of first degree 

sodomy with a 13 -year old boy. 

Republican politician Keith Westmoreland was ar rested on seven felony counts of 

lewd and lascivious exhibition to girls under the age of 16 (i.e. exposing himself to 

children). 

Republican anti -abortion activist John Allen Burt was charged with sexual misconduct 

involving a 15 -year old girl. 

Republican County Councilman Keola Childs pleaded guilty to molesting a male child. 

Republican activist John Butler was charged with criminal sexual assault on a 

teenage girl. 

Republican candidate Richard Gardner admitted to molesting his two daughters. 

Republican Co uncilman and former Marine Jack W. Gardner was convicted of 

molesting a 13 -year old girl. 

Republican County Commissioner Merrill Robert Barter pleaded guilty to 

unlawful sexual contact and assault on a teenage boy. 

Republican City Councilman Fred C. Smeltz er, Jr. pleaded no contest to raping a 15 

year -old girl and served 6 -months in prison. 

Republican activist Parker J. Bena pleaded guilty to possession of child pornography 

on his home computer and was sentenced to 30 months in federal prison and fined 

$18, 000. 

Republican parole board officer and former Colorado state representative, Larry Jack 

Schwarz, was fired after child pornography was found in his possession. 

Republican strategist and Citadel Military College graduate Robin Vanderwall was 

convicted in Virginia on five counts of soliciting sex from boys and girls over the 

internet. 

Republican city councilman Mark Harris, who is described as a "good military man" 

and "church goer," was convicted of repeatedly having sex with an 11 -year -old girl 

and senten ced to 12 years in prison. 

Republican businessman Jon Grunseth withdrew his candidacy for Minnesota 

governor after allegations surfaced that he went swimming in the nude with four 

underage girls, including his daughter. 

Republican director of the "Young Re publican Federation" Nicholas Elizondo 

molested his 6 -year old daughter and was sentenced to six years in prison. Republican benefactor of conservative Christian groups, Richard A. Dasen Sr., was 

charged with rape for allegedly paying a 15 -year old girl for sex. Dasen, 62, who is 

married with grown children and several grandchildren, has allegedly told police that 

over the past decade he paid more than $1 million to have sex with a large number of 

young women. 

Republican Mayor John Gosek, 58, of 275 West 7th Street, Oswego, was arrested for 

the federal offense of "using a facility in inte -state commerce (a telephone) to 

knowingly attempt to persuade, induce, entice, and coerce an individua l under the 

age of 18 years to engage in sexual activity for which he could be charged with 

criminal offenses, that is, rape in the third degree and criminal sexual act in the third 

degree" in violation of the New York State Penal Code. 

Republican racist p edophile and United States Senator Strom Thurmond had sex with 

a 15 -year old black girl which produced a child. 

Republican activist Lawrence E. King, Jr. organized child sex parties at the White 

House during the 1980s. 

Republican lobbyist Craig J. Spence o rganized child sex parties at the White House 

during the 1980s. 

Republican Mayor Philip Giordano is serving a 37 -year sentence in federal prison for 

sexually abusing 8 - and 10 -year old girls. 

Republican Congressman Donald "Buz" Lukens was found guilty of h aving sex with a 

minor and sentenced to one month in jail. 

Republican fundraiser Richard A. Delgaudio was found guilty of child porn charges. 

Republican activist Mark A. Grethen convicted on six counts of sex crimes involving 

children. 

Republican activist Randal David Ankeney pleaded guilty to attempted sexual assault 

on a child. 

Republican Congressman Dan Crane had sex with a minor working as a 

congressional page. 

Republican activist and Christian Coalition leader Beverly Russell admitted to an 

incestuous relationship with his step daughter. 

Republican congressman and anti -gay activist Robert Bauman was charged with 

having sex with a 16 -year -old boy he picked up at a gay bar. 

Republican activist Marty Glickman (a.k.a. "Republican Marty"), was taken into 

cus tody by Florida police on four counts of unlawful sexual activity with a juvenile and 

one count of delivering the drug LSD. 

Republican legislative aide Howard L. Brooks, an advisor to a California 

assemblyman, was charged with molesting a 12 -year old boy a nd possession of child 

pornography. 

Republican Senate candidate John Hathaway was accused of having sex with his 12 -

year old baby sitter and withdrew his candidacy after the allegations were reported in 

the media. 

Republican preacher Stephen White was arrested after allegedly offering $20 to a 14 -

year -old boy for permission to perform oral sex on him. 

Republican talk show host Jon Matthews of Houston was indicted for indecency with 

a child, including exposing his genitals to a girl under the age of 17. 

Republican anti -gay activist Earl "Butch" Kimmerling confessed to molesting an 8 -

year old girl after he attempted to stop a gay couple from adopting her. 

Republican Party leader Paul Ingram of Thurston County, Washington, pleaded guilty to six counts of raping his daughters and served 14 years in federal prison. 

Republican St. Louis Election Board official Kevin Coan was arrested and 

charged with trying to buy sex from a 14 -year -old girl whom he met on the 

Internet. 

Republican politician An drew Buhr, former committeeman for Hadley Township 

Missouri, was charged with two counts of first degree sodomy with a 13 -year old boy. 

Republican politician Keith Westmoreland, a Tennessee state representative, was 

arrested on seven felony counts of lewd and lascivious exhibition to minors under 16 

(i.e. exposing himself to children). 

Republican anti -abortion activist John Allen Burt was charged with sexual misconduct 

involving a 15 year old girl. 

Republican legislator, Richard Gardner, a Nevada state repr esentative, admitted to 

molesting his two daughters. 

Republican activist Parker J. Bena pleaded guilty to possession of child pornography 

on his home computer and was sentenced to 30 months in federal prison and fined 

$18,000. 

Republican parole board offic er and former Colorado state representative, Larry Jack 

Schwarz, was fired after child pornography was found in his possession. 

Republican strategist and Citadel Military College graduate Robin Vanderwall was 

convicted in Virginia on five counts of solicit ing sex from boys and girls over the 

internet. 

Republican anti -abortion activist Howard Scott Heldreth is a convicted child rapist in 

Florida. 

Republican County Commissioner David Swartz pleaded guilty to molesting two girls 

under the age of 11 and was sen tenced to 8 years in prison. 

Republican judge Mark Pazuhanich pleaded no contest to fondling a 10 -year old girl 

and was sentenced to 10 years probation. Of course it's no contest! How could he 

even get a fair fight against those activist judges! 

Republican anti -abortion activist Nicholas Morency pleaded guilty to possessing child 

pornography on his computer and offering a bounty to anybody who murders an 

abortion doctor. - That's the culture of life we all know and love! 

Defense contractor, Mitche ll Wade, admitted that he paid California Rep. Randy 

"Duke" Cunningham (republican) more than $1 million in bribes in exchange for 

millions more in government contracts. 

Republican legislator Edison Misla Aldarondo sentenced to 10 years in prison for 

rapin g his 9 yr old daughter. 

Republican Mayor Philip Giordano serving a 37 -year sentence for sexually abusing 8 -

and 10 -year old girls. 

Republican campaign consultant Tom Shortridge sentenced to 3 years probation for 

taking nude photographs of a 15 -year old gi rl. I'm sure he had a good explanation. 

Republican racist pedophile and esteemed US Senator Strom Thurmond fathered a 

chiled with a 15 -year old black girl. 

Republican pastor Mike Hintz, whom George W. Bush commended during the 2004 

presidential campaign, s urrendered to police after admitting to sexual relations with a 

juvenile. Praise George! 

Republican legislator Peter Dibble pleaded no contest to having inappropriate 

relations with a 13 -year -old girl. 

Republican activist Lawrence E King, Jr. organized chi ld sex parties at the White 

House during the 1980s. Republican lobbyist Craig J. Spence organized child sex parties at the White House 

during the 1980s. 

Republican Congressman Donald "Buz" Lukens found guilty of sex with a female 

minor and s entenced to one month in jail. 

Republican fundraiser Richard A. Delgaudio found guilty of child porn charges 

and paying two teenage girls to pose for sexual photos. 

Republican activist Mark A. Grethen convicted on 6counts of child sex crimes. 

Republican ac tivist Randal David Ankeney pleaded guilty to attempted sexual assault 

on a child. Look, he didn't actually do anything. He only TRIED! You can't fault a 

republican for trying! 

Republican Congressman Dan Crane had sex with a female minor working as a 

congr essional page. 

Republican activist and Christian Coalition leader Beverly Russell admitted to an 

incestuous relationship with his step daughter. Prai$e the lord! 

Republican governor Arnold Schwarzenegger allegedly had sex with a 16 year old girl 

when he was 28. I love this country! 

Republican congressman and anti -gay activist Robert Bauman was charged with 

having sex with a 16 -year -old boy he picked up at a gay bar. Now I'm sure he can 

give us a good explanation for this. 

Republican Committee Chairman Jef frey Patti was arrested for distributing a video 

clip of a 5 -year -old girl being raped. Obviously a liberal conspiracy! 

Republican activist Marty Glickman (a.k.a. "Republican Marty"), was taken into 

custody by Florida police on four counts of unlawful sexu al activity with an underage 

girl and one count of delivering the drug LSD. He was obviously trying to help this 

woman! 

Legislative aide Howard L. Brooks was charged with molesting a 12 -year old boy and 

possession of child pornography. Look! It was his own son. 

Republican Senate candidate John Hathaway accused of having sex with his 12 -year 

old baby sitter and withdrew his candidacy after the allegations were reported in the 

media. He was trying to explain to her what NOT to do when in a difficult situation !

Republican preacher Stephen White, who demanded a return to traditional values, 

was sentenced to jail after offering $20 to a 14 -year -old boy for permission to perform 

oral sex on him. 

Republican talk show host Jon Matthews pleaded guilty to exposing his genitals to an 

11 year old girl. She could have turned away. 

Republican anti -gay activist Earl "Butch" Kimmerling was sentenced to 40 years in 

prison for molesting an 8 -year old girl after he attempted to stop a gay couple from 

adopting her. Liberal jury of course. 

Republican Party leader Paul Ingram pleaded guilty to six counts of raping his 

daughters and served 14 years in federal prison. Now how could anyone rape their 

daughter 6 times! 

Republican election board official Kevin Coan was sentenced to two years probation 

for soliciting sex over the internet from a 14 -year old girl. 

Republican politician Andrew Buhr was charged with two counts of first degree 

sodomy with a 13 -year old boy. 

Republican politician Keith Westmoreland was arrested on seven felony counts of 

lewd and lascivious exhibition to girls under the age of 16 (i.e. exposing himself to 

children). Republican anti -abortion activist John Allen Burt was charged with sexual misconduct 

involving a 15 -year old girl. 

Republican County Councilman Keola Childs pleaded guilty to molesting a male child. 

He pleaded guilty only to keep his family out of the liberal media's spotlight. 

Republican activist John Butler was charged with criminal sexual assault on a 

teenage girl. 

Republican candidate Richard Gardner admitted to molesting his two daughters. 

Republican Councilman and former Marine Jack W. Gardner was convicted of 

molesting a 13 -year old girl. From: Linda Tashker     

> To: FN -OVP -Election Integrity Staff
> Subject: Vote Suppression
> Date: Friday, June 30, 2017 1:40:45 AM

I have worked 35 years in the IT business and I know bad data system design when I see it. 

A "voter integrity" system that purges voters without notification is corrupt. 

A "voter Integrity" s ystem that purges more than one voter based on a single name is 

corrupt. You can't purge 10 people named "jose Rodriguez" because one of them committed a 

felony. 

A "voter integrity" system that won't give a live voter who shows up at the polls a 

provision al ballot is corrupt. An error in YOUR database should not disenfranchise an 

American citizen. 

In this century the number of people prevented from voting can be counted in the 100s of 

thousands - the number of voter fraud cases can be counts in the 100s. And it is so strange that 

the majority of people suppressed are Democrats and so many of the people committing fraud 

are Republicans. Ironic even. 

The person reading this email should be ashamed to be supporting this effort. 

Sincerely 

Linda Tashker From: Paul D. K endall   

> To: FN -OVP -Election Integrity Staff ;

REDACTED          

> Subject: Fwd: FAKE CAPITAL JUNEAU to ANCHORAGE and BP PROP
> Date: Friday, June 30, 2017 1:48:04 AM
> Attachments: #1 EVERY THING IS ON THE TABLE -MOVE THE CAPITAL -NOW.pptx
> ASSEMBLY LTR TO BP.pdf
> BP BLDG -PROP FOR SALE -LEGISLATURE + FINAL.pdf
> BP PROPERTY FORM LETTER FOR RESPONSE.pdf

Date: Thursday, June 29, 2017 

Mr. Kobak and Pres. Trump 

Please pay close attetion to Alaska.... There are a lot of problems here,,, JUNEAU is the 

""BOO factor "" ( base of operations ) last time we tried to move the Capital the vote was 

ahead and there was a power failure and when power came on the vote was way b 

ehind,,ALSO<,, here we just passed a voter auto if you signed up for the p fund divned then 

you are autoatically registered to vote,,, most of these 222 villages are pretty remote and and 

JUNEAU is so corrupt we wonder if there is not voter fraud,.... ask about their records on 

hand,,,, 90 days destroy ,,,,,,, 

PLEASE LOOK INTO ALASKA VOTING BASE,, I think you will find surprising 

things......and it will represent a virgin model for new baseline views and still add to a new 

arctic area development needs of the futute... 

Paul D. Kendall 

REDACTED 

REDACTED 

---------- Forwarded message ----------

From:  Paul D. Kendall  < REDACTED  > Date: Wed, Jun 

28, 2017 at 10:33 AM 

Subject: FAKE CAPITAL JUNEAU to ANCHORAGE and BP PROP 

To:  REDACTED , REDACTED , REDACTED , REDACTED , "Rep. Scott Kawasaki" 

< REDACTED  >,  "Rep. Mark Neuman"  < REDACTED  >,  Peninsulaclarion News  < REDACTED 

>,  Ned Hahn  < REDACTED  >,  Ajc State Ak Postmaster  < REDACTED  >,  Petrostar Info  <

REDACTED  >,  REDACTED , REDACTED , REDACTED 

Date: Wednesday, June 28, 2017 

To: Various Elected, Appointed, and other community entities: 

From: Paul D. Kendall 

REDACTED 

REDACTED 

Dear Ladies and Gentlemen, 

Many of us are very concerned about possible ALASKA voter fraud in the 2018 elections along with other levels of 

corruption reflected by maintaining a dysfunctional and isolated capital in Juneau here in Alaska; 

And many of us Alaskans' think we may need an outside law firm to represent our case. 

Please accept this Forwarded Email with some of my written views on th e "Capital Move to Anchorage" issue. I have various views and positions outside of what i am sending you folks.. But PLEASE VIEW THE #1 

EVERYTHING IS ON THE TABLE POWER POINT PRESENTATION. .. 

( keep in mind this was a rush and compressed effort to begin to outline or form up some discussions relevant to the 

"move the capital to Anchorage ASAP issue") 

In closing, 

and 

Can you please email me a verification of receipt of this email ? (Thank you) 

If I may, in not being able to present my case personally to you folks earlier, 

I hope you see the "historic and public good magnitudes" of this event request,, 

I truly believe the history of this long overdue, imperative, and provable need of 

"Move the Capital to Anchorage" is an 

"in the best interest of Alaskans as a whole" action, (a state constitutional mandate) 

and 

the requested Capitals' relocation validity is in itself simply overwhelming and undeniable fr om many, many and many 

(in not all) reasons/viewpoints. ------

"The 300 mile Blue Line Corridor" alone makes this common sense case on its face ! ( see google map slides "Homer 

to Willow directions overlay" on entire state view,, showing all of Alaska and Anchorage/Juneau locations) -- pauldkendall 

Sincerely, Respectfully, and Well intended, 

Paul D. Kendall 

REDACTED 

REDACTED From:    

> To:
> Diane Hallinen
> FN -OVP -Election Integrity Staff
> Subject: BULL FECES
> Date: Friday, June 30, 2017 1:54:48 AM

You got to be kidding me. You think your request is about election integrity? 

Where were you when we tried to do a manual recount of Michigan's election 

returns? HUH? I hope this email box gets slammed. From:    

> To:
> Martin L. Buchanan
> FN -OVP -Election Integrity Staff
> Subject: OPT OUT request from your national and invasive data collection
> Date: Friday, June 30, 2017 1:54:56 AM

Dear sir or madam: 

In your recent requests to state election officials, you have asked for "... the publicly 

available voter roll data ..., including, if publicly available under the laws of your state, the 

full first and last names of all registrants, middle names or initials if available, addresses, 

dates of birth, political party (if recorded in your state), last four digits of social security 

number if available, voter history (elections voted in) from 2006 onward, active/inactive 

status, cancelled status, information regarding any felony convictions, information regarding 

voter registration in another state, information regarding military status, and overseas 

citizen information. 

1. So you are effectively compiling a national data set with extensive personal identifying 

information of great use for identity thieves, once your data set is compromised, as it 

almost certainly will be. 

2. I OPT OUT. Please remove me from any data sets collected, notably from Colorado, 

California, and Utah data sets (states where I have lived since 2006). 

And by the way, a Presidential Advisory Commission on Electoral Integrity set up by Trump? 

By a serial sexual predator, who took office only with Russian help, the largest tax evader in 

the country, a coward who dodged military service five times? You should all be ashamed of 

yourselves for taking a paycheck from Trump or his minions. Get some backbone and 

scruples and resign. 

Finally, as a senior software engineer who has worked on computer security issues, this is a

really bad idea. I will be communicating with professional organizations in my field about 

this right away. 

Sincerely, 

Martin Buchanan 

Midvale, UT 

Example of letter you have sent to state election 

officials: https://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/wonkblog/files/2017/06/PEIC -Letter -to -

Connecticut -1.pdf From: 

To: 

Subject: 

Date: 

Diane Hallinen 

FN -OVP -Election Integrity Staff 

Authoritarian governments suck 

Friday, June 30, 2017 1:55:20 AM From: 

To: 

Subject: 

Date: 

Diane Hallinen 

FN -OVP -Election Integrity Staff 

Please explain 

Friday, June 30, 2017 1:56:22 AM 

I pay the government a boat load of taxes, so you work for me. I think you are 

doing a terrible job. Explain yourself. From: 

To: 

Loflin, Christine 

FN -OVP -Election Integrity Staff 

Subject: election integrity 

Date: Friday, June 30, 2017 2:09:05 AM 

I am extremely concerned that our voting system has no way to check if something has been 

hacked or changed. In Georgia, there are no paper ballots, and no way to doublecheck votes 

to see if the machines or the computers have been compromised. 

This is my major concern as an American voter! I hope that your commission will address this 

vulnerability. 

Sincerely, 

Christine Dillon 

This e -mail message (including any attachments) is for the sole use of 

the intended recipient(s) and may contain confidential and privileged 

information. If the reader of this message is not the intended recipient, 

you are hereby notified that any dissemination, distribution or copying 

of this message (including any attachmen ts) is strictly prohibited. 

If you have received this message in error, please contact 

the sender by reply e -mail message and destroy all copies of the 

original message (including attachments). From:   

> To:
> Jason Miciak
> FN -OVP -Election Integrity Staff
> Subject: So Glad You Are Working on This
> Date: Friday, June 30, 2017 2:13:12 AM

Mr. Koblach, 

You are fooling absolutely no one. Your efforts to make voting more difficult 

for minorities, poor, the young and the old will fail. You're going the wrong 

direction, in an e-world, making it harder and harder for people to vote. We 

understand, though. You represent ideas that are getting old and dying, 

therefore you need to keep the voting blocs smaller and smaller. 

Here is my concern regarding voting integrity: 

= A president who doesn't care that Russians tampered with our vote and is 

likely susceptible to blackmails. 

- A party that is shameless in its continues re -districting and gerrymandering 

down to a block, whether in North Carolina, Texas, or the other "notables," 

you're doing all you can, as cynically as you can, to ensure an inflated 

Republican vote. 

- An electoral college system that is so outdated that only once in last 5

elections has a Republican president actually won the popular vote (and I'm 

overlooking strange happenings in Pennsylvania). 

- The ties between corporate money and political donations, it's no longer one 

person one vote, it's one -thousand dollars per vote. 

So, those are my primary concerns. Not that I'm fulling myself. I know 

exactly what you're doing and so do all too many others. You're cynical and 

selling out a country that is too good for the plans you have for it. 

Jason Miciak Spokane WA 

# Jason R. Miciak 

# "Alienation" Book One and Two         

> "Even an abductee wandered in the dark.... From:
> To:
> patrick scroggin
> FN -OVP -Election Integrity Staff
> Subject: Election Integrity suggestion
> Date: Friday, June 30, 2017 2:26:46 AM

Dear Sirs, 

May I suggest that you request from the 50 secretaries of state the following information as well: 

Race 

Then you can delete all minority voters who are not registered Republican or White Power Party. I think that is what 

Mr. Kobach would want. Worked ok in Kansas, so well, that he got the KIng of Voter Suppression award. 

You all are a smokescreen or a distraction. Voting is a constitutional right. Sadly not enough people do it, some are 

discouraged by your kind of thugs. 

America the Beautiful doesn't need you or your ilk. 

Regards, 

A concerned citizen From: 

To: 

Thea 

FN -OVP -Election Integrity Staff 

Subject: You overplayed your hand 

Date: Friday, June 30, 2017 2:39:03 AM 

Your nonsense worked when it was in the dark but you won't get away with this. From: 

To: 

Gary Weidner 

FN -OVP -Election Integrity Staff 

Subject: Voter Suppression 

Date: Friday, June 30, 2017 3:11:26 AM 

Dear Mr.Kobach: 

Quit screwing around with voter suppression! 

Karla Koenig From:   

> To:
> Christian Roth
> FN -OVP -Election Integrity Staff
> Subject: The Witchhunt
> Date: Friday, June 30, 2017 4:01:03 AM

To Whom it may Concern: 

I am insulted by this administration's attempt to invalidate votes by wasting the valuable time of various state 

employees. 

This seems to be an attempt to divert resources away from the investigation into the current U.S. president's 

democratic legitimacy, and all of you who are involved should be ashamed of yourselves. 

Sincerely, 

Christian Roth From:   

> To:
> John Butler
> FN -OVP -Election Integrity Staff
> Subject: Voter fraud
> Date: Friday, June 30, 2017 8:39:24 AM

is this where we file complaints about the guy who lost the election bust still became 

president? 

thanks, 

John butler From:   

> To:
> jean -paul bondy
> FN -OVP -Election Integrity Staff
> Subject: Data
> Date: Friday, June 30, 2017 8:43:32 AM

Who the fuck are you evil people? 

Kobach and Pence can eat my asshole. Fucking with voting rights is vile, obnoxious shit and I 

wish anyone who is involved in this ends their lives in prison 

Fuck each and every one of you. 

--

--------------------------------------------•

Jean -Paul Bondy 

www.jbondy.com 

--------------------------------------------•From:   

> To:
> Daniel Breer
> FN -OVP -Election Integrity Staff
> Subject: Re: Voter information
> Date: Wednesday, July 5, 2017 10:40:39 AM

DO NOT RELEASE ANY OF MY VOTER DATA, PERIOD. 

Sent with Mailtrack 

On Fri, Jun 30, 2017 at 10:39 PM, Daniel Breer  < REDACTED  > wrote:  DO NOT 

RELEASE  ANY OF MY VOTER DATA, PERIOD. 

Sent with Mailtrack From:   

> To:
> Joyce S iegel
> FN -OVP -Election Integrity Staff
> Subject: Letter to Vice Chair Kobach
> Date: Wednesday, July 5, 2017 10:53:56 AM

To Commission Vice Chair Kobach: 

Thank you for asking for comments about the work of the Presidential 

Election Commission. Here's what I suggest...I think the first job would be to 

support efforts underway to find out if any people involved in the Trump 

campaign were complicit in the Russian intrusion into our last election. After 

that, here are some of my concerns which I hope your commission will 

address: investigate a nd report back to the public of various state's actions 

to suppress voting in low income and minority communities; look into the 

effects of the Citizen's United decision and money in politics; address the 

effects of gutting the Voting Rights Act; take step s to stop states from 

purging voter rolls without due process; get Congress or the President to 

strengthen the FEC; advise how we can get rid of our antiquated electoral 

college system; and figure out how we can get rid of gerrymandering. 

Yes, that's a lo t to do, but our democracy is in trouble, under threat and as 

patriotic, concerned citizens we...and you, need to address these issues. 

Maryland 

Joyce Siegel From:   

> To:
> R Mora
> FN -OVP -Election Integrity Staff
> Subject: Federal election integrity
> Date: Wednesday, July 5, 2017 11:07:15 AM

I am writing in response to your call for Americans' views on ways 

to preserve the integrity of federal elections. My first suggestion 

is to thoroughly investigate the voting infrastructure in every state 

with a view to determining the degree to which enemy Russian 

operatives were able to compromise it and the poss ible methods 

by which we can protect it from the future attacks our intelligence 

agencies assure us are coming. 

Second, since the integrity of the voting process is most robust 

when it reflects most fully the will of the electorate, I suggest you 

explore ways to ease and expand voter participation in our 

elections, thereby maximizing the expression of the popular will. 

This might be effected, for example, by making Election Day a 

national holiday or scheduling it on a weekend and by making 

voter registrati on automatic. 

As you know, of the hundreds of millions of votes cast in this 

country in the decade ending in 2010, a statistically insignificant 

number were successfully prosecuted as fraudulent. Therefore, 

my third suggestion is that you do all you can to expose and end 

the voter suppression efforts of your party all of which 

masquerade as good -faith measures to end "widespread voter 

fraud." You could start by dismantling the commission you 

presently co -chair, after you have acted on my first and second 

suggestions and whatever further measures Democrats and 

Republicans together agree would best serve the democratic 

process. Thank you for your attention. 

Sincerely 

Thomas Mora From:   

> To:
> William Johnson
> FN -OVP -Election Integrity Staff
> Subject: My voter records
> Date: Wednesday, July 5, 2017 11:54:30 AM

Trump asks what are the states and voters trying to hide by not turning over voting records? 

What is Trump trying to hide by not turning over his income tax returns? Deductions of payments to prostitutes? 

Male prostitutes? Underage male prostitutes? Infected with AIDS? What is Trump trying to hide??? Must be real 

bad. Find out and tell the nation!!! From:    

> To:
> Scott D. Morrow
> FN -OVP -Election Integrity Staff
> Subject: Gestapo tatics
> Date: Wednesday, July 5, 2017 12:26:24 PM

I'm more likely to get hit by lightening than for someone to vote illegally in Colorado. I am 

disgusted by an attorney general who a judge says lied to the Federal Court asking for CO 

records. Your commission on how to best keep legal voters from voting is a scam just like the 

serial rapist POTUS. GEt a life and leave us alone, 

WARNING: The USA has confirmed reports that this communication's metadata is being 

recorded and stored by the NSA in the worlds largest collection site for data located in 

Bluffdale, Utah Scott From:   

> To:
> David Grant
> FN -OVP -Election Integrity Staff
> Subject: Voting Integrity
> Date: Wednesday, July 5, 2017 12:28:13 PM

Mr. Kobach, 

The concern of the people re: voting is the right wing's effort to throw up as many 

roadblocks as possible, to prevent likely opposition voters from voting. Not some 

phony, non -existent voter fraud concocted by the Right as an excuse for silly 

commissions like yours. You have an unsavory reputation for raising this phony issue 

over and over, ignoring the fact that there are no legitimate studies proving your 

argument. You are simply attempting to legitimize a sorry attempt to further restrict 

voting rights. The States are right in refusing the data you requested. since your aim 

is purely political, and antithetical to the right to vote. 

David Grant                  

> REDACTED From: Christopher B. Green P.E. LEED AP
> To: FN -OVP -Election Integrity S taff
> Subject: FW: Krebs won"t share South Dakota voter data with Trump panel
> Date: Wednesday, July 5, 2017 12:37:40 PM
> Attachments: image002 png

To the Presidential Advisory Commission on Election Integrity, 

I’m a registered Republican voter from Rapid City, SD and I have supported President Trump from the day he announced his candidacy. There 

is ample evidence to suggest that voting fraud occurred in the November 2016 election and in fact occurs in every election. The real question is 

to what extent it occurs and what principalities and powers are behind the voting fraud. 

I am very disappointed and find it unacceptable that the South Dakota Secretary of State (Republican Shantel Krebs) is refusing to share ANY 

voter data with the Presidential Advisory Commission on Election Integrity (PACEI). 

Along those same lines I called and spoke to someone named Rachel in the SDSOS Elections office this morning (7/5/17), below is our 

conversation. NOTE: 7/5/17 was the first morning the SDSOS office was open since the press release occurred at the end of the day Friday 

(6/30/17) – in other words the SDSOS office was closed at the time of the press release and remained closed for four days – trying to avoid SD 

voters I presume. 

I asked several questions, I’m paraphrasing some of the answers for clarity sake, the relevant Q&A is below: 

Q1: I’m very disappointed the SDSOS is not sharing voter data with the Presidential Advisory Commission on Election Integrity (PACEI). 

Why aren’t you sharing Voter Data, I want my voter data shared? 

A1: It is “against State Law” for the SDSOS to share voter data. 

Q2: OK, but you currently share voter data with the SD Republican Party, SD Demonrat Party, Researchers and other Special Interest Groups, 

how is this different? 

A2: The receiving parties just mentioned PAY for the voters data. In addition, PACEI is asking for full Date of Birth and the Last four digits of 

the SSN. These two items are data we don’t distribute. 

Q3: The Feds already have all the SSN’s so that answer is irrelevant. 

A3: No response. 

Q4: How many systematic Election Audits have been conducted by the SDSOS office over the last 10 years. 

A4: Answer wasn’t clear – it sounded like none. 

Q4: How many prosecutions of voter fraud by the SDSOS office have occurred in the last 10 years. 

A4: None. We haven’t had voting fraud in SD. 

Q5: “You haven’t had voting fraud in SD” because you haven’t looked for it. It is almost a certainty that voting fraud occurs in each and every 

election in SD. In fact I know of two individuals who have witnessed voting fraud in SD. 

A5: No response. 

Q6: Do we have Dead people voting in SD elections? How about Felons voting? What about individuals who are not US Citizens like 

Daugaard’s Muslim Refugees? Are the Demonrats voting multiple times in SD Elections? 

A6: Answer was No to each question. 

Q7: What is the SDSOS office doing to maintain the integrity of elections in SD? 

A7: No answer. 

My answer, nothing. Tell Ms. Krebs that there will be plenty of SD Republicans voting against her in the next election. 

Sincerely, 

Christopher B. Green, P.E., LEED AP 

REDACTED 

REDACTED 

> http://www.eesolutionspe.com

## Krebs won't share South Dakota voter data with Trump panel     

> Pos ted :Fr i3 02 PM, Jun 30, 2017

PI ERRE, S.D. (A P) -A spokesman for South Dakota Secretary of state Shantel Krebs says she wo n't share voter inf orma tion with 

President Donald Trump's comm ission that's invest igating alleged voter fraud in the 2016 election s.

The Pres iden tial Adv isory Com miss ion on Elec tion Integr ity on Wednesday gave secreta ries of state about two weeks to provide 

about a dozen points of data. That request includes name s,party affi liation s,addresses and vo ting histories of allvoters .It also 

inclu des birth dates, the last four digits of voters' Social Sec urity numbers and any informa tion about felony convictions and 

mi litary statu s.

Krebs spokesman Jason Will iams sa id in an emai lto The Associated Press on Fr iday she won't share the requested data with the 

com miss ion. 

Krebs is a Republican .Several Democrat ic secretar ies of state have said they'll re fuse to share the data .From: keith tomlinson   

> To: FN -OVP -Election Integrity Staff
> Date: Wednesday, July 5, 2017 1:52:41 PM

Aren't you fools tired of trying to solve a problem that doesn't exist? Kobach is an asshole and 

it's only a matter of time until Kansas is the only state that will work with him. From:     

> To:
> Stephanie Frasca
> FN -OVP -Election Integrity Staff
> Subject: Election Integrity -A Letter From A Citizen
> Date: Wednesday, July 5, 2017 4:24:00 PM

Dear Mr. Vice Chair 

As you are seeking input on the subject of election integrity, please permit me to offer some. 

1. There is something wrong when year after year the majority winner in our elections does not become president. 

The Electoral College is subverting the will of the people and those that participate in it have great power then every 

day voters which is a HUGE problem. 

2. True integrity could be restored to elections by reversing the Citizens United ruling. 

3. Campaign Finance Reform would certainly bring about a more fair and just result in which candidates are on an 

even playing field and are NOT the mouth pieces of which ever corporation gave them the biggest donation. 

4. Full reinstatement of the Voting Rights Act would be helpful. 

5. The huge problem of gerrymandering should be reviewed. 

6. Candidates for President should have to pass a basic exam on American policy and history. Nothing more 

difficult than American History advanced placement at high school. 

7. Due process for removing people from the voting rolls. 

8. No more voter suppression - more voter registration! 

9. Term limits and strict limitations on the revolving door in Washington DC. 

The good news is that the American people have never been more engaged and watchful than they are today. I’m 

sure you’ll do the right thing. 

Thanks in advance for you attention. 

Stephanie Frasca 

REDACTED From:   

> To:
> Collett Olson
> FN -OVP -Election Integrity Staff
> Subject: Your request for voter information
> Date: Wednesday, July 5, 2017 5:18:02 PM

I am an Idaho voter. I am DEEPLY concerned and offended by your "study" of the 

integrity of our voting systems. Your letter to the Secretaries of State indicate that the 

information requested by you will be made public. Are you kidding me? 

You are requesting information that is not part of (nor shou ld it be) public records 

such as the last four digits of our social security numbers from which our full number 

can be calculated. How many times are we told not to give out our social security 

number? All the time. Why would you want to make that public? The same goes for 

my birthday. It puts the security of my personal identity at risk. I have enough 

problems with having credit card numbers stolen when I slide a card at the gas 

pump. These things are NOT supposed to be public records. 

I will use Trump’s term “WITCH HUNT” for this “study”. Trump legitimately lost the 

popular vote and his fragile ego can’t handle that. It is my belief that this is a tactic 

that the Trump administration will use to push for MORE voter suppression and it is 

WRONG!! ! It will be used as Kobach did in Kansas (and as other states have done) 

to purge the voter rolls of legitimate voters because lots of people have similar 

names. Voters were not notified of the purge and, when they showed up to vote, were 

not allowed to v ote despite having been legitimately registered to vote during previous 

elections. 

Constitutionally, it is the role of the States to manage elections NOT the federal 

government. 

The more qualified registered voters the country has and the more voters who vote, 

the more democratic our republic will be. Our country should be about inclusion NOT 

exclusion of ALL citizens in the voting process regardless of their ethnic, racial, or 

religious backgrounds. That is what makes this country great right “NOW” not 

“again”. 

Sincerely, 

Collett O’Neill Olson 

Idaho Voter From:                                                           

> To:
> Michelle S padaccini
> FN -OVP -Election Integrity Staff
> Subject: an opinion on our election process
> Date: Wednesday, July 5, 2017 10:17:44 PM
> Dear Mr Kobach,
> I'm merely an American citizen, not aSecretary of State, but Iam grateful for the opportunity to respond
> to your recent call for views "laws, rules, policies, activities, strategies and practices that undermine[s] the
> American people’s confidence in the integrity of federal elections processes."
> As avoter, my confidence in our election process is undermined by:

A president who frequently expresses his distaste for bleeding women but has yet to 

express his opposition to Russian interference in American elections 

Massive purges of voter registration rolls without due process 

Legislators who craft gerrymandered redistricting maps en abling politicians to choose 

their voters rather than the reverse 

The Supreme Court's decision in Shelby County v Holder, gutting the protections of the 

Voting Rights Act under the obviously false rationale that America is today a post -racial 

society 

Voter suppression efforts targeted at voters of color, the working poor, and students 

Antiquated voting systems vulnerable to state -sponsored tampering and conveniently 

producing no auditable paper trails 

A Federal Elections Commission - our democracy's watchdog - that is toothless by 

design 

The Supreme Court's decision in Citizens United v FEC, granting the wealthy few a 

louder voice in political campaigns than all other citizens combined 

An antiquated Electoral College system that enables minority rule 

An advisory committee on election integrity led by a notorious champion of voter 

suppression   

> Sincerely,
> Michelle Spadaccini
> REDACTED From:
> To:
> William Johnson
> FN -OVP -Election Integrity Staff
> Date: Thursday, July 6, 2017 12:09:13 AM

This nation has a $20 trillion deficit. Your requests for voter information are unlawful: 

http://thehill.com/regulation/other/340738 -voter -fraud -commission -may -have -violated -law 

Voter fraud commission may have violated law 

Substantial evidence has not been offered if material voter fraud in this country. President Trump is using taxpayer 

dollars to advance the vain theory that he did not lose the popular vote. I suggest each and every one of you show 

some dignity and integrity and walk of this job. Be a patriot, not a pawn in the hands of a con artist who paid $25 

million dollars last year to settle fraud claims surrounding Trump University. If you are of Spanish descent, walk off 

- trump has shown his feelings towards blacks and Latinos - Claiming without basis that Obama was not born in the 

US and that Latinos should be kept out by a wall and should not serve as judges in his cases. From: 

> To:

REDACTED   

> FN -OVP -Election Integrity Staff
> Subject: Election Integrity
> Date: Thursday, July 6, 2017 9:17:31 AM

As long as you're grasping for private information about voters whose only 

crime was failure to vote the way a bunch of xenophobic old men wanted 

them to vote, do you plan to look into this? 

https://www.theguardian.com/us -news/2017/jul/05/donald -trump -russia -investigation -fake -news -hillary -clinton 

It's about the integrity of an election after all. 

Beefed up the security on this email address yet? From:    

> To:
> Larry Finch
> FN -OVP -Election Integrity Staff
> Cc: Larry Finch
> Subject: Fwd: my voter information
> Date: Thursday, July 6, 2017 11:2 9:22 AM

Just asking for a confirmation that you've been receiving my emails. Without such 

confirmation I will just keep sending them until such acknowledgment is received. 

Hope your project is doing well. Not. 

Sincerely, 

Larry Finch 

Sent from me using a magic, handheld electronic gizmo. 

Begin forwarded message: 

From:  Larry Finch  < REDACTED  >

Date: July 3, 2017 at 8:39:26 PM PDT 

To: ElectionIntegrityStaff@ovp.eop.gov 

Cc: Larry Finch < REDACTED >

Subject: Re: my voter information 

Hi again, 

I failed to get a reply today from the email I sent this weekend, so I am writing 

you once again. 

Understand you are collecting voter information. As I told you in my first email, 

as far as I'm concerned you can go pound sand. 

That's the full amount of information I intend to give you. 

Please acknowledge receipt so I won't have to bother you with additional emails. 

Sincerely, 

Larry Finch 

Sent from me using a magic, handheld electronic gizmo. From:       

> To:
> Robert Oeser
> FN -OVP -Election Integrity Staff
> Subject: Debunking the Voter Fraud Myth
> Date: Thursday, July 6, 2017 9:29:00 AM
> You might wish to review:

The president has continued to claim voter fraud was a problem in the 2016 election. 

But a look at the facts makes clear fraud is vanishingly rare, and does not happen on 

a scale even close to that necessary to “rig” an election. 

January 31, 2017 

[Download PDF] 

Sensationalist claims have circulated this election season about the extent of voter 

fraud, with some politicians going so far as to tell voters to fear that this November’s 

election will be “ rigged .” Because electoral integrity is one of the elements necessary 

to making America the greatest democracy in the world, claims like this garner media 

attention, and frighten and concern voters. But putting rhetoric aside to look at the 

facts makes clear that fraud by voters at the polls is vanishingly rare, and does not 

happen on a scale even close to that necessary to “rig” an election. 

Studies Agree: Impersonation Fraud by Voters Very Rarely Happens 

The Brennan Center’s seminal report on this issue, The Truth A bout Voter Fraud ,

found that most reported incidents of voter fraud are actually traceable to other 

sources, such as clerical errors or bad data matching practices. The report 

reviewed elections that had been meticulously studied for voter fraud, and found 

incident rates between 0.0003 percent and 0.0025 percent. Given this tiny 

incident rate for voter impersonation fraud, it is more likely, the report noted, that 

an American “will be struck by lightning than that he will impersonate another 

voter at the po lls.” 

A study published by a Columbia University political scientist tracked incidence 

rates for voter fraud for two years, and found that the rare fraud that was reported 

generally could be traced to “false claims by the loser of a close race, mischi ef 

and administrative or voter error.” 

A 2017 analysis published in The Washington Post concluded that there is no 

evidence to support Trump’s claim that Massachusetts residents were bused into 

New Hampshire to vote. 

A comprehensive 2014 study published in The Washington Post found 31 

credible instances of impersonation fraud from 2000 to 2014, out of more than 1 

billion ballots cast. Even this tiny number is likely inflated, as the study’s author 

counted not just prosecutions or convictions, bu t any and all credible claims. 

Two studies done at Arizona State University, one in 2012 and another in 2016 ,

found similarly negligible rates of impersonation fraud. The project found 10 

cases of voter impersonation fraud nationwide from 2000 -2012. T he follow -up study, which looked for fraud specifically in states where politicians have argued 

that fraud is a pernicious problem, found zero successful prosecutions for 

impersonation fraud in five states from 2012 -2016. 

A review of the 2016 election found four documented cases of voter fraud. 

Research into the 2016 election found no evidence of widespread voter fraud. 

A 2016 working paper concluded that the upper limit on double voting in the 2012 

election was 0.02%. The paper noted that the incident rate was likely much lower, 

given audits conducted by the res earchers showed that “many, if not all, of these 

apparent double votes could be a result of measurement error.” 

A 2014 paper concluded that “the likely percent of non -citizen voters in recent US 

elections is 0.” 

A 2014 nationwide study found “no evidence of widespread impersonation fraud” 

in the 2012 election. 

A 2014 study that examined impersonation fraud both at the polls and by mail 

ballot found zero instances in the jurisdictions studied. 

A 2014 study by the non -partisan Government A ccountability Office, which 

reflected a literature review of the existing research on voter fraud, noted that 

the studies consistently found “few instances of in -person voter fraud.” 

While writing a 2012 book , a researcher went back 30 years to try to find an 

example of voter impersonation fraud determining the outcome of an election, but 

was unable to find even one. 

A 2012 study exhaustively pulled records from every state for all alleged election 

fraud, and found the overall fraud rate to be “in finitesimal” and impersonation 

fraud by voters at the polls to be the rarest fraud of all: only 10 cases alleged in 

12 years. The same study found only 56 alleged cases of non -citizen voting, in 12 

years. 

A 2012 assessment of Georgia’s 2006 election fo und “no evidence that election 

fraud was committed under the auspices of deceased registrants.” 

A 2011 study by the Republican National Lawyers Association found that, 

between 2000 and 2010, 21 states had 1 or 0 convictions for voter fraud or 

other ki nds of voting irregularities. 

A 2010 book cataloguing reported incidents of voter fraud concluded that nearly 

all allegations turned out to be clerical errors or mistakes, not fraud. 

A 2009 analysis examined 12 states and found that fraud by vote rs was “very 

rare,” and also concluded that many of the cases that garnered media attention 

were ultimately unsubstantiated upon further review. 

Additional research on noncitizen voting can be found 

here: http://www.brennancenter.org/analysis/analysis -noncitizen -voting -

vanishingly -rare .

Additional resources can be found 

here: https://www.brennancenter.org/analysis/analysis -and -reports .

Courts Agree: Fraud by Voters at the Polls is Nearly Non -Existent 

The Fifth Circuit, in an opinion finding that Texas’s strict photo ID law is racially 

discriminatory, noted that there were “only two convictions for in -person voter 

impersonation fraud out of 20 million votes cast in the decade” before Texas 

passed its law. In its opi nion striking down North Carolina’s omnibus restrictive election law —

which included a voter ID requirement — as purposefully racially discriminatory, 

the Fourth Circuit noted that the state “failed to identify even a single individual 

who has ever been c harged with committing in -person voter fraud in North 

Carolina.” 

A federal trial court in Wisconsin reviewing that state’s strict photo ID law found 

“that impersonation fraud — the type of fraud that voter ID is designed to 

prevent 

— is extremely rare ” and “a truly isolated phenomenon that has not posed a 

significant threat to the integrity of Wisconsin’s elections.” 

Even the Supreme Court, in its opinion in Crawford upholding Indiana’s voter ID 

law, noted that the record in the case “contains no evidence of any [in -person 

voter impersonation] fraud actually occurring in Indiana at any time in its history.” 

Two of the jurists who weighed in on that case at the time — Republican -

appointed former Supreme Court Justice John Paul Stevens and conservat ive 

appellate court Judge Richard Posner — have since announced they regret their 

votes in favor of the law, with Judge Posner noting that strict photo ID laws are 

“now widely regarded as a means of voter suppression rather than of fraud 

prevention.” 

Gover nment Investigations Agree: Voter Fraud Is Rare 

Kansas Secretary of State Kris Kobach, a longtime proponent of voter 

suppression efforts, argued before state lawmakers that his office needed special 

power to prosecute voter fraud, because he knew of 100 such cases in his state. 

After being granted these powers, he has brought six such cases , of which only 

four have been successful. The secretary has also testified about his review of 84 

million votes cast in 22 states, which yielded 14 instances of fr aud referred for 

prosecution, which amounts to a 0.00000017 percent fraud rate .

Texas lawmakers purported to pass its strict photo ID law to protect against voter 

fraud. Yet the chief law enforcement official in the state responsible for such 

prosecutions knew of only one conviction and one guilty plea that involved in -

person voter f raud in all Texas elections from 2002 through 2014. 

A specialized United States Department of Justice unit formed with the goal of 

finding instances of federal election fraud examined the 2002 and 2004 federal 

elections, and were able to prove that 0.00000013 percent of ballots cast were 

fraudulent. There was no evidence that any of these incidents involved in -person 

impersonation fraud. Over a five year period, they found “ no concerted effort to tilt 

the election.” 

An investigation in Colorado , in which the Secretary of State alleged 100 cases of 

voter fraud, yielded one conviction. 

In Maine, an investigation into 200 college students revealed no evidence of 

fraud. Shortly thereafter, an Elections Commission appointed by a Republican 

secret ary of state found “there is little or no history in Maine of voter 

impersonation or identification fraud.” 

In Florida, a criminal investigation into nine individuals who allegedly committed 

absentee ballot fraud led to all criminal charges being dism issed against all 

voters. 

In 2012, Florida Governor Rick Scott initiated an effort to remove non -citizen registrants from the state’s rolls. The state’s list of 182,000 alleged non -citizen 

registrants quickly dwindled to 198 . Even this amended list contained many false 

positives, such as a WWII veteran born in Brooklyn. In the end, only 85 non -

citizen registrants were identified and only one was convicted of fraud, out of a 

total of 12 million registered voters. 

In Iowa, a multi -ye ar investigation into fraud led to just 27 prosecutions out of 1.6 

million ballots cast. In 2014 the state issued a report on the investigation citing 

only six prosecutions. 

In Wisconsin, a task force charged 20 individuals with election crimes. The 

majority charged were individuals with prior criminal convictions, who are often 

caught up by confusing laws regarding restoration of their voting rights. 

The verdict is in from every corner that voter fraud is sufficiently rare that it simply 

could not and does not happen at the rate even approaching that which would be 

required to “rig” an election. Electoral integrity is key to our democracy, and politicians 

who genuinely care about protecting our elections should focus not on phantom fraud 

concerns, b ut on those abuses that actually threaten election security .

As historians and election experts have catalogued, there is a long history in this 

country of racially suppressive voting measures — including poll taxes and all -white 

primaries — put in place under the guise of stopping voter fraud that wasn’t actually 

occurring in the first place. The surest way toward voting that is truly free, fair, and 

accessible is to know the facts in the face of such rhetoric. 

Robert A. Oeser 

> REDACTED

email:  REDACTED 

home:  REDACTED 

cell:  REDACTED 

Like The Friends of Brooks Memorial Library on Facebook From: 

To: 

Subject: 

Date: 

Bud Bremer 

FN -OVP -Election Integrity Staff 

?????? 

Thursday, July 6, 2017 1:41:11 PM From: 

To: 

Subject: 

Date: 

Bud Bremer 

FN -OVP -Election Integrity Staff 

?????? 

Thursday, July 6, 2017 1:41:16 PM From:     

> To:
> tammy royce
> FN -OVP -Election Integrity Staff
> Subject: Personal Voter Data -DENY!
> Date: Thursday, July 6, 2017 3:14:38 PM

Hands off my voting rights and every voter across America. Trump lost popular vote because 

he is not popular. There is no voter fraud and your Commission and your actions are 

unAmerican and shameful. Voting is a constitutional right and we will protect it. 

Thank you - American Vote r who is keeping America Great, TRoyce From:  

> To:
> Robert Oeser
> FN -OVP -Election Integrity Staff
> Cc:

REDACTED     

> Subject: Copy of Letter & Request for Response
> Date: Thursday, July 6, 2017 5:02:12 PM
> Attachments: Screenshot 2017 -07 -06 at 4.43.41 PM.png

To whom it may concern, 

Here is a copy of a letter I recently mailed. I would draw your attention to an 

issue that the Commission seems not to have focused on: that of the inordinate and 

unwarranted influence of money in elections. 

Does the Commission's charge include an inquiry into the use of "money in politics?" And, 

if not, can the Commission apply to have it's mission extended to focus on that issue, 

because it is clearly of primary importance? 

The courtesy of your reply is awaited. Robert A. Oeser 

> REDACTED

email:  REDACTED 

home:  REDACTED 

cell:  REDACTED 

Like The Friends of Brooks Memorial Library on Facebook From:   

> To:
> RD Fincher
> FN -OVP -Election Integrity Staff
> Subject: confidence in the integrity of elections
> Date: Thursday, July 6, 2017 5:18:45 PM

I read that you are looking for input regarding what undermines Americans' confidence in 

elections. For me, it's two things: gerrymandering and voter suppression laws (ID 

requirements, limiting early and same -day voting, etc.) 

Concern about voter fraud is a smokescreen to push a radical agenda that limits voting by 

minorities, older poor people, students and young peop le. 

Sincerely, 

Mary -Jeanne Fincher 

Paradise Valley AZ From:    

> To:
> Alice Mulhern
> FN -OVP -Election Integrity Staff
> Subject: Achtung Mein Herr Kobach
> Date: Thursday, July 6, 2017 5:54:57 PM

The more public records reside on one site (e.g., your office), the more vulnerable individuals are to 

hacking and identity theft. Maybe that's what you want. 

We know you and Dumb Donny Dump want only white male Republican racists to have the right to vote. 

Compiling nationwide voting records will allow you to winnow the herd. You know what that means, don't 

you, Farm Boy? Dumb Donny already put a notch in his fat -man belt by eroding Internet privacy (and 

probably profiting from the maneuver). Hitler did the same thing by requiring the Jews to register and 

wear armbands. We see how that all worked out for both the dictators and the wearers. 

One Dump official is no match for a bunch of pissed -off Secretaries of State who must answer to their 

citizens. You may have to answer only to Donny but he's no match for any six -year old with an IQ above 

40 so grow a pair and quit your nothing burger job while you have a few shreds of credibility in Kansas 

(and nowhere else!). 

Save what's left of your pathetic (Dump's word) career and get out now. How 200 million registered voters 

chose is not your business or the business of Dumb Donny, particularly when the intent is voter 

suppression. The statistics don't back you up your fraud claims and neither does the American public. 

Why don't you find some honorable job, like washing dishes in a diner, instead of trying to con the entire 

American public upon orders of the biggest con in the Western World. From:    

> To:
> Paddy Kalish
> FN -OVP -Election Integrity Staff
> Subject: Election Integrity
> Date: Thursday, July 6, 2017 10:02:25 PM

Dear Vice President Pence, 

This is a necessary investigation since a lot of ineligible people voted in the last Presidential 

election. If there is anything I can do, please let me know. 

Best Regards, 

Paddy Kalish From:   

> To:
> Chandler McEvilly
> FN -OVP -Election Integrity Staff
> Subject: You"ll Get Nothing And Like It!
> Date: Thursday, July 6, 2017 10:06:35 PM

I'm thrilled to hear that the vast majority of states have rejected your pea brained idea to consolidate state voter rolls 

into a single database for your ridiculous "voter fraud" commission. What a waste of time and a waste of our 

money. I thought you were all about giving decision making power to the states? Right? Well the states are giving 

you their decision. Try listening instead of showing your hypocrisy. Thanks. 

Sent from my iPhone From: 

To: 

jenna 

FN -OVP -Election Integrity Staff 

Subject: election integrity commission 

Date: Friday, July 7, 2017 12:52:40 AM 

Dear Mr. Kobach, 

What Kent Kangley said. 

Sincerely, 

Jennifer Gruzella From:   

> To:
> John Clevenger
> FN -OVP -Election Integrity Staff
> Subject: RE: my answer to your request re: voter registration info
> Date: Friday, July 7, 2017 1:06:04 PM

You are part of a sham billed to the American people. 

Shame on you. SHAME ON YOU. And by the way, FUCK YOU TOO. WE, THE AMERICAN PEOPLE, ARE 

NOT GOING TO ACCEPT SUCH SHAMS COMMITTED BY AN ADMINISTRATION THAT HAS STUDIED 

NAZI DISINFORMATION TECHNIQUES. 

On a practical level, what does that mean for you? IT MEANS WE WILL FIGHT YOU. SO GET READY, 

you despicable pieces of dogshit. 

This is a fucking screaming outrage and you know it. YOU MEAN TO DISENFRANCHISE VOTERS. FUCK 

YOU. 

Dr. John R. Clevenger 

From:  John  Clevenger  [mailto:  REDACTED ]

Sent: Saturday, July 01, 2017 10:41 AM 

To: 'electionintegritystaff@ovp.eop.gov' 

Subject: my answer to your request re: voter registration info 

FUCK YOU. 

Dr. John R. Clevenger From: 

> To:

REDACTED    

> FN -OVP -Election Integrity Staff
> Subject: Your security & privacy skills suck
> Date: Friday, July 7, 2017 1:58:54 PM

and you're clearly not equipped to deal with the PII for every American voter that's been demanded. 

Then, you're going to publish it for the world to see? 

As Forrest says, "Stupid is as stupid does" and you're the poster children. 

Also, can you say unconstitutional? I know, the concepts are hard.... From:   

> To:
> Deb & M al
> FN -OVP -Election Integrity Staff
> Subject: Election Integrity suggestions
> Date: Friday, July 7, 2017 3:07:55 PM

Dear commissioners: 

Allow me to recommend that all citizens over 18 years of age be automatically registered to vote 

and that all voting be conducted on paper ballots. Whenever someone registers to vote in a 

jurisdiction, their previous jurisdiction should be notified. (That's how it used to work before 

modern technology made the job even easier, but lack of funding hobbled the process of keep ing 

voter rolls current.) 

Malcolm Cumming 

Clinton, WA 98236 From:   

> To:
> Tom Mullin
> FN -OVP -Election Integrity Staff
> Subject: Recommendation
> Date: Friday, July 7, 2017 3:47:51 PM

Allow me to recommend that all citizens over 18 years of age be automatically registered to 

vote and that all voting be conducted on paper ballots. Whenever someone registers to vote 

in a jurisdiction, their previous jurisdiction should be notified. (That's how it used to work 

before modern technology made the job even easier, but lack of funding hobbled the process 

of keeping voter rolls current.) 

Tom Mullin 

WA From: 

> To:

REDACTED   

> FN -OVP -Election Integrity Staff
> Subject: An American"s concerns
> Date: Friday, July 7, 2017 4:44:30 PM

I am not a Secretary of State but I am an American citizen and I have many concerns about the Electoral Integrity 

Commission. Among them: 

We have a president who frequently expresses his distaste for bleeding women but has yet to express his opposition 

to Russian interference in American elections; 

There have been massive purges of voter registration rolls without due process; 

Legislators who craft gerrymandered redistricting maps enabling politicians to choose their voters rather than the 

reverse; 

The Supreme Court's decision in Shelby County v Holder, gutting the protections of the Voting Rights Act under the 

obviously false rationale that America is today a post -racial society; 

Voter suppression efforts targeted at voters of color, the working poor, and students; 

Antiquated voting systems vulnerable to state -sponsored tampering and conveniently producing no auditable paper 

trails; 

A Federal Elections Commission - our democracy's watchdog - that is toothless by design; 

The Supreme Court's decision in Citizens United v FEC, granting the wealthy few a louder voice in political 

campaigns than all other citizens combined; 

An antiquated Electoral College system that enables minority rule; 

An advisory committee on election integrity led by a notorious champion of voter suppression. 

If the Commission is interested in pursuing the above then I say go to it, but the charges of extensive voter fraud 

have no basis in reality and the request for private voter information is offensive and I am happy that my SoS said 

NO! 

Julie  Pease,  REDACTED From:   

> To:
> Odette Mc Millan
> FN -OVP -Election Integrity Staff
> Subject: Wow, who knew?
> Date: Friday, July 7, 2017 7:19:26 PM

Dear Mr. Kobach, 

My voting records and for whom I voted are my business not 

yours. 

It's clear that you want to find voters to disenfranchise 

because you and your neo -Nazi cohorts are scared because you 

know tha t you can't win elections if all eligible voters 

actually vote. 

You're terrified because 2018 is going to be a tsunami of 

eligible voters voting and not voting for you and your cohorts. 

So just stop it! It's not going to work. 

Sincerely, 

Odette Mc Millan From:     

> To:
> Leslie K Brown
> FN -OVP -Election Integrity Staff
> Cc: Leslie K Brown
> Subject: Recommendation to Assure Integrity in Elections
> Date: Friday, July 7, 2017 8:27:10 PM

To the Presidential Advisory Commission on Election Integrity: 

Voting in America is a right and must be protected to assure our democracy 

works. It is not difficult to register voters and assure integrity by looking at 

past practices and states which operate with complete efficiency. Voter 

fraud concerns are not supported by any evidence. Rather, simple solutions 

are available and do not require you gather any ID or voting information 

from anyone. 

I am recommending that all citizens over 18 years of age be automatically 

registered to vote and that all voting be conducted on paper ballots. 

Whenever someone registers to vote in any jurisdiction, their previous 

jurisdiction should be notified. 

(That's how it used to work before modern technology made the job even 

easier, but lack of funding hobbled the process of keeping voter rolls 

current.) 

Please reply to this email. Thank you, 

Leslie Brown, registered voter and citizen of the Un ited States of America From: 

To: 

diana munson 

FN -OVP -Election Integrity Staff 

Subject: Voter info 

Date: Saturday, July 8, 2017 11:55:09 AM 

Your website isn't secure. What's your real motive for your request From:       

> To:
> TGlassey -Earthlink
> FN -OVP -Election Integrity Staff
> Subject: USDC Court ruling -The election was a fraud -because of the court ruling in USDC SF 14 -CV -03629
> Date: Saturday, July 8, 2017 12:15:09 PM

Sorry, but we warned both the Judge and the Governor of the State of 

California what the effect of the ruling in the 14 -CV -03629/WHA matter 

was. It legally invalidated the election because "all of the states 

illegally use IP from the US6370629 suite of patents which are controlled 

fully by the clauses of the Settlement for US6370629". 

Further, the Obama Administration covered this same fraud up because it 

impacts the legal ability to commingle funds illegally obtained in any 

of these foreign nations which are obtained from the sale of US6370629 

based products, software, and online services: AU54015/99, CA2287596, 

EU0997808A3, BR9904979A, ZA9906799, JP2000 -163379, KO2000 -0035093. 

Today this single fraud controls not only the ability to operate the US 

Governmetn, but those others as well. In fact Commissioner Vergaster hit 

Apple for 14B Eu in taxes to continue protecting them from the antitrust 

fraud they are direct parties to in their offshoring money obtained from 

illegal sales therein. Three weeks after she acknowledged receipt of the 

cease -and -desist the counterfeiting actions - the EU hits Apple for 14B 

Eu in fraud -payments. That is the key hammer against the EU itself 

before the Hague. That they agreed Apple was breaking the law and tried 

to strong -arm them for payments to continue protecting them. 

The fun part is US IRS is also protecting them. That is why I am suing 

you folks again - on my way to the Hague. The lawsuit is before Court of 

Federal Claims, 2017 -CV -00901 and it claims a number of things including 

IRS and US DOJ and the Courts themselves have refused to review their 

uses of stolen property. 

That said - please also realize you - USG - have no legal method of 

giving me relief from the criminal fraud done between Canada and the EU, 

or Australia and Japan, or Australia and South Africa, or South Africa 

and Brazil. All of those frauds documented by these - their very 

existence PROVES THE CRIMINAL FRAUDS HAPPENED - AU54015/99, CA2287596, 

EU0997808A3, BR9904979A, ZA9906799, JP2000 -163379, KO2000 -0035093. 

That said - my next steps are that someone owes me several billion in 

direct damages and several hundred billion in offshoring damages. In 

addition IRS has blocked my participation in BOUNTY program against 

Microsoft, Apple, Facebook, Google and two others meaning they - the IRS 

as run by Secretary Mnuchin, are committing yet another crime. 

Your problem simply is that when this matter gets to the Hague/ICC they 

will have no choice but to rule the fraud 'made it legally impossible to 

vote in the US some time in the mid 2003 - to 2005 timeframe' and 

everything since then is a lie. If your attorney's want to talk, or VP Pence or POTUS staff want to 

understand what we are saying in our Law Suit - its pretty simple. No 

one can use US6370629 in the US outside of the California Law 

restrictions which are automatic and which are the hamstring both 

parties agreed to in the beginning to make those contracts so toxic they 

had to be renegotiated. Today that renegotiation is going to cost tens or 

hundreds of billions in direct and probably several hundred billion in 

US Taxfraud losses. 

Have a nice weekend, and send the Boss my best 

//Todd Glassey 

REDACTED From: John Clevenger    

> To: FN -OVP -Election Integrity Staff
> Subject: RE: my answer to your request re: voter registration info
> Date: Saturday, July 8, 2017 12:44:19 PM

Got my message yet, you dumbass pieces of shit? YOU ARE A FUCKING DISGRACE, working on behalf 

of a criminal administration. WE WILL ANNIHILATE YOU. May you and all your evil ilk GO STRAIGHT 

TO HELL. 

Dr. John R. Clevenger 

From:  John  Clevenger  [mailto:  REDACTED ]

Sent: Friday, July 07, 2017 10:06 AM 

To: 'electionintegritystaff@ovp.eop.gov' 

Subject: RE: my answer to your request re: voter registration info 

You are part of a sham billed to the American people. 

Shame on you. SHAME ON YOU. And by the way, FUCK YOU TOO. WE, THE AMERICAN PEOPLE, ARE 

NOT GOING TO ACCEPT SUCH SHAMS COMMITTED BY AN ADMINISTRATION THAT HAS STUDIED 

NAZI DISINFORMATION TECHNIQUES. 

On a practical level, what does that mean for you? IT MEANS WE WILL FIGHT YOU. SO GET READY, 

you despicable pieces of dogshit. 

This is a fucking screaming outrage and you know it. YOU MEAN TO DISENFRANCHISE VOTERS. FUCK 

YOU. 

Dr. John R. Clevenger 

From:  John  Clevenger  [mailto:  REDACTED ]

Sent: Saturday, July 01, 2017 10:41 AM 

To: 'electionintegritystaff@ovp.eop.gov' 

Subject: my answer to your request re: voter registration info 

FUCK YOU. 

Dr. John R. Clevenger From: Rod Fisher 

To: FN -OVP -Election Integrity Staff 

Subject: Voter information 

Date: Saturday, July 8, 2017 3:40:47 PM 

Attachments: image001.png 

Your attempt to get voter information is undemocratic and un -American. Shame on you. 

Rod  Fisher  President  REDACTED 

REDACTED 

REDACTED 

Tel:  REDACTED  | Mob:  REDACTED  | Fax:  REDACTED 

NORTH AMERICA | LATIN AMERICA | EUROPE | NORDIC | ASIA PACIFIC 

REDACTED 

This message may contain privileged and/or confidential information. If you have received this e-mail in error or are not the intended recipient, you may 

not use, copy, print, disseminate or distribute it; do not open any attachments, delete it immediately from your system and notify the sender promptly by 

e-mail that you have done so. Thank you. From:     

> To:
> Mehrnoz
> FN -OVP -Election Integrity Staff
> Subject: You are not entitled to voters" personal information -duh!
> Date: Saturday, July 8, 2017 4: 00:57 PM

Asking for voter identity information is contrary to everything this country and the ideals of 

democracy stand for. 

It doesn't get any stupider than this coming from the very people who should understand this 

best so they can protect us! 

--

Mehrnoz Aghili 

Roxbury CT 06783 From:    

> To:
> Alice Mulhern
> FN -OVP -Election Integrity Staff
> Subject: Me again!
> Date: Sunday, July 9, 2017 11:54:50 AM

Congrats, Kobach. You're the third most hated man in the nation, right behind Trump and Pence. How 

does it feel to be a loser reporting to a loser? How does it feel to be aiding and abetting Trump's 

hilarious idea of joining in a cyber effort with Tsar Vlad? Surely as a Kansan you can relate to personally 

escorting the wolf into the hen house with a 21 -gun salute. 

You wouldn't know election integrity if it bit you on your considerable ass. Save your career and our 

democracy. Get off the Klown Kar now! From:   

> To:
> Jerold Coburn
> FN -OVP -Election Integrity Staff
> Subject: Comment on the Commission
> Date: Sunday, July 9, 2017 6:18:12 PM

I served in the US Air Force from March, 1956 through December, 1958. When I received my commission as a

2nd Lt. in 1955, I took the oath to protect and defend the Constitution against all enemies, foreign and DOMESTIC. 

That oath is still in effect, so I am speaking out to oppose your voter suppression commission. 

We did have massive voter fraud here in Miami -Dade County, Florida, some years ago. The fraud was with 

absentee ballots, committed by Republicans, resulting in an election's results being thrown out by a judge. A new 

election had to be held. We made some serious changes to our procedures locally to prevent this from happening 

again. 

It is obvious that your commission will be using this information, especially voting history, to target people who are 

likely to vote Democratic, and use various, well -known techniques to suppress as many of their votes as possible. I

am a Teddy Roosevelt Republican. He would never condone such un -American behavior. 

Based on everything I have read and heard from reputable sources, the voter “fraud” the president is complaining 

about is almost nonexistent. It’s really pathetic that he can’t accept that almost 3 million more people voted for Mrs. 

Clinton than him, plus about 2 million others who voted for third party and independent candidates. This is a waste 

of money and just another distraction. 

Sincerely. 

Jerold B. Coburn 

REDACTED From:   

> To:
> Ann Durden
> FN -OVP -Election Integrity Staff
> Subject: Voter information
> Date: Sunday, July 9, 2017 7:51:07 PM

Dear Mr. Kobach, 

I appreciate you taking the time to solicit the views of Americans regarding the request for private voter 

information from all 50 states Attorneys General. 

I understand that you were appointed to oversee the possibility of illegal votes in the presidential election 

despite no evidence. However, we do know that our election process was tested by the Russian 

government and are anxious to see our processes upheld and strengthened. That will not happen if time 

and money are spent chasing down an illegal voting problem that doesn't exist. Not to mention the very 

ill -advised idea of consolidating voter information from all 50 states in one database. 

I urge you to work with states to strengthen the voting process. And we will be very vigilant to ensure that 

this does NOT turn into an excuse to purge voter rolls. 

Thank you for your time. 

Ann Durden 

Palm Beach Gardens, FL From: REDACTED on behalf of Lilian Asua 

Subject: I Need you 

Date: Monday, July 10, 2017 6:20:19 PM From: DIANE KROEZE   

> To: FN -OVP -Election Integrity Staff
> Date: Monday, July 10, 2017 6:20:25 PM

What to say. It is very disturbing to find someone who is determined to undermine 

our Voting rights and to disrupt one of the most important functions we have as 

Citizens. Now we have at least two people, you and P. Trump. Just because P. 

Trumps' ego can't stand losing the popular vote, it doesn't mean the whole country 

should suffer. Time and time again the elections have been investigated and it has 

been found there is no evidence of big time fraud. Now you want to pull in 

everybodys voting info. I for one, if Calif. decides to comply in the future will maybe 

withdraw my info , if pos sible, because I do not wish to have conspiracy inclined 

people to have the info. You and the other appointtees of the Trump Admin. seem to 

be possibly inept, uneducated, believers in the extreme right ideology or something, 

but one thing is clear. You ar e bad for the USA.. From: DIANE KROEZE     

> To: FN -OVP -Election Integrity Staff ;REDACTED
> Subject: Re: Help stop election fraud
> Date: Monday, July 10, 2017 7:25:33 PM

He's pretty disgusting and so is his boss. Diane K 

On July 1, 2017 at 12:14 PM  REDACTED  wrote: 

Dear Mr. Kobach, 

Thank you for serving our nation in this time of need. 

I very much want to do my part in fighting election fraud in our wonderful 

country. 

Do you have an application that I can apply for employment in your 

department? 

It's so important that we gain information on so many illegal voters so that 

we 

can deny their registration in the next election. I have seen so many black, 

poor 

and ex -felons breaking in to polling places on the day before big elections 

and 

doing stuff to the machines. I know how important it is for our machines to 

stay 

under the supervision of white election officials. I know you will agree 

because I 

know how white you are. 

But I also k now how very busy you must be reading all these emails, so I'll 

make it short: 

Get out of D.C. before you get caught. 

Neil Hudson From: 

To: 

Victor 

FN -OVP -Election Integrity Staff 

Subject: Pieces of crap 

Date: Monday, July 10, 2017 11:44:44 PM 

I hope you get just shit and nothing else. From:   

> To:
> Jack Mackie
> FN -OVP -Election Integrity Staff
> Subject: Voter FRAUDS
> Date: Tuesday, July 11, 2017 1:14:44 AM

Mr. Koback, 

In your efforts to end VOTE FRAUD in the US of A there is one offender that if you take him off his job no one 

will be ever again vote for a Fraud. 

This one person is the Vice Chair of Presidentail Pence Vice President Committee of VOTER FRAUDS and I think 

you know who I mean. It’s you YOU FRAUD Anti -American UnPatriotic Dirty Commie Rat! 

Sincerely. 

Jack Mackie From:   

> To:
> John Hartman
> FN -OVP -Election Integrity Staff
> Subject: Integrity
> Date: Tuesday, July 11, 2017 9:27:00 AM

Dear Staffers of Election Integrity Commission, 

I ask that you demonstrate a modicum of integrity and resign from this charade immediately. The Commission's 

charge is based on a false premise created by a president who lies continually. Your participation in this phony 

commission only props up the president's lie. One would think you would be too embarrassed by the president's 

phony statements about voter fraud and you would resign from this commission right away. Anyone who works to 

promote the original presidential lie is little better than a prevaricator. 

John Hartman 

REDACTED From:     

> To:
> Alice Mulhern
> FN -OVP -Election Integrity Staff
> Subject: Attention: Kobach
> Date: Tuesday, July 11, 2017 4:03:23 PM

Hey White Supremacist hotshot! Find any dead people on the voter rolls of the two states complying with 

your request? Find any live people who would pee on you if you were on fire? 

Congratulations on eliminating 15% of Kansas voters. Only a jackass like Trump would consider that an 

accomplishment. 

I picture you in the White House basement, perched over an old PC as you input voter info on a

spreadsheet and decide how many Smiths and Joneses are dead, duplicates, ineligible, felons, 

minorities. Enjoy your cushy federal job for the next few weeks because the minute the orange horror 

becomes a defendant in a criminal proceeding your fat ass is out the WH door and on its way back to a

cornfield. And you know what you can do with those ears ... 

Have a nice day~ 

P.S. I removed my name from voter rolls. And I'm a Republican!
