Title: Full text of "LETTERS OF DOCUMENTS OF NAPOLEON VOL 1 THE RISE TO POWER"

URL Source: https://archive.org/stream/lettersofdocumen006632mbp/lettersofdocumen006632mbp_djvu.txt

Markdown Content:
See other formats
-----------------

105457 

By  John  Eldred  Howard 

PARLIAMENT  AND  FOREIGN  POLICY  IN  FRANCE 

THE  RISE  TO  POWER 

General  Bonaparte 

the  victory  medal  designed  by  Huvivier  and  issued  by  the 
Institute  of  I-ranee  on  the  signature  of  tin-  treaty  of  Campo  l:onnio. 

Letters  and  Documents 

of 

NAPOLEON 

Selected  and  translated  by 
EIX>REI> 

VOLUME   ONE 

The  Rise  to  Power 

NEW   YORK 

OXFORD   UNIVERSITY  PRESS 
1961 

COPYRIGHT   BY  JOHN    BIX>RED    HOWARO    Ip6l 

Printed  in  Cr**t  Britain  by  Butl*r  &  T«nn*r  !^td.»  From*  mnrf 

IN  MEMORY  OF  MY  FATHER 

GEORGE  CHARLES  HOWARD 
1859-1942 

Contents 

GENERAL  INTRODUCTION  page  xi 

NOTE  ON  THE  SELECTION  AND  TEXT  xx 

Napoleon's  Family  Tree  xxx 

Volume  I 

THE  RISE  TO  POWER 

Preface  3 

THE  EARLY  YEARS  5 

ITALY  69 

EGYPT  211 

BRUMAIRE  305 

MARENGO  3^9 

LUN&VILLE  AND  AMIENS  4?I 

Table  of  Sources,  etc.  523 

Illustrations  and  Maps 

GENERAL  BONAPARTE  Frontispiece 

Revolutionary  and  Imperial  France  page  xxxii 

Paris  during  the  Revolution  and  Empire  xxxiv 

SOME  EARLY  SIGNATURES  2 

LETTER-HEAD  OF  THE  ARMY  OF  THE  INTERIOR  6 

Corsica  13 

Toulon  13 

MEDALS  OF  THE  ITALIAN  CAMPAIGN  70 

Italy:  March,  1796;  after  Campo  Formio  83 

North  Italy  84 

Area  of  first  operations 9  1796  85 

Mantua  85 

ORDER  OF  THE  DAY  OF  THE  ARMY  OF  THE  EAST  212 

Egypt  and  Syria;  Malta  217 

LETTER-HEADS  OF  THE  CONSULATE  306 

MEDALS  OF  THE  MARENGO  CAMPAIGN  370 

.  Route  of  the  Reserve  Army  376 

The  Battle  ofMarengo  377 

'MADAME  MERE'  472 

Central  Europe  in  1792  475 

Central  Europe  after  Luneville  and  Amiens  476 

'DEMOCRACY,  OR  A  SKETCH  OF  THE  LIFE  OF  BONAPARTE'  524 

GENERAL  INTRODUCTION 

Frenchmen  often  complain  that  foreigners  see  only  the  military  aspects 
of  Napoleon's  career  and  forget  the  work  of  civil  construction  he 
carried  out  in  France.  It  is  probably  true  that  his  domestic  achievement 
is  less  well-known  abroad  and  it  was  certainly  as  great  as  and  far  more 
lasting  and  valuable  than  all  his  military  victories.  The  empire  he  con- 
quered fell  in  his  own  lifetime  and  most  of  the  battles  he  fought  were 
ultimately  meaningless;  the  administrative,  legal  and  educational 
systems,  the  roads,  canals,  buildings  and  industries  he  created  have  sur- 
vived till  the  present  day  and  together  form  an  unequalled  contribution 
to  the  well-being  of  his  countrymen.  If  they  are  more  aware  of  this 
than  are  foreigners  that  is  not  surprising,  for  they  are  more  closely 
touched  by  it,  whereas  the  ancestors  of  the  foreigners  had  to  do  with 
Napoleon  almost  exclusively  on  the  battlefield.  But  Frenchmen  and 
foreigners  alike  can  justly  be  accused  of  neglecting  another  of  his 
legacies  that  is  at  least  as  remarkable  as  any  other — his  writings.  The  pen 
may  be  mightier  than  the  sword,  but  for  most  people  actions  speak 
louder  than  words,  and  'Napoleon  the  soldier  and  statesman  has  gener- 
ally overshadowed  Napoleon  the  writer'.* 

During  the  past  hundred  years  almost  the  whole  of  the  vast  corpus 
of  his  papers  has  been  published  in  France,  but  in  a  form  such  as  to 
ensure  that  little  of  it  has  been  widely  read.  Translations  into  English 
have  been  few  and  small  and,  however  interesting,  have  barely  touched 
the  most  important  material;  readers  of  other  languages  have  been  no 
better  served.  During  the  same  period  the  output  of  works  written  by 
others  about  Napoleon  has  been  immense.  Like  Alexander  and  Charle- 
magne he  has  enthralled  later  generations  as  much  as  he  dominated  his 
own  and  it  is  quite  likely  that  more  books  have  been  written  about  him 
than  about  any  other  secular  figure  in  history;  Kircheisen's  biblio- 
graphy, compiled  early  in  the  twentieth  century,  was  incomplete  but 
still  listed  about  a  hundred  thousand  items,  and  the  flow  has  continued 
unabated  ever  since.  Meanwhile,  what  he  himself  wrote  has  remained 
in  comparative  oblivion. 

Yet  what  Napoleon  wrote  is  the  essential  raw  material  for  under- 
standing the  man  and  the  history  of  his  time.  If  we  are  to  approach  die 
truth  many  other  sources  must  be  taken  into  account  to  supplement  and 
correct  it,  for  the  grain  of  salt  it  is  always  desirable  to  have  ready  when 
reading  the  words  of  statesmen  is  more  than  ever  necessary  here; 
Napoleon's  letters  and  documents  are  inevitably  one-sided,  often  pre- 
judiced, sometimes  deliberately  misleading;  they  cannot  in  the  nature 
of  things  tell  the  whole  story.  They  were  still  the  most  important  factor 
in  twenty  years  of  European  history  and  they  provide  the  most  direct 
VN.  Tomiche:  Napotton  Ecrivain,  p.  4. 

Letters  and  Documents  of  Napoleon 

route  to  an  understanding  of  his  character.  Biographies  and  history 
books  may  give  a  truer  picture,  but  some  reality  and  something  of 
value  is  lost  when  his  own  words  and  thoughts  are  distilled  through  the 
mind  of  the  historian.  Moreover,  his  own  words  are  in  no  way  dull  or 
difficult  to  read;  they  deal  with  important  and  exciting  events  in  an 
exciting  manner  and  even  today  there  is  no  suggestion  of  the  old- 
fashioned  about  them. 

'Bonaparte,'  wrote  Bourrienne,  'like  Xenophon  and  Caesar,  excelled 
in  the  art  of  expressing  thought.'*  Contemporaries  and  posterity, 
admirers  and  opponents  have  alike  found  little  to  criticize  and  much  to 
praise  in  his  spoken  and  written  utterances,  and  in  his  case  there  was 
little  distinction  between  the  two.  Madame  de  Stael,  a  bitter  enemy, 
was  'struck  by  his  superiority  whenever  she  heard  him  speak',  f  and 
writers  from  her  day  till  our  own  have  admired  both  the  form  and  the 
content  of  his  work.  For  Thiers  he  was  the  greatest  writer  of  his  time, 
for  Sainte-Beuve  the  greatest  of  the  century.  Such  propositions  suggest 
his  stature,  but  they  must  be  seen  in  perspective.  Napoleon's  output  is 
certainly  a  literary  monument,  but  at  least  the  greater  part  of  it  and  all 
that  is  of  value  cannot  properly  be  compared  with  the  work  of  pro- 
fessional writers.  He  was  not  a  man  of  letters  but  a  ruler,  and  what  he 
wrote  was  an  instrument  perfectly  adjusted  to  the  needs  of  his  role.  In 
the  words  of  Sainte-Beuve  again,  'it  has  the  stamp  of  the  lion'.  £ 

Napoleon  the  writer  is  in  fact  quite  as  interesting  as  Napoleon  the 
soldier  and  statesman,  and  in  one  respect  his  success  in  this  less 
spectacular  activity  was  a  greater  personal  achievement.  In  war  or 
politics  or  diplomacy  his  problems  were  external  and  he  could  apply 
his  talents  to  them  without  the  hindrance  of  any  inadequacy  in  his 
personal  equipment.  It  was  no  doubt  irritating  to  be  a  poor  rider  in  the 
midst  of  great  horsemen,  but  that  and  similar  handicaps  were  trivial; 
there  were,  too,  flaws  in  his  character  and  judgment  that  were  to  lead 
him  in  the  end  to  St.  Helena,  but  of  them  he  was  unaware.  As  a  writer 
he  had  to  overcome  the  seemingly  insuperable  barrier  of  a  very  imper- 
fect command  of  the  language  he  used  with  such  skill 

(Napoleon  did  not  learn  French  until  he  was  over  nine  years  old.  He 
may  have  picked  up  a  few  words  from  his  father,  one  of  the  few 
Corsicans  of  his  time  who  knew  the  language,  but  he  neither  heard  it 
spoken  nor  received  any  systematic  instruction  in  it  until  he  landed  in 
France  at  the  end  of  1778.  He  retained  a  noticeable  accent  to  the  end  of 
his  days,  often  mispronouncing  words  so  that  they  were  barely 
recognizable.  His  vocabulary  was  weak  and  he  was  sometimes  driven 
to  inventing  his  own  words,  usually  rather  expressive  ones.  His  spelling 

*  MAnoires,  Bk.  I,  Ch.  15. 

f  Considerations  sur  la  Revolution  franfaise,  Vol.  I,  p.  494  (ecL  1862). 

J  Causeries  de  Lundi,  Vol.  I,  p.  144  (ed.  1852). 

jurors  ana  uocuments  oj  Napoleon  xui 

was  atrocious,  his  grammar  faulty,  his  range  of  constructions  limited, 
his  handwriting  almost  indecipherable \  The  secretaries  to  whom  most 
of  his  work  was  dictated  could  correct  some  minor  faults,  but  there  was 
much  that  they  could  not  hide  even  had  they  had  the  time  or  die  wish 
to  do  so.  Those  few  who  received  private  letters  and  the  many  who 
suffered  under  the  daily  avalanche  of  autograph  minutes  saw  every 
outrage  he  committed  on  their  tongue. 

That,  in  France  of  all  countries,  this  state  of  affairs  did  not  damage/ 
his  career  is  surprising.  That  he  himself  was  content  with  it  contrasts 
oddly  with  his  striving  after  precision  and  perfection  in  so  many  other 
respects.  By  an  effort  of  will,  if  he  chose  to  make  it,  he  could  overcome 
his  faults,  for  the  early  autograph  letters  to  Marie-Louise,  those  written 
before  they  met,  are  entirely  free  from  spelling  mistakes  and  gram- 
matical errors  and  are  written  in  a  hand  that,  if  far  from  elegant,  is  at 
least  more  legible  than  his  usual  scrawl.  But  he  seldom  bothered,  and 
he  even  contrived  to  turn  his  failings  to  advantage:  Stendhal  admired 
'the  very  imperfection  of  his  language,  always  slightly  tinged  with 
foreignness'.*  His  command  of  words  made  his  faults  unimportant  and 
placed  a  perfect  tool  at  the  service  of  his  other  qualities.  It  was  indeed 
integrally  related  to  them,  for  the  soldier,  the  statesman  and  the  writer 
were  inseparable  aspects  of  the  same  talent 

The  voice  of  the  lion  is  inappropriate  to  lesser  beasts.  Napoleon's 
developed  style  is  unique.  It  owes  a  good  deal  to  classical  models; 
nothing  at  all  to  any  French  precursor  or  contemporary.  There  are 
rightly  echoes  of  his  words  and  thoughts  as  well  as  of  his  actions  in  the 
work  of  Victor  Hugo,  that  self-appointed  'guardian  of  the  treasures  of 
the  glory  of  the  Empire',  f  Apart  from  that,  though  his  style  is  easily 
copied,  it  has  never  been  so. 

Napoleon's  abilities  came  to  maturity  suddenly  and  seemingly  com- 
plete in  the  Italian  campaign  of  1796.  At  Toulon  and  during  the  next 
two  years  he  showed  undoubted  gifts  as  a  soldier,  but  there  was 
precious  little  about  him  during  that  period  and  nothing  at  all  in  his 
earlier  life  to  herald  what  was  to  comelln  Italy  his  mastery  of  general- 
ship, politics  and  diplomacy  was  constantly  at  as  high  a  pitch  as  it  was 
ever  to  reach.  His  mastery  of  language  followed  the  same  course.  In 
youth  he  turned  out  a  flood  of  history,  fiction,  philosophy,  autobio- 

Ephy,  all  of  it  the  kind  of  stuff  that  many  another  young  intellectual 
produced  and  done  better  and,  if  he  is  wise,  destroyed  before  anyone 
has  seen  it!  It  is  derivative,  turgid  and  long-winded,  without  an  idea  or 
allusion  or  turn  of  phrase  that  is  original.  Its  authorship  gives  it  interest, 
but,  that  apart,  it  is  tedious  and  valueless.  In  Italy  his  language  was 

*  Memoires  sur  Napollon,  Ch.  51. 

t  From  his  poem  on  the  death  of  the  Duchess  of  Abrantes  in  Les  Rayons  et 
Us  Ombres. 

xiv  Letters  and  Documents  of  Napoleon 

individual,  simple,  direct  and  wholly  effective;  the  stamp  of  the  lion 
was  already  there. 

The  reason  for  this  sudden  development  of  his  style  can  be  sur- 
mised, and  it  is  one  which  explains  a  good  deal  about  the  form  of  his 
writing  after  it  occurred.  He  always  read  prodigiously  and  in  youth, 
his  mind  filled  with  borrowed  ideas  and  stylistic  models,  he  sought  to 
copy  the  writers  who  impressed  him.  His  aim  was  essentially  literary, 
but  that  was  not  his  bent  and  the  result  was  failure.  But  young  Buona- 
parte was  also  a  trained  soldier  who  had  studied  and  meditated  on  every 
aspect  of  his  profession.  He  knew  that  the  style  of  the  debating  clubs 
and  the  philosophic  salons  was  ill-adapted  to  leading  armies  to  victory, 
and  when  at  length  he  had  an  army  to  command  he  at  once  instinctively 
found  a  style  fitted  to  his  purpose.  He  was  no  longer  concerned  with 
literary  forms  or  with  any  other  aspects  of  his  letters,  orders,  reports  and 
proclamations  than  that  they  should  produce  the  results  he  intended. 
Like  his  staff  or  his  transport  system  they  were  a  means  to  an  end. 

Like  so  much  else  in  his  life,  the  beginning  of  this  change  can  be 
traced  back  to  Toulon.  Except  for  the  one  story,  Clisson  et  Eugfarie, 
written  during  his  imprisonment  in  1794,  the  last  and  certainly  the  best 
of  his  purely  literary  output  was  the  Souper  de  Bcaucaire,  produced 
immediately  before  he  joined  the  siege.  The  fact  that  that  piece  was 
written  with  the  deliberate  aim  of  persuading  the  people  of  Provence 
to  accept  Jacobin  rule  may  account  for  its  quality,  but  as  to  form  and 
style  it  must  still  be  classed  with  his  earlier  work.  Thereafter  he  was 
engaged  in  severely  practical  problems  and  his  manner  of  writing 
changed  abruptly  to  conform  with  them.  There  was  still  occasionally 
a  literary  tone,  especially  in  private  letters,  but  everything  he  wrote 
between  1793  and  1796  had  more  in  common  with  what  was  to  succeed 
it  than  with  what  had  gone  before.  A  few  pieces  can  even  stand  com- 
parison with  his  later  work,  but  most  certainly  cannot;  they  are  flat,  ill- 
organized  and  confused.  Reading  them  one  has  the  feeling  that,  just  as 
he  had  begun  his  career  but  was  still  beset  by  doubts  and  difficulties,  so 
too  he  had  put  his  literary  style  on  the  right  lines  but  was  only  in  his 
apprenticeship.  In  Italy,  and  for  most  of  his  life  thereafter,  he  was 
inspired. 

All  his  life  Napoleon  was  conscious  of  the  power  of  words  to 
influence  events.  He  knew  that  armies  march,  treaties  are  made,  policies 
formed,  nations  moved  to  action  only  as  a  result  of  words,  and  that  the 
way  these  are  chosen  and  used  profoundly  influences  their  effectiveness. 
His  harsh  control  over  the  press  and  theatre  and  shocking  treatment  of 
many  creative  writers  issued  from  a  genuine  if  misplaced  fear  for  the 
success  of  his  policies  and  the  security  of  his  regime.  By  contrast  he 
deluged  France  in  a  sea  of  paper  that  would  have  delighted  a  modern 
civil  service  and  over  which  he  himself  exercised  a  firm  ultimate  control. 

Letters  and  Documents  of  Napoleon  xv 

He  would  carefully  revise  the  drafts  of  public  documents,  often  show- 
ing in  marginal  notes  or  covering  letters  why  one  phrase  was  to  be 
preferred  to  another.  His  subordinates  received  constant  admonition 
and  advice  about  their  own  style  and  sometimes  stern  but  wise  criticism 
of  what  they  wrote;  often  enough  their  papers  were  returned  to  them 
for  redrafting.  'Words  must  be  weighed,9  he  said  to  Eugene. 

To  Eugene  he  also  wrote:  'The  circular  is  too  long-winded;  authority 
reasons  less  and  explains  itself  more  briefly.  You  would  have  done 
better  to  write  six  lines/*  To  Murat:  'Your  Order  of  the  Day  is 
wretched.  Good  God!  Where  should  we  be  if  I  had  to  write  four  pages 
to  tell  the  soldiers  not  to  let  themselves  be  disarmed?  You  never  learnt 
that  from  me/f  Such  comments  abound;  they  show  both  the  value  he 
placed  on  the  right  use  of  words  and  his  faith  in  his  own  ability  to 
achieve  it.  The  brevity  that  he  urges  he  almost  always  practised.  To 
waste  words  was  to  waste  time,  and  that  'seemed  to  him  a  calamity'; 
'in  politics  as  in  war',  he  said,  'the  lost  moment  never  returns'.:}:  But  he 
also  knew  that  the  fewer  the  words,  provided  they  are  the  right  ones, 
the  more  influence  they  will  wield.  'I  have  read  the  proclamation,'  he 
wrote  to  Lucien,  'it  is  worthless.  There  are  too  many  words  and  not 
enough  ideas.  That  is  not  the  way  to  speak  to  the  people.'§  That  was  in 
1792,  a  time  when  he  could  well  have  profited  from  his  own  advice, 
yet  already  he  was  clearly  aware  of  language  as  a  means  of  power  and 
of  how  it  should  be  used. 

This  constant  concern  with  problems  of  verbal  expression  together 
with  his  growing  experience  inevitably  led  to  some  development  in  his 
own  style  even  during  the  years  of  his  maturity.  It  is  also  significant  that 
he  was  brought  up  during  the  twilight  years  of  the  French  classical 
tradition  and  that  when  he  died  the  romantic  era  was  approaching  its 
height;  no  educated  man  could  live  through  such  a  change  in  cultural 
and  especially  in  literary  thought  and  remain  untouched  by  it, 
and  Napoleon  was  more  sensitive  than  most  men  to  what  was  go- 
ing on. 

For  a  short  period  the  French  Revolution  breathed  new  life  into 
classicism,  though  in  a  form  that  Boileau  might  not  altogether  have 
approved.  The  orators  of  the  assemblies  looked  back  for  models  to 
Demosthenes  and  Cicero,  and  the  threadbare  artillery  officer  looked 
back  with  diem,  but  rather  towards  the  soldiers  and  historians.  Bona- 
parte was  no  Latinist,  but  he  read  and  re-read  the  classics  in  translation 
and  for  years  his  own  work  proclaimed  his  debt  to  them.  His  troops  are 
'phalanxes'  and  'legions';  Alexander,  Scipio,  Brutus,  Caesar,  all  the 
heroes  of  antiquity  recur  in  his  pages;  phrases,  whole  sentences  even, 

*  Correspondance,  No.  8908.      t  Lecestre:  Lettres  intdites  de  Napoleon  I,  No.  270. 

$  Correspondance,  XXX,  p.  264. 

§  Masson  and  Biagi:  Napotton  Inconnu,  Vol.  II,  p.  39<5. 

Letters  and  Documents  of  Napoleon 

are  lifted  out  of  Xenophon,  Lucian,  Livy,  Tacitus;  his  papers  abound  in 
Latin  constructions  and  sometimes  read  like  parodies  of  Caesar.  *It  is 
Rome  itself  that  arises  and  speaks,'  said  Sorel.  It  is  not  surprising  that 
he  spurned  the  comic  title  of  'Proclamator-Elector'  proffered  by 
Siey£s,  nor  any  more  so  that  he  chose  to  call  himself  'Consul*. 

But  as  the  Consulate  advanced  this  classical  tone  became  less  marked 
and  with  the  coming  of  the  Empire  it  disappeared  almost  completely. 
His  language  grew  more  French,  but  also  more  concise  and  more 
individual:  Alexander  and  Caesar  made  way  for  Charlemagne,  Henri 
IV,  Conde  and  Turenne;  the  spirit  of  Greece  and  Rome  were  replaced 
by  the  glories  of  France  and  invocations  of  a  Christian  deity.  This  was 
afl.  consonant  with  the  mystique  of  advancing  romanticism,  and  maybe 
Napoleon  was  simply  following  the  idiom  of  his  time.  All  the  same,  he 
was  himself  one  of  the  most  important  creators  of  that  idiom  and  the 
gradual  change  in  his  literary  tone  perfectly  matches  the  changing 
demands  of  his  personal  position.  It  was  proper  for  the  revolutionary 
general  to  recall  antique  heroes  as  he  smote  the  enemies  of  the  Republic. 
The  better  to  govern,  the  agnostic,  republican  Consul  saw  fit  to  bring 
back  the  bigoted,  illiberal  Church  and  proclaim  himself  a  Christian 
ruler,  even  if  he  did  treat  the  Pope  worse  than  a  recalcitrant  subject. 
The  Emperor  had  to  fear  rather  than  appeal  to  classical  models;  more 
appropriate  traditions  were  to  be  found  in  the  history  of  France,  while 
the  only  possible  precedent  for  his  oecumenical  title — and  a  far-fetched 
one  at  that— lay  in  the  mediaeval  crown  that  fumbling  Habsburg  hands 
dropped  at  his  feet. 

Such  things  are  examples  of  what  he  called  'tact'.  By  it  he  meant  the 
right  touch,  the  perfect  appropriateness  of  means  to  ends,  and  it  was 
something  he  himself  almost  always  achieved  and  whose  absence  in  the 
work  of  others  he  unfailingly  recognized.  The  changes  in  his  style  over 
the  course  of  years  are  slight;  all  that  he  wrote  after  1796  is  recognizably 
by  the  same  hand  and  there  are  plenty  of  verbal  and  syntactical 
favourites  that  he  used  throughout  his  lite.  The  triumph  of  tact  is  far 
more  obvious  in  the  stylistic  flexibility  he  always  had  at  his  command. 
He  believed  there  is  an  appropriate  mode  for  each  subject,  each  person, 
each  community,  and  that  if  the  ruler  is  to  achieve  his  aims  he  must  be 
able  to  call  them  up  at  will.  His  own  writing  has  an  adaptability 
resembling  the  suppleness  of  his  military  manoeuvring  that  enabled  him 
always  to  react  correctly  to  changing  conditions  and  so  never  to  be 
taken  by  surprise.  It  was  perfectly  done  and  from  the  style  alone  it  is 
often  possible  to  tell  whom  he  is  addressing. 

Only  his  letters  to  his  wives,  to  whom  he  wrote  almost  daily  when 
they  were  apart,  were  altogether  personal  and  untinged  by  considera- 
tions of  policy;  when  policy  arises  at  all  it  appears  as  straightforward 
*  Quoted  by  A.  P&rivier:  Napottonjournaliste,  p.  13. 

Letters  and  Documents  of  Napoleon  xvii 

instructions.  His  first  letters  to  Josephine  were  love-letters.  They  are 
long  and  often  incoherent,  sometimes  in  their  contrivances  recalling 
earlier  literary  efforts,  but  undoubtedly  written  from  the  heart,  rarely 
saying  much  of  his  work,  but  lavishing  praise,  protesting  his  own 
jealous  passion,  uninhibited  in  sexual  intimacy.  One  wonders  whether 
Josephine  read  them;  they  are  hardly  legible  and  she  did  not  then  care 
much.  Later,  when  she  did  begin  to  care,  after  the  crisis  of  1798,  a 
metamorphosis  took  place.  Thereafter  she  received  short,  polite,  some- 
times bantering  notes,  giving  a  few  brief  details  of  his  health  and  activi- 
ties, a  few  words  of  advice,  a  few  formal  phrases  of  affection;  very 
rarely,  and  that  mostly  after  they  were  divorced,  did  the  real  depth  of 
his  feeling  for  her  break  through.  To  the  silly,  faithless  Marie-Louise  he 
wrote  similar  but  longer  letters,  giving  more  information  and  more 
advice  and  with  a  solicitude  at  once  gallant  and  paternal. 

Tact  dominated  everything  else.  If  writing  to  a  priest  'the  language 
must  be  sought  in  the  spirit  of  religion,  not  in  that  of  philosophy',* 
In  Egypt  it  was  easy,  from  some  of  his  papers,  to  think  him  a  Moslem. 
Letters  about  finance  are  mostly  columns  of  figures.  His  staff  and 
soldiers  received  precise,  detailed  orders  leaving  no  room  for  misunder- 
standing or  for  the  *ifs*  and  'buts*  that  infuriated  him.  He  was  harsh  in 
rebuke  but  generous  in  praise,  and  with  each  he  surely  stimulated  to 
greater  effort.  For  the  common  man  he  would  often  refer  to  'his  star', 
or  Destiny  or  the  will  of  God;  the  educated  got  reasoned,  forceful 
argument.  Each  letter  is  exactly  adjusted  to  the  personality  of  the 
recipient  and  carefully  designed  to  produce  the  intended  effect;  it  is 
unlikely  that  any  of  those  addressed  realized  how  far  they  were  being 
managed. 

There  is  the  same  sure  touch  in  his  work  as  propagandist,  in  the  pro- 
clamations, pamphlets  and  journalism  by  which  he  sought  'to  govern 
the  masses  without  them  perceiving  it'.f  He  always  found  the  telling 
appeal  to  tradition  or  national  pride,  to  the  love  of  liberty  or  plain  self- 
interest.  He  gave  almost  daily  instructions  about  the  content  and  tone 
of  the  press,  constantly  ordering  articles  to  be  written  and  correcting 
the  drafts;  sometimes,  usually  in  reply  to  attacks  by  foreign  journals,  he 
himself  dictated  articles  which  Thiers  found  jewels  of  reason,  eloquence 
and  style'.  It  is  perhaps  as  an  orator  that  he  showed  both  at  his  best  and 
his  weakest.  His  set  orations  on  formal  occasions  were  competent  and 
sometimes  inspiring,  though  they  could  also  be  rather  dull  and  pom- 
pous; but  he  had  little  confidence  in  debate  against  political  opposition 
and  neither  die  matter  nor  the  manner  of  his  few  speeches  of  that  kind 
had  much  to  commend  it.  At  the  other  end  of  the  scale,  we  know  by 
all  accounts  that  with  a  few  words  to  his  troops  he  could  rouse  them 
to  an  ecstasy  of  devotion.  The  same  effect  was  produced  on  a  wider 
*  Correspondence,  No.  12379.  t  Correspondence,  No.  8001, 

xviii  Letters  and  Documents  of  Napoleon 

scale  by  the  orders  of  the  day  and  military  bulletins  that  are  the  master- 
pieces of  his  written  work. 

Whatever  he  wrote  he  never  lost  sight  of  the  purpose  he  had  in  view 
and  would  not  be  deflected  from  it  by  such  things  as  ethical  principle 
or  regard  for  objective  truth.  If  it  was  generally  desirable  and  often 
vitally  necessary  to  adhere  to  the  facts,  there  were  also  times  when  it 
suited  his  purpose  better  to  dissemble  or  mislead  or  lie.  'Newspapers  are 
not  history',  he  said,  'any  more  than  bulletins  are  history/*  In  fact  he 
saw  little  point,  and  sometimes  great  danger,  in  any  writing,  whether 
his  own  or  another's,  that  did  not  promote  his  policies  or  enhance  his 
prestige,  and  this  was  as  true  of  history  as  of  anything  else.  When  he 
ordered  Bignon  to  write  an  account  of  the  diplomatic  events  of  his 
reign  he  saw  this  as  a  contribution  not  only  to  learning  but  also  to  'the 
glory  of  the  nation  and  my  own'. 

He  himself  enjoyed  and  profited  from  reading  history  and  often 
professed  a  desire  to  write  it;  and  in  the  end  the  opportunity  came.  The 
last  phase  of  his  life  was  largely  spent  in  dictating  his  Memoirs  to  the 
companions  of  St.  Helena.  These  jumbled  volumes  are  often  written 
with  fire,  but  as  history  they  are  utterly  perverse.  Defeated  and  exiled, 
Napoleon  still  had  an  end  in  view:  to  justify  himself  to  posterity.  So  he 
presented  an  image  of  himself,  not  as  he  was,  but  as  the  figure  he  saw 
with  unerring  instinct  would  draw  devotion  and  love:  the  heroic  leader 
of  France  and  arbiter  of  Europe  who  was  also  a  man  of  peace  and 
democracy,  the  incarnation  of  the  Revolution.  Even  then  his  touch  was 
sure,  for  the  Memoirs  played  their  part  in  forming  what  we  know  as  the 
Napoleonic  Legend. 

Viewed  as  a  whole  Napoleon's  papers  do  much  more  than  show  his 
capacity  for  influencing  people;  they  show  day  by  day  the  course  of 
what  was  in  both  its  achievement  ana  its  failure  an  epic  career,  and  they 
afford  an  incomparable  insight  into  the  mind  of  a  man  of  genius.  Such 
men  generally  leave  finished  masterpieces  for  us  to  admire,  with 
perhaps  a  few  tantalizing  hints  of  the  processes  behind  them.  With 
Napoleon  the  processes  arc  revealed,  for  in  what  he  wrote  he  uncon- 
sciously displayed  the  whole  of  his  working  mind.  To  aid  our  under- 
standing he  added  some  consciously  proffered  information;  he  was 
never  reticent  about  himself  and,  although  by  no  means  given  to 
introspective  musing,  he  was  capable  of  acute  self-analysis  and  fre- 
quently passed  on  the  results  for  the  instruction  and  edification  of  his 
subordinates.  His  'great  talent,  which  most  distinguished  him',  he 
thought,  was  'to  sec  everything  clearly  ...  to  see  the  heart  of  the 
question  in  all  its  aspects'.f  That  talent  he  surely  had  and  his  letters 
show  it.  They  show  others  too:  the  mental  range  that  made  him 
equally  at  home  with  statesmen  or  scientists  and  with  simple  soldiers; 
*  Correspondancc,  No.  21360.  f  Correspondancc9  XXIX,  p.  308. 

Letters  and  Documents  of  Napoleon  xix 

the  capacity  for  work  that  enabled  him  in  a  short,  full  life  to  produce  a 
written  output  so  vast;  the  memory  which  often  surprised  his  ablest 
counsellors;  the  mania  for  detail  that  never  deflected  him  from  the 
central  issues;  the  search  for  accuracy  that  led  him  always  to  demand 
precise  statistics  in  place  of  'reports  that  waste  my  time'  and  'resumes 
that  say  nothing'.* 

There  are,  of  course,  some  things  they  do  not  show  and  others  that 
they  distort.  The  decorum  of  his  letters  hides  much  of  the  vulgarity  that 
gradually  eroded  the  refinement  of  his  mind  and  personality  as  surely 
as  the  morbid  fat  on  his  body  overlay  the  delicate  frame  and  ascetic 
features.  Face  to  face  he  could  treat  minister  or  marshal,  foreign 
ambassador  or  brother  sovereign  with  outrageous  discourtesy;  his 
angrier  letters  are  blistering,  but  he  usually  deleted  the  most  wounding 
acerbities  before  they  were  dispatched.  And  if  his  letters  sometimes 
present  him  as  better  than  he  was  the  reverse  is  also  true.  The  curt  order 
to  shoot  the  Turkish  prisoners  at  Jaffa  is  a  brutal  document;  but  it  gives 
no  idea  of  the  agony  of  mind  in  which  it  was  given  when,  after  three 
days  of  hopeless  search  for  an  alternative,  he  yielded  to  the  united 
pressure  of  his  staff  and  generals.  Napoleon  was  often  cruel  or  unfair, 
out  fundamentally  he  was  humane  and  just,  even  though  in  this  as  in 
other  aspects  of  his  character  there  was  a  steady  deterioration;  the  young 
Bonaparte  would  not  have  described  the  ghastly  debris  of  Borodino  as 
'the  most  beautiful  battlefield  I  have  ever  seen'.  But  the  savage  flog- 
gings and  field  punishments  that  disgraced  every  other  European  army 
of  the  time  were  unknown  in  his,  and  by  and  large  the  French  nation 
followed  him  willingly  to  disaster  simply  for  his  personal  qualities  of 
creative  ability  and  inspired  leadership:  'the  praise  of  a  great  commander 
is  a  soldier's  highest  reward'."]" 

To  say,  as  Fisher  did,  that  Napoleon  had  'the  grandest  intellectual 
gifts  ever  vouchsafed  to  man'J  is  an  overstatement.  Even  in  the 
strictest  sense  there  were  lacunae.  His  vaunted  understanding  of  science 
was  genuine,  but  hardly  profound,  while  his  appreciation  of  the  arts, 
though  idiosyncratic,  seldom  rose  above  the  banal.  He  could  jest  about 
the  corruption  of  power  but  could  not  apply  the  moral.  He  could  not 
see  that  the  consulship  for  life  was  the  negation  of  the  democracy  and 
republicanism  in  which  he  once  truly  believed,  nor  what  the  inevitable 
consequences  must  be:  'If  you  take  the  first  step,  you  will  take  the 
last.'§  He  could  not  see  how  undignified  was  the  revolutionary  soldier 
who  joined  the  squalid  dynastic  game  of  the  monarchs,  nor  how  it 
must  corrupt  his  dukes,  princes  and  kings  who  had  once  been  proud  of 
the  simple  title  'Citizen  Minister',  'Citizen  General':  'You  should  have 

*  Correspondance,  No.  9789. 

t  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  Bk.  Ill,  Ch.  19.  Trans.  Maude. 

j  Napoleon,  p.  247.  §  Kipling:  How  far  to  Saint  Helena. 

xviii  Letters  and  Documents  of  Napoleon 

scale  by  the  orders  of  the  day  and  military  bulletins  that  are  the  master- 
pieces of  his  written  work. 

Whatever  he  wrote  he  never  lost  sight  of  the  purpose  he  had  in  view 
and  would  not  be  deflected  from  it  by  such  things  as  ethical  principle 
or  regard  for  objective  truth.  If  it  was  generally  desirable  and  often 
vitally  necessary  to  adhere  to  the  facts,  there  were  also  times  when  it 
suited  his  purpose  better  to  dissemble  or  mislead  or  He.  'Newspapers  are 
not  history',  he  said,  'any  more  than  bulletins  are  history.'*  In  fact  he 
saw  little  point,  and  sometimes  great  danger,  in  any  writing,  whether 
his  own  or  another's,  that  did  not  promote  his  policies  or  enhance  his 
prestige,  and  this  was  as  true  of  history  as  of  anything  else.  When  he 
ordered  Bignon  to  write  an  account  of  the  diplomatic  events  of  his 
reign  he  saw  this  as  a  contribution  not  only  to  learning  but  also  to  'the 
glory  of  the  nation  and  my  own'. 

He  himself  enjoyed  and  profited  from  reading  history  and  often 
professed  a  desire  to  write  it;  and  in  the  end  the  opportunity  came.  The 
last  phase  of  his  life  was  largely  spent  in  dictating  his  Memoirs  to  the 
companions  of  St.  Helena.  These  jumbled  volumes  are  often  written 
with  fire,  but  as  history  they  are  utterly  perverse.  Defeated  and  exiled, 
Napoleon  still  had  an  end  in  view:  to  justify  himself  to  posterity.  So  he 
presented  an  image  of  himself,  not  as  he  was,  but  as  the  figure  he  saw 
with  unerring  instinct  would  draw  devotion  and  love:  the  heroic  leader 
of  France  and  arbiter  of  Europe  who  was  also  a  man  of  peace  and 
democracy,  the  incarnation  of  the  Revolution.  Even  then  his  touch  was 
sure,  for  the  Memoirs  played  their  part  in  forming  what  we  know  as  the 
Napoleonic  Legend. 

Viewed  as  a  whole  Napoleon's  papers  do  much  more  than  show  his 
capacity  for  influencing  people;  they  show  day  by  day  the  course  of 
what  was  in  both  its  achievement  and  its  failure  an  epic  career,  and  they 
afford  an  incomparable  insight  into  the  mind  of  a  man  of  genius.  Such 
men  generally  leave  finished  masterpieces  for  us  to  admire,  with 
perhaps  a  few  tantalizing  hints  of  the  processes  behind  them.  With 
Napoleon  the  processes  are  revealed,  for  in  what  he  wrote  he  uncon- 
sciously displayed  the  whole  of  his  working  mind.  To  aid  our  under- 
standing he  added  some  consciously  proffered  information;  he  was 
never  reticent  about  himself  and,  although  by  no  means  given  to 
introspective  musing,  he  was  capable  of  acute  self-analysis  and  fre- 
quently passed  on  the  results  for  the  instruction  and  edification  of  his 
subordinates.  His  'great  talent,  which  most  distinguished  him',  he 
thought,  was  *to  see  everything  clearly  ...  to  see  the  heart  of  the 
question  in  all  its  aspects',  f  That  talent  he  surely  had  and  his  letters 
show  it.  They  show  others  too:  the  mental  range  that  made  him 
equally  at  home  with  statesmen  or  scientists  and  with  simple  soldiers; 
*  Correspondance,  No.  21360.  f  Correspondence,  XXDC,  p.  308. 

Letters  and  Documents  of  Napoleon  xix 

the  capacity  for  work  that  enabled  him  in  a  short,  full  life  to  produce  a 
written  output  so  vast;  the  memory  which  often  surprised  his  ablest 
counsellors;  the  mania  for  detail  that  never  deflected  him  from  the 
central  issues;  the  search  for  accuracy  that  led  him  always  to  demand 
precise  statistics  in  place  of  'reports  that  waste  my  time*  and  'resumes 
that  say  nothing'.* 

There  are,  of  course,  some  things  they  do  not  show  and  others  that 
they  distort.  The  decorum  of  his  letters  hides  much  of  the  vulgarity  that 
gradually  eroded  the  refinement  of  his  mind  and  personality  as  surely 
as  the  morbid  fat  on  his  body  overlay  the  delicate  frame  and  ascetic 
features.  Face  to  face  he  could  treat  minister  or  marshal,  foreign 
ambassador  or  brother  sovereign  with  outrageous  discourtesy;  his 
angrier  letters  are  blistering,  but  he  usually  deleted  the  most  wounding 
acerbities  before  they  were  dispatched.  And  if  his  letters  sometimes 
present  him  as  better  than  he  was  the  reverse  is  also  true.  The  curt  order 
to  shoot  the  Turkish  prisoners  at  Jaffa  is  a  brutal  document;  but  it  gives 
no  idea  of  the  agony  of  mind  in  which  it  was  given  when,  after  three 
days  of  hopeless  search  for  an  alternative,  he  yielded  to  the  united 
pressure  of  his  staff  and  generals.  Napoleon  was  often  cruel  or  unfair, 
but  fundamentally  he  was  humane  and  just,  even  though  in  this  as  in 
other  aspects  of  his  character  there  was  a  steady  deterioration;  the  young 
Bonaparte  would  not  have  described  the  ghastly  debris  of  Borodino  as 
'the  most  beautiful  battlefield  I  have  ever  seen'.  But  the  savage  flog- 
gings and  field  punishments  that  disgraced  every  other  European  army 
of  the  time  were  unknown  in  his,  and  by  and  large  the  French  nation 
followed  him  willingly  to  disaster  simply  for  his  personal  qualities  of 
creative  ability  and  inspired  leadership:  'the  praise  of  a  great  commander 
is  a  soldier's  highest  reward',  f 

To  say,  as  Fisher  did,  that  Napoleon  had  'the  grandest  intellectual 
gifts  ever  vouchsafed  to  man'J  is  an  overstatement.  Even  in  the 
strictest  sense  there  were  lacunae.  His  vaunted  understanding  of  science 
was  genuine,  but  hardly  profound,  while  his  appreciation  of  the  arts, 
though  idiosyncratic,  seldom  rose  above  the  banal.  He  could  jest  about 
the  corruption  of  power  but  could  not  apply  the  moral.  He  could  not 
see  that  tne  consulship  for  life  was  the  negation  of  the  democracy  and 
republicanism  in  which  he  once  truly  believed,  nor  what  the  inevitable 
consequences  must  be:  'If  you  take  the  first  step,  you  will  take  the 
last.'§  He  could  not  see  how  undignified  was  the  revolutionary  soldier 
who  joined  the  squalid  dynastic  game  of  the  monarchs,  nor  how  it 
must  corrupt  his  dukes,  princes  and  kings  who  had  once  been  proud  of 
the  simple  title  'Citizen  Minister',  'Citizen  General':  'You  should  have 

*  Conespondance,  No.  9789. 

t  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  Bk.  Ill,  Ch.  19.  Trans.  Maude. 

$  Napoleon,  p.  247.  §  Kipling:  How  far  to  Saint  Helena. 

xx  Letters  and  Documents  of  Napoleon 

remained  First  Consul/  Carnot  once  said  to  him,  'you  were  the  only 
one  in  Europe,  and  look  at  the  company  you  are  in  now.'*  He  could 
not  see  that  though  he  united  France  and  strengthened  and  enriched  it 
his  own  policies  were  inexorably  destroying  its  resources,  above  all  its 
human  resources.  'Take  care  of  Vandamme/  he  wrote  to  Davout  in 
1813,  'fighting  men  are  getting  scarce.' f  They  were  indeed;  more  than 
a  million  Frenchmen  had  already  died  on  the  battlefield  at  his  behest. 
Knowing  his  powers  to  be  great,  he  believed  them  boundless  and  failed 
to  realize  that  the  opposition,  criticism  and  advice  he  spurned  and  sup- 
pressed might  sometimes  be  right  and  might  save  even  him  from  error. 
Yet  his  powers  were  indeed  great  and,  despite  all  his  faults  and  failures, 
in  his  chosen  sphere  of  war  and  government  there  is  no  more  than  a 
handful  of  men  in  all  recorded  history  who  are  his  undoubted  equals. 
No  comparable  figure  in  this  or  any  sphere  has  so  totally  revealed 
his  mind. 

A  NOTE  ON  THE  SELECTION  AND  TEXT 

Many  thousands  of  Napoleon's  original  papers  are  in  existence. 
Some  of  them  have  had  strange  histories,  but  by  far  the  largest  groups 
are  now  in  the  Archives  Nationales  and  the  Bibliotheque  Nationale  in 
Paris.  Some  are  in  other  official  French  collections  and  in  many  public 
museums  and  libraries  in  France  and  elsewhere;  there  are  also  a  few 
large  and  many  small  private  collections  scattered  throughout  the 
world.  The  emergence  of  hitherto  unsuspected  documents  is  still 
surprisingly  frequent,  but  how  many  have  been  lost  beyond  recall 
cannot  be  known.J 

A  substantial  proportion  of  this  material  has  been  published,  and  for 
the  purpose  of  this  translation  there  is  no  need  to  go  outside  the 
printed  texts.  But  the  printed  versions  are  not  always  such  reliable 
transcriptions  as  could  be  wished,  and  anyone  involved  in  the  study  of 
Napoleonic  documents  must  also  bear  in  mind  two  problems  concern- 
ing the  authenticity  of  the  original  papers. 

*  Quoted  by  S.  J.  Watson:  Carnot,  p.  200. 

•f  Lecestre:  Lettres  inldites  de  Napollon  I,  No.  1001. 

$  Usually  it  is  single  documents  or  small  groups  that  come  to  light,  but  there 
have  been  several  major  discoveries.  The  last  was  in  1934.  Until  then  only  six  or 
seven  of  Napoleon's  letters  to  Marie  Louise  were  known,  but  in  that  year  a 
collection  of  over  300,  described  only  as  'the  property  of  a  nobleman  to  whom 
they  have  descended  by  inheritance',  mysteriously  appeared  in  a  London  saleroom 
where  they  were  bought  on  behalf  of  the  Bibliotheque  Nationale.  (The  corres- 
ponding letters  from  Marie  Louise  to  Napoleon  were  found  as  late  as  1955  among 
the  Swedish  royal  archives.) 

Letters  and  Documents  of  Napoleon  xxi 

The  first  arises  from  the  fact  that  this  is  a  field  rich  in  forgery,  some  of 
it  motivated  by  political  or  personal,  some  by  purely  mercenary  ends.* 
Many  examples  have  been  exposed,  but  it  is  likely  that  a  few  still  find  a 
place  in  the  accepted  canon;  it  is  unlikely  that  many  do. 

The  second  problem  arises  from  the  methods  of  work  in  Napoleon's 
offices  and  the  consequent  nature  of  much  of  the  material  itself.  Apart 
from  short  minutes  Napoleon  wrote  little  with  his  own  hand  after 
1793,  and,  since  copies  were  seldom  kept  of  the  purely  private  letters 
and  rough  notes  that  form  the  bulk  of  this  autograph  material,  it  is  prob- 
ably these  papers  which  have  suffered  from  the  highest  mortality  rate. 
But,  forgery  apart,  there  can  be  no  doubt  of  the  authenticity  of  such 
autograph  papers  as  do  exist.  Nor  is  there  any  difficulty  over  the  many 
bulletins,  proclamations  and  other  pieces  which  were  prepared  for 
printed  publication;  here  the  original  printed  version  constitutes  the 
authentic  text,  although  in  many  cases  earlier  MS.  drafts  have  survived 
to  throw  interesting  light  on  the  process  of  composition. 

All  else  was  dictated.  Napoleon  spoke  quickly  and  none  dared  ask 
him  to  repeat  himself;  though  his  secretaries  and  other  victims  of  his 
method  developed  a  form  of  shorthand,  they  were  often  reduced  to 
taking  down  no  more  than  the  briefest  notes  of  what  he  said.  From 
these  notes  a  draft  was  later  prepared  which  might,  if  the  matter  was 
important,  be  shown  to  the  Emperor  and  corrected.  A  final  copy  for 
signature  and  dispatch  was  then  prepared,  the  draft  being  retained  as  the 
file  copy.  Sometimes  the  pressure  of  work  was  such  that  the  draft  stage 
was  omitted  and  the  original  note  became  the  only  record  kept.  Some 
letters  were  also  copied  out  again  after  reaching  their  recipients;  several 
copies  of  a  letter  to  a  minister,  for  instance,  might  be  needed  for  action 
in  different  sections  of  the  ministry.  Thus  it  sometimes  happens  that  the 
original  note,  the  draft,  the  final  letter  and  one  or  more  later  copies  of  a 
single  communication  are  all  in  existence,  and  in  such  cases  it  sometimes 
happens  that  no  two  of  the  various  texts  are  identical. 

Two  questions  arise.  First,  while  all  such  variant  forms  of  a  letter  are 
in  a  way  genuine,  which  is  to  be  considered  the  most  authoritative?  It 
seems  reasonable  to  grant  this  position  to  the  final  letter  signed  by 
Napoleon  and  received  by  his  correspondent,  with  the  note  or  draft 
rated  next  in  value  and  later  copies,  where  only  copyists'  errors  can 
account  for  divergences,  somewhat  lower.  Many  of  the  printed 
sources  are  based  on  drafts  or  copies,  a  fact  which  is  sometimes,  but  not 
always  made  clear.  Where  the  draft  or  copy  is  the  sole  extant  version 
there  is,  of  course,  nothing  to  be  said;  but  it  must  be  noted  that  in 
some?  cases  an  original  source  of  higher  authenticity  than  the  printed 

*  Forgeries  of  this  last  kind  include,  as  well  as  outright  inventions,  carefully 
made  facsimiles  of  genuine  documents;  textually  these  should  be  no  less,  perhaps 
more  reliable  than  copies  made  on  a  typewriter  for  honest  purposes. 

xxii  Letters  and  Documents  of  Napoleon 

version  does  exist.  The  importance  of  this  varies:  it  is  seldom  that  the 
main  substance  of  a  letter  differs  from  one  source  to  another,  though 
occasional  additions  or  deletions  are  met;  but  the  wording  often 
differs  substantially  and  this  may  to  some  extent  alter  the  sense.* 

Secondly,  how  far  can  any  letter  produced  by  this  method  really  be 
attributed  to  Napoleon  and  how  far  must  the  secretaries  be  held 
responsible  for  the  form,  if  not  the  substance,  of  much  put  out  in  his 
name?  All  three  principal  secretaries  claimed,  justly,  to  have  achieved  a 
perfect  imitation  of  his  style,  but  none  of  them  claimed  responsibility 
for  his  compositions  beyond  the  most  trivial  level.  Some  conjecture  is 
perhaps  legitimate,  but  most  scholarly  opinion  holds  that  all  but  a  small 
amount  of  the  material  can  safely  be  regarded  as  almost  wholly 
Napoleon's  own  work.  This  does  not,  of  course,  apply  to  many 
ceremonial  letters  and  formal  documents  which  were  prepared  in  the 
ministries  for  his  signature;  these  properly  take  their  place  among  his 
official  papers,  but  few  would  suggest  that  he  had  much  to  do  with  them. 

During  the  lifetime  of  the  Emperor  and  the  thirty  years  folio  wing  his 
death  several  collections  of  his  letters,  orders,  proclamations  and  other 
documents  were  published.  Many  of  these  were  marred  by  corruptions 
and  forgeries,  all  were  of  limited  scope  and  none  contain  any  genuine 
material  not  to  be  found  in  later  compilations.  Though  some  of  them 
have  interesting  features  on  their  own  account,  from  die  point  of  view 
of  the  true  Napoleonic  canon  they  can  be  ignored,  f 

In  1852  there  appeared  the  first  volume  of  the  Memoires  du  Roi 
Joseph,  a  work  completed  in  ten  volumes  and  edited  by  the  Baron  du 
Casse.  In  form  it  is  a  collection  of  Joseph's  correspondence  together 
with  a  brief  commentary,  and  it  includes  transcriptions  of  nearly  but 
not  quite  all  known  letters  addressed  to  him  by  Napoleon.  This  is  the 
earliest  printed  source  to  which  the  student  need  refer.  It  is  also  said  to 
have  inspired  in  Napoleon  IE  the  idea  of  issuing  a  comprehensive 
official  collection  of  his  uncle's  papers. 

However  that  may  be,  in  1854  an  imperial  decree  set  up  a  committee 
charged  with  'collecting,  arranging  and  publishing  the  correspondence 
of  Napoleon  I  concerning  the  different  branches  of  public  affairs'.  The 

*  No.  434  is  a  mild  example.  The  text  given  in  the  Correspondance  is  reproduced 
from  the  draft,  where  the  kst  paragraph  reads:  Je  crois  politique  et  d'une  stride 
]ustice  qu'il  y  ait  au  moins  huit  &  dix  militaires  dans  le  Stoat.  The  final  letter,  signed  by 
Bonaparte  and,  presumably,  received  by  Sieyes,  is  in  my  own  possession.  Here 
the  corresponding  paragraph  reads:  Je  crois  politique  et  d'une  rigoureuse  justice  qu'il  y 
ait  dans  le  Sdnat  conservateur,  au  moins  huit  ou  dix  anciens  militaires.  The  addition  of 
the  word  anciens  does  slightly  affect  the  meaning. 

j"  The  same  must  be  said  of  some  kter  collections.  As  will  become  clear,  not  all 
the  books  mentioned  by  name  in  this  Note  are  free  from  error;  but,  taken  together, 
they  do  form  the  most  complete  and  accurate  printed  source  of  Napoleon's 
writings.  The  greatest  caution  is  needed  hi  using  any  others. 

Letters  and  Documents  of  Napoleon 

first  volume  appeared  in  1859,  the  fifteenth  in  1864,  by  which  time  the 
committee,  publishing  the  material  in  strict  chronological  order,  had 
reached  the  middle  of  the  year  1807.  The  committee  was  then  dis- 
banded and  replaced  by  a  new  body,  under  the  presidency  of  Prince 
Jerome  Napoleon,  which  added  a  further  seventeen  volumes,  thereby 
completing  the  entire  work  almost  on  the  eve  of  the  downfall  of  the 
second  Empire. 

These  thirty-two  volumes  of  the  Correspondence  de  Napoleon  I  run  to 
an  average  length  of  700  pages  each.  They  contain,  in  the  first  twenty- 
eight  volumes,  22,067  numbered  letters  and  documents  and,  in  the  last 
four  and  unnumbered,  a  great  deal  of  the  material  dictated  at  Saint 
Helena,  They  form  the  indispensable  main  source  for  any  serious  study 
of  Napoleon's  writings.* 

Yet,  despite  its  bulk  and  the  care  with  which  it  was  compiled,  the 
Correspondance  is  neither  complete  nor  altogether  reliable.  The  com- 
mittees cannot  be  blamed  for  including  a  few  papers  that  have  since 
been  shown  to  be  forgeries,  while  their  over-enthusiastic  inclusion  of 
a  few  with  which  Napoleon,  through  physical  absence,  can  have  had 
nothing  to  do,  though  a  trap  for  the  unwary,  is  not  discreditable.  Nor 
can  they  be  blamed  for  omitting  documents  whose  existence  was 
unknown  to  them;  they  did  make  every  effort  to  locate  them,  but  some 
have  come  to  light  since.  It  was  not  unreasonable  for  them  also  to 
exclude  laws  and  similar  lengthy  constitutional  and  political  documents 
which  were  easily  accessible  elsewhere.  But  in  addition  to  this  the 
committees  placed  a  very  restrictive  interpretation  on  the  words 
'public  affairs'  in  their  terms  of  reference,  and  they  therefore  omitted 
all  papers  considered  to  be  of  a  purely  private  and  family  nature.  On  the 
ground  that  Napoleon  had  himself  stated  that  his  public  career  began 
at  the  siege  of  Toulon,  they  also  printed  nothing  of  a  date  earlier  than 
October,  1793.  Thus  two  sources  rich  in  interest  were  closed.  A  further 
large  mass  of  material  was  rejected  on  grounds  of  triviality,  although 
much  of  it  is  by  no  means  devoid  of  interest.  All  these  omissions  were 
unfortunate,  though  in  view  of  the  political  circumstances  and  the  size 
of  the  task  they  were  perhaps  understandable.  At  least  they  were  openly 
acknowledged. 

Far  more  questionable  was  the  deliberate  but  covert  suppression  of 

*  The  Correspondance  was  published  by  the  Imperial  Printing  House  in  a  finely 
printed  and  handsomely  produced  limited  edition  in  quarto  format.  All  sets  of 
this  were  presented  to  national  libraries,  foreign  potentates,  descendants  of  the 
great  figures  of  the  empire,  etc.  Simultaneously,  a  badly  printed  commercial 
edirionin  octavo  format  was  published  by  Plon,  Nourrit  &  Cie.  Apart  from  the  not 
infrequent  misprints  in  the  latter,  the  texts  of  the  two  editions  are  identical.  In 
1875  the  specifically  military  papers  in  the  Correspondance  were  extracted  in  the 
Ministry  of  War  and  published  separately  in  ten  volumes  under  the  title  Corres- 
pondance militaire  de  Napoleon  I. 

xxiv  Letters  and  Documents  of  Napoleon 

letters  which  throw  an  unfavourable  light  on  the  Emperor's  character, 
motives  and  policies.  Napoleon  III  himself  had  a  hand  in  this,  and 
indeed  it  was  as  a  result  of  the  publication  of  papers  considered  unsuit- 
able that  the  first  committee  was  replaced  by  a  new  one  in  charge  of  a 
member  of  the  imperial  family  with  strong  views  on  the  limits  of  the 
permissible.  Despite  the  inclusion  of  a  historian  of  the  standing  of 
Merimee  among  its  members,  the  first  committee  was  in  fact  by  no 
means  guiltless:  but  the  second  (which  incidentally  included  Sainte- 
Beuve)  was  far  worse.  The  prince's  declared  aim  was  to  publish  those 
letters  which  Napoleon  himself  might  have  published  'had  he  outlived 
himself  and  wished  to  show  to  posterity  his  character  and  his  system'. 
To  this  end  a  policy  of  ruthless  suppression  was  adopted  and  was  often 
applied  to  letters  whose  publication  would,  one  suspects,  have  worried 
their  author  a  good  deal  less  than  it  worried  his  descendants.  A  barrier 
of  dynastic  pride  and  courtly  delicacy  has  thus  excluded  from  a  great 
compilation  very  many  papers  of  the  utmost  historical  importance. 
Nor  is  this  all.  If  many  letters  which  should  have  been  included  were 
omitted,  some  which  were  published  were  emasculated  in  the  process. 
Offending  words  and  passages  were  left  out,  sometimes  with  no  indica- 
tion at  all  that  anything  is  missing,  sometimes  on  an  untenable  plea  of 
illegibility.*  Then  too,  though  no  doubt  from  other  motives,  the  con- 
clusions and  signatures  of  letters  were  formalized  in  the  printed  texts 
in  a  way  that  often  involves  departure  from  the  original  and  sometimes 
leads  almost  to  historical  falsification.  In  the  case  of  letters  signed  by 
someone  other  than  Napoleon  the  signature  is,  incredibly,  omitted  and 
the  words  'By  order  of  the  Emperor  (First  Consul,  etc.)'  inserted, 
whether  or  not  they  appear  in  the  original  and  despite  the  fact  that  the 
style  sometimes  shows  clearly  that  they  were  composed  by  another,  f 

*  Examples  cited  to  illustrate  various  points  arising  in  this  Note  are  drawn  from 
papers  actually  included  in  the  first  volume  of  the  translation;  many  more  can  be 
found  among  those  excluded  from  it  or  of  a  later  date.  This  is  particularly  so  in  the 
present  instance,  the  sins  of  the  second  committee  being  so  much  the  more 
frequent  and  heinous.  The  following  are  examples  of  the  first  committee's  work. 
In  No.  49  the  last  two  paragraphs  are  omitted,  presumably  on  account  of  their 
'private'  nature.  So  are  the  words  *A  thousand  things  to  Julie1  in  No.  620,  although 
the  full  text  had  already  been  published  in  the  Mdmoires  de  Roi  Joseph  (where  the 
letter  is  incorrectly  dated)  and  although  similar  phrases  are  not  left  out  of  other 
letters  (the  self-same  words,  for  instance,  in  No.  703 ).  The  first  and  last  paragraphs 
of  No.  453  and  the  last  paragraph  of  No.  740  are  omitted  for  reasons  unknown. 
No  indication  is  given  of  any  of  these  omissions. 

fNos.  490  and  586  obviously  express  Bonaparte's  intentions  and  almost 
certainly  his  specific  instructions;  yet  it  is  hardly  necessary  to  examine  the  original 
documents  to  know  that  the  first  was  written  by  Talleyrand  and  the  second  by 
Berthier.  In  the  Correspondence  both  conclude  with  the  words  *By  order  of  the 
First  Consul*.  In  the  case  of  No.  579  these  words  do  not  even  appear  on  the 
original,  yet  in  the  Correspondance  they  replace  the  words  'I  salute  you.  Dupont*. 
This  letter  is  in  a  style  indistinguishable  from  Bonaparte's  and  it  may  well  have 

Letters  and  Documents  of  Napoleon 

After  1804,  when  the  signature  'Napoleon*  was  adopted,  this  name  is 
invariably  printed  in  full  at  the  foot  of  letters  signed  by  him,  although 
he  more  often  used  the  forms  'Napole',  'NapoT,  *Nap',  *Np*  or  'N?. 
Publication  of  the  Correspondence  at  once  stimulated  historians  to  fill 
in  the  wide  gaps  it  contains,  and  for  some  time  there  was  a  stream, 
subsiding  later  to  a  trickle,  of  books  that  have  vastly  expanded  the 
printed  sources  of  Napoleon's  writing.  The  following  are  all  collections 
devoted  wholly  to  this  purpose.  Four  books  that  went  far  towards 
publishing  the  letters  secretly  suppressed  by  the  committees  are: 
Supplement  a  la  Correspondence  de  Napoleon  I  by  du  Casse,  1887;  Lettres 
inddites  de  Napollon  I  by  L.  Lecestre,  2  vols.  1897;  Lettres  inedites  de 
NapoUon  I  by  L.  de  Bro tonne,  1898,  and  Dernieres  Lettres  inedites  de 
Napollon  I  by  the  same  editor,  2  vols.  1903.  Napoleon  Inconnu  by  F. 
Masson,  2  vols.  1895,  is  the  main  source  for  the  early  writings  up  to  the 
autumn  of  1793,  Lettres  de  Napoleon  a  Josephine  by  L.  Cerf,  1928,  an 
important  source  for  letters  omitted  from  the  Correspondance  as  being 
private.  Much  of  the  material  in  Lettres  inedites  de  Napoleon  a  Marie 
Louise  by  L.  Madelin,  1935,  would  no  doubt  have  been  similarly 
omitted  had  it  been  available  at  the  time.  Other  compilations  offer,  in 
the  main,  further  papers  which  have  come  to  light  since  1870  or  glean- 
ings among  those  omitted  from  the  Correspondance  on  grounds  of 
triviality  or  repetition;  most,  as  their  titles  imply,  cover  particular 
aspects  or  periods  of  the  Emperor's  career.  They  are:  Le  Registre  de  I9  lie 
fElbe:  lettres  et  ordres  intdites  de  Napoleon  7,  28  mai  1814-22  fevrier  1815 
by  L.  G.  Pelissier,  1897;  Lettres,  Ordres  et  Diaets  de  Napoleon  I  en 
1812-14  by  Vicomte  de  Grouchy,  1897;  Supplement  a  la  Correspondance 
de  NapoUon  I:  VEmpereur  et  la  Pologne,  anonymous,  1908;  Lettres  de 
YEmpereur  Napoleon  du  i  aodt  aui8  octobre  1813  by  X,  1909;  En  marge  de  la 
Correspondance  de  NapoUon  I:  Pieces  inedites  concernant  la  Pologne  by  A. 
Skalkowski,  1911;  Ordres  et  Apostilles  de  NapoUon,  1799-1815  by  A. 
Chuquet,  4  vols.  1911-12;  Correspondance  inldite  de  NapoUon  I  con- 
servte  aux  Archives  de  la  Guerre9  1804-12  by  E.  Picard  and  L.  Tuetey, 
5  vols.  1912-13,  and  Intdits  Napoleoniens  by  A.  Chuquet,  2  vols. 

I9L3-I9- 

All  of  these  books  contain  important  material,  though  not  all  of 
them  are  confined  to  matter  unpublished  elsewhere,  even,  in  some 
cases,  when  they  claim  to  be  so.  Nor  are  they  all  immune  to  the  same 
kind  of  criticism  as  can  be  levelled  at  the  Correspondance:  the  positive 

been  dictated  by  him;  it  was  none  the  less  written  in  the  form  of  a  personal  letter 
from  Dupont  to  Lannes.  (The  propriety  of  including  such  letters  in  a  selection 
devoted  to  Napoleon  may  be  questioned;  done  sparingly  in  the  case  of  interesting 
and  important  papers  which  obviously  express  his  thought  it  seems  to  me  reason- 
able.) The  last  sentence  of  the  postscript  to  No.  669  together  with  Bourrienne's 
signature  are  omitted  in  the  Conespondtmce. 

xxvi  Letters  and  Documents  of  Napoleon 

pressures  of  the  Second  Empire  had  been  removed  by  the  time  they 
were  produced,  but  political  opinions  and  personal  prejudices  lingered 
on  and,  in  any  case,  Napoleon  for  long  aroused — perhaps  still  arouses — 
passions  of  love  and  hate  capable  of  outweighing  the  academic  stan- 
dards of  well-trained  and  able  scholars.  It  is  not  without  significance 
that  du  Casse  had  been  aide-de-camp  to  Prince  Jerome,  and  his 
handling  of  the  work  of  the  second  committee  is  very  different  from 
that  of  its  stern  critics,  Lecestre  and  de  Brotonne;  but  the  fact  that  these 
two  quarrelled  violently  with  one  another  also  led  to  the  exposure  of 
numerous  flaws  in  their  own  books.  Several  of  the  editors  go  even 
further  than  the  committees  in  omitting  the  heads  and  endings  of  letters 
and  some  of  them  have  committed  accidental  but  sometimes  serious 
errors.*  It  must  in  fairness  be  added  that  several,  particularly  among  the 
later  ones,  have  worked  with  scrupulous  accuracy  and  honesty. 

In  addition  to  these  complete  collections  a  fair  number  of  papers  have 
appeared  in  historical  works  devoted  to  Napoleon  and  his  period. 
Especially  important  in  this  respect  are:  Les  Rois  Freres  de  Napoleon  and 
Memoires  du  Roijfrome,  both  by  du  Casse;  NapoUon  et  sa  Famille  and 
NapoUon  et  les  Femmes,  both  by  Masson;  Napoleon  et  le  Roi  Louis  by 
M.  F.  Rocquain,  and  Napoleon  et  Alexandre  by  A.  Vandal.  Some,  too, 
have  been  published  in  periodicals  such  as  the  English  Historical  Review, 
XTII,  533,  and  various  issues  of  La  Revue  Historique,  La  Revue  des  Deux 
Monies  and  I 'Amateur  d' autographes. 

Owing  to  duplications  the  total  number  of  separate  papers  printed  in 
all  these  various  sources  cannot  easily  be  estimated;  together  with  laws 
and  similar  officially  published  documents  it  probably  amounts  to  some 
45,000.  This  is  not  the  whole  of  the  extant  Napoleonic  canon,  but  it  is 
undoubtedly  a  very  substantial  proportion  of  it.  A  number  of  hitherto 
unpublished  papers  of  varying  importance  are  known  to  exist  and 
others  may  come  to  light  in  the  course  of  time;  there  are  also  many 
thousands  of  trivial  minutes  and  purely  formal  documents  whose 
publication  would  be  supererogatory. 

Little  of  this  large  mass  of  material  has  been  made  available  in 
English  translations.  In  1855  a  two-volume  selection  from  the  Memoires 
du  Roi  Joseph  was  published  by  an  anonymous  translator  under  the 
tide  Confidential  Correspondence  of  Napoleon  with  his  brother  Joseph;  it 
contains  about  a  quarter  of  the  Napoleonic  letters  contained  in  the 
original.  In  1884  appeared  Capt.  D.  A.  Bingham's  Letters  and  Despatches 

*  Inaccurate  dates  and  incorrect  addresses,  as  well  as  minor  misprints,  must  be 
watched  for  in  several  cases.  An  example  of  something  more  serious — and 
incomprehensible — is  to  be  found  on  p.  13  of  the  Supplement  a  la  Conespondance  de 
Napoleon  L  Here  du  Casse  gives  the  text  of  No.  203,  correctly  dated  and  headed 
Milan;  at  the  end  and  as  though  forming  part  of  the  same  letter  he  prints  all  but 
the  first  paragraph  of  No.  54,  which  was  in  fact  written  from  Paris  nearly  eighteen 
months  earlier. 

Letters  and  Documents  of  Napoleon  xxvii 

of  the  First  Napoleon.  This  was  a  selection  from  the  Correspondance 
together  with  a  few  papers  dating  from  before  Toulon  which  were 
drawn  from  suspect  sources  and  include  some  forgeries;  the  work  ran 
to  three  volumes,  but  about  half  the  space  is  occupied  by  a  somewhat 
facetious  commentary  whose  tone  seems  to  have  governed  the  choice  of 
most  of  the  documents  included.  Lady  Mary  Loyd's  New  Letters  of 
Napoleon,  1898,  gives  about  half  those  published  in  Lecestre's  two 
volumes,  and  about  half  those  in  Picard  and  Tuetey's  five  were  translated 
in  Unpublished  Correspondence  of  Napoleon  I,  3  vols.  1918.  Cerf's  book 
was  translated,  by  H.  W.  Bunn  as  Letters  of  Napoleon  to  Josephine*  in  193 1 , 
Madeira's  anonymously  as  The  Letters  of  Napoleon  to  Marie  Louise  in 
1935.  In  1934  J.  M.  Thompson  produced  a  small  general  selection  of 
300  pieces  under  the  tide  Letters  of  Napoleon.  Finally,  Mr.  Somerset  de 
Chair  published  a  translation  of  the  Souper  de  Beaucaire  in  1945  and  in 
1948  a  substantial  selection  of  Napoleon  s  Memoirs. 

These  books  are  of  very  varied  quality;  while  Mr.  de  Chair's  are 
models  of  their  kind,  some  of  the  others  are  neither  so  wisely  chosen 
nor  so  felicitously  translated.  Some  of  them  were  published  only  in 
England,  others  only  in  the  United  States;  most  of  them  are  out  of 
print  and  hard  to  come  by.  But  even  the  determined  reader  who 
assembles  them  all  hardly  has  a  balanced  selection  at  his  disposal.  He 
has  much  that  is  interesting,  but  most  of  it  is  peripheral  to  the  great 
mass  of  political,  military  and  diplomatic  papers  that  form  the  central 
core  of  Napoleon's  writings.  Only  Bingham  and  Thompson  give 
general  selections,  and  of  these  the  first  is  hardly  to  be  recommended  on 
any  count,  while  the  second  is  on  so  tiny  a  scale  as  to  do  no  more  than 
whet  the  appetite;  it  gives  only  the  slightest  sketch  of  Napoleon  as  a 
man  and  no  impression  at  all  of  his  career  or  his  policies.  ^ 

The  aim  of  the  present  translation  is  to  offer  a  substantial  selection  of 
Napoleon's  papers,  neglecting  no  significant  aspect  of  his  life  but 
maintaining  a  proper  balance  between  the  important  and  the  secondary. 
The  secondary,  the  private,  even  the  trivial,  cannot  be  entirely  ignored; 

*  This  American  volume  was  not  published  in  Great  Britain.  N.  F.  Hall's  Letters 
of  Napoleon  and  Josephine,  which  appeared  in  London  in  1901,  is  textually  unre- 
liable. 

f  It  ill  becomes  one  translator  to  carp  at  the  minor  errors  of  others  unless  they 
positively  distort  the  sense  of  the  original.  But  in  No.  172  Bonaparte's  complaint 
against  Despinoy  was  his  failure  to  fight  at  the  head  of  his  troops,  not,  as  Thomp- 
son (his  No.  23)  puts  it,  that  he  'Doesn't  use  his  head';  in  No.  411  (his  No,  49) 
Thompson  translated  croisiere  as  'cruiser',  which  it  does  not  mean,  thus  under- 
stating the  danger  Bonaparte  had  to  fear.  From  a  scholar  of  the  highest  standing 
these  are  more  than  trivial  inaccuracies.  Bingham  produced  some  real  mon- 
strosities; for  instance  in  No.  232  (his  VoL  I,  p.  151)  he  gives  only  the  second 
paragraph  and  makes  it  appear  to  apply  only  to  Bernadotte's  division  and  to  be  a 
deliberate  slight  on  that  general  and  his  troops.  The  reverse  is  the  truth. 

XXV111 

Letters  and  Documents  of  Napoleon 

they  often  throw  valuable  light  on  his  character  and  thought  and  they 
are  sometimes  entertaining,  But  their  interest  arises  from  the  fact  that 
Napoleon  was  a  great  historic  figure,  and  a  representative  selection  of 
his  papers  must  be  dominated  by  the  official  documents  by  which  for 
twenty  years  he  dominated  history. 

To  give  the  whole  of  the  Napoleonic  canon  would  fill  sixty  or  more 
large  volumes,  and  to  make  a  comparatively  small  selection  from  this 
huge  amount  of  material  is  not  easy.  There  is  hardly  any  of  it  that  is  not 
in  some  way  interesting,  though  perhaps  a  quarter  can  be  eliminated 
without  great  hardship.  The  use  of  a  painfully  rigorous  standard  raises 
this  proportion  to  more  than  one  half,  and  further  inroads  can  be  made 
by  the  regrettable  but  necessary  exclusion  of  certain  episodes  or  aspects 
of  them.  There  remains  a  fifth  or  a  quarter  that  demands  inclusion  if  a 
representative  selection  is  to  be  made.  Yet  even  that  is  far  too  heavy  a 
burden  for  the  translator  if  not  for  the  reader;  the  desirable  must  yield 
to  the  possible  and  these  remaining  papers  be  further  reduced  by  two- 
thirds  or  more,  to  some  5  or  6  per  cent,  of  the  whole.  At  this  point  per- 
haps i  per  cent,  select  themselves,  for  they  are  documents  that  could  not 
reasonably  be  left  out.  A  little  help  can  be  gained  by  giving  a  slight 
preference  to  those  referring  to  England  and  the  United  States  and  by 
representing  some  episodes  less  fully  than  others — not,  it  must  be  hoped, 
to  an  extent  that  mars  the  harmony  of  the  whole.  Beyond  that  there 
can  be  no  solution  other  than  an  agonizing  personal  choice;  there  is 
much  that  it  is  hard  to  leave  aside. 

There  are  a  few  French  words  of  the  period — the  days  and  months  of 
the  revolutionary  calendar,  d&ade,  chouan,  etc. — for  which  there  are  no 
English  equivalents  or  whose  equivalents  distort  the  specialized  mean- 
ing they  then  had;  these  are  left  in  their  original  or  in  slightly  anglicized 
forms  and  a  note  explaining  the  meaning  is  given  at  the  first  use  of  each. 
For  ease  of  understanding  distances,  weights  and  measures  are  converted 
to  modern  English  practice,  though  the  league  (three  miles)  is  retained. 
For  the  same  reason,  military  ranks  are  translated  by  their  English 
equivalents,  though  this  does  some  violence  to  the  French  language  and 
incidentally  deprives  the  chiefs  of  staff  of  the  imperial  armies  of  the 
honorific  tide  of 'Major-General';  they  remain  simply  *  Chief  of  Staff'. 
Admirals  always  appear  as  'Admiral'  although  they  were  often 
addressed  as  'General'.  Early  in  the  Revolution  the  very  complicated 
royal  coinage  gave  way  to  the  simpler  centime,  franc,  and  louis  (later 
napoUon),  but  occasional  survivals  occur  and  these  are  converted  to  the 
more  familiar  currency.* 

By  Napoleon's  time  French  orthography  and  grammar  had  already 

*,  100  centimes — i  franc,  20  francs — I  louis  or  napollon.  There  was  also  a  ten 
centime  unit  called  a  dlcime,  which  has  since  disappeared.  The  louis  and  napoUon 
were  worth  slightly  less  than  the  English  gold  sovereign. 

Letters  and  Documents  of  Napoleon 

become  fixed  in  their  present  form,  but  there  was  still  a  good  deal  of 
fluidity  in  the  spelling  of  surnames:  Talleyrand  is  sometimes  referred 
to  as  Tallerand,  Sieves  as  Syeyes,  Davout  as  Davoust,  and  the  accent 
was  frequently  omitted  from  such  names  as  Kleber,  Scherer  and  Serurier. 
These  variations  were  widespread  and  had  nothing  to  do  with  the  fact 
that  Napoleon's  own  spelling  left  much  to  be  desired.  The  modern 
form  is  used  in  all  such  cases. 

Letterheads  have  been  formalized  and  the  office  and  often  the 
location  of  addressees  added;  names  are  supplied  where  addressees  were 
addressed  by  their  offices.  As  to  endings  and  signatures,  the  printed 
sources  are  perforce  followed  in  most  cases,  even  though  liable  to  be 
incomplete  and  inaccurate.  To  check  each  text  against  the  original 
document  would  be  a  herculean  task  and  is  not  always  possible;  but 
it  has  been  done  in  a  few  cases  and  the  text  amended  if  necessary.  In 
particular  the  correct  signatures  have  been  added  to  those  few  papers 
which  were  obviously  composed  as  well  as  signed  by  persons  other 
than  Napoleon.  A  few  corrections  gleaned  from  other  authoritative 
sources  have  been  made. 

Round  brackets  ( )  and  any  words  contained  in  them  appear  in  the 
original  text.  The  few  words  in  square  brackets  [  ]  have  been  added 
during  translation  to  avoid  obscurity.  The  subject  matter  of  documents 
minuted  by  Napoleon  and,  occasionally,  of  omitted  passages  is  indi- 
cated in  italic  type  also  in  square  brackets.  Omissions  are  shown  by 
dots  . . . ,  except  in  the  case  of  complete  paragraphs  in  documents  whose 
paragraphs  are  numbered.  A  very  few  papers  have  been  abridged  in 

precis  form  and  this  is  mentioned  in  footnotes.  A  solid  line  

represents  a  gap  in  the  original.  The  use  of  inverted  commas  and  of 
italics  in  the  body  of  the  texts  follows  the  sources;  as  a  result,  alien 
words  of  French  origin  are  treated  as  denizens  and  are  not,  as  they 
would  normally  be,  italicized. 

The  short  notes  appearing  at  the  head  of  each  section  are  not  intended 
to  provide  more  than  an  essential  minimum  of  contextual  information. 
It  would  be  easy  to  write  several  books  of  explanatory  matter  around 
the  texts;  but  since  anything  of  that  kind  can  be  included  only  at  the 
expense  of  the  translation,  it  must  be  ruthlessly  restricted.  The  footnotes, 
too,  are  generally  limited  to  such  few  as  seem  necessary  to  ensure 
intelligibility. 

XXX 

Letters  and  Documents  of  Napoleon 

Lucciano  B. Guiseppe  B.  =  Saveria  Paravicini 

Archdcn.         | 

1 

Nicolo  Paravicini  =  Gertrude 

CARLO  MARIA  BUONAPARTE  = 
1746-1785  I 

JOSEPH 
1768-1844 

K  of  Naples 
K.  of  Spain 

tfi.Juiie  Clary 

,  o 

ZENAIDE  CHARLOTTE 

i.  Charles  m.  N.  Louis 

of  Lucien  s.  of  Louis 

(onaparte  Bonaparte 

NAPOLEON  I 

1769-1821 

Emperor  of  the 

French 

m.  i  Josephine 
de  Beauhamais 

div.  1809 

HI.  2  Marie  Louise 
of  Austria 
div.  1814 

NAPOLEON  (II) 
1811-1832 
K.  of  Rome 

D.  ofReichstadt 

LUCIEN 

1775-1840 

Pr.  ofCanino 

m.  i  Chr.  Boyer 

d.  1800 

m.  2  Alexandrine 
Jouberthou 

CHARLES 

d.  1859 

Pr.  ofCanino 

m.  Zenaide 

d.  of  Joseph 

I 

PAUL 
d.  1827 

LUCIEN 
d.  1891 

MARIANNA 

ELIZA 

1777-1820 

m.  Felix 

Bacciochi 

D.  of  Lucca 

one 
daughter 

I  I  I 

PIERRE      ANTOINE       Six 

d.  1881  daughters 

m.  Eleonore 
Ruflin 

JOSEPH  LUCIEN 
d.  1865  d.  1895 
.  ofCanino  Cardinal 

N.  CHARLES 

d,  1899 
Pr.  Bonaparte 

ALEXANDRE  = 

Vise,  de 
Beauhamais 
1760-1794 

ROLAND    JEANNE 

:   JOSEPHINE 

Tascherdela 

Pagerie 

1763-1814 

Augusta 
of  Bavaria 

EUGENE 
1781-1824 

D.of 

Leuchtenberg 

Viceroy  of 

Italy 

HORTENSE  = 
1783-1837 

=       Louis 
K.  of  Holland 

I 

GUSTUS=  Maria 

1835          Q.  of 
Portugal 

MAXIMILIAN  =  M.  Nicolaievna 
d.  1852  Gd.  Duchess 

of  Russia 

NAPOLEON'S  FAMILY  TREE 

JOSEPHINE  = 

Oscar  I 
of  Sweden 

Letters  and  Documents  of  Napoleon 

xxxi 

Giovanni  R.  =  Angela  Pietra  Santa  =  (2)  Francis  Fesch 

= MARIA  LETIZIA  RAMOLINO 
|  1750-1836 

Joseph  Fesch 

1763-1839 
Cardinal 

I 

Louis 

1778-1846 

K.  of  Holland 

m.  Hortense  de 

Beauhamais 
d.  of  Josephine 

I 

PAULINE 

1780-1825 
m.  I  Ch.  Leclerc 

General 
m.  2  Pr.  Camillo 

Borghese 

I 

CAROLINE 

1782-1839 

w.  J.  Murat 

Marshal  of  the 

Empire 
2C  of  Naples 

1 

JEROME 

1784-1860 

K.  of  Westphalia 

m.  i  Elizabeth 

Paterson 
annulled  1805 

N.I 

m.  2  Ca 
ofWurt 

i 

ACHILLE         LUCIEN 

Two 

Pr.  Murat 

daughters 

CHARLES            N.  LOUIS 

1807          1804-1831 
m.  Charlotte 
d.  of  Joseph 

CH.  Louis  N.  = 
NAPOLEON  IE 
1808-1873 
Emperor  of  the 
French 

-  Eugenie  M. 
Ctss.ofTeba 

N.  EUG.  Louis 

1856-1879 
Prince  Imperial 

JEROME  N. 
1805-1870 
Pr.  Jerome 

JEROME  N. 

1814-1847 

Pr.  ofMontfort 

MATHUDE 

1820-1904 

m.  Anatole 

Pr.  Demidqff 

JEROME  N. 
d.  1893 

CH.  JOSEPH 

Attorney-Gen. 

U.S.A. 

N.  JOSEPH  CH. 

1822-1891 

Pr.  Napoleon 

m.  Clotilde 

of  Savoy 

FRANJOIS  CLARY 

Ch.  Bemadotte  =  DESIREE    JULIE  = 
Marshal  of  the 

Empire 
K.  of  Sweden 

VICTOR  N. 
1862-1926 
Pr.  Napoleon 

Louis  N. 
1914- 

Joseph 
K,  of  Spain 

Louis 
1864-1932 

LETIZIA 

d.  1890 

m.  Amadeus 

D.  ofAosta 

K.  of  Spain 

OSCAR  I      =  Josephine 
K.  of  Sweden      d.  of  Eugene 

Below,  left:  House  of  Beauhamais;  right:  House  of  Clary 

Letters  and  Documents  of  Napoleon 

SOMME 
SEINE  INF.  J^  15 

:  CURE 

'  \  OU11TH1  \ 

a,' y*SAMBRL  •  *••.. .../-., 

J|ARDENNES^\ 

2      JMBUSBl  3 

*  MAINE     • 

?  LOIRE  INF. )  £T  LOJRE  \   INDREET   *    -^-      .  , 

>.. U -"-P-X  LOIRE  J  ;  CHER  » 

:-   ^^1      \_/iNDRE  ;       : 

VENDEE    •    DEUX\  ^  ;     ^... 

\    VIENNE     \m  m^'       ALLIER 

yONNn**"-MARNE\VOSGES    /•*• 

..•*•,..       V^-^    /IIAUT 

RHIN 

"  SEVRES  1 

WE  ;v -.   ALLmR  1  -"  D'OR     s,- 

v"  •  21  "xx — ^*"'%v-.  r^:.D° 

/HTE    "  /  I   SAONEET     '•/    A    •.. 

r  HTE.  »    CREUSE    /I  /      6       *A 

J  ^^     LOIRE     /  * 

^/.JUKA 

^VIENNE 

L               TCORREZE]PUYM 
IDORDOGNE  : ^     /  DOME 

^ 2     ; 

-  -    -" 

/  CIRONDE 

"BASSES    h  GERS    /, 

^PYRENEES/  \t     a.«^    10        V          ; -._ 

Att«S-'*c:-   <?. •*     X^.*     «£RAULT 

I&S&*;#;  \     ^^ 

20  i    «»/x  ...-—•  . 

,.-——,/  •:.     HAUTE     '. 

CANTA1 "; 

A1N 

ISERE 

DROME   i 

:£•  "          X 

;  *   J   ARRIEGE    *-     AUDE     V 
^^'i-VRENEESC 

REVOLUTIONARY  AND  IMPERIAL  FRANCE 
The  thick  line  shows,  approximately,  the  frontier  before  1792  and  after  1815. 

Letters  and  Documents  of  Napoleon 

xxxiu 

«  Ecoucn 

Conflans         SEINE  ET  QISE 

Enghien 

•-.,  »" ' *•„.•" \ » •* '  VVilleneuvc        ,*  ± 
SEINE  ET  oiSE  /£  /W 

\      *i     {  J^i^t/V*  ;Brie« 

DEPARTMENTS  A3STD  MILITARY  DISTRICTS 
Inset:  Department  of  the  Seine 

XXXIV 

Letters  and  Documents  of  Napoleon 

HDSSiMSHSjfite 

J 

nrt£>x>; 

Rfep 

PARIS  DURING  THE  REVOLUTION  AND  EMPIRE 

Tkfe  to! 

D 

Some  early  Signatures 

From  above:  1794;  1796,  to  Josephine;  1798;  1801;  1802,  proxy  signa- 
ture by  the  Secretary  of  State,  Maret,  who  was  empowered  during 
the  Consulate  so  to  sign  formal  documents;  Maret's  own  signature. 

Actual  size 

Preface 

Though  he  had  already  then  been  head  of  the  French  state  for  over 
six  months,  Napoleon's  rise  to  power  may  be  said  to  have  been  com- 
pleted when  he  returned  to  Paris  after  the  Marengo  campaign.  That 
was  at  the  beginning  of  July,  1800,  just  six  weeks  before  his  thirty-first 
birthday.  Up  till  that  time  his  life  had  passed  through  a  series  of  phases, 
each  in  a  sense  logically  complete  in  itself.  The  sections  in  this  volume 
follow  these  natural  divisions  of  his  career,  though  they  vary  widely  as 
to  the  proportion  of  the  available  material  that  they  contain. 

The  first  twenty-four  years  of  Bonaparte's  life  covered  his  child- 
hood in  Corsica,  his  education  at  Autun,  Brienne  and  Paris  and  nearly 
eight  years  as  a  commissioned  officer  in  the  French  army.  Yet  despite  its 
variety  this  period  had  a  unity  of  its  own,  for  it  was  the  period  both  of 
his  obscurity  and  of  his  emotional  attachment  to  Corsica,  during  which 
he  was  more  interested  and  involved  in  the  affairs  of  his  native  island 
than  in  those  of  France  and  indeed  looked  upon  the  French  as  alien  con- 
querors. At  the  end  of  it,  disillusioned  with  his  compatriots,  he  re- 
nounced his  Corsican  attachment  and  almost  simultaneously  stepped 
into  the  pages  of  history.  The  next  two  and  a  half  years,  lying  'between 
the  time  when  he  was  nothing  and  the  time  when  he  was  everything', 
form  another  distinct  period,  one  characterized  by  alternating  success 
and  frustration  and  brought  to  a  close  by  marriage  and  his  first 
command  of  an  army  in  the  field. 

Regrettably  but  necessarily  these  two  periods  are  together  repre- 
sented by  but  a  single  short  section,  The  Early  Years,  of  seventy-four 
documents.  The  thirty  letters,  short  notes  and  extracts  dating  from 
before  Toulon  can  give  little  idea  of  the  prolific  essays,  histories,  notes, 
novels  and  dialogues  with  which  he  filled  notebook  after  notebook  for 
seven  or  eight  years;  all  they  can  do  is  show  something  of  the  develop- 
ment of  his  life  and  give  a  glimpse  of  a  few  of  his  activities,  interests 
and  ideas.  There  is  far  less  extant  material  of  the  next  period  and  the 
forty-three  papers  translated  form  almost  one-third  of  what  is  available 
in  the  printed  sources. 

Between  March,  1796,  and  December,  1797,  Bonaparte  first  demon- 
strated the  real  extent  of  his  powers.  The  Italian  campaigns  and  their 
aftermath  faced  him  with  situations  as  difficult  and  complex  as  any  he 
was  to  meet,  and  he  handled  them  all  with  intense  energy  and,  despite 
his  inexperience,  with  masterly  ability.  The  2,500  or  so  surviving 
documents  that  he  produced  while  doing  so  contain  some  of  the  most 
interesting  he  ever  wrote.  Italy ;  the  longest  section  in  the  volume, 
contains  195  of  them.  This  is  not  enough  to  give  a  clear  picture  of  a 
most  intricate  series  of  events,  but  the  most  important  documents  are 
included,  as  are  examples  of  his  battle  orders  and  orders  of  the  day  and 

The  Rise  to  Power 

of  the  remarkable  love  letters  to  Josephine;  the  military,  political, 
diplomatic,  administrative  and  personal  aspects  of  the  period  are  all 
represented. 

After  Italy  came  Egypt,  which,  with  its  brief  prologue,  the  projected 
invasion  of  England,  lasted  almost  exactly  the  same  length  of  time;  but 
it  has  left  behind  rather  fewer  documents— some  2,000,  The  144  given 
in  the  section  Egypt  include  all  those  concerned  with  the  proposed 
invasion,  but,  except  for  these,  purely  military  papers  have  been  left 
aside  in  order  to  allow  more  space  for  those  showing  how  Bonaparte 
handled  the  novel  political  and  administrative  problems  the  expedition 
entailed;  a  few  naval  papers  of  outstanding  interest  are  included.  The 
main  course  of  the  military  events  can  be  followed  in  his  despatches  to 
the  Directory. 

Immediately  after  his  return  from  Egypt  there  opened  the  final 
critical  phase  of  the  rise  to  power.  Two  sections  of  this  translation, 
overlapping  in  time,  cover  die  seven  months  ftom  Brumaire  to  the 
battle  of  Marengo  with  a  total  of  267  documents  or  about  a  quarter  of 
those  available.  Brumaire  contains  almost  all  those  concerned  with  the 
coup  d'etat  itself  together  with  a  selection  of  later  pieces  to  give  some 
idea  of  the  way  he  set  about  organizing  his  government  and  tackling 
the  manifold  difficulties  facing  it.  In  Marengo  are  grouped  a  substantial 
proportion  of  all  Bonaparte's  military  documents  dealing  with  the 
campaign;  they  give  a  dear  picture  of  the  planning,  movements  and 
operations  with  the  exception  of  the  three  days  immediately  preceding 
the  batde,  from  which,  unfortunately,  none  of  his  own  papers  have 
come  down  to  us. 

A  short  final  section  has  been  added.  Though  they  came  after 
Bonaparte  was  firmly  installed  as  First  Consul,  die  treaties  of  Lunevffle 
and  Amiens  form  a  natural  epilogue  to  this  first  stage  of  his  career,  for 
while  the  Revolution  was  ended  at  Brumaire  it  was  only  through  them 
that  its  legacy,  die  revolutionary  war,  was  brought  to  a  close,  Luntville 
and  Amiens  gives  seventy  diplomatic  papers  dealing  with  die  negotia- 
tions that  led  up  to  them.  These  are  almost  all  that  he  himself  wrote; 
in  the  main  his  guidance  was  given  verbally  to  Talleyrand  and  corres- 
pondence remained  in  the  hands  of  the  minister. 

The  Early  Years 

\  V, 

8 

I 

§ 
« 

B 

<3 

C/5 

fr 

*-O 

£ 

U( 

O 

8    ^F 

•c  x 

S# 
M  a'tj 

m      .S     H 
5        I     § 

IHI      3    H 
^     rS    S 

o  ,_,  "55 

•o  p 

5>  ^  &1 

*c{  u  *-" 

I  rg 

O 

o 

i 

rt 

PQ 

X, 

NAPOLEON  WAS  BORN  AT  AJACCIO  IN  CORSICA  ON  THE  FIFTEENTH 
of  August,  1769,  He  was  a  French  subject  since  a  year  earlier 
the  island  had  been  ceded  by  Genoa  to  France,  but  for  some 
years  previously  the  inhabitants  had  achieved  practical  independence 
and  they  fought  bitterly  but  unsuccessfully  against  the  French  troops 
sent  to  repress  them.  In  the  spring  of  1769  they  were  finally  defeated; 
Paoli,  their  leader,  fled,  to  settle  kter  in  London,  and  his  supporters,  of 
whom  Carlo  Buonaparte  was  one,  unwillingly  accepted  French  rule. 
These  facts  were  of  much  importance  for  the  first  twenty-four  years  of 
Napoleon's  life. 

Little  is  known  of  his  early  childhood,  but  it  seems  to  have  been 
happy  and  carefree,  and  he  had  an  elementary  education  at  the  school 
of  the  Abbe  Rocco.  His  family  was  among  the  most  prominent  in  the 
island,  but  even  by  Corsican  standards  it  was  not  rich  and  Carlo  was 
an  easy-going  spendthrift.  In  other  ways  he  was  an  excellent  father. 
Since  he  could  claim  noble  birth  his  children  were  eligible  for  free 
pkces  in  the  royal  military  schools  and  with  the  help  of  the  French 
governor,  Marbeuf,  he  succeeded  in  placing  Napoleon  at  Brienne. 
Later  he  also  placed  Lucien  there  and  Marianna  at  the  girls'  college  of 
St.  Cyr.  In  December,  1778,  he  took  Joseph  and  Napoleon  to  the  college 
at  Autun,  where  they  were  to  learn  French,  and  four  months  kter 
Napoleon  moved  to  Brienne.  He  proved  to  be  very  good  at  mathe- 
matics, fair  at  history  and  geography,  but  very  poor  at  languages.  After 
five  years  at  Brienne  he  passed  into  the  Royal  Military  College  at  Paris 
and  a  year  kter  he  was  commissioned  into  the  Artillery  Regiment  of 
k  Fere,  then  stationed  at  Valence.* 

The  first  extant  document  written  by  Buonaparte  is  a  long  letter  to 
one  of  his  uncles  dated  July,  1784;  the  second  appears  as  No.  i  in  this 
transktion.  Soon  he  became  a  prolific  writer:  letters,  essays  on  every 
subject  from  love  to  politics  and  military  science,  autobiographical  jot- 
tings, stories  and  projects  for  books  came  in  profusion;  he  read  widely 
and  made  copious  notes  on  his  reading  (No.  10).  Much  of  this  throws 
light  on  the  author ;  little  is  of  intrinsic  merit,  though  some  of  his  letters, 
such  as  the  series  to  Joseph  in  1792  (Nos.  22-26),  give  interesting 
accounts  of  the  Revolution.  Apart  from  this  literary  activity  and  his 
regular  duties,  after  the  death  of  his  father  in  1785  he  became  responsible 
for  the  family  interests  in  France;  he  supervised  Lucien's  and  kter 

*  His  own  little  note  (No.  9)  tells  the  bare  outline  of  his  life  until  June,  1788.  The 
record  can  be  continued  as  follows:  he  remained  with  his  regiment  at  Auxonne  till 
September,  1789;  he  was  in  Corsica  from  then  until  February,  1791,  when  he 
returned  to  Auxonne,  moving  to  Valence  in  June  on  being  transferred  to  the  4th 
Artillery  Regiment  (formerly  of  Grenoble);  with  a  gap  of  five  months  in  Paris 
between  May  and  October,  1792,  he  was  again  in  Corsica  from  October,  1791, 
till  June,  1793.  Thereafter  his  true  career  began.  He  was  promoted  full  lieutenant 
in  June,  1791,  captain  a  year  kter. 

The  Rise  to  Poiver 

Louis's  education  (No.  16),  watched  over  Marianna  (Nos.  23,  27)  and 
tried  unsuccessfully  to  obtain  the  money  owed  to  the  Buonapartes  by 
the  French  state  (No.  13). 

But  throughout  these  early  years  his  real  interest  lay  in  Corsica,  and 
for  the  first  eight  years  after  he  was  commissioned  almost  two-thirds  of 
his  time  was  spent  there.  Though  educated  in  France  and  an  officer  in 
the  French  army,  he  felt  the  French  to-be  not  only  alien  but  the  oppres- 
sors of  his  own  nation  (No.  4).  Corsican  independence  was  his  aim  and 
Paoli  his  hero,  and  when  he  planned  a  large  historical  and  propagandist 
work  on  the  subject  he  sought  the  general's  approval  (No.  14).  At  the 
same  time  he  was  strongly  influenced  by  French  political  thought  and 
believed  that  the  principles  of  the  Revolution  should  be  adopted  in 
Corsica,  which  would  find  its  true  independence  through  their  applica- 
tion. It  was  therefore  as  a  leader  of  the  revolutionary  party  that  in  1790 
he  began  to  play  a  prominent  part  in  the  island's  turbulent  politics.  A 
few  months  later  Paoli  returned  and,  though  he  was  feted  on  his  way 
through  Paris,  it  soon  became  clear  that  he  was  quite  out  of  sympathy 
with  these  ideas.  By  1793  Corsica  was  in  a  state  of  civil  war,  and  the 
French  government,  overburdened  with  war  and  revolt  at  home,  was 
unable  to  help  the  small  republican  party.  The  Buonaparte  house  was 
sacked  and  Napoleon  himself  narrowly  escaped  capture  and  death.  On 
ii  June  he  abandoned  Corsica  for  good  and  sailed  with  all  his  family  to 
France,  having  a  few  days  earlier  written  a  last  account  of  the  island's 
affairs  (No.  29).  A  year  later,  at  the  invitation  of  the  Paolists,  Corsica 
was  occupied  by  the  English. 

While  his  family  settled  in  Marseilles  Buonaparte  joined  part  of  his 
regiment  attached  to  the  Army  of  Italy  at  Nice.  There  he  was  employed 
in  organizing  the  coastal  batteries  and  in  that  capacity  on  3  July  he 
wrote  No.  30  to  the  Minister  of  War;  a  day  or  two  later  he  was  sent  to 
Avignon  to  collect  supplies.  The  royalist  revolt  which  swept  through 
the  southern  cities  after  the  triumph  of  the  Jacobins  had  already  broken 
out,  and  it  seems  that  he  joined  Carteaux's  little  army  in  its  attack  on 
the  insurgents  at  Avignon,  but  after  the  capture  of  the  town,  when 
Carteaux  moved  on  to  bring  Marseilles  and  Toulon  to  heel,  he  stayed  to 
carry  out  his  task  and  also  spent  some  time  in  writing  and  publishing 
The  Supper  at  Beaucaire.  This,  his  best-known  political  pamphlet,  is  a 
dialogue  in  which  he  appeals  to  the  rebels  to  surrender;  the  main  argu- 
ment is  the  hopelessness  of  their  military  position,  but  he  also  makes  a 
political  defence  of  Jacobinism  and  an  attack  on  the  treasonable  nature 
of  the  revolt. 

Marseilles  fell  on  25  August  and  Carteaux  moved  the  Army  of  the 
South  to  attack  Toulon.  This  was  a  harder  problem,  for  not  only  was 
the  town  in  a  strong  and  well-fortified  position  but  by  agreement  with 
.1  L-I Tj««.i:«.i,  .fl^*  ,W,W  Wnnrl  Viarl  moved  into  the  roads  and 

The  Early  Years 

landed  some  12,000  British  and  allied  troops.  At  the  very  first  action 
Dommartin,  Carteaux's  artillery  commander,  was  wounded;  shortly 
afterwards  Buonaparte  was  passing  through  the  army  area  on  his  way 
back  to  Nice  and  Saliceti,  Representative  of  the  People*  with  the  army 
and  a  fellow  Corsican  who  knew  something  of  him,  at  once  put  him 
under  requisition  to  take  Dommartin's  place.  He  was  also  promoted 
major. 

There  is  no  doubt  that  Buonaparte  played  an  important  part  in  the 
capture  of  the  town;  numerous  reports  attest  his  capacity,  energy  and 
courage,  and  he  was  to  find  among  his  superiors  there  loyal  patrons 
who  recognized  his  abilities.  He  carried  the  main  responsibility  for 
executing  the  plan  of  attack  against  I'Eguillette  and  the  fleet,  but  the 
plan  itself  had  been  agreed  between  the  generals  and  Representatives 
on  the  spot  and  had  equally  been  devised  in  Paris  before  ever  he  reached 
the  scene;  despite  the  suggestion  in  No.  33,  it  was  not  'his'  plan,  and 
a  dozen  others  with  more  justification  but  fewer  historians  to  support 
them  claimed  it  as  their  own.  It  is  often  also  glossed  over  that  he  was 
formally  in  command  of  the  artillery  only  until  6  November,  when 
General  du  Teil  took  over;  conscious  of  the  weakness  of  his  own  rank 
Buonaparte  had  himself  asked  in  No.  3 1  for  such  an  appointment  to  be 
made,  though  du  Teil  entirely  endorsed  and  supported  his  subordinate's 
plans  (Nos.  31-36). 

With  the  fall  of  Toulon  his  services  were  rewarded  by  immediate 
promotion  to  the  rank  of  brigadier-general  and  the  post  of  Commander 
of  Artillery  in  the  Army  of  Italy  together  with  a  special  assignment  to 
reorganize  the  coastal  defences  so  as  to  hold  the  English  fleet  at  bay  and 
protect  the  vital  shipping  lanes  linking  the  southern  ports.  During  the 
first  half  of  1794  he  was  mainly  at  work  on  this  (Nos.  37-39,  42-43), 
but  he  also  commanded  his  artillery  in  the  spring  offensive  along  the 
coast.  This  brought  him  into  close  association  with  the  Representative, 
Augustin  Robespierre,  brother  of  Maximilian,  who  reported  on  him  as 
an  officer  of  'transcendant  merit'.  It  also  gave  him  a  first  view  of  the 
problems  of  warfare  on  the  Piedmontese  frontier  and  in  May  he  drew 
up  a  plan  for  the  campaign  in  Italy  which  was  strongly  supported  by 
the  Representatives  but  was  vetoed  in  Paris  in  favour  of  a  far  more 
limited  operation. 

On  23  July,  the  Revolution  of  Thermidor,  Robespierre  fell,  and  all 
those  considered  his  supporters  were  placed  in  jeopardy.  On  8  August 
Buonaparte  was  arrested  and  lodged  in  the  Fort  Carr6  at  Antibes. 
While  there  he  rejected  an  offer  by  his  aides-de-camp  Junot  and  Mar- 
mont  to  secure  his  escape  (No.  44)  and  sent  off  what  seemed  his  last 
report  on  the  coastal  defences  (No.  45).  But  the  Representatives  were 
well  aware  of  his  value  to  the  army  and  no  evidence  could  be  found 
*  For  the  role  of  the  Representatives  of  the  People,  see  p.  81  below. 

io  The  Rise  to  Power 

against  him;  on  20  August  he  was  released  and  reinstated  and  so  took 
part  in  the  small  but  successful  autumn  operations  against  the  Austrians 
which  he  recounts  in  No.  47.  At  the  end  of  that  letter  he  refers  to  the 
forthcoming  expedition  to  drive  the  English  from  Corsica  and  the 
winter  was  spent  in  preparing  for  this.  The  fleet  sailed  on  5  March, 
1795,  with  Buonaparte  in  command  of  the  landing  artillery,  but  it  was 
brought  to  action,  sustained  heavy  loss  and  damage  and  was  forced  to 
return.  His  post  with  the  Army  of  Italy  having  been  given  to  Casa- 
bianca,  he  was  now  unemployed,  and  at  the  end  of  April  he  was 
summoned  to  Paris. 

He  reached  the  capital  at  the  end  of  May  and  there  began  another 
long  series  of  letters  to  Joseph,  who  was  still  at  Marseilles  and  shortly 
moved  to  Genoa  (No.  48,  etc.);  these  are  again  interesting  for  his 
impressions  of  the  social  and  political  life  of  Paris  as  well  as  information 
about  the  family  and  his  own  doings.  He  was  almost  at  once  posted  to 
command  an  infantry  brigade  in  the  Army  of  the  West,  but  this  had 
few  attractions  and  on  a  plea  of  ill-health  he  refrained  from  taking  it  up. 
He  then  obtained  far  more  interesting  work  in  the  Topographical 
Office*  of  the  Committee  of  Public  Safety,  which  placed  him  at  the 
centre  of  the  operational  planning  for  all  the  armies  (No.  56).  At  about 
the  same  time  he  offered  to  lead  a  military  mission  to  Turkey,  a  pro- 
posal that  was  strongly  supported  by  some  members  of  the  Committee 
but  was  finally  refused  on  the  ground  that  his  abilities  were  needed  at 
home  (Nos.  56-57). 

On  13  Vendemiaire  (5  October),  after  weeks  of  simmering  ferment 
(Nos.  60-61),  the  royalist  faction  in  Paris  revolted.  Barras,  the  nominal 
commander  of  the  Army  of  the  Interior,  called  in  Buonaparte  who 
quickly  and  effectively  suppressed  the  rising  (Nos.  62-63).  Before  the 
month  was  out  he  was  given  the  formal  command  of  the  Army  of  the 
Interior  and  the  Paris  Military  District.  At  about  the  same  time  he  met 
Josephine;f  before  the  end  of  the  year  they  were  lovers  (No.  69),  and 
on  9  March,  1796,  they  were  married  (No.  74). 

One  other  factor  of  great  importance  during  this  period  of  his  life 
was  his  continued  interest  in  the  Italian  theatre  of  war.  With  his  know- 

*  This  important  office  was,  as  its  name  implies,  originally  no  more  than  a  map 
section.  When  the  Committee  of  Public  Safety  assumed  the  virtual  government 
of  France  it  quickly  expanded  into  a  large  department  in  which  was  centralized 
almost  all  military  intelligence  and  operational  planning.  It  continued  under  the 
Directory,  and  was  retained  by  Buonaparte  when  he  came  to  power  as  a  means  of 
direct  communication  with  the  armies  by-passing  the  Ministry  of  War. 

f  Josephine  Tascher  de  la  Pagerie  came  of  an  old  family  settled  in  Martinique 
and  was  born  in  1763.  In  1779  she  married  Viscount  Alexandre  de  Beauharnais, 
who  reached  high  command  in  the  revolutionary  wars  but  was  guillotined  during 
the  Terror;  she,  too,  was  arrested  but  was  saved  by  Thermidor.  There  were  two 
children  of  this  marriage:  Eugene,  born  in  1781,  and  Hortense,  two  years  younger. 

The  Early  Years  n 

ledge  of  the  area  and  the  problems  it  presented  he  could  not  approve 
the  timorous  operations  being  carried  out.  In  the  summer  of  1795  he 
prepared  two  papers  (No.  53)  setting  out  in  detail  what  he  thought  the 
right  plan  of  campaign.  These  had  little  practical  effect,  but  in  the  fol- 
lowing January  he  wrote  two  further  notes  (No.  70)  criticizing  current 
operations  and  restating  his  own  plans.  These  were  sent  to  Scherer,  the 
army  commander,  who  replied  that  they  could  not  be  carried  out  and 
that  if  they  were  to  be  tried  the  man  who  had  prepared  them  should  do 
it;  he  also  offered  to  resign.  Scherer  was  taken  at  his  word,  and  on 
2  March  Buonaparte  was  appointed  Commander-in-Chief  of  the  Army 
of  Italy. 

THE  DIRECTORIAL  CONSTITUTION 

During  the  earlier  stages  of  the  Revolution  Buonaparte  had  been 
little  more  than  an  interested  spectator,  but  after  his  return  in  1793  the 
politics  of  France  affected  him  more  directly.  That  event  coincided 
with  the  outbreak  of  the  Terror,  of  which  he  saw  a  good  deal  since  it 
was  at  its  most  violent  in  the  southern  towns.  Though  wisely  reticent, 
his  opinions  at  that  time  tended  towards  Jacobinism;  but  there  is  little 
doubt  that  he  liked  organized  terror  as  little  as  mob  rule,  and  he 
probably  approved  of  the  effects  of  Thermidor  despite  the  momentary 
danger  in  which  it  pkced  him.  For  a  further  two  years  he  remained 
politically  insignificant,  but  with  the  regime  of  the  Directory  he  was 
from  start  to  finish  intimately  concerned. 

The  Constitution  of  the  Year  ni  vested  all  executive  power  in  a  board 
of  five  Directors  elected  by  the  councils.  One  Director  retired  annually, 
and  a  quorum  of  three  was  needed  for  their  acts  to  be  valid.  Directors 
must  be  forty  years  of  age  and  they  could  not  personally  command 
troops.  Legislative  power  rested  with  two  councils  chosen  by  electoral 
colleges  in  the  departments,  one-third  of  their  members  being  replaced 
each  year.  Legislators  could  hold  no  other  public  office,  must  be  French 
citizens  with  full  rights  and,  absence  on  official  business  apart,  must  have 
resided  in  the  Republic  for  ten  years  before  election.  The  Council  of 
five  Hundred,  with  500  members  who  must  be  twenty-five  years  old, 
proposed,  discussed,  amended  and  voted  all  draft  laws.  The  Council  of 
the  Ancients,  with  250  members  of  at  least  forty  years  of  age,  discussed 
and  voted  for  or  against  all  bills  passed  by  the  lower  house.  The  councils 
could  form  no  permanent  committee  but  could  form  themselves  into 
ad  hoc  secret  general  committees  for  discussion  only;  all  other  meetings 
were  public.  They  could  not  hold  joint  sessions  but  must  sit  in  the  same 
commune,  which  was  to  be  determined  by  the  Ancients.  A  specially 
recruited  Legislative  Guard  was  assigned  to  them  and  the  government 
could  not  bring  other  troops  within  twelve  leagues  of  their  seat. 

12  The  Rise  to  Power 

This  constitution  was  voted  by  the  Convention  on  22  August,  1795, 
and  approved  by  the  electorate  in  September.  It  came  into  force  on 
i  November  when  La  Reveillere-Lepeaux,  Letourneur,  Rewbel, 
Barras  and  Carnot  were  chosen  Directors. 

The  Thermidorians  had  suppressed  the  Terror,  but  they  were  them- 
selves ex-terrorists,  republicans  and  regicides.  Large  sections  of  the 
public  now  held  far  more  reactionary  views  and,  under  the  influence  of 
secretly  returned  emigrants  supported  by  English  gold,  were  frankly 
royalist.  To  prevent  their  own  political  extinction  and  probable  pro- 
scription the  men  of  Thermidor  therefore  passed,  together  with  the 
constitution,  a  Law  of  Two  Thirds,  by  which  at  the  first  election  two- 
thirds  of  the  members  of  the  councils  should  be  chosen  from  the  mem- 
bership of  the  lapsed  Convention.  It  was  this  law  that  provoked  the 
insurrection  of  Vendemiaire.  There  was  thus  a  fatal  dichotomy,  at  first 
between  the  public  and  the  whole  constitutional  apparatus  and  later,  as 
subsequent  elections  brought  royalists  into  the  councils,  between  these 
and  the  Directors.  The  result  was  the  series  of  more  or  less  violent  coups 
d'etat  which  afflicted  the  history  of  the  Directory  and  paved  the  way  for 
Brumaire. 

THE  REPUBLICAN  CALENDAR 

On  5  October,  1793,  a  new  republican  calendar  was  legally  introduced  in 
France,  the  aim  being  partly  to  further  the  dissociation  between  the  new  secular 
society  and  Christian  tradition  and  partly  to  achieve  a  more  'reasonable'  system 
than  die  Gregorian.  Preparation  of  the  scheme  was  the  work  of  a  committee  in 
which  the  mathematicians  Monge  and  Lagrange  and  the  poet  Fabre  d'Eglantine 
were  the  most  active  members.  The  new  calendar  was  backdated  to  the  proclama- 
tion of  the  Republic  on  22  September,  1792,  which  thus  became  the  first  day  of 
the  new  Year  I. 

The  year  was  divided  into  twelve  months  of  thirty  days  each,  the  months,  in 
their  order  in  the  calendar,  being  named:  Vendemiaire,  Brumaire,  Frimaire, 
Nivose,  Pluviose,  Ventose,  Germinal,  Flor6al,  Prairial,  Messidor,  Thermidor  and 
Fructidor.  Since  these  months  included  a  total  of  only  360  days,  5  'complementary 
days',  or  'sansculottides',  were  added  at  the  end  of  each  year;  i.e.  after  30  Fructidor. 
A  sixth  complementary  day  was  added  in  leap  years.  Translation  between  the  two 
calendars  is  complicated  by  the  fact  that  the  leap  day  is  in  one  case  added  in  Sep- 
tember and  in  the  other  in  February  and  that  the  leap  years  do  not  in  any  case 
coincide.  (In  this  translation  Gregorian  in  addition  to  Republican  dates  are  given 
at  the  head  of  all  documents  dated  according  to  the  latter  system.  Republican  dates 
within  the  texts  are  not  so  translated,  but  they  can  be  identified  by  reference  to 
appropriate  letter-heads.) 

Each  month  was  divided  into  three  periods  of  ten  days,  known  as  'decades', 
and  the  days  of  the  decade  were  named:  Primidi,  Duodi,Tridi,  Quartidi,  Quintidi, 
Sextidi,  Septidi,  Octidi,  Nonidi,  D6cadi.  De*cadi  was  the  legal  day  of  rest  and  the 
complementary  days  were  also  given  over  to  festivals  and  holidays. 

The  republican  calendar  was  discontinued  and  the  Gregorian  restored  as  from 
i  January,  1806  (n  Nivose,  Year  XIV). 

The  Early  Years 

CORSICA 

TOULON 

14  The  Rise  to  Power 

I 
To  Monsieur  Carlo  Buonaparte 

At  Ajaccio  Royal  Military  School,  Brienne 

12  October,  1784 
My  dear  Father, 

Your  letter,  as  you  can  imagine,  has  not  given  me  much  pleasure; 
but  the  interests  of  your  health  and  of  the  family  are  very  dear  to  me 
and  have  forced  me  to  approve  your  early  return  to  Corsica,  which  has 
consoled  me  for  everything. 

Besides,  being  assured  of  the  continuance  of  your  kindness  and  love 
and  your  eagerness  to  help  me  in  every  way,  how  could  I  not  be  happy 
and  content?  I  hasten  to  ask  you  for  news  of  the  effect  the  waters  have 
had  on  your  health  and  to  assure  you  of  my  respectful  devotion  and 
eternal  gratitude. 

I  am  pleased  that  Joseph  has  gone  to  Corsica  with  you,  provided 
that  he  is  here  on  I  November,  that  is  about  a  year  from  now.  Joseph 
can  come  here,  because  Father  Patrault,  my  mathematics  master,  whom 
you  know,  is  not  leaving.  Consequently  the  Principal  has  told  me  to 
assure  you  that  he  will  be  well  received  here  and  can  come  with 
confidence.  Father  Patrault  is  an  excellent  teacher  and  has  assured  me 
that  he  will  take  charge  of  him  with  pleasure,  and,  if  my  brother  is 
ready  to  work,  we  can  take  the  artillery  examination  together  .  ,  .  My 
dear  Father,  for  several  reasons  I  hope  you  will  place  him  at  Brienne 
rather  than  Metz.  i.  Because  that  will  be  a  consolation  for  Joseph, 
Lucien  and  me  ...  2.  It  is  not  usual  at  Metz  to  learn  in  six  months  what 
Joseph  must  know  for  the  examination;  since  my  brother  knows  no 
mathematics,  they  would  put  him  with  the  children.  These  and  many 
other  reasons  should  decide  you  to  send  him  here  .  ,  . 

Please  send  me  Boswel's  History  of  Corsica*  and  other  histories  or 
memoirs  concerning  that  kingdom.  You  need  have  no  fear;  I  will  take 
care  of  them  and  bring  them  back  to  Corsica  with  me  when  I  come. 

Good-bye,  my  dear  Father.  Lucien  embraces  you  with  all  his  heart. 
He  works  well  and  did  very  well  at  the  public  exercise.  The  inspector 
will  be  here  on  the  isth  or  i6th  of  this  month  at  the  latest.  When  he 
leaves  I  will  let  you  know  what  he  said  to  me.  Give  my  respects  to 
Minana-f  Saveria,  Aunt  Gertrude,  Uncle  Nicolino,  Aunt  Touta,  etc. 
.  .  .  Please  take  care  of  them.  Send  me  news  of  them  and  tell  me  they 
are  happy.  I  end  by  wishing  you  health  as  good  as  my  own. 

Your  humble  and  obedient  son, 
DE  BUONAPARTE 

*  He  means  An  Account  of  Corsica  by  James  Boswell. 

f  A  Corsican  diminutive  for  'mother*.  Saveria  was  his  paternal  grandmother, 
Gertrude  his  paternal  aunt,  Nicolino  her  husband,  Nicolo  Paravicini.  Aunt 
Touta  is  unidentified. 

The  Early  Years  15 

To  Archdeacon  Lucciano  Buonaparte 

At  Ajacdo  Royal  Military  School,  Paris 

23  March,  ij$$ 
My  dear  Uncle, 

It  would  be  useless  to  tell  you  how  affected  I  have  been  by  the 
tragedy  that  has  befallen  us.  We  have  lost  in  him  a  father,  and  God 
knows  what  a  father  he  was,  what  his  tenderness  and  love  for  us!  Alas! 
In  everything  he  was  the  protector  of  our  youth.  You  have  lost  in 
him  an  obedient  and  grateful  nephew.  You  know  better  than  I  how 
much  he  loved  you.  I  will  even  dare  to  say  that  through  his  death  our 
country  has  lost  an  enlightened  and  disinterested  citizen.  That  dignity 
with  which  he  has  several  times  been  honoured  shows  the  confidence 
his  compatriots  had  in  him,  and  yet  heaven  lets  him  die,  arid  where? 
A  hundred  leagues  from  home,  in  a  strange  country,  far  from  all  he  held 
most  dear.  One  son,  it  is  true,  was  present  at  that  terrible  moment;  that 
must  have  been  a  great  consolation  to  him,  but  certainly  not  to  be 
compared  with  the  triple  joy  he  would  have  felt  if  he  had  ended  his 
career  in  his  own  house,  beside  his  wife  and  all  his  family.  But  the 
supreme  Being  has  not  allowed  it  to  be  so.  His  will  is  immutable.  He 
alone  can  console  us.  Alas!  Though  he  has  taken  from  us  what  we 
held  most  dear,  he  has  at  least  left  those  who  alone  can  replace  him. 
Agree,  then,  to  be  for  us  as  the  father  we  have  lost.  Our  affection  and 
gratitude  will  be  equal  to  so  great  a  service.  I  end  by  wishing  that  your 
health  may  be  like  my  own. 

NAPQLEONE  DI  BUONAPAXTE 

3 
To  Madame  Letizia  Buonaparte 

At  Ajacdo  Royal  Military  School,  Paris 

28  March,  1785 
My  dear  Mother, 

Today,  when  time  has  calmed  a  little  the  first  transports  of  my  grief, 
I  hasten  to  show  you  the  gratitude  that  your  goodness  towards  us 
inspires  in  me.  Be  consoled,  dear  Mother;  circumstances  demand  it. 
We  will  redouble  our  care  and  thankfulness  and  be  happy  if  by  our 
obedience  we  can  make  good  a  little  the  boundless  loss  of  a  dearly  loved 
husband.  I  end,  my  dear  Mother,  as  my  sorrow  demands,  by  begging 
you  to  calm  your  own.  My  health  is  perfect,  and  every  day  I  pray  that 
heaven  may  grant  you  the  same.  Give  my  respects  to  Aunt  Gertrude, 

Your  very  affectionate  son, 
NAPOLEON  DI  BUONAPARTE 

P.S.  The  queen  of  France  gave  birth  to  a  prince,  named  Duke  of 
Normandy,  at  7.0  in  the  evening  on  27  March. 

16  The  Rise  to  Power 

4 
Note  Valence 

3  May,  1786 

Always  alone  in  the  midst  of  men,  I  come  home  to  dream  and  give 
myself  up  to  the  full  force  of  my  melancholy.  What  is  its  subject 
today?  Death.  In  the  dawn  of  my  life,  I  can  hope  to  live  a  long  time. 
I  have  been  away  from  my  country  for  six  or  seven  years.  What 
pleasures  shall  I  not  taste  when,  in  four  months,  I  again  see  my  relatives 
and  my  compatriots?  Can  I  not  expect,  from  the  tender  feelings  that 
memories  of  my  childhood  pleasures  bring,  that  my  happiness  will  be 
complete?  So  what  madness  makes  me  wish  to  destroy  myself?  What 
to  do  with  my  life,  no  doubt.  Since  I  must  die,  is  it  not  best  to  kill 
oneself?  If  I  were  already  over  sixty,  I  would  respect  the  prejudices  of 
my  contemporaries  and  wait  patiently  for  nature  to  run  its  course;  but 
since  I  am  beginning  to  know  sorrow  and  nothing  gives  me  pleasure, 
why  should  I  put  up  with  days  that  bring  me  no  good?  How  far  men 
are  removed  from  nature!  How  vile,  cowardly  and  grovelling  they 
are!  What  sight  shall  I  see  in  my  country?  My  compatriots  in  chains 
and  fearfully  kissing  the  hand  that  oppresses  them.  They  are  no  longer 
those  brave  Corsicans  whom  a  hero  inspired  with  his  own  virtues, 
enemies  of  tyrants,  luxury  and  vile  courtiers.  Proud  and  filled  with  a 
noble  sense  of  his  personal  importance,  a  Corsican  was  happy  if  he  had 
spent  the  day  in  public  affairs.  The  night  passed  in  the  tender  arms  of  a 
beloved  wife.  Reason  and  enthusiasm  wiped  out  all  the  troubles  of  the 
day.  Love  and  nature  made  his  nights  like  those  of  the  gods.  But,  when 
liberty  came,  those  happy  times  vanished  like  dreams!  Frenchmen,  not 
satisfied  with  having  ravished  everything  we  held  dear,  you  have  even 
corrupted  our  morals.  So  the  picture  of  my  country  as  it  now  is  and  the 
impossibility  of  changing  it  is  an  added  reason  for  escaping  from  a  land 
where  duty  forces  me  to  praise  men  whom  honour  should  lead  me  to 
hate.  How  am  I  to  behave  when  I  go  back  to  my  native  land,  and  what 
am  I  to  say?  When  his  country  is  no  more,  a  good  patriot  should  die. 
If  I  could  deliver  my  countrymen  by  destroying  one  man,  I  would  go 
on  the  instant  and  sink  the  avenging  blade  in  the  tyrant's  breast.  My 
life  is  a  burden  because  nothing  gives  me  pleasure  and  everything  is 
painful.  It  is  a  burden  because  the  men  among  whom  I  live  and  shall 
probably  always  live  are  as  different  from  me  as  the  moon  is  from  the 
sun.  So  I  cannot  live  the  one  kind  of  life  that  would  be  bearable  and 
therefore  everything  is  distasteful.* 

*  Buonaparte  was  far  from  being  as  solitary  as  this  piece  suggests.  He  had  a  close 
friendship  with  his  contemporary  de  Mazis  and  an  easy  enough  relationship  with 
his  other  fellow  officers.  But  he  had  little  social  life  outside  the  regiment  at  this 
time:  what  little  money  he  could  save  was  spent  on  books  and  his  leisure  in 
reading. 

The  Early  Years  17 

To  Monsieur  Paul  Borde 

Bookseller,  at  Geneva  Valence 

29  July,  1786 

I  am  writing  to  you  direct,  Sir,  to  ask  you  to  send  me  the  Memoirs 
ofMme  de  Valens  and  Claude  Anet  to  follow  on  from  the  Confessions 
of  J.-J-  Rousseau. 

I  also  beg  you  to  send  me  the  last  two  volumes  of  the  History  of  the 
Corsican  Revolutions  by  the  Abbe  Germanes.  I  shall  be  obliged  if  you 
will  let  me  have  a  note  of  the  works  on  the  island  of  Corsica  which  you 
have  or  could  procure  for  me  quickly. 

I  await  your  reply  to  send  you  die  money  due. 

Please  address  your  letter:  *To  Monsieur  Buonaparte,  artillery  officer 
in  the  Regiment  of  La  Fere,  in  garrison  at  Valence,  Dauphine.' 

I  am,  Sir,  with  perfect  consideration,  your  very  humble  and  obedient, 
etc. 

BUONAPARTE 
Artillery  officer 

6 
To  Doctor  Tissot,  F.R.S.* 

At  Lausanne  Ajaccio 

i  April,  1787 
Sir, 

You  have  spent  your  days  in  treating  humanity  and  your  reputation 
has  reached  even  into  the  mountains  of  Corsica  where  medicine  is  not 
much  used.  It  is  true  that  the  short  but  glorious  eulogy  you  gave  to  their 
beloved  general  is  tide  enough  to  the  gratitude  of  my  compatriots, 
which  I  am  delighted  to  find  myself  in  a  position  to  offer  you. 

Not  having  the  honour  of  being  known  to  you  and  with  no  right 
other  than  the  respect  I  have  for  your  works,  I  yet  dare  approach  you 
to  ask  advice  for  one  of  my  uncles  who  has  the  gout.  You  may  think 
litde  of  my  consultation  when  you  learn  that  the  patient  in  question 
is  seventy  years  old;  but  consider,  Sir,  that  some  live  to  be  a  hundred 
and  more,  and,  by  his  constitution,  my  uncle  should  be  of  this  privi- 
leged number:  of  medium  build,  neither  too  sedentary  nor  too  little  so, 
having  never  been  afflicted  by  those  violent  passions  which  disorder  the 
natural  economy,  having  had  hardly  any  illness  throughout  his  life; 
I  will  not  say,  like  Fontenelle,  that  he  had  those  two  great  qualities  for 
living:  a  good  body  and  an  evil  heart ...  An  old  Genoese  sufferer 

*  Tissot  was  a  celebrated  doctor,  though  better  known  for  his  book  on  onanism 
than  his  Treatise  on  the  Health  of  Men  of  Letters,  where  he  had  mentioned  Paoli  in 
the  same  context  as  Caesar,  Mahomet,  and  Cromwell.  The  sufferer  from  gout  was 
the  Archdeacon  Lucien  Buonaparte.  Tissot  did  not  reply  and  wrote  on  the  back  of 
the  letter:  'Unanswered,  of  little  interest/ 

1 8  The  Rise  to  Power 

from  the  gout  once  foretold  that  he  would  be  afflicted  by  this  dis- 
comfort, a  prediction  based  on  the  fact  that  my  uncle  has  very  small 
feet  and  hands  and  a  large  head.  I  imagine  you  will  judge  the  outcome 
of  this  prediction  as  no  more  than  coincidence. 

His  gout  struck  him  at  the  age  of  thirty-two  ...  He  eats  well, 
digests  well,  talks,  reads,  sleeps  and  passes  his  days,  but  without  move- 
ment, without  being  able  to  enjoy  the  sweetness  of  the  sun.  He  im- 
plores the  aid  of  your  science,  if  not  to  cure  him,  at  least  to  move  this 
troublesome  malady  into  another  place. 

Humanity,  Sir,  leads  me  to  hope  that  you  will  deign  to  answer  this 
poorly  phrased  consultation.  I  myself  have  been  afflicted  with  an  ague, 
which  makes  me  doubt  whether  you  will  be  able  to  read  this  scrawl. 
I  finish,  Sir,  by  expressing  the  high  regard  that  reading  your  works  has 
inspired  in  me  and  the  sincere  gratitude  that  I  hope  to  owe  to  you. 

I  am,  Sir,  with  the  deepest  respect,  your  very  humble  and  obedient 
servant. 

BUONAPARTE 
Artillery  officer  in  the  Regiment  of  La  Fere 

7 
To  the  Marshal  Duke  of  S&gur 

Minister  of  War  Ajaccio 

21  April,  1787 

REGIMENT  OF  LA  F^RE 

Memorandum  requesting  leave 

Mr.  Napoleon  de  Buonaparte,  2nd  lieutenant  in  the  artillery  Regi- 
ment of  La  Fere,  begs  my  Lord  the  Marshal  of  Segur  to  grant  him 
leave  for  five  and  a  half  months  to  date  from  16  May  next,  which  he 
needs  for  the  recovery  of  his  health,  in  accordance  with  the  enclosed 
certificate  of  the  doctor  and  surgeon.  In  view  of  my  lack  of  means  and 
costly  treatment,  I  request  that  the  leave  should  be  granted  with  pay. 

BUONAPARTE 

8 
Note 

Hotel  de  Cherbourg,  Paris 

22  November,  1 787 

I  left  the  Rue  des  Italiens  and  walked  quickly  down  the  avenues  of 
the  Palais-Royal.  With  my  mind  as  usual  filled  with  lively  thoughts,  I 
was  indifferent  to  the  cold;  but  imagination  cooled,  and  I  began  to  feel 
the  rigour  of  the  season  and  entered  the  gallery.  I  was  nearly  at  those 
iron  gates  when  my  eyes  lighted  on  a  woman.  From  the  time  of  day, 
from  her  figure  and  youth  I  could  not  doubt  that  she  was  a  whore.  I 
stared  at  her;  she  stopped,  not  in  their  usual  grenadier  manner,  but  in 
a  way  that  exactly  matched  her  movement.  This  harmony  struck  me. 

The  Early  Years  19 

Encouraged  by  her  reticence,  I  spoke  to  her — I  who  am  repelled  more 
than  most  by  her  trade  and  feel  myself  sullied  by  a  single  glance.  But 
before  her  pale  face,  frail  body  and  soft  voice  I  did  not  hesitate.  Either, 
I  thought,  this  is  a  person  who  will  be  useful  for  the  inquiry  I  want  to 
make,  or  else  she  is  only  a  half-wit. 

*  You  must  be  pretty  cold,'  I  said;  *how  can  you  stand  walking  in  the 
avenues?' 

*Oh,  Sir,  hope  keeps  me  going.  I  must  finish  my  evening.' 

The  indifference  with  which  she  said  it,  the  unconcern  of  her  reply 
caught  my  interest  and  I  moved  beside  her. 

'You  don't  look  very  strong.  I  am  surprised  you  are  not  worn  out  by 
your  trade/ 

'Oh,  dear  me,  Sir!  I  have  got  to  do  something.' 

'That  may  be,  but  is  there  no  work  better  for  your  health?' 

'No,  Sir,  one  must  live.' 

I  was  delighted,  for  at  least  she  was  answering  me,  and  such  success 
had  not  crowned  every  attempt  I  had  made. 

'You  must  be  from  some  southern  country,  since  you  can  face  the  cold.* 

*I  am  from  Nantes  in  Brittany.' 

'I  know  that  country.  Mademoiselle,  you  must  give  me  the  pleasure 
of  telling  me  how  you  lost  your  virginity.' 

'It  was  an  officer  who  took  it/ 

'Does  that  annoy  you?' 

'Oh,  yes,  I  should  say  so !  My  sister  is  well  set  up  now.  Why  shouldn't 
I  have  been?' 

'How  did  you  come  to  Paris?' 

'The  officer  who  degraded  me  deserted  me.  I  had  to  escape  a  mother's 
anger.  A  second  appeared,  brought  me  to  Paris,  deserted  me;  and  a 
third,  whom  I  lived  with  for  three  years,  followed  him.  He  is  French, 
but  his  business  has  taken  him  to  London,  and  he  is  there  now.  Let's 
go  to  your  place/ 

'What  shall  we  do  there?' 

'Come  on,  we  will  get  warm  and  you  will  have  your  pleasure/ 

9 
Note 

Presumed  Auxonne 
Presumed  June /July  1788 

PERIODS  OF  MY  LIFE 

Born  in  1769  on  15  August. 

Left  for  France  15  December,  1778. 

Arrived  at  Autun  i  January,  1779. 

Left  for  Brienne  12  May,  1779. 

Left  for  the  School  at  Paris  30  October,  1784. 

20  The  Rise  to  Power 

Left  for  the  Regiment  of  La  Fere  as  a  second  lieutenant  30  October, 

1785. 

Left  Valence  for  six  months  leave  at  Ajaccio,  1786,  i  September. 

Thus  I  returned  to  my  country  7  years  9  months  after  my  departure, 
aged  17  years  i  month.  I  was  an  officer  at  the  age  of  16  years  15  days. 

Arriving  on  15  September,  1786,  I  left  on  12  September,  1787,  for 
Paris,  whence  I  left  again  for  Corsica  which  I  reached  on  i  January, 
1788,  and  left  on  i  June  for  Auxonne. 

10 
Notes  on  the  History  of  England* 

Auxonne 
Begun  July  1788 

It  is  probable  that  the  British  Isles  were  peopled  by  Gaulish  colonies. 
The  agreement  between  the  customs,  religion,  etc.,  of  the  people  in  the 
southern  part  of  the  island  and  those  of  the  Gauls  leaves  no  doubt  of 
this;  but  to  the  north  of  the  river  Tyne  the  east  seems  to  have  been 
inhabited  by  Scythians  or  Scandinavians.  The  Scots  came  from  Ireland 
before  the  invasion  of  Julius  Caesar.  Their  huts  were  small  and  made 
of  branches  covered  with  mud;  their  villages  were  in  the  woods.  The 
people  of  the  county  of  Kent  knew  agriculture,  but  those  in  the 
interior  lived  on  milk,  fruit  and  by  hunting.  The  use  of  dress  was  little 
known.  The  inhabitants  of  the  south,  trading  with  the  Phoenicians, 
wore  animal  skins.  Diodorus  Siculus  praises  their  honesty  and  frugality. 
Women  were  held  in  common  . .  . 

Religion.  They  worshipped  the  Supreme  Being  under  the  name  of 
Esus  or  Hesus,  whose  symbol  was  the  oak.  The  woods  were  their 
temples.  The  oak  was  regarded  as  the  residence  of  the  Almighty. 
Flowers  sprinkled  with  salt  water  were  the  sole  offering  they  made  to 
their  Gods,  but  soon  after  worshipping  the  gods  of  the  Phoenicians  they 
ended  by  immolating  even  men. 

Their  priests  were  called  druids  from  the  Celtic  word  Dem  which 
means  oak.  The  power  of  the  priesthood  did  not  content  the  druids 
and  they  soon  extended  their  authority  over  all  public  acts .  .  .  The 
Bards  or  poets  enjoyed  the  greatest  credit .  .  . 

A.D.  61.  Boadicea  having  claimed  the  inheritance  of  her  husband 
Prasutagus,  the  Roman  praetor,  Catus  Decianus,  had  her  publicly 
whipped  and  handed  over  the  princesses  her  daughters  to  his  soldiers. 
Furious,  she  made  the  Romans  pay  dear  for  the  indignity.  It  is  reckoned 
that  she  had  80,000  massacred  in  the  sack  of  a  single  town.  Finally  she 
was  defeated  in  battle  and  took  poison. 

*  Made  while  reading  John  Barrow's  New  and  Impartial  History  of  England  from 
the  Invasion  of  Julius  Caesar  to  the  Preliminaries  of  Peace  in  1763.  "Were  they  to  be 
given  in  full,  these  notes  would  occupy  some  fifty  pages  of  this  translation. 

The  Early  Years  21 

The  Romans  left  the  island  in  446  .  .  . 

1215.  The  barons  and  the  nation  in  general  demanded  restoration 
of  the  liberties  granted  by  Stephen  and  Henry  I.  They  took  to  arms 
and  seized  London;  the  fugitive  King  granted  their  demand  and  the 
charter  called  Magna  Charta,  the  foundation  of  English  liberty. 

Magna  Charta  confirms  freedom  of  election  for  die  clergy;  says  that 
ecclesiastics  will  not  be  fined  in  proportion  to  their  benefices,  but  in 
accordance  with  their  patrimonial  property;  fixes  the  dues  of  earldoms, 
baronies  and  other  fiefs;  ordains  that  the  barons  will  recover  the  lands 
of  their  vassals  confiscated  for  felony  a  year  and  a  day  after  coming  into 
the  hands  of  the  King;  that  widows  cannot  be  forced  to  marry  against 
their  will;  that  no  scutage  or  grant  in  aid  may  be  levied  without  the 
consent  of  the  Council  of  State,  except  in  the  case  of  paying  a  ransom 
for  the  King  .  .  .  that  no  free  man  may  be  arrested,  imprisoned  or 
deprived  of  his  free-holds,  liberty  or  free  customs  except  by  the  legal 
judgement  of  his  peers .  .  . 

1688.  The  King  tried  in  vain  to  abolish  the  penal  kws  and  the  Test 
Act.  But  the  good  English  saw  with  horror  the  steps  taken  by  the  King 
to  overturn  the  Constitution.  They  united  and  resolved  to  oppose  these 
ambitious  projects.  On  his  own  authority  James  abolished  the  penal 
laws  and  allowed  liberty  of  conscience.  But  the  Bishop  of  London  and 
Archbishop  of  Canterbury,  Sancroft,  refused  to  publish  this  law.  They 
were  sent  to  the  Tower  as  having  issued  licentious  libels  against  the 

The  officers  of  James's  army  told  him  that  they  could  not  in  con- 
science fight  against  the  Prince  of  Orange  who  was  at  the  head  of  the 
national  association.  On  23  December  the  King  fled  from  England 
with  his  son,  the  Duke  of  Berwick  .  .  . 

Parliament  declared  that,  James  n  having  sought  to  exceed  the  Con- 
stitution by  breaking  the  original  contract  between  the  sovereign  and 
his  subjects,  having  violated  the  fundamental  laws  and  abandoned  the 
kingdom,  die  Throne  was  vacant.  The  Earls  of  Rochester  and  Notting- 
ham proposed  the  election  of  a  protector,  as  though  the  king  were  mad. 
These  lords  were  the  leaders  of  the  Tory  party.  But  by  two  votes  a 
new  sovereign  was  preferred.  It  was  decided  by  a  majority  of  seven 
votes  that  an  original  contract  did  exist  between  the  subjects  and  the 
King... 

ii 
Dissertation  on  the  Authority  of  Kings 

Auxonne 
23  October,  1 788 

This  work  will  begin  with  the  origin  and  growth  of  the  name  of 
king  in  mens*  minds.  Military  government  is  favourable  to  it.  The 

22  The  Rise  to  Power 

work  will  then  enter  into  details  of  the  usurped  authority  enjoyed  by 
the  kings  in  the  twelve  kingdoms  of  Europe. 

There  have  been  very  few  kings  who  have  not  deserved  to  be 
dethroned.* 

12 
To  Madame  Letizia  Buonaparte 

At  Ajaccio  Auxonne 

12  January,  1789 

My  health  is  at  last  restored,  so  I  can  write  to  you  at  length.  This 
country  is  very  unhealthy  because  of  the  marshes  surrounding  it  and 
the  frequent  flooding  of  die  river  which  fills  all  the  ditches  with  water 
and  this  gives  off  infected  vapour.  I  have  had  several  periods  of  con- 
tinuous fever  which  would  leave  me  for  a  few  days  only  to  attack  me 
again.  That  made  me  weak,  gave  me  delirium  and  made  me  undergo 
a  long  convalescence.  Today,  now  that  the  weather  has  improved  and 
the  snow,  ice,  winds  and  fog  have  disappeared,  I  am  out  and  about 
again.  I  have  taken  the  opportunity  of  writing  to  M.  de  Campy.  As 
soon  as  I  have  his  reply  I  will  let  you  know.  This  unhappy  period  in  the 
finances  of  France  is  seriously  delaying  discussion  of  our  affair.  But  let 
us  hope  that  we  shall  be  compensated  for  everything  and  shall  not  lose 
through  our  long  and  painful  wait.f 

The  King  has  just  secured  a  loan  of  30  millions.  The  Discount  Bank 
has  supplied  it  at  5  per  cent,  repayable  in  1792.  That  means  the  opera- 
tions of  the  States  General  can  be  awaited  patiently.  Discord  seems 
to  have  thrown  the  apple  among  the  Three  Orders,  and  the  Third 
Estate  has  already  carried  the  day  as  to  the  number  of  deputies  it  will 
have,  but  that  victory  will  not  mean  much  unless  it  also  obtains  voting 
by  numbers  instead  of  by  Order  which  is  as  old  as  the  monarchy.  The 
Clergy  and  Nobility  seem  disposed  to  defend  their  ancient  rights  and 
prerogatives  strongly.  Apart  from  these  general  divisions,  there  is  not 
a  province  where  there  are  not  four  or  five  quarrels  about  different 
things.  In  any  case,  the  letters  of  summons  have  not  yet  been  sent,  so 
the  States  cannot  meet  before  May  or  June.  The  King  of  Spain,  as  you 
know,  died  a  few  months  ago.  The  King  of  England  has  gone  mad, 
and  after  long  discussions  the  Regency  has  been  given  to  the  Prince  of 
Wales.  The  Emperor  is  in  danger.  They  say  he  has  dropsy  of  the  chest. 
The  cold  has  stopped  work  in  the  countryside.  Denmark,  which 
wanted  to  come  out  against  Sweden,  has  been  prevented  by  the 
declarations  of  Berlin  and  London. 

It  seems  that  the  Council  of  War  is  busy  drawing  up  our  regulations. 
We  shall  know  in  a  month  and  shall  see  what  they  want  to  do  with  us. 

*  This  project  appears  never  to  have  been  written, 
t  See  No.  13  below. 

The  Early  Years  23 

But  it  looks  as  if  the  Engineers  will  be  roughly  handled.  Two  months 
ago  they  were  talking  of  reducing  them  to  150  officers.  That  is  not  a 
pleasant  prospect  for  them,  though  in  fact  there  are  350  and  that  is 
certainly  too  many.  What  changes  are  there  in  Corsica?  . . .  Send  me 
news  of  Joseph.  Has  he  stayed  or  gone  to  Pisa  .  . .  Marianna  is  well. 

I  have  good  reason  to  be  worried.  I  have  had  no  news  from  Corsica 
since  October.  So  write  to  me  at  once. 

13 
To  the  Intendant  of  Corsica 

At  Versailles  Auxonne 

2  April,  1789 

Pardon  me,  Sir,  if,  even  in  the  centre  of  pleasures,  I  pursue  you  with 
my  affairs.  It  is  three  years  since  we  were  promised  indemnity  for  the 
cancellation  of  our  contract  for  the  establishment  of  a  plantation  of 
mulberries;  it  is  three  years  since  the  deed  was  drawn  up  and  you  were 
so  good  as  to  forward  it  to  the  Court,  but  we  have  heard  nothing 
further. 

This  delay  is  seriously  harming  our  situation,  which  this  undertaking 
has  much  damaged.  You  are  aware  of  the  justice  of  our  claims  and  I 
am  now  asking  your  kindness,  as  the  protector  of  justice,  in  helping  us 
to  obtain  it. 

You  know,  Sir,  that  last  year  we  delivered  but  4,000  or  5,000  trees, 
although  we  had  10,000  ready  to  transplant.  This  year  we  have 
delivered  only  some  hundreds,  although  the  King  should  still  have 
taken  10,000.  This  cultivation  is  ruining  us,  and  I  cannot  hide  from 
you  that  the  plantation  is  now  in  a  very  bad  state. 

But  something  must  be  done,  and  it  is  not  just  that  we  should 
continue  to  suffer.  I  await  the  honour  of  your  reply  and  will  then  at 
once  take  steps  as  a  result.  I  am  charmed  that  this  circumstance  gives 
me  the  occasion  to  recall  myself  to  you. 

BUONAPARTE 

14 
To  General  Paoli 

At  London  Auxonne 

12th  June,  1789 
General, 

I  was  born  as  our  country  was  dying.  Thirty  thousand  Frenchmen 
spued  onto  our  coasts,  drowning  the  throne  of  liberty  in  rivers  of 
blood:  such  was  the  horrible  sight  which  first  struck  my  gaze.  The 
cries  of  the  dying,  the  groans  of  the  oppressed,  the  tears  of  despair 
surrounded  my  cradle. 

You  left  the  island,  and  the  hope  of  happiness  went  with  you;  slavery 

24  The  Rise  to  Power 

was  the  price  of  our  submission:  crushed  under  the  triple  chains  of  the 
soldier,  the  lawyer  and  the  tax  collector,  our  compatriots  live  despised 
...  Is  that  not  the  cruellest  torture  for  a  man  of  feeling?  Did  the 
unfortunate  Peruvian  know  a  more  wounding  pain  as  he  perished 
beneath  the  iron  of  the  Spaniard? 

To  justify  themselves,  traitors  to  our  country,  vile  souls  corrupted 
by  love  of  sordid  gain,  have  spread  calumnies  against  the  national 
government  and  against  your  person  in  particular.  Writers  have 
accepted  them  as  truths  and  are  transmitting  them  to  posterity. 

Reading  them  my  anger  grew  hot  and  I  determined  to  sweep  away 
this  fog  born  of  ignorance.  An  early  study  of  the  French  language, 
prolonged  observation  and  memories  drawn  from  the  papers  of 
patriots  has  led  me  to  hope  for  some  success.  I  wish  to  compare  your 
administration  with  the  present  administration.  I  wish  to  blacken  with 
the  brush  of  infamy  those  who  have  betrayed  the  common  cause.  I 
want  to  call  those  who  govern  before  the  tribunal  of  public  opinion, 
point  out  their  impositions,  uncover  their  secret  intrigues  and,  if 
possible,  interest  the  virtuous  minister  who  governs  the  State  in  the 
deplorable  fate  afflicting  us  so  cruelly  .  .  . 

I  am  still  young,  and  my  undertaking  may  be  rash,  but  love  of  truth, 
of  our  country,  of  my  compatriots,  and  the  enthusiasm  which  leads 
me  always  to  hope  for  an  improvement  in  our  condition  will  support 
me.  If,  General,  you  will  deign  to  approve  a  work  which  will  concern 
you  so  closely;  if  you  will  deign  to  encourage  the  efforts  of  a  young 
man  whose  birth  you  witnessed  and  whose  parents  were  always 
attached  to  the  right  party,  I  shall  dare  to  look  for  some  success. 

I  hope  at  some  time  to  be  able  to  go  to  London  to  tell  you  of  the 
sentiments  you  have  roused  in  me  and  to  discuss  the  miseries  of  our 
country  with  you,  but  distance  presents  an  obstacle;  the  day  may  come 
when  I  can  overcome  it. 

Whatever  may  be  the  success  of  my  work,  I  know  that  it  will  rouse 
against  me  the  numerous  cohort  of  French  officials  who  govern  our 
island  and  whom  I  attack;  but  what  does  that  matter  if  it  is  in  the 
interest  of  our  country.  I  shall  hear  the  wicked  roar  and,  if  the  thunder 
falls,  I  will  retire  into  my  conscience,  remember  the  legitimacy  of  my 
motives  and  thenceforward  I  shall  be  able  to  face  it. 

Allow  me,  General,  to  offer  you  the  homage  of  my  family  and,  why 
should  I  not  say,  of  my  compatriots.  They  sigh  at  the  memory  of  a 
time  when  they  hoped  for  liberty.  My  mother,  Madame  Letizia,  asks 
me  to  remember  to  you  the  years  at  Corte. 

I  end,  with  respect,  General, 

Your  very  humble  and  obedient  servant, 

NAPOLEON  BUONAPARTE 
Officer  in  the  Regiment  of  La  Fere 

The  Early  Years  25 

15 

To  Archdeacon  Fesch 

At  Ajacdo  Serve,  Dauphine 

8  February,  ijgi 

I  am  in  a  poor  man's  cabin  where  it  is  pleasant  to  write  to  you  after 
a  long  conversation  with  these  worthy  souls.  It  is  four  in  the  afternoon 
and  the  weather  is  chilly;  I  have  been  for  a  walk;  snow  is  not  far  off, 
but  has  not  yet  fallen.  Everywhere  I  find  the  peasants  very  firm  in  their 
views,  especially  in  Dauphine,  where  they  are  all  ready  to  die  in  support 
of  the  Constitution. 

At  Valence  I  found  the  people  resolute,  the  soldiers  patriotic  and  the 
officers  aristocratic;  but  there  is  an  exception,  since  the  president  of  the 
club  is  a  captain  named  Du  Cerbeau  .  .  . 

Everywhere  the  women  are  royalist.  That  is  not  surprising;  liberty 
is  a  prettier  woman,  who  eclipses  them. 

All  the  priests  of  Dauphine  have  taken  the  civic  oath  and  are  laughing 
at  the  ravings  of  the  bishops. 

We  must  not  grumble  too  much  about  our  Department;  I  know 
those  in  office  at  Valence  and  they  are  worth  less  than  ours.  .  . . 

What  is  called  good  society  is  three-quarter  aristocratic;  that  is  to 
say,  it  hides  behind  the  mask  of  the  partisans  of  the  English  constitution. 

It  is  true  that  Peretti  threatened  Mirabeau  with  a  knife,  and  that  does 
no  honour  to  our  nation.  The  Patriotic  Society  should  give  a  complete 
Corsican  costume  to  Mirabeau:  cap,  coat,  breeches,  cartridge-pouch, 
dagger,  pistol  and  musket.  That  would  make  a  good  impression  .  .  . 

I  embrace  you,  my  dear  Fesch.  The  coach  is  coming  and  I  must  join 
it.  We  shall  sleep  at  Saint-Vallier. 

BUONAPAHTB 

16 
To  Monsieur  Joseph  Buonaparte 

At  Ajacdo  Auxonne 

Easter  Day  (24  April),  1791 

Fesch,  to  whom  I  have  written  at  length,  can  give  you  some  in- 
formation as  to  the  way  you  should  go  about  settling  the  business  of 
the  plantation.  It  is  time  you  took  this  in  hand  seriously.  When  you 
have  done  all  that  has  to  be  done  at  Bastia,  I  will  try  to  bring  it  to  a 
conclusion  by  petitioning  the  National  Assembly. 

Louis  has  written  five  or  six  letters;  I  don't  know  what  gibberish  is 
in  them. 

He  is  studying  hard  and  learning  to  write  French.  I  am  teaching  him 
mathematics  and  geography  and  he  is  reading  history.  He  will  be  an 
excellent  pupil.  Afl  the  women  round  here  love  him.  He  has  quite  the 
proper  French  manner;  when  he  goes  into  company  he  bows  with 

26  The  Rise  to  Power 

grace  and  says  the  correct  things  with  as  much  gravity  and  dignity 
as  if  he  were  thirty.  I  can  easily  see  that  he  will  be  the  best  of  the  four 
of  us,  and  at  least  none  of  us  will  have  had  so  fine  an  education. 

You  may  not  find  his  progress  in  writing  very  great,  but  remember 
that  so  far  his  master  has  only  taught  him  to  cut  his  pens  and  write 
capitals.  You  will  be  better  pleased  with  his  spelling.  He  is  a  charming 
pupil  and  works  because  he  likes  it  rather  than  from  self-respect . . . 

The  treasurer  Conti  will  need  a  clerk  or  two.  Could  he  not  take 
Lucien?  The  treasurer  of  Saint-Jean-de-Losne  has  three  clerks  .  .  . 

Your  address  [to  the  Societies  of  Friends  of  the  Constitution]  was 
thought  better  than  I  feared.  It  has  had  a  very  good  effect. 

Farewell. 

I? 
To  Monsieur  le  Sancquer 

Chief  Clerk,  Ministry  of  War  Auxonne 

3  June,  1791 
Sir, 

Far  from  Paris  and  without  connexions  it  is  in  you  that  I  place  my 
hope.  The  friendship  which  you  were  pleased  to  show  to  my  father 
leads  me  to  hope  that  you  will  help  me. 

It  appears  to  me  that  in  the  reorganization  of  the  service  I  shall  be 
transferred  to  another  regiment;  that  distresses  me  from  every  point 
of  view,  so  long  as  there  are  officers  immediately  below  me  on  the  list 
who  would  change  without  displeasure.  I  have  a  brother  with  me  who 
is  destined  for  die  service;  I  have  made  myself  responsible  for  his 
education,  which  would  be  impossible  in  another  regiment. 

Had  the  orders  already  appeared,  I  would  not  approach  you.  I 
know  that  in  that  case  I  could  but  obey;  but  as  things  are  I  flatter 
myself  that  you  will  take  an  interest  in  my  case. 

I  shall  retain  a  grateful  memory  of  your  kindness. 

With  respect, 
BUONAPARTE 

18 
Notes  on  Rousseau*  . 

Valence 

June /October,  1791 

Page  j6.  It  is  in  the  consciousness  of  his  moral  freedom  that  man  shows 
the  spirituality  of  his  nature  .  .  . 

The  only  goods  that  he  knows  in  the  universe  are  food,  a  female  and 
sleep.  The  only  ills  he  fears  are  pain  and  hunger.  I  do  not  believe  that. 
*  Essay  on  the  Origins  of  Inequality  among  Men. 

The  Early  Years  27 

Page  84.  In  the  primitive  state,  having  no  house,  nor  cabin,  nor 
property  of  any  kind,  each  halted  at  random  and  often  for  but  a  single 
night;  the  males  and  females  coupled  fortuitously  as  they  met  and  in 
accordance  with  opportunity  and  desire;  they  parted  with  the  same 
ease  ...  I  believe  none  of  this. 

Page  111.  Let  us  conclude  that,  wandering  in  the  forests  without 
industry,  speech  or  homes,  without  war  or  contact,  with  no  need  for 
his  kind  nor  any  desire  to  harm  them,  perhaps  even  without  knowing 
another  individually,  primitive  man  .  . ,  I  do  not  believe  any  of  that. 

MY  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE  STATE  OF  NATURE 

I  do  not  think  man  has  ever  wandered  solitary,  without  contact  with 
or  need  of  his  kind.  On  the  contrary,  I  believe  that  man,  passing  from 
childhood  into  adolescence,  has  felt  a  need  for  others,  nas  joined  a 
woman  and  chosen  a  cavern  to  be  the  base  for  his  hunting,  his  refuge 
from  the  storm  and  at  night,  his  food  store.  The  union  was  strengthened 
by  habit  and  by  the  bond  of  children;  but  it  could  be  broken  caprici- 
ously. I  believe  that  two  savages  met  when  hunting,  met  again,  found 
friendship  and  had  the  desire  to  bring  their  homes  together.  In  that 
moment  the  natural  clan  was  born.  I  think  this  clan  lived  happily 
because  it  had  abundant  food,  shelter  against  the  climate  and  beautiful 
products,  that  it  lived  happily  because  it  enjoyed  natural  feelings  and 
natural  religion.  I  think  that  for  a  great  many  centuries  the  earth  was 
divided  between  a  very  few  such  clans,  widely  separated  and  unknown. 
With  the  centuries  the  dans  multiplied  and  had  to  enter  into  relations. 
Then  the  earth  could  not  provide  for  them  without  cultivation,  and 
property  and  social  relations  and  soon  governments  were  born.  From 
then  on  there  was  exchange  of  goods  and  tastes.  Imagination  left  the 
hole  where  it  had  long  been  hidden.  Selfishness,  suspicion  and  pride 
arose  and  there  were  pale  ambitious  men  who  seized  control  of  amirs 
and  healthy  young  rascals  who  seduced  the  wives  and  frequented 
harlots. 

My  object  is  not  to  prove  this  series  of  stages  through  which  men 
have  passed  on  their  road  to  the  social  condition,  but  only  to  prove 
that  they  have  never  lived  wandering  without  homes,  or  contacts  or 
other  needs  than  that  of  the  male  and  female  coupling  furtively  as  they 
met  in  accordance  with  opportunity  and  desire.  Why  is  it  supposed 
that  man  ate  in  the  state  of  nature?  Because  there  is  no  example  of  a 
man  existing  except  by  this  means.  I  believe  that  in  the  state  of  nature 
man  had  the  same  faculties  of  feeling  and  reasoning.  He  must  have 
made  use  of  them  for  there  is  no  example  of  a  man  existing  without 
using  these  two  faculties.  To  feel  is  the  need  of  the  heart,  as  to  eat 
is  that  of  the  body.  To  feel  is  to  become  attached,  to  love.  Man  must 
have  known  pity,  friendship,  love.  Thence  gratitude,  veneration, 

respect.  If  it  had  been  otherwise,  if  it  were  true  to  say  that  sentiment  and 
reason  are  not  inherent  in  man,  but  only  fruits  of  society,  then  there 
would  be  no  natural  sentiment  or  reason;  no  duty  of  virtue;  no  happi- 
ness in  virtue.  It  will  not  be  the  citizen  of  Geneva  who  will  tell  us  that. 

19 
To  Monsieur  Sucy 

War  Commissary,  at  Valence  Corte 

17  February,  1792 

Circumstances  have  forced  me,  dear  Sucy,  to  remain  in  Corsica 
longer  than  the  duty  of  my  employment  allowed.  I  know  that,  yet  I 
have  nothing  with  which  to  reproach  myself;  dearer  and  more  sacred 
duties  justify  me. 

Now  that  I  am  more  free,  I  would  like  to  come  and  join  you,  but 
first  I  would  like  your  advice.  How  am  I  placed  as  a  result  of  the  review 
of  i  January?  Has  my  post  been  filled  and  what  steps  should  I  take?* 

I  am  at  Corte.  M.  Volney  is  here  and  in  a  few  days  we  are  leaving 
on  a  tour  of  the  island.  M.  de  Volney,  known  in  the  Republic  of  Letters 
for  his  Voyage  in  Egypt,  his  essays  on  agriculture  and  his  Meditation  on 
Ruins,  is  equally  so  in  the  memory  of  patriots  for  his  constancy  in 
supporting  the  good  party  in  the  Constituent  Assembly.  He  wishes  to 
setde  here  and  pass  his  life  quietly  in  the  midst  of  a  simple  people,  a 
fertile  soil  and  the  perpetual  spring  of  our  country. 

I  received  your  letter  several  months  ago;  you  gave  me  good  news 
of  our  friends  on  the  Rhone,  which  pleased  me.  Tell  them  that  I  take 
a  deserved  interest  in  their  health  and  happiness. 

I  see  no  point  in  your  showing  my  letter  to  these  gentlemen  of  the 
regiment;  it  is  for  you  alone  to  make  me  speed  my  departure;  on 
receiving  your  letter,  I  will  leave. 

My  compliments  to  Gouvion,  Berthon  and  Vaubois.  My  respect 
and  friendship,  dear  Sucy.  Your,  etc. 

BUONAPARTE 

20 
To  Monsieur  Sucy 

War  Commissary,  at  Valence  Corte 

27  February,  ij$2 

In  difficult  times  the  place  of  honour  for  a  good  Corsican  is  his  own 
country.  With  this  idea  my  friends  have  demanded  that  I  stay  among 
them;  but  since  I  do  not  wish  to  fail  in  my  duty  I  was  proposing  to 
offer  my  resignation.  Then  the  general  officer  of  the  department 

*  He  had  in  fact  been  struck  off  the  Army  List  as  absent  without  leave.  But 
owing  to  the  shortage  of  officers  due  to  emigration  he  had  no  difficulty  in  securing 
reinstatement. 

offered  me  a  modus  vivendi  which  has  reconciled  everything.  He  has 
offered  me  the  post  of  adjutant-major  in  the  volunteer  battalions.* 
This  commission  will  delay  the  moment  when  we  can  renew  our 
acquaintance,  but  I  hope  not  for  long  if  affairs  go  well. 

You  have  completely  neglected  me,  Sir,  for  it  is  a  long  time  since 
I  heard  from  you. 

Things  are  going  well  here  and  I  hope  that  when  you  read  this  the 
political  troubles  will  have  ended,  at  least  for  this  campaign;  our 
enemies  would  be  very  foolish  to  hasten  the  opening  of  hostilities,  as 
they  must  know  well  that  a  defensive  position  ruins  us  as  much  as  a  war. 

If  you  take  the  trouble  to  think  of  an  old  friend,  send  me  news. 
If  your  nation  loses  its  courage  at  this  moment  it  will  cease  to  exist  for 
ever. 

If  you  still  have  connexions  with  Saint-Etienne,  I  beg  you  to  have 
a  pair  of  double-barrelled  pistols  made  for  me  ...  I  will  pay  up  to 
seven  or  eight  louis  in  five-franc  assignats .  .  . 

BUONAPARTE 

21 
Battalion  Regulations 

Corsican  National  Guard  Ajactio 

April,  1792 

The  adjutant-major  must  hold  the  rolls  of  all  the  companies  and  of 
the  officers  and  N.C.O.s  with  their  rank  and  service  so  that  he  is  at  all 
times  in  a  position  to  give  ordinary  and  extraordinary  orders  to  each 
one. 

He  must  attend  the  daily  midday  parade,  inspect  the  guard  and  march 
it  off  to  relieve  the  old  guard. 

Immediately  the  guard  is  mounted  the  orderly  sergeant  and  cor- 
porals of  the  different  companies  will  report  to  the  adjutant-major, 
who  will  read  the  orders.  Officers  required  for  duty  will  be  informed 
by  the  N.C.O.  of  the  duty  company. 

The  duties  of  an  adjutant-major  demand  energy  and  discipline;  he 
must  be  a  man  entirely  devoted  to  his  service.  It  is  round  him  that  the 
whole  command  of  the  battalion  revolves.  After  the  parade  he  must 
report  the  position  to  the  battalion  commander. 

CAPTAIN 

The  captain  is  responsible  for  the  discipline  of  his  company.  He  must 
supervise  the  issue  of  pay  and  ensure  that  no  soldier  is  absent  without 

*  Regular  officers  were  entitled  to  hold  commissions  in  the  National  Guards 
without  forfeiting  their  position  or  seniority  in  their  own  regiments.  At  the  begin- 
ning of  April  Buonaparte  was  elected  lieutenant-colonel  of  the  2nd  Battalion  of 
the  Corsican  National  Guard,  and  it  was  in  this  capacity  that  he  issued  the 
regulations  given  in  No.  21. 

30  The  Rise  to  Power 

leave.  He  himself  cannot  grant  more  than without  the  permission 

of  the  battalion  commander. 

There  will  be  an  orderly  captain  for  each  day.  His  duties  will  be  to 
attend  the  midday  roll-call  of  the  battalion,  to  receive  the  rolls  of  the 
companies,  to  punish  those  absent  and  to  render  a  report  to  the 
battalion  commander.  In  the  evening,  at  retreat,  he  will  inspect  the 
various  quarters  to  ensure  that  all  is  quiet  and  receive  the  rolls  from 
the  sergeant-majors.  He  will  inform  the  guard  sergeant  and  orderly 
sergeants  of  his  whereabouts  so  that  he  can  be  found  in  case  of  need. 

LIEUTENANT 

The  lieutenants  must  supervise  the  training  of  their  platoons.  There 
will  be  a  daily  duty  lieutenant  with  one  man  per  company,  a  sergeant 
and  a  corporal  to  police  headquarters.  At  9.0  a.m.  daily  the  duty 
lieutenant  will  send  one  of  the  corporals  to  the  battalion  commander 
with  his  report. 

SERGEANT-MAJOR 

It  is  the  sergeant-major  who  is  principally  responsible  for  the  com- 
pany accounts.  On  pay  days  he  will  draw  up  die  total  due  to  those 
present  in  his  company,  will  have  it  signed  by  the  company  commander 
and  take  it  to  the  quartermaster  treasurer.  The  sergeant-major  must 
record  all  movements  of  the  company  and  report  them  daily  to  the 
adjutant-major  and  weekly  to  the  war  commissary  .  .  . 

At  9.0  a.m.  daily  the  sergeant-majors  will  report  to  the  lieutenant- 
colonel.  There  they  will  present  requests  for  leave  and  the  require- 
ments of  their  companies.  They  will  then  report  to  their  captains  any 
orders  given.  They  will  call  die  roll  of  their  companies  at  midday 
and  in  die  evening  and  will  report  the  roll  to  the  orderly  captain. 

SERGEANT  AND  CORPORAL 

For  each  company  there  will  be  an  orderly  sergeant  and  corporal 
who  must  remain  at  the  Seminary.  They  will  receive  orders  from  the 
adjutant-major  daily  at  midday,  will  warn  the  officers  of  their  company 
ordered  for  duty  and  inform  die  sergeant-major  that  so  many  men  of 
the  company  are  ordered  for  such  a  time  .  .  . 

VOLUNTEERS 

There  will  be  one  volunteer  per  company  on  guard  and  one  at  call 
on  picket,  who  must  be  at  headquarters  at  1.30  p.m.  The  men  on  picket 
will  return  to  their  quarters  at  night.  Volunteers  will  be  present  at 
roll-call  at  midday  at  the  Seminary  and  at  night  in  their  quarters.  They 
must  turn  in  at  retreat  as  do  regular  soldiers. 

A  volunteer  must  not  walk  out  armed.  They  are  forbidden  to  carry 
dagger  or  pistols.  They  are  required  to  obey  their  corporals. 

BUONAPARTE 
Lieutenant-Colonel 

The  Early  Years  31 

22 

To  Monsieur  Joseph  Buonaparte 

At  Ajaccio  Paris 

29  May,  1792 

I  reached  Paris  yesterday.  For  the  moment  I  have  put  up  at  the  hotel 
where  Pozzo  di  Borgo,  Leonetti  and  Peraldi*  are  staying.  It  is  too  dear, 
so  I  shall  move  today  or  tomorrow.  I  have  seen  Pozzo  di  Borgo  only 
for  a  moment;  we  were  restrained,  but  friendly. 

Paris  is  in  great  convulsions.  It  is  flooded  with  foreigners  and  there 
are  many  discontented.  For  three  nights  the  city  has  been  lit  up.  The 
national  guards  guarding  the  King  at  the  Tuileries  have  been  doubled. 
The  Household  Corps,  which  is  said  to  be  very  undesirably  composed, 
is  to  be  disbanded. 

News  from  the  frontiers  is  still  the  same.  They  will  probably  retire 
so  as  to  fight  a  defensive.  Desertion  among  the  officers  is  excessive;  in 
every  way  the  position  is  critical . .  . 

They  tell  me  that  Pozzo  di  Borgo  stands  very  well  with  the  Minister 
of  War. 

I  have  not  seen  Marianna  yet.  I  shall  go  the  day  after  tomorrow  .  .  . 

Keep  on  close  terms  with  PaolL  He  is  everything  and  can  do  every- 
thing. In  the  future  he  is  going  to  be  more  than  anyone  foresees  . . . 

I  shall  go  to  the  Assembly  for  the  first  rime  today.  This  one  has  not 
got  the  same  reputation  as  the  Constituent. 

Give  my  news  to  the  family.  Write  to  me  at  once.  I  embrace  you. 

BUONAPARTE 

23 
To  Monsieur  Joseph  Buonaparte 

At  Ajaccio  Paris 

iSJune,  1792 

There  are  three  parties  in  France:  one  wants  the  Constitution  as  it  is 
because  it  thinks  it  good;  another  thinks  it  bad,  but  desires  liberty  and 
adopts  its  principles.  It  wants  change,  but  wants  it  through  the  pro- 
visions of  die  Constitution,  that  is  by  the  Revising  Court  which  should 
take  place  in  a  few  years  time.  These  two  parties  are  united  and  at  the 
moment  they  seek  tie  same  end,  the  maintenance  of  order,  of  the  law 
and  all  the  established  authorities;  they  make  war  against  the  foreigners; 
thus,  we  confuse  them  and  treat  them  as  one.  The  second  party  wants 
the  Constitution,  but  instead  of  the  King  it  would  have  a  Senate.  This 
is  the  party  of  the  Jacobins  and  calls  itself  republican.  They  would  take 
advantage  of  the  Queen's  brother  making  war  on  us  to  bring  this  great 
revolution  about.  The  third  party  thinks  the  Constitution  absurd  and 
would  like  a  despot.  Even  among  these  there  are  many  who  would 
*  Corsican  deputies  to  die  National  Assembly. 

32  The  Rise  to  Power 

like  the  two  chambers  or  some  moderate  system,  but  the  whole  party 
thinks  that  nothing  will  ever  be  achieved  without  the  help  of  enemy 
armies . . . 

The  day  before  yesterday  I  saw  Marianna,  who  is  well.  She  begged 
me  to  take  her  away  if  they  ever  change  their  institutions. 

Whether  she  leaves  now  or  stays  another  four  years,  it  is  clear  she 
will  not  get  a  dowry.*  Seven  or  eight  have  left  at  the  age  of  twenty 
without  getting  it.  It  seems  certain  diat  the  school  is  going  to  be  either 
abolished  or  altogether  changed  from  what  it  is  like  now.  Marianna  is 
young  and  would  easily  adapt  herself  to  the  new  ways ...  So,  my  dear 
brother,  if,  as  I  suppose,  you  are  at  Ajaccio  and  you  think  her  marriage 
could  be  arranged,  write  to  me  and  I  will  bring  her.  If  you  think  that 
very  uncertain,  then  we  could  run  the  risk  of  leaving  her,  since  we 
cannot  tell  how  things  will  turn  out.  One  reason  that  influences  me 
much  is  that  I  feel  she  would  be  unhappy  in  Corsica  if  she  stays  in  her 
convent  until  she  is  twenty,  whereas  today  she  would  make  the  change 
without  noticing  it.  Lose  no  time  in  writing  me  what  you  think  about 
this. 

You  must  try  to  see  if  Lucien  can  stay  with  the  General.  It  is  more 
than  ever  probable  that  all  this  will  end  in  our  independence  .  .  . 

BUONAPARTE 

24 
To  Monsieur  Joseph  Buonaparte 

At  Ajaccio  Paris 

22  June,  1792 

M.  de  la  Fayette  has  written  to  the  Assembly  against  the  Jacobins. 
His  letter,  which  many  believe  a  forgery,  is  very  strong.  M.  de  la 
Fayette,  most  of  the  army  officers,  all  honest  men,  the  ministers,  the 
administration  of  Paris  are  on  one  side;  the  majority  of  the  Assembly, 
the  Jacobins  and  the  populace  are  on  the  other.  The  Jacobins  no  longer 
show  any  restraint  against  La  Fayette,  whom  they  picture  as  an  assassin 
and  a  scoundrel.  The  Jacobins  are  fools  who  have  no  common  sense. 
The  day  before  yesterday  seven  or  eight  thousand  men,  armed  with 
pikes,  axes,  swords,  guns,  spits  or  sharp  sticks,  went  to  the  Assembly 
with  a  petition.  From  there  they  went  to  the  King.  The  gardens  of  the 
Tuileries  were  shut  and  15,000  national  guards  were  guarding  it.  They 
broke  down  the  gates,  entered  the  palace,  levelled  cannon  against  the 
King's  appartment  and  offered  him  two  cockades,  one  white,  the  other 
tricolour.  They  gave  him  the  choice.  Choose,  they  said,  whether  you 
will  reign  here  or  at  Coblenz.  The  King  did  well.  He  chose  the  red  cap. 
The  Queen  and  the  royal  Prince  did  the  same.  Then  they  drank  with 

*  Formerly,  girls  leaving  Saint-Cyr  at  the  age  of  twenty  to  be  married  had 
received  a  dowry  of  3,000  francs. 

The  Early  Years  33 

the  King.  They  remained  in  the  palace  for  four  hours.  That  has  supplied 
plenty  of  material  for  the  aristocratic  declarations  of  the  Feiiillantins. 
But  it  is  none  the  less  true  that  it  was  unconstitutional  and  a  very 
dangerous  example.  It  is  hard  to  foresee  what  will  become  of  the  empire 
in  such  stormy  circumstances .  .  . 

I  am  sending  you  a  copy  of  the  Cabinet  of  Fashions.  That  is  for 
Paoletta. 

I  will  await  your  answer  about  Marianna.  I  am  more  undecided  than 
ever.  I  have  been  a  month  in  Paris  and  still  the  papers  about  the 
Plantation  have  not  come.  I  foresaw  well  enough  what  would 
happen  .  .  . 

Cataneo  of  Calvi  is  here.  Oh,  the  misery  of  human  folly!  He  has 
almost  gone  off  his  head;  he  gambles  all  day,  often  loses,  has  sold  his 
clothes  and  has  only  an  old  blue  coat  left.  I  pity  him.  He  has  not  been 
to  see  his  daughter  for  three  years.  The  girl  thinks  he  is  in  Corsica. 
This  news  is  for  you  alone  .  .  . 

BUONAPARTE 

25 
To  Monsieur  Lucien  Buonaparte 

At  Ucciani*  Paris 

3  July,  1792 

I  am  sending  you  the  proposals  of  the  committee  on  public  educa- 
tion; nothing  has  yet  been  decided,  and  the  Assembly  cannot  consider 
it  at  such  an  inflammable  moment.  Read  it  with  attention,  my  dear 
Lucien,  and  profit  by  it;  it  is  not  a  masterpiece,  but  it  is  good  all  the 
same. 

Sensible  men  have  found  Lafayette's  step  necessary  but  dangerous  for 
liberty.  In  times  of  revolution  an  example  is  a  law  and  that  general  has 
just  given  a  pretty  dangerous  example.  The  people,  that  is  to  say  the 
lowest  classes,  are  roused,  and  no  doubt  there  is  going  to  be  trouble. 
It  may  be  such  as  to  hasten  the  ruin  of  the  Constitution. 

Those  at  the  top  are  poor  creatures.  It  must  be  admitted,  when  you 
see  things  at  first  hand,  that  the  people  are  not  worth  the  trouble  taken 
in  winning  their  favour.  You  know  the  history  of  Ajaccio;  that  of 
Paris  is  exactly  the  same;  perhaps  men  are  here  even  a  little  smaller, 
nastier,  more  slanderous  and  censorious.  You  have  to  see  things  close 
to  to  realize  that  enthusiasm  is  but  enthusiasm  and  that  the  French  are 
an  old  nation  without  ties. 

Everyone  seeks  his  own  interests  and  wants  to  succeed  at  the  price 
of  no  matter  what  horror  and  calumny;  intrigue  is  as  base  as  ever.  All 
that  destroys  ambition.  People  pity  those  who  have  to  pky  a  prominent 

*  In  the  hills  above  Ajaccio,  where  Letizia  Buonaparte,  Lucien,  and  the  younger 
children  were  spending  the  summer. 

34  The  Rise  to  Power 

part,  especially  when  they  need  not;  to  live  quietly  and  enjoy  one's 
family  and  one's  own  life,  that,  my  dear  brother,  is  the  life  you  should 
lead  if  you  have  an  income  of  4,000  or  5,000  francs  and  you  are  twenty- 
five  or  more  so  that  imagination  no  longer  troubles  you. 

I  embrace  you  and  urge  you  to  be  moderate  in  everything;  in 
everything,  you  understand,  if  you  want  to  live  happily. 

BUONAPARTE 

26 
To  Monsieur  Joseph  Buonaparte 

At  Corte  Paris 

7  August,  1792 

The  day  after  tomorrow  they  are  going  to  discuss  the  deposition  of 
the  King.  Everything  points  to  violent  events  and  many  are  leaving 
Paris.  It  has  been  decreed  that  monks  and  nuns  must  leave  their  houses. 
The  property  of  the  congregations  is  confiscated,  etc. 

The  affair  of  the  Ajaccio  battalion,  which  I  have  not  bothered  about 
since  it  interests  me  little  at  a  time  such  as  this,  has  been  sent  from  the 
War  Ministry  to  the  Minister  of  Justice,  because  they  can  see  no 
military  offence  in  it.  That  is  what  I  most  wanted,  so  the  matter  is 
ended . .  . 

I  tbinlc  I  sljall  soon  decide  to  resign  from  the  battalion.  Then,  what- 
ever happens,  I  shall  be  established  in  France  . . . 

Keep  yourself  in  a  position  to  come  as  a  deputy  to  the  next  legis- 
lature; otherwise  you  will  always  play  a  sorry  role  in  Corsica. 

"Write  to  me  still  under  cover  of  Leonetti  or  Pietri,  who  will  forward 
my  letters  . . . 

Since  I  have  been  here  I  have  been  studying  astronomy.  It  is  a  good 
occupation  and  a  superb  science.  With  my  mathematical  knowledge  it 
needs  litde  effort  to  learn  it.  That  is  one  more  important  acquisition. 

If  I  had  consulted  only  the  interests  of  the  family  and  my  own 
inclination,  I  should  have  come  to  Corsica.  But  you  are  all  agreed  in 
thinking  that  I  ought  to  go  to  my  regiment.  So  I  shall  go. 

My  work  is  finished,  corrected,  copied,  but  this  is  not  the  moment 
to  have  it  printed.*  In  any  case,  I  no  longer  have  the  ambition  to  be 
an  author  . , . 

My  health  is  better.  Tell  Lucien  I  will  write  to  him  soon. 

BUONAPARTE 

*  He  is  probably,  but  not  certainly,  referring  to  the  Lyons  dissertation.  This 
was  an  essay  submitted  for  a  prize  which  the  Abb6  Raynal  had  offered  through 
the  Academy  of  Lyons.  The  set  subject  was:  What  are  the  most  important  truths 
md  opinions  that  men  should  be  taught  for  their  happiness?  The  essay  did  not  win  the 
prize  and  is  of  little  merit;  it  is  mainly  a  hotch-potch  of  second-hand  ideas  culled 
from  Rousseau  and  other  writers. 

The  Early  Years  35 

27 
To  the  Municipality  of  Versailles 

Paris 

i  September,  1792 
Gentlemen, 

Buonaparte,  brother  and  tutor  of  Miss  Marianna  Buonaparte,  has 
the  honour  to  inform  you  that,  in  view  of  the  Law  of  7  August  and 
more  particularly  the  additional  article  decreed  on  the  i6th  of  the  same 
month  suppressing  the  House  of  Saint-Louis,  he  wishes  to  invoke  the 
kw  and  return  his  said  sister  to  her  family.  Urgent  matters  of  public 
service  obliging  him  to  leave  Paris  without  delay,  he  begs  you  to  order 
that  she  shall  enjoy  the  benefit  of  the  kw  of  die  idth  and  that  the 
treasurer  of  the  district  be  authorized  to  pay  her  the  twenty  sous  per 
league  to  Ajaccio  in  Corsica  where  she  is  to  proceed  in  order  to  join 
her  mother. 

With  respect, 
BUONAPARTE 

28 
To  Lieutenant  Costa 

Corsican  National  Guard,  at  Bonifacio  Ajaccio 

18  October,  1792 

My  dear  Costa,  I  have  learned  of  your  desire  to  see  me  with  the 
greatest  pleasure,  but  without  surprise;  I  assure  you  that  my  own  is  no 
less.  You  know  my  feelings  for  you  well  enough.  Your  captain  has  told 
me  briefly  of  all  the  complaints  you  have  .  , .  This  time  once  again 
a  letter  from  Robaglia  announces  that  supplies  will  not  arrive  till 
Saturday.  Tell  your  volunteers  that  this  is  the  last  time  such  a  thing  will 
happen,  and  that  in  future  I  shall  be  there  and  all  will  go  as  it  should. 

I  wished  to  come  straight  to  Bonifacio  and  put  things  right,  but  the 
general  has  sent  for  me,  so  I  must  go  to  Corte.  I  shall  be  with  you  as 
soon  as  possible  . . .  The  latest  news  is  that  the  enemy  has  abandoned 
Verdun  and  Longwy  and  crossed  the  river  .  . .  Savoy  and  the  county 
of  Nice  have  been  taken  and  Sardinia  will  soon  be  attacked.  The 
soldiers  of  liberty  will  always  triumph  over  the  hired  skves  of  a  few 
tyrants  .  . . 

BUONAPARTE 

29 
Note  on  the  Situation  in  Corsica 

Bastia 

ijune,  1793 

There  are  two  different  powers  in  Corsica:  the  Commissioners  of  the 
Convention  and  General  Paoli.  There  are  two  armed  forces  in  opposi- 
tion: on  one  side  the  continental  troops  of  the  Republic  together  with 
L.D.N. — c 

36  The  Rise  to  Power 

a  few  battalions  of  Corsican  light  infantry;  on  the  other  the  National 
Guards  under  the  command  of  Paoli.  There  are  several  political  opinions 
in  Corsica:  the  Independents,  the  Republicans  and  the  Aristocrats. 

How  have  these  two  powers  come  about?  What  are  their  respective 
positions?  .  .  .  What  are  their  military  resources?  . .  . 

All  who  made  and  supported  the  Revolution  in  Corsica  ardently 
desired  the  return  of  General  Paoli.  They  believed  him  a  friend  of 
liberty,  for  he  had  seemed  a  martyr  for  it.  But  it  was  not  long  before 
they  saw  the  unlimited  ambition  of  the  old  chief,  who  wanted  all  to 
see  with  his  eyes  and  judge  with  his  conscience  . .  .  After  the  crisis  of 
August  he  dissimulated  no  more.  He  thought  France  lost  and  prepared 
to  kick  her  himself,  but  the  victories  of  Dumouriez  and  the  com- 
mission of  lieutenant-general  commanding  in  Corsica  which  the 
Executive  Power  gave  him  made  him  withdraw,  but  only  to  strike  the 
better.  Commanding  all  the  troops,  he  removed  all  the  regular  forces 
from  the  maritime  fortresses  and  replaced  them  by  Corsican  national 
guards,  of  whom  he  felt  surer;  he  created  four  companies  to  which  he 
appointed  as  officers  those  who  had  lost  their  fathers  in  the  war  of  1768 
against  France  and  who  therefore,  according  to  the  custom  of  the 
island,  had  a  vendetta  against  the  French. 

When  the  departmental  administration  was  formed  he  had  Pozzo  di 
Borgo  made  procurator.  That  man  has  some  ability  and  energy  . .  . 
He  was  the  man  whom  Paoli  needed  and  whom  he  need  not  fear. 
The  rest  of  the  administration  was  composed  of  fools  who  could  be 
led  easily. 

Paoli  then  found  himself  in  control  of  the  fortresses  and  all  the 
military  resources,  the  Department  and  the  gendarmerie,  which  was 
commanded  by  his  nephew  Leonetti;  but  he  lacked  the  military  chest 
and  a  paymaster  at  his  own  disposal.  He  had  the  effrontery  to  make  the 
Department  suspend  the  paymaster  Arena  and  substitute  one  of  his  own 
creatures.  That  move  went  far  to  reveal  his  criminal  plans  to  Paris  .  . . 

Then  the  Sardinian  expedition  occurred.  Paoli  was  required  to  pre- 
pare 4,000  Corsicans  and  Semonville  came  to  inform  him.  That  was  a 
critical  moment  for  him;  he  knew  he  must  hide  his  real  aims  and  feared 
lest  they  be  uncovered  at  a  moment  when  the  Republic  had  a  consider- 
able fleet  and  was  victorious  over  all  her  enemies.  But  he  was  clever 
enough  to  appear  obliging  and  yet  to  prevent  his  forces  from  going  to 
Sardinia,  just  as  he  had  prevented  them  from  joining  the  Army  of  the 
South.  He  did  not  want  tie  Corsicans  to  become  gallicized,  nor  did 
he  want  to  weaken  himself. 

He  had  plenty  of  pretexts  to  cover  these  schemings.  He  would  say  to 
friends  whom  he  distrusted:  'It  is  true  I  am  trying  to  bring  the  fortresses 
under  Corsican  control;  it  is  true  I  do  not  want  them  to  leave  home, 
but  the  reason  is  simple:  we  must  be  ready  to  hold  firm  in  the  event 

The  Early  Years  37 

of  a  counter-revolution  and  offer  a  refuge  to  the  Mountain  in  the 
Convention/ 

He  has  often  been  heard  to  complain  at  the  keenness  of  Corsicans  to 
join  the  armies,  particularly  at  Cagliari,  *in  order  to  make  war,*  as  he 
said,  'on  our  dearest  ally,  the  one  king  who  helped  us  in  the  days  of 
trouble  for  Corsica.5 

After  the  declaration  of  war  against  England  all  were  struck  by  his 
readiness  to  praise  the  generosity,  goodness,  virtue,  power  and  wealth 
of  that  nation.  By  that  time  his  plans  were  clear,  and  all  those  who  were 
attached  to  him  but  preferred  their  country  to  him  began  to  draw 
away.  . .  .  He  is  plunging  his  country  into  civil  war;  drawing  it  out 
of  association  with  France,  which  alone  can  make  for  its  happiness, 
abusing  the  confidence  of  the  Republic  against  which  he  makes  war 
with  its  own  arms  and  money.  .  . .  Paoli  has  goodness  and  sweetness 
on  his  face,  but  hatred  and  vengeance  in  his  heart . .  . 

The  Convention  sent  Commissioners  to  Corsica.  He  poisoned  the 
mind  of  the  nation  against  them.  The  Department  sent  no  one  to 
receive  them;  he  himself  feigned  illness;  the  gendarmerie  arrested 
members  of  their  suite  under  their  eyes ...  He  wanted  to  make  the 
Commissioners  bow  before  him,  for  he  feared  them  .  .  . 

One  of  them,  the  able  Saliceti,  on  the  pretext  of  seeing  his  family, 
went  to  Corte  and  saw  Paoli,  who  flattered  him  and,  finding  the 
Commissioners  apparently  willing  to  ignore  everything,  had  them 
recognized  by  the  Department.  Meanwhile,  all  true  Republicans  made 
haste  to  join  them.  The  patriotic  districts  and  authorities  sent  deputa- 
tions. Partly  by  ginning  and  partly  by  force  the  forts  of  Bastia  and 
Saint-Florent  were  seized,  and  the  Commissioners  were  slowly  gaining 
ground  and  supplanting  the  Paolist  party  when  the  Convention's 
decree  suspending  Paoli  and  summoning  him  to  Paris  arrived  and 
precipitated  matters. 

Instead  of  going  to  Paris,  Paoli  took  to  arms,  reinforced  the  garrison 
of  Ajaccio  .  .  .  sent  agents  into  all  parts,  arrested  the  principal  patriots 
and  frightened  others  by  burning  the  houses  and  destroying  the  pro- 
perty of  those  most  respected  by  the  people. 

All  this  took  place  while  he  was  writing  fine  letters  to  the  Conven- 
tion claiming  that  age  and  infirmity  prevented  him,  much  against  his 
will,  from  going  to  Paris,  but  without  mentioning  that  Pozzo  di 
Borgo,  who  had  not  the  same  excuses,  was  still  in  his  office. 

The  good  patriots  of  Calvi  . .  .  drove  out  the  battalion  stationed 
there  and  took  the  commander  prisoner.  They  found  correspondence 
for  two  years  between  him  and  Paoli  which  revealed  the  whole  depth 
of  his  perfidy.  .  . . 

With  400  men  and  two  frigates  the  Commissioners  sailed  for  Ajaccio, 
where  they  should  have  found  at  least  1,000  good  patriots  (since  apart 

3  g  The  Rise  to  Power 

from  a  small  party  led  by  Peraldi  the  whole  town  was  for  France)  .  . . 
They  had  an  artillery  train  and  would  have  forced  the  citadel  and 
driven  out  the  rebels.  They  left  Saint-Florent  with  the  greatest  secrecy, 
but  were  seven  days  at  sea  owing  to  bad  weather.  Paoli  had  time  to  send 
2,000  men  to  Ajaccio,  to  arrest  sixty  of  the  best  patriots,  to  seize  all 
the  ports  and  to  burn  and  devastate  the  property  of  the  Buonapartes,  of 
Multedo,  the  Deputy  to  the  Convention,  and  several  others.  The 
Commissioners  no  longer  held  superiority  and  had  to  return.  .  .  . 

The  Commissioners  of  the  Convention  in  Corsica  regard  Paoli  and 
his  adherents  as  rebels .  . . 

The  Department  is  trying  to  have  the  Commissioners  regarded  as 
agents  of  a  faction  which  would  place  Egalit6  on  the  Throne.  It  has  had 
the  impudence  to  print  such  a  stupidity  .  .  .  Paoli  tells  any  who  will 
listen  that  the  Commissioners  are  agents  of  the  Genoese,  but  that  is 
only  for  the  populace  and  has  never  been  printed  . .  . 

The  Republic  has  3,100  continental  troops  in  Corsica  and  about 
1,200  Corsicans  on  the  pay-roll,  total  4,300.  It  has  a  fairly  good  field 
artillery  and  lacks  nothing,  Bastia,  Calvi,  Saint-Florent,  Cape  Corso 
and  the  Nebbio  are  in  its  power. 

Paoli  can  count  on  6,000  men,  but  they  are  farmers  as  well  as 
soldiers.  He  holds  Ajaccio,  Bonifacio  and  the  rest  of  Corsica.  He  has 
thirty  tons  of  powder  and  two  poor  field  guns  .  .  . 

If  5,000  men  and  a  few  warships  were  sent,  Paoli  would  be  forced  to 
withdraw. 

Ajaccio  is  the  most  important  port  for  the  Republic  and  should  be 
captured  first.  Holding  the  other  three  ports  already,  once  we  were 
masters  of  Ajaccio  we  should  be  masters  of  the  interior  as  well.  At  the 
worst,  Paoli  could  be  left  in  the  mountains  where  he  would  be  of  no 
importance  and  would  soon  be  destroyed  by  the  people  themselves. 
In  any  case,  he  would  be  of  no  interest  in  the  eyes  of  a  maritime  power 
if  he  did  not  hold  the  port  of  Ajaccio. 

Three  ships  of  the  line  are  needed  to  threaten  Ajaccio  and  in  that 
way  it  would  not  be  necessary  to  fire  a  shot.  They  need  not  fear  the 
Spaniards,  since  they  have  Calvi  and  Saint-Florent  for  refuge. 
What  is  the  strength  of  the  different  factions? 
The  Independence  party,  completely  devoted  to  Paoli,  is  very  small, 
but  it  is  numerous  when  allied  to  the  Aristocrats.  But  the  Republican 
party  would  be  the  strongest  but  for  the  large  number  of  prisoners  and 
the  tactics  of  Paoli.  He  wheedles,  threatens,  burns  and  allows  pillage. 
At  the  same  time  he  asserts  that  the  Commissioners  have  been  aban- 
doned by  France  and  will  receive  no  help,  since  the  Convention  has 
changed  its  mind.  He  maintains  as  well  that  France  is  lost  and  that 
he  will  soon  have  the  help  of  England.  In  such  a  situation  good  men  are 
uncertain  and  afraid;  die  doubtful  become  bad.  And,  besides,  the  active 

The  Early  Years 

and  restless  spirit  natural  to  the  Corsicans  is  involved.  All  must  take 
sides,  and  it  seems  better  to  be  on  that  which  is  winning  and  which 
does  the  burning  and  looting;  at  the  pinch  it  is  better  to  eat  than  be 
eaten. 

It  will  be  different  when  a  force  is  visible.  Then  the  good  will  come 
together,  bringing  the  doubtful  with  them  and  the  wicked  will  either 
flee  or  put  up  a  useless  resistance. 

Paoli  is  seventy.  He  has  never  had  a  warlike  spirit  and  rides  a  horse 
with  difficulty.  His  nephew  Leonetti  has  neither  courage,  nor  intelli- 
gence nor  reputation.  Pozzo  di  Borgo  is  intelligent.  Colonna  is  a 
soldier  only  in  appearance. 

Paoli  has  not  a  single  officer.  Every  Corsican  with  any  military; 
political  or  administrative  knowledge  has  deserted  him.  The  time  to 
beat  him  is  this  month  and  next,  since  that  is  the  time  of  the  harvest. 

BUONAPARTE 
Captain  in  the  4th  Artillery  Regiment 

30 
To  Citizen  Bouchotte 

Minister  of  War  Nice 

_.  .      „.  .  3  July,  1793 

Citizen  Minister, 

We  have  not  yet  adopted  the  custom  in  the  artillery  of  building 
reverberating  furnaces  near  the  coastal  batteries,  but  content  ourselves 
with  a  simple  grill  with  forge  bellows.  But  the  advantages  of  rever- 
berating furnaces  being  generally  known,  General  du  Teil  requires 
me  to  ask  you  for  a  model  with  drawings,  so  that  we  shall  be  in  a 
position  to  have  them  constructed  on  our  coasts  and  so  burn  the  ships 
of  the  despots. 

With  respect,  Citizen  Minister,  your  devoted, 

BUONAPARTE 
Captain  in  the  4th  Artillery  Regiment 

To  the  Committee  of  Public  Safety 

H.Q.,  Ollioules 

4  Brumaire,  Year  II  (25  Oct,  1793) 

...  As  soon  as  we  are  masters  of  the  Eguillette  and  Cape  Sepet,  we 
will  set  up  batteries  there  which  will  force  the  enemy  to  evacuate  the 
two  harbours  and  we  will  direct  our  attacks  against  the  bastion  and 
frontage  of  Toulon  nearest  to  the  arsenal,  which  is  also  the  weakest. 
But  that  needs  a  considerable  siege-train:  it  is  artillery  that  takes 
fortresses;  infantry  does  no  more  than  help.  And  it  is  with  extreme 
sorrow  that  I  see  the  little  trouble  that  has  been  taken  over  this  im- 

4d  The  Rise  to  Power 

portant  matter.  Three  out  of  four  concern  themselves  with  what  is 
necessary  only  when  they  feel  the  need  of  it,  but  then  it  is  too  late. 

There  is  no  one  in  charge  of  the  arsenal  at  Marseilles,  and  it  needs 
great  knowledge  to  occupy  that  post.  It  is  a  fact  that  the  most  difficult 
operation  in  the  artillery  is  the  formation  of  a  siege-train. 

The  artillery  was  not  organized  at  all  when  I  joined  this  army;  now 
it  is  beginning  to  move,  thanks  to  the  orders  you  have  given  in  several 
matters.  I  have  had  to  struggle  against  ignorance  and  the  passions  it 
gives  rise  to.  You  must  complete  the  work  of  giving  the  artillery  in 
this  army  the  consideration  and  independence  which  military  law  and 
immemorial  custom  have  accorded  to  it  and  without  which  it  cannot 
usefully  serve. 

The  first  step  I  will  propose  to  you  is  to  send  to  command  the 
artillery  an  artillery  general  who  can,  if  only  by  his  rank,  demand 
respect  and  deal  with  a  crowd  of  fools  on  the  staff  with  whom  one 
has  constantly  to  argue  and  lay  down  the  law  in  order  to  overcome 
their  prejudices  and  make  them  take  action  which  theory  and  practice 
alike  have  shown  to  be  axiomatic  to  any  trained  officer  of  this  corps. 
Tlie  Commander  of  Artillery,  Army  of  the  South, 

BUONAPARTE 

32 
To  Major  Gassendi 

H.Q.,  OUioules 
14  Brumaire,  Year  II  (4  Nov,  1793} 

I  have  not  had  the  letters  which  we  agreed  you  would  send  from 
Avignon.  You  are  by  now,  I  expect,  in  Grenoble. 

One  of  die  things  we  most  need  is  8,000  or  10,000  spare  muskets. 
You  should  be  going  near  Saint-Etienne,  so  you  will  easily  be  able  to 
have  these  sent  to  us. 

We  have  two  lo-inch  mortars  among  eight  we  have  received  and 
we  have  been  sent  nearly  a  thousand  bombs,  but  nearly  all  12-inch. 
See,  then,  if  you  cannot  get  us  some  jo-inch  bombs  without  delay.  At 
Marseilles  we  have  six  8-inch  mortars  and  not  a  single  bomb. 

I  have  not  been  able  to  procure  as  many  pioneer  tools  as  I  had  hoped. 
See  if  you  can  have  some  sent  from  Grenoble  and  Valence.  What  we 
principally  lack  is  axes  and  spades. 

It  would  be  no  bad  thing  if  you  were  to  send  some  pontoons.  I 
cannot  tell  you  precisely  how  many,  since  we  shall  use  them  only  for 
crossing  a  marsh  which  forms  when  it  rains. 

I  am  not  sending  you  the  original  order  by  the  Representatives  of  the 
People  concerning  you;*  as  I  have  sent  the  certified  copy  to  the 
Minister,  I  need  to  keep  it  myself. 

*  Seconding  him  from  the  Army  of  Italy. 

The  Early  Years  41 

You  will  find  many  more  resources  at  Lyons  than  I  first  thought, 
especially  in  the  way  of  wagons. 

If  you  find  any  signal  rockets  ready  made,  have  some  sent  to  me. 
We  also  need  incendiary  shells.  I  am  having  all  these  made,  but  it  is 
slow  work.  You  ought  to  find  some  at  Lyons. 

BUONAPARTE 
The  Commander  of  Artillery,  Army  besieging  Toulon 

33 
To  Citizen  Bouchotte 

Minister  of  War  H.Q.  Ollioules 

24  Brumaire,  Year  II  (14  Nov,  1793) 

Citizen  Minister,  the  plan  of  attack  which  I  have  laid  before  the 
Generals  and  Representatives  of  the  People  is,  I  believe,  the  only 
practicable  one.  If  it  had  been  followed  from  the  first  with  a  little  more 
warmth,  it  is  probable  that  we  should  now  be  in  Toulon  .  .  . 

To  drive  the  enemy  from  the  harbour  is  the  essential  preliminary  to 
the  siege  proper  and  might  even  give  us  Toulon  itself.  I  shall  argue  on 
both  hypotheses. 

To  become  masters  of  the  harbour  we  must  first  become  masters  of 
the  promontory  of  the  Eguillette.  As  soon  as  we  control  the  pro- 
montory we  must  bombard  Toulon  with  eight  or  ten  mortars.  We 
hold  the  heights  of  the  Arenes  which  is  scarcely  1,800  yards  distant 
and  we  could  easily  approach  to  within  1,600  yards  without  crossing 
the  river  Neuve.  At  the  same  time  two  batteries  would  be  brought  into 
action  against  Malbousquet  fort  and  another  against  the  Artigues  fort. 
It  is  quite  possible  that  the  enemy,  surprised  and  having  already  lost 
possession  of  the  harbour,  might  decide  on  retreat  through  fear  of 
otherwise  being  immediately  overpowered. 

You  will  realize  that  this  is  very  hypothetical.  It  would  have  been 
certain  a  month  ago,  before  the  enemy  received  reinforcements.  But 
today  it  is  possible  that  the  garrison  might  hold  on  and  undergo  a  siege, 
even  if  the  fleet  were  forced  to  evacuate  the  roads. 

In  that  case  the  two  batteries  established  against  Malbousquet  would 
be  promptly  reinforced  by  a  third,  and  the  mortars  which  had  been 
bombarding  Toulon  for  three  days  would  turn  to  destroy  the  defences 
of  Malbousquet.  The  fort  would  not  hold  out  forty-eight  hours  and 
there  is  then  nothing  else  to  stop  us  up  to  the  walls  of  Toulon. 

These  we  attack  at  the  Marais  and  Arsenal  bastions  by  a  sudden 
assault  which  at  once  carries  us  to  the  second  trench,  supported  by  the 
batteries  at  Malbousquet  and  on  the  slopes  of  the  Arenes.  In  this 
operation  we  should  be  impeded  by  the  Artigues  fort,  but  the  four 
mortars  and  six  guns  brought  to  bear  on  it  in  the  first  stages  of  the 
attack  would  remain  in  position  and  increase  their  fire. 

42  The  Rise  to  Power 

It  must  not  be  neglected  that  to  undertake  this  last  stage  of  the  siege 
we  have  a  great  many  needs,  and  it  is  essential  that  the  items  requested 
in  the  attached  inventory  should  be  available  in  our  park. 

I  owe  you  an  account  of  the  steps  I  have  taken  to  form  the  siege-train 
quickly  (see  attached  Sheet  A). 

It  is  more  than  a  month  since  I  told  the  generals  that  our  existing 
artillery  was  adequate  to  extinguish  all  fire  from  the  English  redoubt  on 
the  summit  of  the  promontory  of  the  Eguillette  .  .  . 

BUONAPARTE 

SHEET  A 

When  the  Representatives  of  the  People  appointed  me  to  the  army 
before  Toulon  and  gave  me  command  of  the  artillery  there  were  only 
a  few  field  guns,  two  24-pounders,  two  i6-pounders  and  two  mortars, 
with  none  of  the  necessary  equipment,  with  no  establishment,  no 
artillery  park,  no  organization  or  unity  of  command.  From  the  general 
to  the  last  aide-de-camp  everyone  directed  and  changed  the  disposition 
of  the  artillery  according  to  his  whim. 

I  set  myself  to  provide  the  artillery  corps  with  that  consideration  and 
independence  in  its  operations  without  which  it  cannot  be  of  useful 
service. 

The  weakness  of  the  army,  our  lack  of  material,  the  time  necessary  to 
prepare  a  siege-train,  all  made  me  feel  the  need  to  put  out  of  mind  the 
idea  of  besieging  Toulon  and  to  limit  myself  to  forming  a  force  that 
would  enable  us  to  clear  the  enemy  out  of  the  roads  by  placing  a 
battery  on  the  Eguillette. 

I  soon  had  fourteen  guns,  four  mortars  and  enough  equipment  to  set 
up  several  batteries.  I  established  a  park  and  entrusted  to  N.C.O.s  the 
responsibilities  that  I  could  not  give  to  non-existent  officers.  Three  days 
after  my  arrival  the  army  had  an  artillery  arm. 

At  that  moment  the  enemy,  seeing  the  inadequacy  of  their  naval 
artillery,  put  all  to  the  hazard  and  disembarked  on  the  Eguillette.  They 
ought  to  have  been  crushed  during  the  landing;  fate  or  our  ineptitude 
decided  they  should  succeed.  A  few  days  later  they  had  24-pounders 
there,  a  covered  road  and  palissades;  shortly  afterwards  they  received 
considerable  reinforcements  from  Naples  and  Spain.  I  realized  that  the 
Toulon  affair  had  miscarried  and  that  we  must  resign  ourselves  to  a 
siege. 

I  spared  nothing  in  pushing  ahead  the  preparations  for  attacking  the 
Eguillette  and  forming  the  siege-train. 

I  called  an  intelligent  officer  from  the  Army  of  Italy  and  sent  him  to 
Lyons,  Brianson  and  Grenoble  to  fetch  from  those  places  all  that  might 
be  useful  to  us.  I  requested  the  Army  of  Italy  to  furnish  me  with  the 
guns  surplus  to  the  defence  of  Antibes  and  Monaco.  On  the  attached 
sheet  *C*  you  will  see  what  they  can  supply.  The  difficulty  was  having 

The  Early  Years  43 

them  transported,  but  I  sent  a  hundred  horses  that  I  requisitioned  in 
Marseilles  .  .  . 

I  have  established  at  Ollioules  an  arsenal  where  eighty  artisans, 
smiths,  wheelwrights  and  carpenters  are  working  continuously  to 
produce  what  we  need  .  . . 

I  have  requisitioned  horses  throughout  all  departments  from  Nice 
to  Valence  and  Montpellier.  I  have  had  all  the  timber  that  I  could  find 
brought  from  La  Seyne  and  La  Ciotat  and  this  is  being  made  into  gun 
and  mortar  platforms.  Five  thousand  sandbags  are  being  made  daily  in 
Marseilles,  and  I  hope  soon  to  have  the  quantity  I  need  .  . . 

I  have  taken  steps  to  repair  the  Ardennes  foundry,  which  is  in  our 
hands,  and  I  hope  within,  a  week  to  have  case  and  round  shot  and 
within  a  fortnight  a  mortar  coming  from  this  foundry.  I  have  an 
armoury  with  a  staff  of  ten  armourers  where  muskets  are  repaired. 

You  will  see  some  added  merit  in  these  operations,  Citizen  Minister, 
when  you  know  that  I  have  only  myself  to  control  the  park,  the 
military  operations  and  the  arsenal,  that  I  have  not  even  an  engineer 
N.C.O.  and  only  fifty  regular  gunners  many  of  whom  are  recruits . .  . 

We  need  an  intelligent  ordnance  officer  so  that  I  can  entrust  to  him 
all  the  work  of  the  arsenal. 

BUONAPARTE 

34 
Minutes 

Council  of  War  H.Q.,  Ollioules 

5  Frimaire,  Year  II  (25  Nov,  1793) 

General  Dugommier,  Commander-in-Chief,  General  of  Artillery  du 
Teil,  Major-Generals  Lapoype  and  Mouret,  Brigadiers  Labarre  and 
Gamier,  Majors  Buonaparte,  Sugny  and  Brule  and  Captains  of 
Engineers  Flayelle  and  La  Mothe  met  in  council  of  war  in  the  presence 
of  the  Representatives  of  the  People  and,  after  carefully  considering 
the  position,  the  strength  of  the  enemy  and  the  resources  at  their 
disposal,  decided: 

1.  To  direct  all  attacks  against  the  English  redoubt,  so  that  batteries 
can  be  established  in  the  most  favourable  positions  at  the  end  of  the 
promontory  of  the  Eguillette  in  order  to  force  the  squadron  to  evacuate 
the  port  and  even  to  destroy  it,  should  a  contrary  wind  prevent  it  from 
leaving. 

2.  To  bombard  fort  Malbousquet  so  as  to  mislead  the  enemy  as  to 
the  point  of  attack  and  to  prepare  for  an  infantry  assault  on  Mal- 
bousquet in  case  such  becomes  possible. 

3.  To  pkce  a  battery  in  the  most  favourable  position  to  fire  on  the 
heights  of  Cape  Brun  to  mislead  the  enemy  as  to  the  front  to  be 
attacked. 

44  The  Rise  to  Power 

4.  To  capture  and  hold  Mount  Faron. 

5.  To  make  these  different  attacks  simultaneously,  the  right  division 
being  responsible  for  the  feint  against  Malbousquet  and  the  attack  on 
the  redoubt  of  the  Eguillette.  The  left  division  will  make  the  feint  on 
Cape  Brun  and  the  attack  on  Mount  Faron. 

6.  To  establish  in  the  most  suitable  position  between  Malbousquet 
and  the  Convention  battery  a  battery  of  six  long-range  mortars  which 
will  open  fire  on  Toulon  at  the  moment  judged  most  effective  with 
the  aim  of  lowering  the  morale  of  the  enemy  and  increasing  the  distrust 
between  the  different  nations  forming  the  garrison. 

7.  To  establish  a  protective  redoubt  to  the  left  of  Convention  Hill  to 
prevent  the  enemy  turning  and  capturing  the  Convention  battery 
under  cover  of  fire  from  the  Saint- Antoine  redoubts. 

8.  The  members  of  the  council  approve  the  batteries  that  have 
already  been  installed. 

BUONAPARTE 

35 
To  Major  Gassendi 

H.Q.,  Olliouks 
17  Frimaire,  Year  II  (7  Dec,  1793} 

I  have  received  all  your  letters  and  am  sorry  that  you  should  fear 
persecution.  By  the  next  mail  I  will  send  you  a  testimonial  from  the 
Representatives  of  the  People  and  some  kind  of  general  recommenda- 
tion. . .  . 

Here  we  are  more  or  less  in  the  same  position.  The  army  is  thirty 
thousand  strong  and  we  have  eleven  batteries  against  the  Malbousquet 
fort  and  the  camp  at  the  Eguillette.  A  few  days  ago  the  enemy  tried 
to  capture  the  Convention  battery  consisting  of  seven  24-pounders. 

This  battery  is  2,000  yards  from  Toulon  and  fires  on  Malbousquet 
from  the  right.  They  occupied  the  battery  and  spiked  our  guns,  but  the 
reaction  was  fatal  to  them.  We  took  200  of  them  prisoner,  including 
the  English  General  O'Hara,  Commander-in-Chief  and  Governor  of 
Toulon,  a  Spanish  colonel,  an  English  major  and  a  score  of  other 
officers. 

More  than  400  were  killed,  almost  all  English.  Our  troops  attacked 
as  far  as  the  outworks  of  Malbousquet.  The  fight  lasted  seven  hours. 
We  had  about  50  dead  and  150  wounded. 

BUONAPARTE 

3<5 
To  Citizen  Dupin 

Assistant  to  the  Minister  of  War  H.Q.,  Oltioules 

4  Niv&e,  Year  II  (24  Dec,  1793) 
I  promised  you  brilliant  successes  and,  as  you  see,  I  have  kept  my  word. 

The  Early  Years  45 

Worn  out  with  work  and  fatigue  I  could  not  be  the  first  to  let  you 
know.  I  need  only  tell  you  that  the  English  have  taken  away  none  of 
our  guns  and  there  is  the  same  artillery  in  Toulon  as  there  was  before 
they  arrived.  It  is  true  they  have  spiked  them,  but  more  than  half  are 
ready  for  action  again  at  the  time  of  writing.  They  have  simply 
increased  and  improved  the  fortifications,  so  that  Toulon  is  now  more 
defensible  than  ever. 

The  enemy  withdrew  in  strange  haste.  A  large  part  of  their  tents 
and  baggage  has  fallen  to  us;  they  gave  themselves  no  time  to  fire  the 
ships  properly  and  fifteen  are  in  our  hands;  they  burnt  neither  the 
timber  nor  rope-yards.  I  have  been  to  the  naval  arsenal  and  I  can 
assure  you  that  the  damage  they  have  done  can  easily  be  repaired. 

If  the  wind  had  forced  them  to  deky  another  four  hours  they  would 
have  been  lost.  One  frigate,  which  was  a  poor  sailer  and  was  kte  getting 
out,  was  still  in  range  when  we  got  our  batteries  onto  the  Eguillette. 
We  gave  her  a  salvo  of  red-hot  balls  and,  to  the  immense  satisfaction 
of  all  the  Republicans,  we  burnt  her  in  full  view  of  the  squadron  . .  . 

Last  night  three  Spanish  i8-gun  brigs  sailed  nicely  into  the  small 
harbour.  Orders  were  to  let  everything  in,  but  nothing  out,  and  we 
took  all  three,  to  their  great  surprise.  Tonight  we  are  expecting  a 
Spanish  battleship;  that  too  will  be  caught  in  our  trap  unless  it  gets  a 
warning  .  . . 

We  have  found  only  twenty  tons  of  powder  in  Toulon. 

BUONAPARTE 

37 
To  Citizen  Bouchotte 

Minister  of  War    .  Marseilles 

i  Pluviose,  Year  II  (20  Jan,  1794} 

In  each  coastal  battery  there  is  a  requisitioned  company  of  naval 
gunners.  I  feel  that  the  good  of  the  navy  demands  that  these  sailors  be 
employed  afloat.  I  think,  therefore,  that  a  chief  gunner  should  be 
appointed  for  each  gun  with  ten  labourers  requisitioned  from  the 
National  Guard,  without  other  officers  than  the  chief  gunners  and  the 
battery  commanders.  This  simple  method  will  not  be  burdensome  to 
the  Republic,  and  the  service  will  be  better  carried  on. 

I  am  far  from  satisfied  with  these  companies  of  coastal  gunners;  they 
do  not  practise  and  are  as  ignorant  as  on  the  first  day.  Sailors  are  of  use 
only  at  sea,  and  I  think  that  on  all  counts  they  should  be  returned  to  it. 

Please  write  me  a  line  as  to  the  course  I  should  follow.  I  know  of  no 
law  dealing  with  the  manning  of  the  coastal  batteries. 

I  am  occupied  in  rebuilding  most  of  the  batteries,  which  are 
absolutely  indefensible  owing  to  the  incompetence  of  those  who  have 
hitherto  been  directing  them. 

46  The  Rise  to  Power 

I  hope  within  a  fortnight  to  have  put  the  coast  from  the  mouths  of 
the  Rhone  to  the  Var  upon  a  respectable  footing. 

BUONAPARTE 

38 
To  the  Committee  of  Public  Safety 

Marseilles 
24  PluviSse,  Year  II  (12  Feb9  1794) 

It  is  urgently  necessary  to  bring  order  into  the  military  expenditure 
on  the  artillery  and  the  engineers;  immense  sums  are  being  used  for 
very  bad  work.  It  is  also  essential  that  infantry  generals  should  not 
order  repairs,  since  they  always  make  mistakes  and,  understanding 
nothing  of  our  work,  they  listen  to  busybodies. 

Since  there  are  funds  for  the  engineers  and  artillery,  why  do  the 
paymasters  authorize  expenses  of  this  kind  on  the  extraordinary 
account?  In  this  way  the  Republic  is  paying  for  works  which  officers 
of  the  artillery  and  engineers  have  refused  to  approve.  Worse  still,  the 
Republic  is  acquiring  useless  and  dangerous  works  which  must  be 
remade. 

I  have  just  come  from  Bouc,  near  Martigues;  there  used  to  be  four 
bronze  i6-pounders  there  on  very  good  fixed  mountings,  but  these 
have  been  converted  to  marine  mountings  in  the  belief  that  fixed 
mountings  are  worthless. 

Another  matter  needing  your  care  and  attention  is  a  decree  placing 
the  organization  of  gunners  in  the  coastal  batteries  on  a  permanent 
basis.  I  have  had  a  provisional  ruling  adopted  by  the  Representatives 
of  the  People,  but  this  is  not  sufficient;  a  definite  law  is  needed.  Far  too 
many  people  are  being  paid  and  without  reference  to  their  services  or 
usefulness. 

BUONAPARTE 

39 
To  the  Committee  of  Public  Safety 

Saint-  Tropez 

10  Ventose,  Year  II  (28  Feb,  1794) 

Since  the  capture  of  Toulon  I  have  been  occupied  in  putting  our 
coasts  into  a  respectable  state  of  defence. 
I  have  visited  those  between  the  mouth  of  the  Rhone  and  Saint- 

Tropez;  work  is  in  hand  everywhere  to  improve  the  old  batteries  and 
build  new  ones  at  several  points  where  I  judge  it  necessary. . .  . 

The  bay  of  Saint-Tropez  is  blockaded  by  an  enemy  squadron  which 
intercepts  our  convoys;  they  have  already  taken  a  few  ships  kden  with 
provisions.  In  future  these  convoys  will  be  protected  by  two  batteries 

The  Early  Years  47 

I  am  going  to  have  installed,  one  at  Cape  Lardier,  the  other  at  Cape 
Taillat;  as  soon  as  these  batteries  are  completed  I  hope  that  com- 
munication between  Nice  and  Marseilles  will  be  fiee  and  will  be  able 
to  operate  even  in  sight  of  the  enemy  squadrons. 

Apart  from  the  important  aim  of  helping  our  convoys,  I  have 
thought  it  right  to  reinforce  the  batteries  on  this  bay  so  that,  in  case  of 
need,  they  can  protect  our  fleet.  The  whole  of  this  coast  is  weak  and 
in  need  of  a  great  many  guns. 

From  this  point  of  view,  the  bay  of  Hyeres  has  particularly  occupied 
my  attention;  at  the  moment  the  Republican  and  Convention  batteries 
are  being  installed  there,  each  composed  of  four  3<5-pounders,  two 
i8-pounders  and  two  fixed  mortars.  These  two  batteries,  situated  one 
on  the  island  of  Porquerolles  and  the  other  on  the  island  of  Port-Cros, 
are  independent  of  the  armament  of  the  other  forts  on  these  islands.  I 
am  setting  up  36-pounders  at  Bregan^on,  Gapeau  and  Giens,  so  that 
soon  the  huge  roads  of  Hyeres  will  be  as  well  defended  as  is  possible 
and  able  to  offer  a  refuge  to  our  fleet,  whatever  the  strength  of  the 
enemy. 

I  leave  today  to  complete  my  inspection  of  the  coast  as  far  as  Menton. 
As  soon  as  I  have  done  so  I  will  send  you  a  general  report  from  which 
you  will  see  the  purpose  of  each  battery,  its  previous  condition,  the 
changes  that  have  been  made  and  the  state  of  supplies  and  of  the  crews 
serving  it. 

Meanwhile  I  have  thought  to  send  you  these  details,  since  I  know 
that  you  are  worried  about  the  situation  on  this  coast. 

BUONAPARTE 

40 
To  Captain  Berlier 

O.C.,  Artillery,  at  Antibes  Toulon 

11  Ventose,  Year  II  (i  Mar,  1794) 

The  fleet,  consisting  of  more  than  twenty-two  sail,  put  to  sea  at 
3.0  p.m.  today.  Warn  the  battery  commanders  at  the  Gulf  Juan  and 
Saint-Tropez,  so  that  if  it  appears  by  day  or  night,  they  pay  attention 
to  the  ships*  signals  and  do  not  take  them  for  the  English  fleet. 

BUONAPARTE 

To  Colonel  Manceauz 

Director  of  Artillery,  Toulon  H.Q.,  Nice 

13  Germinal,  Year  II  (2  Apr,  1794) 

We  have  an  urgent  need  of  cartridges;  send  a  million  to  Nice  without 
delay. 

The  Rise  to  Power 

We  are  going  into  action  tomorrow  with  30,000  men;  think  of  the 
cartridges  we  shall  use.* 

BUONAPARTE 

To  Citizen  Pille 

Committee  for  the  Army  &  Navy  H-Q*9  Nice 

28  Prairial,  Year  II  (i  6  June,  1794) 

...  I  enclose  a  map  of  the  Gulf  Juan  showing  the  batteries;  please 
lay  it  before  the  Committee  of  Public  Safety. 

Send  me  four  Gomer  12-inch  mortars  for  this  gulf.  These  are 
essential. 

I  cannot  help  telling  you  that  Admiral  Thevenard,  the  admiral  at 
Port-la-Montagne,  ...  is  interfering  with  my  dispositions  and  harming 
the  service.  I.  He  is  hoarding  too  many  guns  and  mortars  there  at 
the  expense  of  other  parts  of  the  coast.  2.  I  had  decided  to  place  in 
each  sizeable  battery  of  Port-k-Montagne  one  i8-pounder  for  every 
ten  36-pounders,  because  fire  with  red-hot  balls  is  easier  and  much 
more  accurate  with  small  guns;  also  because  it  is  better  to  use  small 
guns  to  fire  on  small  boats.  Too  many  different  calibres  is  certainly 
an  inconvenience  to  be  avoided  in  large  batteries;  but  the  advantages 
to  be  gained  from  smaller  calibres  should  not  be  lost  through  too  much 
uniformity.  In  any  case,  the  effectiveness  of  artillery  is  the  business  of 
gunners. 

I  shall  be  glad  if  you  will  write  a  word  to  Admiral  Thevenard  to 
remind  him  of  military  practice.  He  should  order  no  changes  in  the 
coastal  artillery  without  my  approval,  since  I  am  in  command  of  the 
artillery  of  the  Army  of  Italy,  quite  apart  from  an  order  charging  me 
with  the  defences  of  the  coast  between  the  mouths  of  the  Rhone  and 
Menton. 

There  is  nothing  but  confusion  if  people  exceed  their  proper 
functions. 

BUONAPARTE 

43 
To  Captain  Berlier 

O.C.,  Artillery,  at  Antibes  Antibes 

fMessidor,  Year  II  (25  June,  1794} 

I  am  most  dissatisfied  with  the  progress  in  arming  the  battery  of  La 
Brague.  It  is  still  without  powder,  shot  and  gunners.  That  should  all 
have  been  done  within  twenty-four  hours.  Put  the  commander, 
Corporal  Carli,  in  prison  for  absenting  himself  to  fetch  wine  from 
Antibes. 

*  During  the  spring  offensive  of  the  Army  of  Italy. 

The  Early  Years  49 

Instruct  all  battery  commanders  that  in  no  circumstances  are  they  to 
leave  their  posts. 
Inform  me  when  the  iron  24-pounders  have  arrived.  . . . 

BUONAPARTE 

44 
To  Lieutenant  Junot 

Aide-de-Camp  to  General  Buonaparte  Antibes 

Presumed  25  Thermidor/2  Fructidor,  Year  II  (12/19  Aug,  1794) 
The  proposal  you  make  to  me,  my  dear  Junot,  shows  clearly  enough 
your  friendship  for  me;  you  have  long  known  mine  for  you,  and  I 
hope  you  rely  on  it. 

Men  may  be  unjust  to  me,  my  dear  Junot,  but  it  is  enough  that  I 
am  innocent;  my  own  conscience  is  the  tribunal  before  which  I  bring 
my  conduct. 

When  I  examine  it,  that  conscience  is  calm;  so  do  nothing,  you  will 
only  compromise  me. 
Good-bye,  my  dear  Junot;  regards  and  friendship. 

BUONAPARTE 
Under  arrest 

45 
To  Citizens  Albitte,  Saliceti  and  Laporte 

Representatives  of  the  People  Antibes 

27  Thermidor,  Year  II  (14  Aug,  1794) 

Citizens,  you  will  find  attached  the  reply  to  the  four  questions  you 
asked  me.  The  information  I  am  sending  about  the  defence  of  the 
coasts  is  not  as  complete  and  detailed  as  I  would  have  wished.  I  will 
hand  over  to  whomever  in  the  artillery  you  entrust  with  your  con- 
fidence materials  to  enable  him  to  provide  a  more  satisfactory  answer. 
I  had  begun  a  work  on  the  coastal  defences,  but  I  do  not  feel  in  a 
position  to  complete  it.  Since  I  have  felt  that  I  have  lost  the  respect 
of  free  men  my  conscience  has  enabled  my  spirit  to  be  calm,  but  the 
feelings  of  my  heart  are  overturned,  and  with  a  cool  head  and  a  hot 
heart  I  cannot  resign  myself  to  go  on  living  under  suspicion. 

BUONAPARTE 

46 
To  Citizen  Multedo 

Representative  of  the  People  H.Q.,  Loano 

2g  Fructidor,  Year  II  (15  Sept,  1794) 

I  have  written  to  you  several  times  but  you  have  not  answered;  I 
cannot  believe  it  is  from  scorn.  I  wrote  about  the  trouble  that  had 

50  The  Rise  to  Power 

befallen  me,  and  I  thought  that  if  the  opportunity  arose  to  speak  on 
my  behalf  you  would  help  me  with  the  zeal  deserved  of  a  constant 
friend  of  liberty  and  one  who  has  always  been  attached  to  you. . . . 

BUONAPARTE 
P.S.  Give  my  compliments  to  Arrighi  and  Casabianca. 

47 
To  Citizen  Multedo 

Representative  of  the  People  H.Q.,  Cairo 

2  Vendlmiaire,  Year  III  (23  Sept,  1794} 

I  have  had  no  answer  to  several  letters  I  wrote  you  a  few  decades  ago. 

The  Austrians  were  threatening  Savona  and  thereby  the  neutrality 
of  Genoa,  since  they  would  completely  intercept  our  trade.  They  had 
already  built  great  roads,  set  up  camps,  brought  up  artillery.  But, 
while  making  their  plans,  they  had  not  thought  that  the  Republicans 
were  there,  watching  their  movements  and  waiting  to  catch  them 
red-banded. 

You  know  that  the  oligarchs  of  Genoa  who  rule  that  Republic  hate 
us  and  are  only  awaiting  the  chance  to  betray  us  with  impunity.  The 
news  from  Genoa  and  the  enemy's  movements  left  no  doubt  of  their 
intentions.  The  Representatives  were  convinced  that  there  was  but 
little  time  in  which  to  meet  and  nullify  their  preparations  and  ordered 
the  Army  of  Italy  to  advance  against  die  enemy,  fight  him  and  thwart 
his  plans. 

On  the  2nd  Sansculottide  we  marched  with  12,000  men,  a  division 
of  mountain  artillery  and  600  dragoons.  By  well-planned  and  well- 
executed  marches  we  forced  the  enemy  to  abandon  his  very  favourable 
entrenched  position. 

On  the  morning  of  the  4th  we  came  face  to  face  with  the  Austrian 
army,  which  was  deployed  in  the  plain  of  Carcare,  a  Genoese  town;  it 
had  fortified  the  high  ground  and  installed  good  batteries. 

We  were  occupying  the  heights  of  Biestro,  Pallare  and  Millesimo. 
As  soon  as  we  saw  the  situation  of  the  enemy,  we  decided  to  open  the 
attack  by  capturing  the  old  castle  of  Millesimo  and  moving  from  there 
to  the  chapel  between  Carcare  and  Cairo,  so  as  to  attack  the  enemy 
in  rear  of  his  entrenchment.  Thereby  we  would  cut  off  his  retreat, 
disrupt  his  battle  plan  and  assure  ourselves  of  complete  victory.  At 
3.0  p.m.  we  attacked  the  old  castle.  The  enemy  had  a  good  Hungarian 
battalion  there  which  defended  itself  long  enough  to  gain  a  few  hours 
and  withdrew  when  on  the  point  of  being  surrounded. 

When  Held-Marshal  Colardo  saw  that  we  held  Millesimo  and  were 
ready  to  march  on  the  chapel,  he  ordered  a  retreat  which  was  carried 
out  in  good  order  and  with  plenty  of  efficiency  on  the  part  of  his 
troops.  He  was  also  helped  by  the  night,  throughout  the  whole 

The  Early  Years  51 

of  which  he  continued  to  march,  only  halting  at  Dego,  two  leagues 
beyond  Cairo.  That  same  night  we  entered  Carcare,  marching  the 
next  day  to  Cairo,  a  little  Piedmontese  town,  whose  inhabitants  brought 
us  the  keys. 

At  2.0  p.m.  we  saw  the  enemy  from  the  village  of  La  Rochetta. 
Both  their  left  and  right  flanks  were  against  mountains  which  they 
thought  very  strong,  and  their  centre  was  entrenched  behind  the 
Bormida  and  covered  by  their  artillery.  Their  uhlans,  which  were  their 
only  cavalry,  were  manoeuvring  in  the  plain,  seeking  to  overawe  us. 

Had  we  thought  they  would  wait  for  us  till  the  next  day,  we  would 
willingly  have  postponed  the  issue;  but  we  were  sure  they  would  have 
fled  during  the  night  and  at  once  prepared  to  attack. 

Six  battalions  and  a  few  mountain  guns  penetrated  the  mountains 
on  the  right  with  orders  to  turn  the  enemy's  left  and  take  up  positions 
on  the  Dego  to  Spigno  road,  thus  preventing  his  retreat.  Two  battalions 
were  sent  to  dislodge  the  enemy  from  the  position  covering  his  right. 
The  rest  of  the  army,  with  the  cavalry  and  artillery,  was  drawn  up 
behind  the  village  of  La  Rochetta. 

It  was  very  late  before  these  movements  could  be  completed.  The 
left  attacked  and,  after  four  charges,  remained  in  possession  of  the  high 
ground  the  enemy  had  occupied.  On  the  right,  where  he  had  large 
forces,  the  fire  was  heavy.  We  drove  him  from  some  of  his  positions, 
but  a  very  dark  night  prevented  us  from  advancing  further  and  reach- 
ing Dego.  The  centre  attacked  with  great  energy;  everywhere  the 
enemy  gave  way  and  their  cavalry,  so  splendid  in  its  evolutions, 
thought  it  wise  not  to  await  the  shock  of  ours. 

The  night  separated  us.  We  bivouacked  on  the  battlefield  and  pkced 
our  artillery  ready  to  blast  them  at  first  light.  But  they  decided  not  to 
wait  for  us  and  marched  off  without  halting  for  twenty-four  hours. 
Their  losses  are  reckoned  at  1,000  or  1,200  men.  The  battlefield,  their 
stores  at  Dego  and  even  their  wounded  were  left  in  our  hands. 

Thus  their  plans  against  Savona  are  spoilt  for  a  long  time. 

If  we  had  had  three  more  hours  of  daylight  the  fight  at  Dego  would 
have  overthrown  the  Emperor  in  his  Lombard  States „ . . 

It  only  remains  for  us  to  rescue  Corsica  from  the  tyranny  of  the 
English.  The  season  is  favourable  and  there  is  not  a  moment  to  be  lost; 
the  Spaniards  have  returned  to  port;  we  have  fresh  news  from  Ajaccio, 
and,  far  from  having  increased  their  means  of  defence  in  that  important 
part  of  Corsica,  they  have  removed  part  of  the  military  stores  from  the 
citadel. 

With  8,000  or  10,000  men  and  twelve  warships  an  expedition  to 
Corsica  at  this  time  of  year  would  be  just  a  military  parade. 

To  drive  the  English  from  a  position  giving  them  command  of  the 
Mediterranean,  to  drive  them  out  of  the  one  department  they  still 

52  The  Rise  to  Power 

occupy,  to  punish  the  villains  who  have  betrayed  the  Republic  and 
to  rescue  the  many  good  patriots  who  still  exist  in  that  department: 
that,  my  friend,  is  the  expedition  which  ought  to  be  entirely  occupying 
the  Government  and,  especially,  the  deputies  of  that  and  the  neighbour- 
ing departments. 

BUONAPARTE 

48 
To  Citizen  Joseph  Buonaparte 

At  Marseilles  Semur 

4  Prairial,  Year  III  (23  May,  ijg$) 

Yesterday  I  saw  the  estate  at  Ragny  belonging  to  M.  de  Montigny. 
If  you  want  to  do  a  good  deal  you  should  come  and  buy  it,  at  a  price 
of  8  millions  in  assignats.  You  could  put  up  60,000  francs  of  your  wife's 
dowry.  That  is  my  wish  and  my  advice.  Remember  me  to  your  wife, 
to  Desiree  and  to  the  family.* 

You  will  not  find  France  in  foreign  countries,  and  to  run  around 
the  Levant  smacks  of  the  adventurer  or  at  least  of  the  man  looking  for 
a  fortune.  If  you  are  sensible,  you  have  only  got  to  enjoy  yours.  I  am 
sure  you  can  get  this  pkce  for  80,000  francs  in  silver;  before  the 
Revolution  it  was  worth  250,000.  I  think  it  is  an  unique  chance  to 
invest  some  of  your  wife's  dowry.  Assignats  are  losing  value  daily. 

BUONAPARTE 

49 
To  Citizen  Joseph  Buonaparte 

At  Marseilles  Paris 

4Messidor,  Year  III  (22  June  ^  1795} 

I  have  received  your  letter  numbered  16  .  .  .  I  will  do  what  I  can 
to  find  a  post  for  Lucien. 

I  am  employed  as  a  brigadier-general  in  the  Army  of  the  West,  but 
not  in  the  artillery.  I  am  unwell,  which  forces  me  to  take  two  or  three 
months'  leave.  When  my  health  is  better,  I  will  see  what  I  will  do. 

Today  the  Constitution  is  being  read  in  the  Convention.  People  are 
expecting  happiness  and  peace  from  this  Constitution;  I  will  send  it  to 
you  the  moment  it  is  printed  and  can  be  had. 

Jerome  writes  asking  me  to  find  him  a  school;  he  has  nothing  at 

*  In  1794  Joseph  had  married  Julie  Clary,  daughter  of  a  wealthy  merchant  of 
Marseilles,  and  now  Napoleon  had  formed  an  attachment  with  her  younger  sister, 
Desiree.  But  this  came  to  nothing,  partly  through  the  opposition  of  her  father 
(*one  Corsican  in  the  family  is  enough'),  partly  because  life  in  Paris  offered  new 
outlets  to  die  general's  emotional  as  well  as  to  his  intellectual  energies.  In  1798 
Desiree  married  Bernadotte. 

The  Early  Years  53 

the  moment.  Casabianca  intends  to  send  his  son  to  Genoa  and  thence  to 
Corsica;  he  is  keeping  him  with  him  doing  nothing. 

Casabianca  should  be  writing  to  you  about  Songis  and  your  brother- 
in-kw;  the  latest  kw  is  favourable  to  them,  and  there  is  no  doubt  they 
can  return  and  be  struck  off  the  list  of  emigrants, 

BUONAPARTE 

50 
To  Citizen  Joseph  Buonaparte 

At  Marseilles 

6Messidor,  Year  IS.  (24  June,  1795) 

I  will  hasten  to  send  what  your  wife  asks  for.  Desiree  has  asked  for 
my  portrait,  so  I  shall  have  it  done;  you  must  give  it  to  her  if  she  still 
wants  it,  otherwise  keep  it  for  yourself.  Wherever  circumstances  may 
lead  you,  you  know  that  you  cannot  have  a  better  friend,  who  holds 
you  more  dear  or  who  desires  your  happiness  more  sincerely.  Life  is 
just  a  dream  that  fades  away.  If  you  go,  and  think  it  may  be  for  some 
time,  send  me  your  portrait.  We  have  lived  together  for  so  many  years 
and  so  closely  united  that  our  hearts  have  fiised;  you  know  better 
tbfrn  anyone  how  completely  mine  is  yours.  In  writing  these  words  I 
have  an  emotion  such  as  I  have  seldom  known.  I  feel  we  shall  not  see 
each  other  again  soon  and  cannot  go  on  with  my  letter. 

Good-bye,  my  friend. 

BUONAPARTE 

5i 
To  Citizen  Joseph  Buonaparte 

At  Genoa 

iSMessidor,  Year  III  (6  July,  1795) 

I  have  had  no  news  of  you  since  you  left;  evidently  one  must  cross 
the  river  Lethe  to  reach  Genoa,  for  Desiree,  too,  has  not  written  since 
she  has  been  there. 

The  English  have  made  a  landing  in  Brittany  with  twelve  thousand 
men,  mostly  emigrants.  That  has  not  produced  much  akrm  here; 
people  are  so  sure  of  the  superiority  of  our  infantry  that  they  kugh  at 
these  English  threats.  The  Armies  of  Italy  and  the  Pyrenees  appear  to 
be  heavily  attacked. 

Every  day  a  few  articles  of  the  Constitution  are  passed.  All  is  very 
quiet.  Bread  is  still  scarce;  the  weather  is  rather  cold  and  damp  for  the 
time  of  year,  which  is  dekying  the  harvest.  The  rate  for  the  louis  is 
750  francs. 

BUONAPARTE 

54  The  Rise  to  Power 

52 
To  Citizen  Joseph  Buonaparte 

At  Genoa  Paris 

24  Messidor,  Year  III  (12  July,  1795) 

The  English  will  be  forced  to  embark  in  a  few  days,  Pichegru  is 
preparing  to  cross  the  Rhine.  The  Vendee  proper  is  quiet;  the  chouans* 
begin  only  north  of  the  Loire.  Peace  with  Spain  is  said  to  be  imminent. 
The  Dutch  seem  to  be  warm  friends  of  their  revolution.  The  Stadthalter 
will  probably  not  go  back;  his  party  is  non-existent.  The  north  is  in 
turmoil  and  Polish  hopes  are  rising.  Italy,  as  ever,  does  well  out  of  the 
losses  and  misfortunes  of  France  .  . . 

Here  luxury,  pleasure  and  the  arts  are  reviving  astonishingly.  Yester- 
day Phectre  was  played  at  the  Opera  for  the  benefit  of  a  retired  actress; 
although  the  prices  were  trebled  there  was  an  immense  crowd  by  two 
o'clock.  Carriages  and  dandies  are  reappearing,  or  rather  remember 
their  eclipse  only  as  a  long  dream.  Libraries  and  courses  of  history, 
chemistry,  botany,  astronomy,  etc.,  follow  one  another.  Everything 
that  can  delight  and  make  life  pleasant  is  piled  on.  One  has  no  rime  to 
think  and  how  could  one  be  gloomy  in  the  midst  of  so  gay  a  round 
and  such  a  display  of  wit.  The  ladies  are  everywhere:  in  the  theatre, 
out  driving,  in  the  libraries.  You  see  lovely  creatures  in  the  scholar's 
study.  Here,  in  this  one  place  in  all  the  world,  they  are  worthy  to  hold 
the  reins;  and  the  men  are  mad  about  them,  think  of  nothing  else  and 
live  only  for  and  through  them.  A  woman  needs  six  months  in  Paris 
to  know  what  is  her  due  and  her  empire. 

BUONAPARTE 

53 
Note  on  the  Army  of  Italy 

Paris 

Early  Thermidor,  Year  III  (late  July,  1795) 

In  the  present  situation  in  Europe,  great  use  can  be  made  of  the 
Army  of  Italy  which  can  strike  serious  blows  against  the  house  of 
Austria  and  prove  decisive  for  peace. 
It  must: 

1.  Drive  the  enemy  from  the  positions  of  Loano  and  Vado  whence 
they  intercept  our  supply  trains  and  the  shipping  between  Genoa  and 
Marseilles. 

2.  Use  the  rest  of  the  campaign  to  take  up  positions  which  it  can 
hold  through  the  winter  and  both  threaten  Piedmont  and  be  in  a 
position  to  protect  it  against  the  anger  of  the  Austrians;  by  this  means 
force  the  King  of  Sardinia  to  accept  peace. 

*  A  name,  of  uncertain  origin,  given  to  the  royalist  insurgents  in  the  West. 

The  Early  Years  55 

3.  Conquer  Lombardy,  destroy  the  influence  of  the  house  of  Austria 
in  Italy  and  offer  the  King  of  Sardinia  indemnities  there  for  Nice  and 
Savoy. 

4.  Once  master  of  Lombardy,  seize  the  gorges  of  Trent,  enter  the 
Tyrol,  link  up  with  the  Army  of  the  Rhine  and  force  the  Emperor, 
attacked  inside  his  hereditary  States,  to  conclude  a  peace  that  answers 
the  hopes  of  Europe  and  the  sacrifices  of  all  kinds  that  we  have  made. 

The  first  and  second  aims  can  be  carried  out  before  the  end  of  the 
campaign;  the  third,  during  the  winter;  and  the  fourth  at  the  first  fine 
weather  of  the  next  campaign,  if  the  enemy  forces  us  to  do  it. 

The  Army  of  Italy  should  be  reinforced  with  the  available  divisions 
of  the  Army  of  the  Pyrenees;  it  will  then  be  very  easy  to  retake  the 
important  position  of  Vado  from  the  enemy.  Once  taken,  the  harbour 
defences  should  be  repaired,  so  that  a  convoy  can  shelter  there  from 
the  attack  of  enemy  ships. 

The  Austrians  will  retire  onto  the  positions  defending  the  Lombardy 
road;  for  preference  they  will  occupy  the  mountain  chain,  from  Priero, 

upper  and  lower  Montenotte The  Piedmontese  will  occupy  the 

positions  covering  the  entry  into  Piedmont,  that  is  to  say,  the  Heights 
of  San-Giovanni,  la  Solta,  Biestro  and  Montezemolo. 

By  a  continuing  movement,  which  does  not  interrupt  that  which 
will  give  us  Vado,  and  a  feint  march  on  Sassello,  the  enemy  should  be 
attacked  or  forced  to  evacuate  all  his  positions  as  far  as  lower  Monte- 
notte and  to  retire  on  Acqui  or  even  Alessandria,  Then,  by  way  of 
Cairo  and  Millesimo,  seize  the  height  of  Montezemolo  which  domi- 
nates Ceva,  while  the  division  held  back  to  defend  the  Tanaro  advances 
beyond  Batiffollo  and  invests  Ceva  on  the  Garessio  side,  joining  the 
division  at  Montezemolo  as  near  to  Ceva  as  possible. 

Meanwhile,  the  road  from  Savona  to  Altare  will  be  repaired  so  that 
the  thirty-six  siege  guns  necessary  to  take  Ceva  can  pass. 

While  Ceva  is  being  invested  one  division  of  the  Army  of  the  Alps 
will  join  the  left  of  the  Army  of  Italy  on  Sambuco  mountain  and,  if 
possible,  will  invest  Demonte  by  seizing  the  height  of  Valloria.  Some 
movements  of  heavy  artillery  will  be  made  in  the  valley  of  the  Stura 
so  as  to  convince  the  enemy  that  Demonte  is  to  be  seriously  besieged, 
so  forcing  him  to  adopt  positions  from  which  he  can  observe  the  siege 
of  Ceva  as  well  as  that  of  Demonte,  a  situation  very  favourable  for  the 
siege  of  Ceva.  The  capture  of  Demonte  being  by  no  means  necessary 
to  the  execution  of  the  plan,  the  siege  will  not  in  fact  be  attempted 
unless  it  seems  that  there  is  the  necessary  time,  material  and  force  to  take 
it  without  in  any  way  weakening  the  right  division  of  the  Army  of 
Italy. 

Once  Ceva  is  captured,  the  fortifications  will  be  repaired  and  that 
fortress  put  in  the  best  possible  state  of  defence.  If  the  enemy  squadron 

56  The  Rise  to  Power 

appears  in  these  waters,  or  if  the  Austrians  are  heavily  reinforced  after 
the  fall  of  Ceva,  one  or  two  good  battalions  will  be  put  into  the 
fortress  of  Savona. 

It  is  round  Ceva  that  the  army  will  be  assembled,  being  cantonned 
in  all  the  nearby  towns  and  villages.  Foraging  will  be  carried  out  well 
ahead  in  the  plain  of  Piedmont,  and  the  King  of  Sardinia  will  be  faced 
with  the  prospect  of  a  considerable  army  ready  to  invade  his  States: 
he  will  probably  conclude  peace. 

Our  armies  in  Italy  have  all  perished  through  diseases  due  to  the 
summer  heat.  Once  established  on  the  plains,  the  real  time  to  make 
war  there  is  from  February  till  July.  During  that  season  the  Alpine 
passes  are  snowbound,  and  one  can  halve  the  troops  guarding  them 
so  as  to  increase  the  Army  of  Italy  and  march  on  Turin,  if  the  King 
of  Sardinia  has  not  made  peace,  and  on  Milan,  if  he  has. 

Controlling  Lombardy  as  far  as  Mantua,  the  army  would  find  all 
that  was  necessary  to  re-equip  itself  and  would  be  able  to  mount  the 
gorges  of  Trent,  cross  the  Adige  and  reach  the  Tyrol,  while  the  Army 
of  the  Rhine  passed  into  Bavaria  and  also  entered  the  Tyrol. 

Few  plans  of  campaign  offer  more  advantageous  results,  worthy  at 
once  of  the  courage  of  our  soldiers  and  the  destinies  of  the  Republic. 

54 
To  Citizen  Joseph  Buonaparte 

At  Genoa  Paris 

12  Thermidor,  Year  III  (30  July,  1795) 

Enclosed  is  the  passport  you  ask  for.  Tomorrow  you  will  get  a  letter 
from  the  Committee  of  Foreign  Affairs  to  the  minister  at  Genoa:  it 
asks  him  to  help  you  in  every  way  necessary.  .  . . 

Lucien  has  got  himself  arrested,  but  a  courier  leaving  tomorrow  has 
an  order  from  the  Committee  of  Public  Safety  to  set  him  free. 

Have  patience!  I  will  carry  out  all  your  wishes. 

The  Peace  with  Spain  ensures  the  success  of  an  offensive  war  in 
Piedmont.  They  are  discussing  the  plan  I  proposed,  which  will  certainly 
be  adopted.  If  I  go  to  Nice,  we  will  see  each  other,  and  also  Desiree. 
I  am  only  awaiting  your  answer  to  buy  you  a  property. 

I  am  going  to  write  to  Madame  Isoard  to  give  Lucien  some  money, 
and  I  wiH  get  him  a  job  in  Paris  before  leaving. 

I  trust  you  will  let  me  know  in  advance  when  you  think  of  coming 
back.  You  will  probably  get  a  post  as  consul  in  Italy. 

Everything  is  quiet.  The  peace  concluded  with  Spain  and  Naples, 
which  we  learned  of  yesterday,  fills  us  with  joy.  The  public  funds  are 
improving  and  assignats  rising. 

It  is  not  yet  hot,  but  the  harvests  are  as  good  as  possible.  This  great 
people  is  giving  itself  over  to  pleasure;  dances,  theatres,  women,  and 

The  Early  Years  57 

these  are  the  loveliest  in  the  world,  are  becoming  the  rage.  Wealth, 
luxury,  good  taste,  all  has  come  back;  the  Terror  seems  only  a  dream. 
The  news  of  the  fine  victory  of  Quiberon  and  of  peace  with  Spain 
makes  all  the  difference  to  the  state  of  our  affairs. 

BUONAPARTE 

55 
To  Citizen  Sucy 

Asst.>  Q.M.G.,  Army  of  Italy  Paris 

30  Thermidor,  Year  III  (17  Aug,  1795} 

I  send  you  my  compliments  on  having  rejoined  the  army.  You  will 
be  useful  there  and  you  will  have  the  sweet  satisfaction  of  employing 
your  ability  for  the  good  of  the  country.  A  man's  fortune,  position 
and  repute  vary  and  are  always  in  flux;  justified  pride  in  having  been 
of  use  and  having  merited  the  respect  of  those  few  who  can  appreciate 
genius  and  beauty  is  as  invariable  and  constant  in  you  as  the  sentiment 
of  honour. 

I  have  been  posted  to  serve  as  an  infantry  general  in  the  army  of  the 
Vendee,  but  I  am  not  accepting;  plenty  of  officers  will  command  a 
brigade  better  than  I,  and  few  will  command  artillery  with  more 
success.  I  remain  behind,  satisfied  that  the  injustice  done  to  the  services 
is  well  enough  known  by  those  who  can  realize  it. 

You  are  in  a  delicate  position,  my  friend.  If  active  genius  and  con- 
summate experience  are  arbitrarily  excluded  from  the  army  in  which 

you  must  mix  with  incapable  representatives rogues,  not  to  say 

more,  they  cannot  break  through  and  earn  a  reputation;  but,  my 
friend,  in  this  best  of  all  possible  worlds  the  great  secret  is  to  do  the 
best  one  can  and  let  one's  own  knowledge  of  it  be  the  reward;  then  one 
is  never  either  an  impostor  or  a  lackey,  not  bitter  or  disappointed  or 
vindictive  or  criminal. 

Nothing  new  here;  only  hope  remains  to  honest  men:  that  is  the 
sorry  state  this  empire  has  come  to. 

Good  health,  perseverance  and  happiness  be  with  you,  and  never 
discouragement.  If  you  meet  evil  and  nasty  men,  remember  the  good, 
if  farcical  maxim  of  Scapin:  Let  us  be  thankful  for  all  the  crimes  they  dont 
commit. 

B.  P. 

56 
To  Citizen  Joseph  Buonaparte 

At  Genoa  Paris 

3  Fructidor,  Year  III  (20  Aug,  1795) 

At  the  moment  I  am  attached  to  the  topographical  office  of  the 
Committee  of  Public  Safety  for  the  direction  of  the  armies,  in  place  of 

58  The  Rise  to  Power 

Garnet  If  I  ask  for  it  I  shall  be  sent  by  the  Government  to  Turkey,  as 
a  general  of  artillery  with  a  good  salary  and  flattering  ambassadorial 
tide,  to  organize  the  artillery  of  the  Grand  Turk.  I  will  have  you  made 
Consul  and  Villeneufve  engineer  to  go  with  me.  You  told  me  M. 
Anthoine  was  there  already.  Should  this  happen,  I  would  come  to 
Genoa  within  a  month  and  we  would  go  on  to  Leghorn  and  leave 
from  there.  In  that  case  do  you  still  want  to  buy  a  property? 

Things  are  quiet  here,  but  storms  may  be  brewing;  the  primary 
assemblies  meet  in  a  few  days.  I  shall  take  five  or  six  officers  with  me, 
but  I  will  write  in  more  detail  soon. 

As  the  commission  of  the  Committee  of  Public  Safety,  which 
employs  me  in  the  direction  of  the  armies  and  the  plans  of  campaign, 
loads  me  with  praise,  I  fear  they  may  not  want  to  let  me  go  to  Turkey; 
we  shall  see. 

I  embrace  you.  Write  often,  and  assume  that  I  shall  go. 

BUONAPARTE 

57 
To  the  Committee  of  Public  Safety 

Paris 
13  Fructidor,  Year  III  (30  Aug,  1795) 

At  a  time  when  the  Empress  of  Russia  has  drawn  tighter  her  former 
with  Austria,  it  is  to  the  interest  of  France  to  do  all  she  can  to 
make  the  military  power  of  Turkey  more  formidable.  The  Turkish 
armies  are  large  ana  brave,  but  very  ignorant  of  the  principles  of  the 
art  of  war. 

The  organization  of  the  artillery  service,  which  in  our  modern 
tactics  influences  so  powerfully  the  winning  of  battles  and  almost 
exclusively  so  in  the  capture  and  defence  of  fortified  positions,  is  in  its 
infancy  in  Turkey.  The  Porte  is  aware  of  this  and  has  several  times 
asked  for  artillery  and  engineer  officers.  Indeed,  we  have  a  few  there 
at  this  moment,  but  they  are  neither  numerous  enough  nor  well 
enough  trained  to  produce  important  results. 

General  Buonaparte,  who  has  gained  some  reputation  in  command 
of  the  artillery  of  our  armies  in  various  circumstances  and  notably  at 
the  siege  of  Toulon,  offers  to  proceed  to  Turkey  with  a  mission  from 
the  Government;  he  will  take  with  him  six  or  seven  officers,  each  of 
whom  has  a  special  knowledge  of  some  branch  of  the  science  of  war. 

l£  in  this  new  career,  he  can  make  the  Turkish  armies  more  formid- 
able and  improve  the  defensive  fortifications  of  that  Empke,  he  will 
believe  that  he  has  rendered  a  signal  service  to  our  country  and,  on 
his  return,  to  have  deserved  well  of  it. 

BUONAPARTE 

The  Early  Years  59 

58 
To  Citizen  Joseph  Buonaparte 

At  Genoa  Paris 

ip  Fructidor,  Year  III  (5  Sept,  1795) 

The  Committee  has  decided  that  it  is  impossible  for  me  to  leave 
France  while  the  war  lasts.  I  am  to  be  re-posted  in  the  artillery  and  shall 
probably  continue  to  work  for  the  Committee. 

The  elections  and  primary  assemblies  take  place  here  the  day  after 
tomorrow.  Peace  with  Hesse-Cassel  has  been  ratified. 

Public  and  emigrant  goods  are  not  dear,  but  private  estates  are  at 
ridiculous  prices. 

If  I  stay  here,  I  might  take  it  into  my  head  to  marry.  I  should  like 
a  word  from  you  about  that,  and  it  might  be  a  good  idea  to  speak  to 
Desiree's  brother;  let  me  know  the  result  and  I  will  decide. 

Chauvet  goes  to  Nice  in  ten  days  and  is  bringing  the  books  you 
asked  for. 

The  famous  bishop  of  Autun  [Talleyrand]  and  General  Montesquiou 
have  been  given  permission  to  return  and  are  struck  off  the  list  of 
emigrants. 

BUONAPARTE 

59 
To  Citizen  Joseph  Buonaparte 

At  Genoa  Paris 

20  Fructidor,  Year  III  (6  Sept,  1 795) 

The  consulate  at  Chios  is  vacant,  but  you  told  me  you  do  not  want 
an  island;  I  am  hoping  for  something  better  in  Italy. 

Yesterday  it  was  decided  that  all  who  supported  Toulon  during  the 
siege  or  who  held  posts  under  the  king  should  be  treated  as  emigrants. 
Freron  and  Tallien  spoke  very  forcibly.  It  is  today  that  the  primary 
assemblies  of  Paris  are  meeting;  there  are  plenty  of  placards  for  and 
against,  but  it  is  hoped  that  people  will  be  wise.  There  is  no  doubt 
about  the  Constitution,  which  will  be  accepted  unanimously;  the  only 
doubt  is  over  the  decree  ordering  that  two-thirds  of  the  Convention 
will  remain  in,  office.  .  . . 

Whatever  happens,  you  need  have  no  fear  for  me;  I  have  all  the 
right  people  as  friends,  whatever  their  party  or  opinion.  Mariette  is 
very  much  on  my  side  and  I  am  on  good  terms  with  Dulcette;  you 
know  my  friends  on  the  other  side. 

Go  on  writing  to  me  and  tell  me  what  you  want  to  do;  try  to  see 
that  my  absence  does  not  prevent  what  I  desire.  I  am  writing  to  your 
wife.  I  am  very  pleased  with  Louis;  he  is  realizing  my  hopes  and  what 
I  expected  of  nirn;  he  is  a  good  fellow  after  my  own  heart:  warmth, 
spirit,  health,  ability,  carefulness,  goodness,  he  combines  everything. 

<So  The  Rise  to  Power 

You  know,  my  friend,  that  I  live  only  for  die  pleasure  I  can  give  my 
family;  if  my  hopes  have  the  good  fortune  that  always  attends  my 
doings,  I  shall  be  able  to  carry  out  your  wishes  and  make  you  happy.  .  . 

I  miss  Louis  badly;  he  was  a  great  help  to  me.  .  .  .  Now  he  is  not 
here,  I  can  attend  only  to  the  most  important  things.  Write  to  him 
and  tell  him  you  are  waiting  for  the  first  drawing  he  sends  to  judge 
his  progress  and  that  you  are  sure  he  will  keep  his  promise  to  write  as 
well  as  Junot  before  the  end  of  the  month. 

Tomorrow  I  shall  have  three  horses  which  will  enable  me  to  use 
a  carriage  and  manage  all  my  business. 

Good-bye,  my  good  friend;  enjoy  yourself  and  be  gay;  think  about 
my  affair,  for  I  badly  want  to  have  a  household.  Since  you  are  not  there 
and  want  to  stay  abroad,  the  question  of  Desiree  must  either  be  settled 
or  broken  off.  You  can  stay  at  Genoa  as  long  as  you  wish;  your  excuse 
is  simple;  it  is  to  get  from  Corsica  the  few  pins  still  remaining  to  us. 

BUONAPARTE 

60 
To  Citizen  Joseph  Buonaparte 

At  Genoa  Paris 

29  Fructidor,  Year  III  (15  Sept,  1795) 

The  majority  of  the  Republic  has  already  accepted  the  Constitution 
and  the  decree  of  renewal.  Some  of  the  Paris  sections*  are  still  in 
ferment;  but  the  situation  seems  to  have  been  saved.  Our  army  in  the 
Vendee  is  very  large. 

I  have  just  read  the  following  sentence  in  a  printed  report  by 
Cambon  on  events  in  the  south:  *We  were  in  immediate  danger  when 
the  good  and  brave  General  Buonaparte  put  himself  at  the  head  of 
fifty  grenadiers  and  opened  the  way  for  us/ 

The  government  will  probably  be  organized  within,  a  month;  then 
things  will  necessarily  be  quieter.  .  . . 

BUONAPARTE 

61 
To  Citizen  Joseph  Buonaparte 

At  Genoa  Paris 

5  Vendemiaire,  Year  IV  (27  Sept,  1795} 
I  have  your  letter  of  24  Fructidor. 

My  journey  is  more  likely  than  ever;  in  fact,  it  would  have  been 
decided  if  there  were  not  such  a  ferment  here.  But  things  are  boiling 
up  at  the  moment  and  the  situation  is  inflammatory:  it  will  all  be  over 
in  a  few  days. 

*  The  forty-eight  local  government  areas  into  which  Paris  was  then  divided. 

The  Early  Years  61 

I  have  received  the  messages  from  M.  de  Villeneufve.  He  cannot 
hope  for  more  than  a  captaincy.  It  is  only  as  a  favour  that  I  can  include 
him  in  the  mission  in  that  capacity;  but  the  chief  thing  is  to  help  and 
be  useful.  .  *  .  Lucien  is  on  his  way  here;  if  I  am  still  here  I  will  see 
what  I  can  do  for  him. 

Heads  are  very  hot,  and  the  moment  seems  critical;  but  the  genius 
of  liberty  never  abandons  its  defenders.  All  our  armies  triumph. 

BUONAPARTE 

62 
To  Citizen  Joseph  Buonaparte 

At  Genoa  Paris 

14  Vendemiaire,  Year  JV  (6  Oct,  17^5),  2  a.m. 
At  last,  all  is  over.  My  first  thought  is  to  send  you  my  news. 

The  Royalists,  organized  in  the  sections,  were  daily  getting  bolder. 
The  Convention  ordered  the  Lepellerier  section  to  be  disarmed,  but  it 
drove  the  troops  back.  Menou,  who  was  in  command,  is  thought  to 
have  been  a  traitor,  and  he  was  dismissed  at  once.  The  Convention 
appointed  Barras  to  command  the  troops,  and  the  committees  nomi- 
nated me  as  second-in-command.  The  enemies  attacked  us  at  the 
Tuileries.  We  killed  a  good  many  of  them;  they  killed  thirty  of  our 
men  and  wounded  sixty.  We  have  disarmed  the  sections  and  all  is 
quiet.  As  usual,  I  was  not  wounded. 

BUONAPARTE 
Brigadier-General 
P.S.  Happiness  is  mine;  my  respects  to  Desiree  and  Julie. 

63 
Report 

Paris 

Presumed  15  Vendemiaire,  Year  IV  (7  Ort,  1795} 
At  5.0  a.m.  on  the  13th  Representative  of  the  People  Barras  was 
appointed  Commander-in-Chief  of  the  Army  of  the  Interior;  General 
Buonaparte  was  appointed  second-in-command. 

Most  of  the  garrison  artillery  was  still  at  the  camp  of  Les  Sablons, 
guarded  by  only  150  men;  the  rest  was  at  Marly  with  200  men.  The 
depot  of  Meudon  was  without  any  guard  at  all.  At  the  Feuillants  there 
were  only  a  few  4-pounders  without  gunners  and  only  80,000  cart- 
ridges. The  ration  dumps  were  scattered  over  Paris.  Several  sections 
were  mobilizing  and  that  of  the  Theatre-Fran^ais  had  outposts  as  far 
as  the  Pont-Neuf  which  they  had  barricaded. 

General  Barras  ordered  the  artillery  to  move  at  once  from  the  camp 
of  Les  Sablons  to  the  Tuileries  and  had  gunners  found  in  the  battalions 

62  The  Rise  to  Power 

of  '89  and  the  gendarmerie  to  man  them.  He  sent  to  Meudon  50 
cavalrymen,  2  companies  of  veterans  and  200  men  of  the  police  legion 
drawn  from  Versailles,  ordered  the  evacuation  of  all  equipment  from 
Marly  to  Meudon,  had  cartridges  brought  up  and  a  workshop  to 
manufacture  them  established  at  Meudon,  and  arranged  food  supplies 
for  several  days  for  the  army  and  the  Convention  independently  of 
the  dumps  that  were  in  the  sections. 

Meanwhile  reports  were  coming  in  from  every  side  that  the  insur- 
gents were  coming  together  under  arms  and  forming  their  columns. 
He  therefore  deployed  his  troops  to  defend  the  Convention  and  posted 
his  artillery  to  punish  the  rebels. 

He  placed  guns  at  the  Feuillants  to  fire  on  the  Rue  Honore  and 
covered  all  the  exits  with  8-pounders,  and,  to  guard  against  a  mishap, 
he  placed  guns  in  reserve  to  bring  a  flanking  fire  to  bear  on  any  column 
which  might  force  a  way  out.  He  left  two  howitzers  and  two  8- 
pounders  in  the  Carrousel  so  as  to  be  able  to  destroy  any  houses  from 
which  the  Convention  might  be  fired  on. 

At  four  o'clock  the  rebel  columns  emerged  from  the  streets  to  form 
up.  Even  had  we  had  well-disciplined  troops,  this  was  the  critical 
moment  at  which  we  ought  to  have  crushed  them;  but  it  was  French 
blood  that  would  have  to  be  shed,  and  it  was  for  those  wretches,  already 
traitors,  to  besmirch  themselves  with  the  crime  of  fratricide  as  well: 
the  honour  of  striking  the  first  blow  must  belong  to  them. 

At  4.45  the  rebels  began  to  attack  from  all  sides.  Everywhere  they 
were  routed.  French  blood  flowed,  and  the  crime  and  shame  of  that 
terrible  day  belonged  to  the  insurgents. 

Among  the  dead  were  to  be  seen  many  emigrants,  priests  and  nobles; 
most  of  those  taken  prisoner  were  found  to  be  chouans  from  Charette. 

But  the  rebels  did  not  yet  t-Tivnlr  themselves  beaten.  They  had  taken 
refuge  in  Saint-Roch  church,  in  the  Theatre  de  k  Republique  and  the 
Palais-Egalite  and  all  around  they  were  to  be  heard  inciting  the  people 
to  take  up  arms.  To  spare  the  blood  that  would  have  been  shed  next 
day,  they  had  to  be  pursued  energetically  and  given  no  time  to 
reorganize. 

The  General  ordered  General  Monchoisy,  who  was  in  reserve  at 
the  Place  de  k  Revolution  to  send  a  force  with  two  12-pounders 
through  the  boulevards  to  turn  the  Pkce  Vendome  and  join  up  with 
the  picket  at  headquarters. 

General  Cartaux  sent  200  men  of  his  division  and  one  4-pounder 
through  the  Rue  Saint-Thomas-du-Louvre  into  the  Place  du  Palais- 
Egalite* 

General  Brune  who  had  had  a  horse  killed  under  him  moved  to  Les 

Feuillants.  All  these  columns  advanced.  Saint-Roch  and  the  Theatre 

e  k  Republique  were  taken  and  the  rebels  evacuating  them  retired  to 

The  Early  Years  63 

the  upper  end  of  the  Rue  de  k  Loi,  which  they  barricaded  on  every 
side.  Patrols  were  sent  up  and  several  cannon  shots  were  fired  with 
great  effect. 

At  first  light  the  General  learnt  that  a  group  from  the  commune  of 
Saint-Germain,  with  two  guns,  were  marching  to  the  aid  of  the  rebels, 
and  he  sent  a  detachment  of  dragoons  which  seized  these  guns  and 
brought  them  to  the  Tuileries. 

The  rebel  remnants  were  still  showing  fight.  They  had  barricaded 
the  entrances  to  the  Lepelletier  section  and  placed  guns  in  the  principal 
streets.  At  nine  o'clock  General  Berruyer  drew  up  his  division  in  the 
Place  Vendome.  He  placed  two  8-pounders  in  the  Rue  des  Vieux- 
Augustins  and  ranged  them  on  the  headquarters  of  the  Lepelletier 
section.  General  Vachot,  with  a  force  of  light  infantry,  came  up  on  the 
right,  ready  to  move  into  the  Pkce  Victoire.  General  Brune  occupied 
the  Perron  and  stationed  two  howitzers  at  the  end  of  Rue  Vivienne* 
General  Duvignau,  with  the  centre  column  and  two  12-pounders, 
advanced  up  the  Rue  Richelieu  and  the  Rue  Montrnartre. 

But  at  the  fear  of  seeing  their  retreat  cut  off  the  courage  of  the 
insurgents  failed.  They  abandoned  the  position,  thereby,  in  the  opinion 
of  our  soldiers,  forgetting  the  military  honour  of  Frenchmen  which  was 
theirs  to  maintain. 

The  Brutus  section  still  caused  some  disquiet,  and  the  wife  of  a 
representative  had  been  arrested  there.  General  Duvignau  was  ordered 
to  advance  along  the  boulevard  as  far  as  the  Rue  Poissonniere.  General 
Berruyer  stationed  himself  in  the  Place  Victoire.  General  Brune 
occupied  the  Pont-au-Change.  The  Brutus  section  was  surrounded,  the 
lie  Saint-Louis  searched  and  the  Pkce  de  Greve,  Pkce  du  Theatre- 
Fran^ais  and  Pkce  du  Pantheon  occupied.  Everywhere  the  patriots 
had  regained  courage;  the  spread  of  civil  war  ceased;  the  people  were 
realizing  their  error  and  folly. 

The  next  day  the  two  sections  of  Lepelletier  and  the-  Theitre- 
Fran^ais  and  the  infantry  and  grenadiers  of  the  National  Guard  were 
disarmed. 

BUONAPARTE 

64 
To  Citizeness  Clary 

At  Marseilles  Pa™ 

19  Vendemiaire,  Year  JV  (11  Oct,  1795} 

Freron,  who  is  on  a  mission  to  Marseilles,  will  hand  you  this  letter. 
I  beg  you,  Madam,  to  receive  him  as  you  would  myself.  You  will  find 
him  a  good  fellow  and  a  man  who  likes  to  help  people.  I  have  told 
fej.TTi  of  my  friendship  for  your  family.  Do  what  you  can  to  make  his 
stay  in  Marseilles  pleasant. 

64  The  Rise  to  Power 

All  goes  well  here.  The  Royalists  have  been  beaten,  but  you  need  not 
fear  that  the  Terror  will  return;  we  like  it  no  more  than  you. 

Had  serious  work  not  kept  me  in  Paris,  I  would  gladly  have  come 
to  Marseilles,  but  the  Convention  has  appointed  me  to  command  the 
Army  of  the  Interior  under  the  orders  of  Representative  Barras. 

Farewell,  Madam:  homage  to  Mme  Pluvinal,  to  Mile  Sophia  and 
to  your  niece.  My  compliments  to  Clary.  Assure  him  and  all  your 
family  that  I  shall  always  have  their  interests  at  heart. 

BUONAPARTE 

65 
To  Citizen  Joseph  Buonaparte 

At  Genoa  Paris 

10  Brumaire,  Year  IV  (i  Nov,  1795) 

A  week  ago  I  was  appointed  Commander-in-Chief  of  the  Army  of  the 
Interior. 

The  Councils  of  Five  Hundred  and  of  the  Ancients  have  met,  and 
the  first  has  already  drawn  up  its  list  for  the  Executive  Directory.  It 
seems  that  the  five  members  will  be  Sieves,  Rewbel,  Barras,  Le  Tour- 
neur,  Cambaceres  and  La  Revelliere-Lepaux;  one  of  these  six  will  not 
be  a  member. 

I  am  well,  though  over-worked. 

BUONAPARTE 

66 
To  Citizen  Joseph  Buonaparte 

At  Genoa  Paris 

26  Brumaire,  Year  IV  (17  Nov,  1795) 

I  hear  from  you  very  seldom.  You  must  not  be  hard  on  me;  you 
know  that  my  work  and  the  constant  agitation  of  my  life  prevent  me 
from  writing  regularly;  but  Fesch  should  write  daily. 

The  family  lacks  nothing;  I  have  sent  them  silver,  assignats,  etc. 
I  have  just  received  400,000  francs  for  you;  I  have  handed  it  to  Fesch, 
who  will  account  for  it. 

I  may  have  the  family  come  here.  Send  me  your  news  in  greater 
detail,  and  of  your  wife  and  Desiree.  Good-bye,  my  good  friend,  all 
yours;  my  only  worry  is  to  know  you  are  far  away  and  not  to  have 
your  company,  If  your  wife  were  not  pregnant,  I  would  get  you  to 
come  to  Paris  for  a  time. 

Songis  is  my  colonel  aide-de-camp;  Junot  major;  Louis  and  five 
others,  whom  you  do  not  know,  captains. 

BUONAPARTE 

The  Early  Years  65 

67 

To  Major-General  Cb&teauneuf-Randon 

G.O.C.,  i  ?th  Military  District  H.Q.,  Paris 

3  Frimaire,  Year  IV  (24  Nov9  1795} 

Citizen  General,  I  have  ordered  the  Commander  of  Engineers  to 
have  stoves  and  planks  installed  in  the  various  barrack-rooms  in  the 
barracks  at  Saint-Cloud  and  Bellevue.  Until  this  order  is  carried  out 
a  ration  of  brandy  will  be  distributed  each  morning  to  those  without 
stoves  or  fireplaces  and  they  will  be  given  fifteen  pounds  of  straw 
instead  of  the  ten  allowed  by  law.  The  Quartermaster-General  will 
give  the  necessary  orders.  .  .  . 

The  Commander-in-Chief,  Army  of  the  Interior 

BUONAPARTE 

68 
To  Citizen  Faypoult 

Minister  of  Finance  H.Q.,  Paris 

28  Frimaire,  Year  IV  (ig  Dec,  1795} 

The  Treasury,  Citizen  Minister,  should  have  paid  25  millions  for  the 
forage  of  the  Army  on  the  25th.  But  that  is  three  days  ago;  it  is  still 
continuing  its  system  of  keeping  the  Army  of  the  Interior  in  a  state  of 
need.  If  there  is  some  malicious  plan  to  starve  this  army,  I  beg  you, 
Citizen  Minister,  to  press  the  Treasury  agents  so  hard  that  they  are 
forced  to  disclose  it. 

It  is  essential  that  there  should  be  no  further  deky  in  making  this 
payment;  otherwise  we  shall  be  forced  to  seize  from  the  farms  in 
order  to  maintain  the  service.  You  will  appreciate  how  dangerous  that 
would  be. 

BUONAPARTE 

To  Viscountess  Josephine  de  Beauharnais 

Paris 
December \  1795 

I  awake  full  of  you.  Your  image  and  the  intoxication  of  last  night 
give  my  senses  no  rest. 

Sweet,  incomparable  Josephine,  what  a  strange  effect  you  have  on 
my  heart.  Are  you  angry?  Do  I  see  you  sad?  Are  you  worried?  My 
soul  breaks  with  grief,  and  there  is  no  rest  for  your  lover;  but  how 
much  the  more  when  I  yield  to  this  passion  that  rules  me  and  drink  a 
burning  flame  from  your  lips  and  your  heart?  Oh !  this  night  has  shown 
me  that  your  portrait  is  not  you! 

You  leave  at  midday;  in  three  hours  I  shall  see  you. 

66  The  Rise  to  Power 

Meanwhile,  my  sweet  love,  a  thousand  kisses;  but  do  not  give  me 
any,  for  they  set  my  blood  on  fire. 

70 
Note  on  the  Army  of  Italy 

Paris 
2p  Niv6se,  Year  IV  (19  Jan,  1796) 

If  the  Army  of  Italy  lets  February  slip  by  without  doing  anything 
as  it  has  let  January,  the  Italian  campaign  will  be  entirely  fruitless.  It 
must  be  understood  that  in  Italy  success  is  to  be  had  only  in  winter. 

Assuming  that  the  Army  of  Italy  moves  as  soon  as  possible,  it  can 
march  on  Ceva  and  force  the  entrenched  camp  before  the  Austrians, 
who  are  at  Acqui,  have  joined  the  Piedmontese. 

If,  in  view  of  the  preparations  being  made  by  the  French,  the 
Austrians,  moving  beyond  the  Tanaro,  were  to  join  up  with  the 
Piedmontese,  our  army  should  make  a  double  march  on  Acqui  by 
going  to  Cairo  and  Spigno;  we  can  be  sure  that  then  the  Austrians 
would  quickly  return  to  defend  their  communications  with  the 
Milanese. 

The  operation  to  be  carried  out  is  simple.  Are  the  Piedmontese 
alone?  Then  march  against  them  through  Garessio,  Bagnasco,  La 
Solta,  Castelnuovo,  Montezemolo.  Once  they  are  beaten  and  the  camp 
taken,  ky  siege  to  Ceva  (an  operation  preliminary  to  all  others,  what- 
ever direction  we  may  wish  to  take).  Do  the  Austrians  have  the  good 
sense  to  join  the  Piedmontese  atMontezemolo?They  must  be  separated, 
to  which  end  march  on  Alessandria  and,  as  soon  as  they  separate, 
gain  twenty-four  hours  to  capture  the  camp  of  Ceva.  Once  we  have 
occupied  the  camp  it  will  need  double  our  forces  to  make  us  raise  the 
siege  of  the  fortress. 

The  siege  artillery  will  disembark  at  Vado.  There  need  be  no  fear 
of  kck  of  wagons,  the  countryside  being  rich  in  means  of  transport 
and  the  siege  of  Ceva  needing  no  more  than  from  twenty-four  to 
thirty  guns. 

Ceva  captured,  not  a  moment  must  be  lost  in  advancing  the  division 
guarding  Tenda,  Briga  and  the  heights  of  Nice  county,  which  should 
join  the  main  force  at  Mondovi,  in  investing  Cuneo  with  the  centre 
division  and  marching  straight  for  Turin.  The  King  of  Sardinia  will 
then  propose  peace.  The  general  must  say  that  he  has  no  power  to 
make  peace  and  that  an  envoy  must  be  sent  to  Paris,  and  meanwhile 
the  King  of  Sardinia  will  be  obliged  to  make  proposals  which  cannot 
be  refused  and  will  perfectly  effect  the  Government's  aim.  Otherwise 
Turin  will  be  burned,  regardless  of  the  citadel. 

Since  warfare  in  Italy  depends  wholly  on  the  season,  each  month 
requires  a  different  plan  of  campaign.  The  Government  must  have 

The  Early  Years  67 

complete  confidence  in  its  general  and  allow  him  wide  latitude,  telling 
him  only  the  end  to  be  achieved.  It  takes  a  month  to  receive  a  reply  to 
a  dispatch  from  Savona  and  everything  can  change  in  that  time. 

When  Turin  is  ours  it  will  be  pointless  to  besiege  Alessandria  and 
Tortona;  we  shall  enter  the  Milanese  unimpeded,  as  though  it  were 
Champagne. 

The  Government  must  order  the  completion  of  the  pontoon  train 
for  the  Mincio  and  Oglio,  which  I  had  begun.  Everything  needed  for 
bridging  the  Po,  Adige,  Ticino  and  Tanaro  will  be  found  in  Italy. 

Wagons,  clothing  and  food  will  be  found  for  the  brave  army  that 
seizes  the  plains  of  Piedmont  and  the  Milanese. 

BUONAPARTE 

7i 
To  Citizen  Merlin 

Minister  of  Police  H.Q-,  Paris 

8  Pluviose,  Year  IV  (27  Jan,  1796) 

I  am  enclosing,  Citizen  Minister,  a  declaration  by  the  Justice  of 
die  Peace  of  Saint-Cloud  which  attests  that  the  troops  quartered  there 
are  maintaining  the  most  complete  discipline.  You  will  see,  therefore, 
that  the  charges  made  agauost  diem  are  false  and  can  only  be  the  work 
of  trouble-makers. 

BUONAPARTE 

72 
To  the  Executive  Directory 

H.Q.,  Paris 
23  Pluviose,  Year  IV  (12  Feb,  1796) 

Insurrection  is  making  noticeable  progress  in  the  departments  of 
the  Eure,  Eure-et-Loir  and  Loiret. 

In  the  department  of  the  Eure  General  Huet  has  seized  from  the 
brigands  a  store  of  several  hundred  rations  of  bread  which  they  had 
in  the  forest  of  Breteuil. 

In  the  department  of  the  Aisne  they  are  posting  counter-revolu- 
tionary notices  urging  citizens  not  to  pay  the  forced  loan. 

Young  men  of  the  first  requisition  are  rejoining  on  all  sides;  the 
department  of  the  Somme  alone  has  produced  nearly  3,000. 

I  must  praise  the  conduct  of  the  departmental  administration  of  the 
Eure;  but  in  the  other  departments  where  there  is  trouble  the  municipal 
authorities  behave  badly  or  feebly. 

I  have  organized  three  companies  from  among  the  former  gunners 
of  Paris  and  have  sent  them  to  the  coast.  This  step  was  suggested  to  me 
by  the  need  to  free  Paris  of  a  large  number  of  idle  men  and  to  provide 
for  the  coastal  defence  of  the  Seine-Inferieure. 

BUONAPARTE 

L.D.N. — D 

68  The  Rise  to  Power 

73 
To  Citizen  Aubert-Dubayet 

Minister  of  War  H.Q.,  Paris 

10  Ventose,  Year  IV  (29  Feb,  1796) 

Citizen  Minister,  the  Executive  Directory  has  decreed  that  part  of 
the  troops  and  equipment  in  the  9th,  loth  and  nth  Military  Districts 
should  be  sent  to  the  Army  of  Italy.  You  gave  the  consequential  orders 
more  than  a  month  ago.  Yet  I  am  informed  that  there  are  still  clothing, 
camp,  transport  and  artillery  stores  in  these  three  districts  which  are 
useless  for  their  present  needs.  I  wish  you  would  write  to  the  generals 
commanding  these  districts  to  send  to  me  without  delay,  to  Nice, 
returns  of  all  the  troops  in  their  districts;  to  the  three  artillery  com- 
manders to  send  me  returns  of  the  artillery  personnel  and  material, 
and  to  the  quartermasters  of  the  three  districts  to  send  me  returns  of 
the  stores  of  the  various  services,  and  to  let  me  have  those  things  that 
I  think  necessary  unless  they  believe  that  my  demands  will  compromise 
their  service,  and  then  to  report  to  you  at  once.* 

BONAPARTE 

74 
To  Citizen  Letourneur 

President  of  the  Executive  Directory  H.Q.,  Paris 

21  Ventose,  Year  IV  (11  Mar,  1796} 

I  had  charged  Citizen  Barras  with  informing  the  Executive  Directory 
of  my  marriage  to  Citizeness  Tascher  Beauharnais,  The  confidence 
shown  in  me  at  all  times  by  the  Directory  makes  it  my  duty  to  inform 
it  of  all  my  actions.  This  is  one  more  bond  linking  me  to  the  nation, 
another  pledge  of  my  firm  resolution  to  seek  honour  only  in  the 
Republic. 

The  Commander-m-Chief  of  the  Army  of  Italy 

BUONAPARTE 

*  Buonaparte  already  knew  of  his  appointment  to  command  the  Army  of 
Italy,  though  this  -was  not  gazetted  until  2  March.  He  was  succeeded  as  C.-in-C. 
of  the  Army  of  the  Interior  by  Hatry. 

Italy 

Medals  of  the  Italian  Campaign 

Above:  Millesimo-Dego  medal;  centre:  Mantua  medal;  below:  victory 

medal  (reverse). 

All  actual  size. 

BONAPARTE,  AS  HE  NOW  BEGAN  TO  SPELL  HIS  NAME,  REACHED  HIS 
headquarters  at  the  end  of  March  to  find  the  army  he  was  to  com- 
mand in  a  serious  plight.  The  barrenness  of  the  area,  lack  of 
money,  the  weaknesses  of  the  supply  system  and  the  English  blockade 
of  the  coast  had  combined  to  produce  desperate  shortages  of  food,  cloth- 
ing and  equipment  while  the  troops,  their  pay  in  arrears,  were  undis- 
ciplined and  mutinous.  He  at  once  took  such  steps  as  he  could  to  put 
thongs  right  (Nos.  75-86),  but  little  was  possible  in  the  existing  situation 
and  he  knew  well  enough  that  victory  was  the  best  means  both  of 
restoring  morale  and  obtaining  supplies^lt  was  also  essential  to  his  plans 
to  take  the  field  as  soon  as  possible,  and  after  a  few  days  he  began  to 
advance  and  within  a  fortnight  he  was  in  action.  The  supply  problem 
remained  acute  until  he  entered  the  Italian  plain;  the  problem  of  dis- 
cipline was  never  properly  solved  despite  his  fulminant  orders  against 
looting  and  straggling  (Nos.  97,  151),  for,  although  from  the  first 
battles  the  troops  became  loyal  and  devoted  and  always  fought  splen- 
didly, yet  even  a  year  later  they  were  still  when  off  the  battlefield  a 

Bernadotte  irom  tne  Army  of  tne  xvliine. 

^The  Army  of  Italy  had  been  in  action  during  every  year  since  1792 
and  had  achieved  notable  successes.  Nice  and  Savoy  had  early  been 
siezed  from  Piedmont,  and  Bonaparte  had  himself  taken  part  in  the 
victory  at  Dego  in  1794.  In  November,  1795,  Kdlermann's  victory  at 
Loano  had  brought  the  coast  as  far  as  Savona  under  French  control. 
But  through  the  policy  of  the  government  or  the  timidity  of  the  com- 
manders these  successes  were  not  exploited  as  they  might  have  been  and 
as  Bonaparte  had  suggested  they  should  be.  ** 
f  The  army  was  now  opposed  by  some  30,000  Austrians  under 
Beaulieu  and  some  20,000  Piedmontese  under  CollLx(The  fact  that 
Bonaparte  when  writing  to  the  Directory  added  the  garrison  and  base 
troops  of  the  enemy  and  so  almost  doubled  these  figures  is  typical  of 
the  exaggerations  he  often  found  it  expedient  to  adopt)  Lombardy  (the 
Duchy  of  Milan),  an  Austrian  province  ruled  by  the  Archduke  Ferdi- 
nand,-and  Naples  were  also  at  war  with  France,  but  apart  from  a  small 
force  of  Neapolitan  cavalry  neither  had  troops  in  the  field. 
]f*  Generally  speaking  the  peoples  of  Italy  were  either  apathetic  towards 
the  war  or  inclined  to  support  the  French.  The  exactions  of  their  alien 
or  clerical  rulers  and  the  attractions  of  the  revolutionary  principles  had 
in  most  of  the  states  produced  a  nucleus  of  republicanism  which  French 
agents  had  encouraged.  Only  Piedmont,  a  well-organized  state  under  a 
native  dynasty,  really  held  die  loyalty  of  its  subjects.  But  the  govern- 
ments were  unanimously  hostile  to  regicide  and  atheist  France  and  the 
majority  ,though  nominally  neutral,  openly  aided  the  allies.  Genoa 
alone,  like  Venice  a  wealthy  but  corrupt  oligarchy,  was  accessible  to 

72  The  Rise  to  Power 

French  influence  and  was  an  important  source  of  supplies  for  the  army; 
but  under  political  pressure  from  the  coalition  and  the  practical  threats 
of  the  English  fleet  it  had  recently  been  less  co-operative. 

Relations  with  Genoa  indirectly  determined  the  opening  stages  of  the 
new  campaign.  One  of  Scherer's  last  acts  had  been  to  send  forward  a 
brigade  under  Cervoni  to  occupy  Voltri  with  the  aim  of  forcing  the 
Genoese  to  grant  a  loan.  This  move  displeased  Bonaparte  (Nos.  75,  85), 
who  feared  it  would  alarm  the  enemy  prematurely,  but  in  the  event  it 
was  to  serve  him  well.  Beaulieu  determined  to  attack  this  vanguard 
with  his  main  force  while  a  secondary  attack  under  Argenteau  moved 
from  the  north  against  Savona  where  the  bulk  of  the  French  were  con- 
centrated; the  Piedmontese,  further  to  the  west  round  Ceva,  took  little 
part  in  these  first  moves.  This  plan  involved  the  dispersal  of  the  allied 
forces  in  rugged  mountain  country  where  communications  were 
difficult  and  rapid  concentration  impossible,  a  mistake  that  Bonaparte 
was  to  exploit  to  the  full.  Leaving  Serurier's  division  to  cover  the 
Piedmontese,  he  moved  the  bulk  of  the  army  against  Argenteau.  The 
victory  of  Montenotte  on  12  April  gave  him  the  junction  of  the  Turin 
and  Alessandria  roads  at  Carcare,  thus  cutting  the  contact  between 
Colli  to  the  west  and  Beaulieu  to  the  east.  Nos.  87  to  93  are  his  operation 
orders  preceding  the  battle,  No.  94  his  first  Order  of  the  Day  announc- 
ing victory  and  No.  95  his  first  victorious  dispatch  to  the  Directory. 

During  the  following  days  this  initial  advantage  was  further  de- 
veloped, and  after  French  successes  at  Millesimo  on  13  April  and  Dego 
on  the  I4th  and  I5th  Beaulieu  withdrew  all  his  forces  on  Acqui  where 
he  remained  more  or  less  inactive  while  Bonaparte  turned  rapidly  on 
Colli.  Outflanked  and  forced  to  abandon  their  strongly  fortified  posi- 
tions at  Ceva,  the  Piedmontese  were  brought  to  battle  and  defeated  at 
Mondovi  on  the  2ist  (No.  96).  The  next  day  Colli  sued  for  an  armistice 
and  in  the  early  hours  of  the  28th  he  accepted  Bonaparte's  terms 
(Nos.  98, 100,  104).  By  the  armistice  of  Cherasco  the  French  not  only 
eliminated  one  of  the  opposing  armies  but  also  opened  up  far  better 
lines  of  communication  with  France. 

The  Austrians  now  prepared  to  hold  the  line  of  the  Po,  and,  since 
Bonaparte  gave  every  indication  that  he  would  try  to  cross  at  Valenza, 
their  main  strength  concentrated  there  with  smaller  forces  on  the  tribu- 
taries to  the  east  But  a  strong  French  formation  was  moved  along  the 
right  bank  to  Piacenza,  where  a  crossing  was  made  on  7  May,  the  bulk 
of  the  army  quickly  following  (Nos.  106, 112).  The  Austrian  positions 
were  thus  turned  and  after  some  sharp  but  small-scale  actions  Beaulieu 
rather  tamely  drew  off  towards  Mantua,  abandoning  the  whole  of 
Lombardy  apart  from  a  small  garrison  in  the  citadel  of  Milan-ftThe 
famous  battle  of  Lodi  on  10  May  had  an  immense  influence  in  raising 
Bonaparte's  personal  self-confidence  and  the  prestige  of  the  Army  of 

73 

Italy  in  both  its  own  and  the  French  nation's  eyes;  but  it  had  little 
strategic  importance.  Beaulieu  had  no  intention  of  standing  west  of  the 
Mincio,  and,  as  the  Order  of  the  Day  (No.  116)  makes  clear,  the  battle 
was  fought  against  a  rearguard,  not  the  main  Austrian  army  as  is 
suggested  by  die  dispatch  (No.  117). 

Bonaparte  had  now  to  face  a  crisis  in  his  relations  with  the  govern- 
ment. In  granting  the  armistice  of  Cherasco  he  had  exceeded  the  strict 
letter  of  his  instructions  and  the  Directors  did  not  approve  the  ambitious 
schemes  he  proposed  in  No.  105.  They  intended  the  Army  of  Italy  to 
discipline  the  Italian  states  and  to  provide  no  more  than  a  holding 
diversion  against  the  Austrians  while  the  main  attack  was  launched  on 
the  Rhine;  they  also  proposed  to  divide  the  army  into  two  separate 
commands  with  Kellermann  in  control  against  the  Austrians  while 
Bonaparte  moved  south  in  Italy.  His  criticism  of  this  foolish  plan  (Nos. 
121,  122)  was  unanswerable  and  no  more  was  heard  of  it.  A  few  days 
later  he  was  also  able  to  send  off  the  first  of  many  consignments  of 
plunder  which  'forged  a  link  of  gold  between  the  general  and  the 
government'  (Nos.  129,  130).  Thereafter  his  relations  with  the  Directory 
were  often  strained,  but  there  were  few  further  attempts  to  control  his 
policy. 

Another  worry  that  never  left  him  until  Josephine  joined  Hm  at  the 
beginning  of  July  was  her  constant  refusal  on  one  pretext  or  another  to 
leave  Paris  and  her  failure  to  write  to  him  in  sufficiently  loving  terms  or 
even  for  long  periods  to  write  at  all  (Nos.  84,  103,  120,  140). 

On  15  May  Bonaparte  entered  Milan  and  was  for  the  first  time  faced 
with  problems  of  political  organization,  for  which  he  had  neither 
specific  instructions  nor  defined  powers.  (Cp.  No,  126.)  With  the 
Austrian  army  still  in  the  field  he  at  first  simply  encouraged  the  friends 
of  France  while  retaining  most  of  the  former  administration  under 
military  control;  to  supply  the  army  and  satisfy  the  Directors  he  also 
had  to  impose  heavy  contributions  (Nos.  133,  134).  All  this  produced  a 
sharp  reaction  and  on  25  May  there  was  a  serious  revolt  at  Pavia  and 
rioting  at  Milan  which  were  severely  repressed  (Nos.  143,  144). 

On  22  May  he  learned  that  peace  with  Piedmont  had  been  signed, 
thus  securing  his  communications.  He  at  once  moved  against  Beaulieu, 
who  was  holding  the  line  of  the  Mincio,  and  after  heavy  fighting  at 
Borghetto  and  elsewhere  the  Austrians  were  driven  in  disorder  up  the 
Adige  and  into  the  Alps.  This  uncovered  Mantua,  which  was  promptly 
besieged  by  the  French  (No.  147).  The  fortress  was  the  key  to  control 
of  north  Italy  and  Austrian  efforts  to  relieve  it  dominated  the  strategy 
of  the  ensuing  months, 

But  for  the  moment  the  enemy  was  incapable  of  action,  and  during 
the  second  half  of  June  Bonaparte  moved  small  forces  south  and  west 
in  order  to  drive  the  English  from  Leghorn  (No.  162)  and  to  overawe 

74  The  Rise  to  Powet 

the  Roman  and  Neapolitan  courts  (No.  161).  He  quickly  succeeded; 
Leghorn  was  occupied  and  Rome  and  Naples  sued  for  peace.  By  the 
armistice  of  Foligno  on  the  23rd  the  French  gained  large  sums  from  the 
Pope  in  cash  and  treasure  and  occupied  Ancona  and  the  papal  cities  of 
Bologna,  Reggio  and  Ferrara  (No.  164).  In  October  these  three  cities, 
together  with  Modena,  were  to  form  themselves  into  the  Cispadane 
Republic,  a  step  approved  by  Bonaparte;  at  about  the  same  time  the 
English  left  Corsica  and  evacuated  the  Mediterranean,  and  he  was 
forced  to  attend  to  the  government  of  his  native  island  (No.  189). 
These  things  apart,  from  July  to  the  following  February  he  was  con- 
cerned to  keep  the  political  position  stable,  for  this  was  a  period  of 
repeated  and  desperate  fighting. 

By  detaching  troops  from  the  Rhine  front,  where  the  French  offen- 
sive was  dekyed,  cautious  and  unsuccessful,  the  Austrians  made  four 
successive  efforts  to  crush  the  French  in  Italy  and  relieve  Mantua.  Each 
came  very  close  to  success  and  stretched  the  resources  of  the  Army  of 
Italy  to  the  uttermost  (cp.  No.  196).  There  were  many  variations  of 
detail,  but  all  four  were  essentially  designed  as  enveloping  movements. 
This  strategy  led  to  complex  operations  and  numerous  actions;  it  often 
succeeded  in  bewildering  the  French  command  and  seriously  mauling 
some  of  their  formations,  but  it  also  enabled  Bonaparte  to  fight  on 
interior  lines  against  a  divided  enemy,  and  in  each  case  his  insight  and 
speed  of  movement  succeeded  in  crushing  the  main  threat  in  a  decisive 
battle. 

At  the  end  of  July  Beaulieu's  successor,  Wurmser,  attacked  down  the 
Adige  while  a  secondary  column  under  Quosdanovitch  overran 
Sauret's  positions  west  of  Lake  Garcia  and  captured  Brescia.  The 
Austrians  were  finally  stopped  at  Castiglione  on  5  August,  but  by  then 
Bonaparte  had  been  forced  to  raise  the  siege,  abandon  Hs  siege  train  and 
allow  Mantua  to  be  revictualled.  In  mid-September  a  second  offensive 
by  Wurmser  was  routed  at  Bassano;  he  cut  his  way  through  to  Mantua 
but  was  driven  into  the  city  and  the  siege  was  renewed  (Nos.  179, 180). 
Jn  October  Bonaparte  called  on  Wurmser  to  surrender  and  on  the 
Emperor  to  make  peace  (Nos.  186-7),  but  neither  responded,  and 
shortly  afterward  the  third  Austrian  blow  was  struck,  Alvinzi  advanc- 
ing from  the  east  through  Verona  and  Davidovitch  down  the  Adige; 
this  threat  was  defeated  at  Arcola  where  Bonaparte  himself  was  nearly 
killed  (Nos.  195-7).  The  final  Austrian  effort,  led  by  Alvinzi  and  Pro- 
vera,  was  made  in  January  when  their  main  body  was  destroyed  at 
Rivoli  (No.  208).  On  2  February  Mantua  surrendered  ^Nos.  212,  214, 
216). 

Bonaparte  now  moved  south  again  with  Victor's  division ,  denounced 
the  armistice  of  Foligno  and  forced  the  treaty  of  Tolentino  on  the  Pope 
(Nos.  191, 209, 211, 218-19).  Early  in  March  he  was  back  and,  although 

75 

to  his  constant  concern  the  French  armies  on  the  Rhine  had  made  no 
move,  he  launched  his  own  offensive  against  the  Austrians.  By  a  series 
of  well-planned  movements  and  successful  actions  he  drove  the  Arch- 
duke Charles  back  in  confusion  through  the  gorges  of  Tyrol  and 
Carinthia  as  far  as  Leoben.  There,  on  18  April,  were  signed  an  armistice 
and  preliminaries  of  peace  whose  main  terms  were  that  France  was  to 
gain  the  Rhine  frontier,  the  Austrian  Netherlands  (Belgium)  and  con- 
trol of  Italy  west  of  the  Oglio,  while  Austria  would  be  partly  com- 
pensated through  the  partition  of  Venice  (Nos.  221-7,  231,  233). 

In  preparation  for  this  and  on  the  ground  of  incidents  at  least  some  of 
which  were  provoked,  Bonaparte  at  once  overthrew  the  Venetian 
government  and  occupied  its  lands  (Nos.  229,  236-8,  240,  242-3).  The 
acquisition  of  the  Ionian  islands  clearly  stimulated  his  ideas  of  oversea 
conquest  and  heralded  the  next  stage  in  his  career  (Nos.  244,  254,  etc.). 
In  June  less  forceful  intervention  was  needed  to  remove  the  Genoese  oli- 
garchy in  favour  of  the  democratic  Ligurian  Republic  (Nos.  243,  246), 
a  step,  as  he  thought,  on  the  road  to  union  with  France  (No.  265).  In 
July  the  Cisalpine  Republic  was  formed  by  the  union  of  Lombardy  and 
the  Cispadane  with  a  constitution  largely  modelled  on  that  of  France, 
but  with  the  first  authorities  appointed  by  Bonaparte;  his  moderate 
appointments  and  firm  repression  of  both  Jacobin  and  clerical  extremes 
was  perhaps  the  wisest  and  most  fruitful  aspect  of  his  whole  Italian 
policy  (No.  264).  In  October  the  Venetian  lands  west  of  the  Adige  and 
in  November  the  Swiss  territory  of  the  ValtelHne  were  added  to  the 
Cisalpine. 

^Meanwhile  the  Austrians  were  dragging  out  the  peace  negotiations 
in  hope  of  a  restoration  of  the  monarchy  in  Paris,  where  largely  royalist 
chambers  were  at  grips  with  the  regicide  executive.  The  crisis  was  solved 
at  the  coup  d'etat  of  Fructidor  (4  September),  when  Augereau  purged 
the  chambers,  drove  the  moderate  Carnot  from  the  Directory  and  in- 
stalled staunch  Jacobins  in  power.  Publicly  Bonaparte  held  aloo£  but  in 
private  he  abetted  this  solution;  as  a  presumed  agent  of  the  Directors  he 
had  come  in  for  his  share  of  attacks  to  which  he  had  forcefully  replied 
(Nos.  248-9),  but  it  is  dear  from  No.  259  that  his  political  thought  was 
already  moving  along  other  lines.  The  Austrians  now  perforce  agreed 
to  make  peace  and  the  treaty  of  Campio  Fonnio  was  signed  on 
17  October  (Nos.  261-2).^ 

^  For  the  moment  the  continental  war  was  at  an  end,  and  Bonaparte 
was  ordered  to  prepare  for  the  invasion  of  England,  the  sole  remaining 
enemy.  On  15  November  he  handed  over  command  of  the  army  to 
Berthier  and,  after  spending  a  few  days  at  Rastadt  where  he  was  a 
French  delegate  to  the  congress  to  settle  the  affairs  of  the  Holy  Roman 
Empire,  he  reached  Paris  on  5  December, 

76  The  Rise  to  Power 

THE  REPUBLICAN  ARMIES 

"When  Bonaparte  assumed  command  of  the  Army  of  Italy  there  was 
in  progress  the  last  of  a  series  of  reforms  which  converted  the  old  royal 
army  into  a  military  establishment  essentially  modern  in  administra- 
tion and  structure.  The  chief  effect  of  this  last  change  was  to  increase 
the  size  and  decrease  the  number  of  units  through  amalgamations.  It 
finally  took  effect  in  the  Army  of  Italy  on  26  May,  1796,  and  in  other 
commands  at  about  the  same  time,  and  the  military  organization  which 
it  completed  remained  unaltered  until  the  end  of  the  continental  revolu- 
tionary war  in  1801.  Thereafter,  when  building  the  huge  armies  of  the 
Empire,  Napoleon  and  his  lieutenants  introduced  many  reforms;  yet 
the  military  structure  set  up  by  the  Republic  was  not  fundamentally 
changed  until  after  1815. 

For  both  operational  and  administrative  purposes  the  basic  and 
permanent  infantry  unit  was  the  'demi-brigade'.  After  the  reforms  of 
1796  the  whole  French  army  contained  one  hundred  and  ten  numbered 
Demi-brigades  of  the  Line  together  with  thirty  Light  Infantry  Demi- 
brigades  carrying  separate  serial  numbers.  A  colonel's  command,  the 
demi-brigade  had  a  nominal  establishment  of  3,000  organized  in  three 
battalions  under  majors.  Battalions  were  divided  into  eight  companies 
under  captains,  companies  into  troops  under  subalterns,  troops  into 
sections  under  n.c.o/s.  Infantry  of  the  line  were  termed  'fusiliers',  light 
infantrymen  'chasseurs',  but  the  first  company  in  each  battalion  was  an 
elite  unit  which  marched  at  the  head  of  the  column  and  was  called 
upon  for  the  more  hazardous  operations;  its  members  were  known 
as  'grenadiers'  in  the  line  units  and  'carabiniers5  in  the  light  infantry.* 

Most  units  were  usually  well  below  establishment  in  other  ranks, 
the  average  strength  of  demi-brigades  in  the  Army  of  Italy  during 
Bonaparte's  command  being  less  than  2,000;  at  the  same  time  they  also 
usually  carried  a  number  of  supernumerary  officers  who  were  available 
as  replacements  and  for  special  duties.  Demi-brigades  found  their  own 
staff  and  service  personnel,  civilians  (including  women)  being  carried 
on  the  strength  as  cooks,  tailors,  laundresses,  etc.  The  chief  staff  officer 
of  a  demi-brigade  held  the  special  staff  rank  of  adjutant-major  (ranking 
with  captain),  that  of  a  battalion  of  adjutant-captain  (ranking  with 

*  Demi-brigades  were  first  formed  in  1793  by  the  amalgamation,  of  formerly 
independent  battalions,  usually  on  the  basis  of  one  of  regulars  to  two  of  volunteers. 
The  distinction  then  disappeared,  since  all  were  incorporated  in  a  unified  French 
army.  To  raise  the  forces  needed,  the  levee  en  masse  was  decreed  at  the  same  time, 
and  this  unwieldy  general  obligation  of  military  service  was  pkced  on  a  more 
rational  and  effective  basis  by  Jourdan's  conscription  kw  of  1798.  (Conscription 
as  it  is  known  today  dates  from  this  measure.)  Serial  numbers  for  units,  in  pkce  of 
the  territorial  titles  of  the  royal  army,  were  also  adopted  in  1793*  but,  like  many 
other  changes,  this  took  effect  only  over  a  period  of  years;  there  were  still  a  few 
named  units  in  the  Army  of  Italy  when  Bonaparte  reached  it. 

Italy 77 

lieutenant).  Each  demi-brigade  had  a  depot  for  training,  equipping  and 
forwarding  recruits,  holding  stores  and  keeping  records;  depots  were 
mobile  but  remained  in  France,  forward  depots  being  set  up  in  the 
rear  areas  of  armies  on  active  service  beyond  the  frontiers. 

Grenades  were  sometimes  used  against  fortified  positions,  but  other- 
wise the  musket  and  bayonet  were  the  only  weapons  of  the  soldiers  of 
the  line.*  The  light  infantry  were  generally  similarly  equipped,  though 
in  theory  and  sometimes  in  practice  they  held  carbines,  which  were 
shorter  and  lighter  but  rather  less  efficient  than  the  musket;  some 
carabiniers  were  equipped  with  rifles,  but,  while  the  far  greater  range 
and  accuracy  of  these  made  them  ideal  sniping  weapons,  the  extreme 
difficulty  of  loading  made  them  almost  useless  for  any  other  purpose 
and  they  were  withdrawn  during  the  Empire. 

The  line  units  were  heavy  assault  troops  designed  to  fight  in  close 
order  in  pitched  battle  and  to  carry  the  day  by  the  volume  of  their 
fire-power  and  the  weight  of  their  bayonet  charge;  numerous  tactical 
formations — line,  column,  battalion  square,  etc. — were  used  for  differ- 
ent purposes.  Light  infantry,  on  the  other  hand,  were  designed  for 
mobility  rather  than  weight  and  for  open-order  skirmishing  rather 
than  fighting  in  mass.  Their  uses  included  reconnaissance,  sniping, 
patrolling  and  the  provision  of  covering  forces;  in  battle  their  model 
role  was  to  make  first  contact  with  the  enemy,  harass  and  disorganize 
his  movement  or  position,  and,  as  the  lines  became  engaged,  to  retire 
onto  the  flanks  where  they  could  make  useful  diversions  and  encircling 
attacks. 

The  basic  cavalry  unit  was  the  'regiment'  of  800  men,  organized 
in  squadrons  and  troops,  the  regimental  command  and  administrative 
structure  being  in  all  essential  respects  identical  with  that  of  the  infantry 
demi-brigade.  There  were  in  all  some  twenty-five  Regiments  each  of 
(mounted)  Chasseurs,  Hussars,  Dragoons  and  (heavy)  Cavalry  or 
Cuirassiers.  The  chasseurs  and  hussars  were  light  cavalry  trained  for 
long-range  reconnaissance  and  pursuit;  the  cuirassiers,  who  alone  were 
armoured  with  helmet  and  breastplate,  were  primarily  intended  for 
the  charge  in  battle;  the  dragoons  were  available  in  either  role.  All 
cavalry  were  armed  with  sabres  and  with  either  pistols  or  carbines, 
and,  with  the  exception  of  the  cuirassiers,  all  were  trained  to  fight  on 
foot  as  well  as  on  horseback  and  so  to  act  as  mounted  infantry* 

*  The  musket  was  a  muzzle-loading  flint-lock  of  a  pattern  introduced  in  1777, 
which,  slightly  modified  in  1800,  continued  in  use  throughout  the  Empire.  It  was 
of  17-5  mmT  calibre  and  weighed  loj  Ibs.  It  could  not  be  aimed  accurately  at 
ranges  beyond  some  sixty  yards  and  its  effective  killing  range  was  perhaps 
five  times  th«  distance.  But  musket  balls  would  travel  several  hundred  yards 
beyond  their  killing  range,  a»d  the  prevalence  of  such  'spent  balls*  on  the  densely 
populated  battlefields  of  the  time  accounts  for  the  large  number  of  superficial 
wounds  reported. 

78  The  Rise  to  Power 

The  artillery  and  engineers  were  also  organized  in  'regiments',  but 
this  was  mainly  for  administrative  purposes  in  the  metropolitan  bases, 
and  operational  postings  normally  took  place  at  a  lower  level.  Both 
were  highly  trained,  specialized  arms  almost  entirely  composed  of 
long-service  professional  soldiers;  volunteers  and  conscripts  could  serve 
in  them  only  as  labourers,  and  graduation  through  the  appropriate 
military  schools  was  essential  for  commissioned  rank.  There  had  been 
some  dilution  during  the  Revolution  but  the  results  were  not  happy, 
and  the  rules  were  strictly  enforced  again  once  Bonaparte  reached 
power. 

The  duties  of  the  engineers  included  everything  to  do  with  the  con- 
struction and  demolition  of  fortifications,  all  military  building,  bridg- 
ing, road  making  and  cartography.  The  service  necessarily  contained 
a  high  proportion  of  officers,  but  there  were  specialist  companies  of 
sappers,  miners,  smiths,  masons,  and  pontoon  and  bridging  teams  as  well 
as  general  pioneer  battalions. 

Artillery  regiments  contained  twelve  companies,  divided  into  troops; 
about  a  quarter  were  mounted,  the  remainder  foot  companies.  All 
guns,  limbers  and  ammunition  -wagons  were  horse-drawn,  but  the 
artillery  horses  were  not  army  property  and  were  supplied  by  civilian 
contractors,  supplemented  in  occupied  territory  (and  occasionally  in 
France  itself)  by  requisitioning.  Guns  of  a  great  many  different  calibres 
were  in  use;  from  2-pounders  to  12-pounders  formed  the  normal  field 
artillery,  with  16-  and  24-pounders  in  the  siege-trains;  heavier  guns 
were  used  in  static  coastal  defence  positions  and  permanent  fortresses. 
All  guns  fired  round  shot  (cannon-balls)  and  case  shot  (an  anti- 
personnel weapon  consisting  of  a  'case'  of  small  projectiles,  the  fore- 
runner of  shrapnel).  Explosive  shell  was  fired  from  howitzers,  mostly 
of  6-  or  8-inch  calibre,  and  8-,  10-  and  12-inch  mortars  firing  bombs 
were  used  in  siege  work.*  The  extreme  range  of  guns  firing  round 
shot  was  about  3,000  yards,  but  they  were  inaccurate  beyond  some 
1,200  yards;  case  shot  was  considered  ineffective  beyond  800  yards, 

*  The  development  of  the  percussion  fuse  enabled  all  guns  to  fire  explosive 
shot,  and  today  a  howitzer  is  simply  a  short-barrelled,  high-angle  gun  of  relatively 
large  calibre  and  low  muzzle-velocity.  But  in  Napoleon's  time  shell  could  be 
fired  only  from  just  such  a  gun;  short  barrel,  since  the  fuses  of  shells  had  to  be 
ignited  down  the  barrel  after  loading;  high  angle,  since  one  of  the  chief  uses  of 
shell  was  plunging  fire  against  fortifications;  large  calibre,  since  only  low  explosives 
were  available  and  a  fairly  large  projectile  was  needed  to  produce  much  effect; 
low  velocity,  owing  to  the  danger  of  premature  bursts  with  the  cast-iron  cases 
generally  used.  The  French  word  for  ^howitzer',  obitsier  (obus — shell),  still 
suggests  the  original  function  of  these  weapons.  Though  it  was  seldom  done, 
shell  could  in  fact  be  fired  from  ordinary  guns  by  the  use  of  special  methods  and 
devices,  and  in  1788  Buonaparte  was  a  member  of  a  regimental  committee 
appointed  to  experiment  and  report  on  these;  his  interesting,  but  highly  technical 
report  still  exists  and  was  printed  by  Masson  in  NapoUon  Inconnu. 

Italy 79 

and  the  extreme  range  of  howitzers  was  about  600  yards.  Guns  were 
normally  used  at  ranges  far  less  than  these  maximum  figures.  Two  of 
the  most  important  military  reforms  later  carried  out  by  Napoleon 
were  the  placing  of  artillery  horses  on  the  regular  army  establishment 
and  the  standardization  of  only  a  few  different  calibres  throughout  the 
service.  There  was  no  separate  ordnance  service,  and  the  artillery  arm 
was  responsible  for  the  arsenals,  the  manufacture  of  ammunition, 
including  infantry  cartridges,  and  for  the  storage  and  distribution  of 
all  military  supplies  other  than  those  of  the  engineers. 

The  whole  of  the  commissariat  was  in  the  hands  of  civilians.  At 
the  staff  level  and  responsible  for  the  general  supervision  of  all  the 
supply,  transport,  financial  and  medical  services  was  a  special  body  of 
officials  divided  into  the  three  ranks  of  quartermaster-general,  quarter- 
master and  war  commissary.  This  contained  some  able  men  who  made 
it  their  career;  but  many  posts  were  filled  by  temporary  appointments 
(both  Joseph  and  Lucien  Bonaparte  served  for  a  time)  and  as  a  whole 
the  commissary  service  was  neither  efficient  nor  tree  from  corruption. 
Much  the  same  may  be  said  of  the  separate  paymaster  service  which 
was  administratively  under  its  control.  Supplies  of  food,  forage  and 
clothing,  and  transport  were  provided  on  a  contract  basis  by  com- 
mercial companies,  whose  agents  accompanied  the  armies  in  the  field 
and  were  often  more  concerned  to  line  their  own  pockets  than  to 
serve  the  troops. 

The  medical  service  presented  a  different  picture.  Unit  surgeons  were 
often  only  semi-trained,  but  France  possessed  several  combined  military 
hospitals  and  medical  schools,  based  on  the  Invalides  and  a  central 
directorate,  and  these  produced  devoted  and  skilful  doctors  who  staffed 
the  rear  hospitals  and  the  'flying  ambulances',  the  mobile  field  dressing 
stations  devised  by  Larrey  in  1793  and,  within  a  few  years,  attached 
to  every  division  on  active  service.  This  organization,  combined  with 
a  good  deal  of  inventiveness  and  a  strict  regard  for  cleanliness,  gave 
the  French  armies  of  the  later  Revolution  and  Empire  a  far  lower  rate 
of  loss  from  sickness  and  a  far  higher  rate  of  recovery  from  wounds 
than  any  other  army  of  the  time. 

At  one  period  in  1793  there  were  no  less  than  thirteen  separate 
French  armies  in  the  field,  but  this  unwieldy  number  quickly  decreased 
and  by  1796  had  dropped  to  seven  and  by  the  time  of  Brumaire  to  five. 
Their  strength  varied  from  a  few  thousand  to  over  100,000  men,  the 
Army  of  the  Rhine,  in  1800,  at  120,000,  being  the  largest  distinct 
French  force  before  the  Grand  Army.  The  Commander-in-Chief  of 
each  army  had  at  his  disposal  a  staff  headed  by  a  major-general  with 
two  or  more  brigadiers  as  assistants,  about  half  a  dozen  adjutants- 

aeral  and  a  number  of  junior  officers.  (Adjutants-general  held  the 

"hest  of  the  special  staff  ranks;  they  did  not  rate  as  generals,  but  it 

8o  The  Rise  to  Power 

is  perhaps  not  surprising  that  they  behaved  as  if  they  did,  and  to  pre- 
vent the  resulting  abuses  the  name  of  the  rank  was  changed  in  1800 
to  adjutant-commandant.)  General  staffs  were  small  and  often  no  more 
than  adequately  efficient.  Staff  officers  received  no  special  training  and 
mostly  were  only  temporarily  so  employed  between  fighting  com- 
mands; those  who  regarded  staff  work  as  a  profession  were  few,  and 
those  who,  like  Berthier,  were  notably  competent  at  it  fewer  still. 
At  the  head  of  the  service  staff  stood  the  quartermaster-general  with 
three  or  four  assistant  quartermasters  and  a  number  of  war  commis- 
saries. The  army  surgeon-general  and  paymaster-general  were  admin- 
istratively subordinate  to  the  Q.M.G.  but  personally  responsible  for 
the  technical  aspects  of  their  own  services. 

Demi-brigades  and  cavalry  regiments  normally  moved  and  fought 
as  complete  units.  They  were  posted  to  armies  as  the  need  arose  and 
were  there  brigaded  ad  hoc  into  divisions,  which  had  no  fixed  estab- 
lishment and  whose  size  varied  according  to  circumstances  and  the 
decision  of  the  army  commander.  Infantry  divisions  might  contain 
anything  from  two  to  seven  or  eight  demi-brigades,  three  or  four 
being  the  most  common  number,  usually  in  the  proportion  of  one 
light  infantry  to  two  of  the  line.  They  were  true  divisions  containing 
all  arms,  since  cavalry,  artillery  and  engineer  units  'were  attached  to 
them,  but  the  bulk  of  the  cavalry  was  usually  organized  in  special 
cavalry  divisions  and  a  proportion  of  the  guns  and  most  engineer  units 
were  retained  in  centralized  parks.  Each  army  had  separate  com- 
manders of  cavalry,  of  artillery  and  of  engineers,  who  had  each  his  own 
staff  and  administrative  control  of  all  troops  of  his  own  arm  and 
often  operational  command  of  those  not  attached  to  the  divisions. 

Divisions  were  commanded  by  major-generals,  with  two  or  more 
brigadiers  under  them  according  to  the  size  of  the  division.  Divisional 
staffs  mirrored  the  army  staff  in  every  respect,  but  on  a  smaller  scale 
and  at  a  lower  level;  they  were  headed  by  adjutants-general  with  war 
commissaries  as  the  chief  commissariat  officers. 

Brigades  were  simply  fighting  commands  without  distinct  staffs,  and 
their  organization  was  very  fluid.  The  army  corps  had  not  yet  appeared 
as  a  field  formation,  and  divisional  commanders  were  directly  respon- 
sible to  the  C.-in-C.  Towards  the  end  of  the  Italian  campaign  Joubert, 
Massena  and  Bernadotte  was  each  at  various  times  placed  in  control 
of  two  or  more  divisions  but  retained  command  of  his  own,  and 
true,  though  very  sketchily  organized,  corps  were  formed  during  the 
Marengo  and  Hohenlinden  campaigns;  both  the  term  *army  corps*  and 
the  tide  'lieutenant-general'  (it  has  never  in  the  French  army  been 
strictly  speaking  a  rank*)  appeared  at  that  time.  This  development 

*  It  had  earlier  been  used  occasionally  for  special  appointments;  see,  for  instance, 
No.  29  where  PaolTs  appointment  as  Lieutenant-General  of  Corsica  is  referred  to. 

Italy  8 1 

was  finally  to  be  completed  in  the  permanent,  fully  staffed,  and 
numbered  corps  of  the  Grand  Army.  It  was  only  then,  too,  that  the 
numbering  and  regular  establishment  of  divisions  came  into  force, 
though  in  1797  Bonaparte  introduced  numbers  into  the  Army  of 
Italy  in  place  of  the  unsatisfactory  but  usual  custom  of  referring  to 
divisions  by  the  names  of  their  commanders.  (Cp.  No.  210.) 

Metropolitan  France  was  divided  into  twenty-three  (ultimately 
thirty-two)  Military  Districts  commanded  by  brigadiers  or  major- 
generals.*  District  commanders  were  responsible  for  the  defensive 
garrisons  and  fortresses  and  had  some  supervisory  but  not  necessarily 
operational  control  over  other  military  establishments  in  their  areas. 
But  their  main  duties  were  to  preserve  internal  order  and  to  act  in 
concert  with  the  civil  authorities  and  as  agents  of  the  central  govern- 
ment; they  had  control  of  the  gendarmerie  and  national  guards  and  of 
a  variable  number  of  regular  troops.  Their  staffs  were  similar  to  those 
of  field  divisions.  Districts  occupied  by  or  in  the  rear  areas  of  the  field 
armies  were  usually  allotted  to  those  armies  as  supply  and  communica- 
tion zones  and  placed  under  the  control  of  the  army  commanders; 
thus  Bonaparte  became  responsible  for  the  8th  District  in  1796  and 
in  1800  the  i8th  and  ipth  Districts  were  allotted  to  the  Reserve  Army. 

Administrative  control  of  both  field  armies  and  home  establishments 
was  centred  in  the  Ministry  of  War.  A  strong  and  knowledgeable 
minister  serving  a  weak  government  could  sometimes  also  achieve  a 
good  deal  of  operational  control,  but  grand  strategy  and  operational 
planning  generally  remained  in  the  hands  of  the  government,  which 
had,  in  the  Topographical  Office,  a  specialized  advisory  body  inde- 
pendent of  the  Ministry.  As  a  field  commander  Bonaparte  corre- 
sponded with  the  minister  on  administrative  matters  but,  whether  the 
minister  was  an  insignificant  Petiet  or  a  soldier  of  the  standing  of 
Scherer,  on  all  operational  matters  he  wrote  to  the  Directors.*}* 

Government  control  over  the  armies  was  greatly  increased  by  a 
Decree  of  April,  1793.  Prompted  by  the  desertion  and  treachery  of  so 
many  officers,  this  laid  down  that  three  members  of  the  Convention 
should  be  attached  to  each  of  the  armies  as  Representatives  of  the 
People  'invested  with  unlimited  powers*.  The  Representatives  carried 
out  their  duties  despotically  and  ruthlessly,  intervening  in  every  aspect 
of  military  service  and  often  reducing  the  army  commanders  to  little 

*  See  map,  p.  xxxii. 

f  It  must  be  remembered  that  the  ministers  did  not,  as  they  do  in  a  modern 
parliamentary  democracy,  themselves  form  the  government.  They  were  important 
officials  and  sometimes  influential  political  figures,  but  they  were  always  subordin- 
ated to  a  superior  government  whether  Convention,  Committee  of  Public 
Safety,  Directors,  Consuls  or  Emperor.  American  rather  than  British  constitu- 
tional arrangements  are  the  closer  analogy. 

82  The  Rise  to  Power 

more  than  technical  consultants  and  subordinates.  (It  was  mainly  due 
to  the  favourable  opinion  of  the  Representatives  with  whom  he  served 
— Barras,  Fr&ron,  Saliceti,  Robespierre — that  Buonaparte  received  his 
early  opportunities.)  With  the  coming  of  the  Directory  the  Repre- 
sentatives were  replaced  by  Government  Commissioners,  who  could 
not  be  deputies  and  whose  powers  were  less;  these  were  still  almost 
complete  in  the  political  and  diplomatic  spheres  and  considerable  in 
the  administrative,  but  operational  control  was  wholly  reserved  to  the 
soldiers,  though  the  commissioners  were  still  expected  to  keep  an  eye 
on  the  political  loyalty  of  the  military  chiefs.  In  the  Army  of  Italy 
Bonaparte  was  quick  to  repress  any  intrusion  of  the  commissioners  into 
his  own  functions,  and  he  quickly  reduced  them  to  a  position  of  com- 
plete subordination.  (Cp.  No.  166.  Saliceti,  at  first  the  sole  commis- 
sioner, was  in  any  case  a  friend  who  did  not  dispute  his  supremacy  and 
worked  in  complete  harmony  with  him.)  When  he  formed  the  Army 
of  the  East  the  nominal  commissioner,  Poussielgue,  was  his  own 
appointee  with  the  real  function  of  heading  the  civil  administration 
of  the  conquered  territory.  The  whole  system  was  formally  abolished 
at  the  beginning  of  the  Consulate. 

THE  ARMY  OF  ITALY 

It  is  not  possible  to  give  a  useful  Order  of  Battle  of  the  Army  of  Italy  during 
1796-7  since  it  seldom  remained  constant  for  more  than  a  few  weeks  at  a  time. 
"When  Bonaparte  took  command  the  army  had  a  strength  of  about  45,000  and 
contained  four  field  divisions  of  infantry  under  Mass&ia,  Augereau,  Serurier  and 
Laharpe  and  one  of  cavalry  under  Kilrnaine.  Other  senior  officers  were:  C.  ofS., 
Berthier;  Deputy  C.  ofS.t  Vignolle;  Cdr.  Cavalry,  Stengel;  Cdr.  Artillery,  Dujard; 
Cdr.  Engineers,  Chasseloup;  Q.M.G.,  Chauvet.  Berthier  was  appointed  at  the  same 
time  as  Bonaparte,  who  also  brought  as  aides-de-camp  Murat,  Marmont  and 
Junot.  Gaultier,  the  former  Chief  of  Staff,  remained  in  charge  of  rear  H.Q.  By 
the  armistice  of  Leoben  the  strength  had  risen  to  about  85,000  with  eight  infantry 
and  two  cavalry  divisions:  ist,  Massena;  2nd,  Augereau;  yd,  Bernadotte;  4th, 
Serurier;  $th,  Joubert;  6th,  Baraguey  d'Hilliers;  jth,  Delmas;  &th,  Victor;  ist  Cav., 
Dugua;  2nd  Cav.,  Dumas. 

Initially,  Saliceti  was  the  only  Government  Commissioner  attached  to  the  army, 
but  in  June  Garrau  and  Haller  were  sent  out,  the  latter  in  charge  of  the  levying  of 
contributions,  In  November  Clarke  arrived  as  a  special  Commissioner  to  negotiate 
with  the  Austrians. 

At  the  beginning  of  May,  1796,  Bonaparte  withdrew  the  bulk  of  the  grenadier 
and  carabinier  companies  from  the  divisions  and  brigaded  them  into  a  special  elite 
formation  commanded  by  Daflemagne  and  Lannes.  This  'Advance-guard'  led  the 
army  at  me  crossing  of  the  Po  and  the  bridge  of  Lodi.  The  practice  was  common 
in  most  armies  of  the  time;  it  gave  the  commander  a  powerful  and  reliable 
weapon,  but  by  removing  their  best  elements  it  seriously  weakened  the  fighting 
potential  of  the  ordinary  divisions.  Bonaparte  seems  quickly  to  have  seen  tms  dis- 
advantage, for  he  maintained  the  system  only  for  a  few  weeks  and  never  again 
resorted  to  it. 

ITALY 

Above:  in  March,  1796- 
Below:  after  the  Treaty  of  Campp  Fonmo. 
The  shading  shows  the  French  and  Austrian  alliance  systems. 

The  Rise  to  Power 

NORTH  ITALY 

Italy 

AREA  OF  FIRST  OPERATIONS,  1796 

MANTUA 

86  The  Rise  to  Power 

75 

To  the  Executive  Directory 

H.Q.,  Nice 
8  Germinal,  Year  IV  (28  Mar,  ij$6) 

For  several  days  I  have  been  in  the  midst  of  the  army  and  I  assumed 
;ommand  yesterday.* 

^"Tmust  mention  three  essential  matters,  i.  The  departments  of 
tfaucluse,  Bouches-du-Rhone,  Var  and  Basses-Alpes.  2.  The  condition 
:>f  the  army;  what  I  have  done  and  what  I  hope  to  do.  3.  Our  political 
position  with  Genoa. 

The  four  departments  of  the  army  area  have  not  paid  the  forced 
.oan  or  contributions  in  corn,  nor  carried  out  the  delivery  of  forage 
required  by  the  kw  of  7  Vendemiaire,  nor  begun  the  levy  of  one  horse 
in  thirty.  These  authorities  act  very  slowly,  I  have  written  to  them, 
[  have  seen  them,  and  they  have  led  me  to  hope  for  some  energy  in 
these^  matters  so  essential  to  the  army. 

*rhe  administrative  position  of  the  army  is  difficult  but  not  desperate. 
I  am  forced  to  threaten  the  contractors,  who  have  stolen  a  great  deal, 
and  by  finally  treating  them  pleasantly  I  get  much  out  of  them.  From 
now  on  the  army  will  eat  good  bread  and  have  meat,  and  already  it 
has  received  considerable  advances  of  overdue  pay. 

The  stages  on  the  road  from  the  Rhone  to  the  Var  are  provisioned 
and  for  five  days  my  cavalry,  artillery  and  transport  have  been  on  the 
move.  Your  instructions  will  be  carried  out,  Citizen  Directors;  I  shall 
march  shortly.  In  your  name  I  have  informed  the  army  of  your  satis- 
faction at  its  patience  and  good  conduct.  This  greatly  pleased  the 
soldiers  and  particularly  the  officers.  One  battalion  has  mutinied,  on 
the  ground  that  it  had  neither  boots  nor  pay.  I  had  all  the  grenadiers 
arrested  and  made  the  battalion  move  off  and,  when  it  was  a  league 
from  Nice,  I  sent  it  counter  orders  and  sent  it  to  the  rear.  I  intend  to 
disband  this  unit  and  incorporate  the  men  in  other  battalions,  since  the 
officers  have  not  shown  enough  nerve.  The  battalion  is  200  strong  and 
known  for  its  mutinous  spirit. 

I  have  been  received  by  the  army  with  signs  of  pleasure  and  the 

*  Dated  27  March,  1796,  there  is  included  in  the  Correspondance  (No.  91)  a 
famous  'Proclamation*  to  ie  Army  of  Italy  which  reads  as  follows:  'Soldiers, 
you  are  naked  and  starving.  The  Government  owes  you  much;  it  can  give  you 
nothing.  Your  patience,  the  courage  you  show  in  the  midst  of  these  rocks,  are 
admirable;  but  they  bring  you  no  glory.  I  will  lead  you  into  the  most  fertile 
plains  in  the  world.  Rich  provinces  and  great  cities  will  be  in  your  power;  there 
you  will  find  honour,  glory  and  wealth.  Soldiers  of  Italy,  will  you  lack  courage 

This  was  never  placed  on  the  Order  of  the  Day,  for  it  was  composed  at  St. 
Helena  to  <*rnjv*nish  the  Memoirs.  Yet,  since  it  was  in  fact  written  by  Napoleon,  it 
cannot  simply  be  ignored  as  a  forgery. 

My  87 

confidence  owed  to  one  who  was  known  to  have  merited  your 
trust. 

I  have  been  particularly  satisfied  with  the  openness  and  honesty  of 
General  Scherer.  His  loyal  conduct  and  readiness  to  give  me  all 
information  that  may  be  helpful  to  me  have  earned  my  gratitude.  His 
health  seems  somewhat  affected.  He  combines  great  facility  of  speech 
with  moral  and  political  understanding,  which  may  perhaps  be  of  use 
to  you  in  some  important  employment. 

Our  position  with  Genoa  is  critical.  It  has  been  badly  handled,  and 
we  have  either  gone  too  far  or  not  far  enough;  but  it  is  to  be  hoped 
that  no  harm  wul  come  of  it.  The  Government  of  Genoa  is  stronger 
than  is  thought.  There  are  only  two  ways  with  it:  either  to  seize  Genoa 
by  a  quick  coup  de  main,  which  is  contrary  to  your  intentions  and  to 
international  law,  or  else  to  live  in  friendship  and  not  try  to  take  their 
money  from  them,  for  that  is  the  one  thing  they  prize. 

In  four  days  I  shall  move  my  headquarters  to  Albenga. 

BONAPARTE 

76 
Order  of  the  Day 

Army  of  Italy  H.Q.,  Nice 

g  Germinal,  Year  IV  (29  Mar,  1796) 

The  Commander-in-Chief  has  reviewed  the  zooth  and  idfth  Demi- 
brigades,  the  yth  Hussars  and  the  artillery.  He  was  satisfied  with  the 
bearing  of  the  troops,  their  devotion  to  die  Republic  and  the  strong 
will  to  victory  which  they  showed  him.  He  has  passed  through  the 
field  divisions  of  the  army  and  everywhere  found  soldiers  accustomed 
to  vanquish  and  suffer,  devoted  both  to  liberty  and  to  discipline,  which 
is  the  nerve  of  armies.  They  will  find  in  him  a  comrade  in  arms  sup- 
ported by  the  confidence  of  die  Government,  proud  of  the  regard  of 
patriots  and  determined  to  bring  to  the  Army  of  Italy  a  destiny 
worthy  of  it. 

In  accordance  with  the  decree  of  the  Executive  Directory,  dated 
12  Ventose,  General  Alexander  Berthier  is  appointed  Chief  of  Staff  of 
the  Army  of  Italy.  Adjutant-general  Vignolle  remains  Deputy  Chief 
of  Staff. 

Major-General  P.  Gaultier  remains  employed  in  the  headquarters  at 
Nice;  for  the  time  being  he  will  be  specially  in  charge  of  all  matters 
concerning  the  new  organization  of  die  army,  with  the  men  joining 
as  a  result  of  the  levy  and  with  the  exchange  of  prisoners  of  war;  he 
will  sign  all  documents  relating  to  this  work. 

Generals  who  have  less  than  the  number  of  aides-de-camp  authorized 
by  law  are  ordered  to  choose  them  in  accordance  with  its  provisions. 

88  The  Rise  to  Power 

Adjutants-general  who  have  no  assistants  are  also  ordered  to  propose 
at  once  the  officers  they  consider  capable  of  carrying  out  this  important 
function.  No  personal  considerations  must  influence  their  choice; 
ability,  morality  and  a  pure  and  enlightened  patriotism  alone  must 
determine  it. ... 

By  order  of  the  Commander-in-Chief 

77 
To  Major-General  Berthier 

Chief  of  Staff,  Army  of  Italy  H.Q.,  Nice 

10  Germinal,  Year  IV  (30  Mar,  1796) 
Fresh  meat  will  be  issued  five  times  per  decade;  battalions  which 

have  drawn  salt  meat  today  will  have  fresh  meat  tomorrow,  and  those 
which  have  had  fresh  meat  will  have  salt.  .  . . 

BONAPARTE 

73 
To  Major-General  Berthier 

Chief  of  Staff,  Army  of  Italy  H.Q.,  Nice 

11  Germinal,  Year  IV  (31  Mar,  1796) 

The  Commander-in-Chief  is  informed  that  several  war  commis- 
saries and  officers  hold  sums  proceeding  from  various  sales,  from 
contributions  and  from  revenues  of  conquered  territory.  That  being 
contrary  to  orders,  to  the  good  of  the  service  and  to  the  Constitution, 
he  orders  that  these  funds  should  be  deposited  without  deky  in  the 
office  of  the  army  paymaster  or  of  his  agents  so  that  they  may  be  used, 
on  the  orders  of  the  Quartermaster-General,  in  the  interest  of  the 
service  and  to  procure  for  the  soldier  what  is  due  to  him. 

BONAPARTE 

79 
To  Adjutant-general  Chabran 

G.S.,  Army  of  Italy  H.Q.,  Nice 

11  Germinal,  Year  IV  (31  Mar,  1796) 

Adjutant-general  Chabran  is  ordered  to  leave  Nice  today,  n  Ger- 
minal, and  proceed  as  quickly  as  possible  to  Albenga,  where  he  will 
prepare  the  establishment  of  headquarters,  which  leaves  Nice  on  the 
I2th  and  will  reach  Albenga  on  the  15th. 

For  this  purpose  he  will  confer  with  the  governor  and  the  consul; 
he  will  take  all  measures  required  by  the  law  of  nations  in  neutral 
territory,  but  will  make  all  necessary  dispositions  for  the  lodging  of 
the  headquarters. 

By  order  of  the  Commander-in-Chief 

Italy  89 

80 
To  Major-General  Berthier 

Chief  of  Staff,  Army  of  Italy  H.Q.,  Nice 

12  Germinal,  Year  IV  (i  Apr,  1796) 

There  will  be  three  coastal  districts.  The  first  will  extend  from  the 
Rhone  to  Bandol,  including  the  departments  of  Vaucluse  and  Bouches- 
du-Rhone,  and  will  be  commanded  by  General  Barbentane.  The 
second  will  be  commanded  by  General  Mouret  and  will  extend  from 
Bandol  to  the  river  Argens.  The  third  district  will  extend  from  the 
river  Argens  to  Vintimiglia  and  will  be  commanded  by  General 
Casabianca. 

General  Stengel  will  command  the  cavalry  of  the  army.  General 
Kilmaine  will  command  one  cavalry  division. 

General  Dujard  will  command  the  artillery.  Colonel  Sugny  will  be 
chief  of  staff  of  that  arm. 

BONAPARTE 

81 
To  Citizen  Sucy 

Asst.  Q.M.G.,  Army  of  Italy,  at  Genoa  H.Q.,  Nice 

12  Germinal,  Year  IV  (i  Apr,  1796) 

If,  when  I  arrived  a  week  ago,  the  Quartermaster-General  had  sent 
me  a  letter  like  the  one  I  have  received  from  you,  my  dear  Quarter- 
master, I  should  have  taken  steps  to  ensure  the  forage  service;  but  all 
the  letters  I  received  from  Genoa  tended  to  lull  my  mind. 

The  route  from  the  Rhone  to  the  Var  is  provisioned;  Nice  is  pro- 
visioned for  one  month  and  Menton  equally. . . . 

You  will  receive  attached  the  movement  orders  for  the  cavalry. 
The  wagons  are  moving  fast,  and  tomorrow  2,000  mules  will  leave; 
they  will  be  sent  to  Finale  and  Vado. 

If  Citizen  Navarre  is  trustworthy,  with  the  advances  he  has  received 
in  Paris  and  the  60,000  francs  you  have  given  him,  you  should  have 
no  further  cause  for  disquiet.  Go  to  Varaggio  and  place  contracts  for 
30,000  francs  on  condition  that  the  forage  is  delivered  to  Loano,  Finale 
and  Oneglia  before  the  25th  of  the  month;  I  will  honour  your  engage- 
ments at  Albenga. 

Corn  is  assured  by  the  Flosque  company.  That  citizen,  who  will  be 
going  to  Genoa,  has  promised  me  20,000  pairs  of  boots  to  be  paid  for 
in  Paris.  I  shall  send  5,000  pairs  from  here  tomorrow;  12,000  pairs  will 
leave  from  Marseilles.  You  will  deliver  the  attached  letter  in  which 
Collot  orders  his  house  to  send  10,000  pairs  and  800  quintals  of  hay. 
Hasten  the  departure  of  the  boots  you  have  bought. 

I  leave  tomorrow  for  Bordighera.  I  shall  be  at  Albenga  on  the  I5th 
and  await  you  there  as  soon  as  possible, 

90  The  Rise  to  Power 

Headquarters,  including  all  the  agents  for  the  services,  have  left 
today.  Lambert  goes  with  me. 
Farewell,  my  dear  Quartermaster.  Energy  and  courage! 

BONAPARTE 

82 
To  Citizen  Faypoult 

French  Minister  to  Genoa  H.Q.,  Nice 

12  Germinal  Year  IV  (i  Apr,  1796} 

I  leave  tomorrow  for  Albenga,  where  I  hope  to  have  news  of  you. 
Gavi  is  a  strong  position  which  should  hold  out  several  days;  it  can 
fall  only  through  treason,  and  from  that  moment  I  would  treat  as 
enemies  of  France  the  oligarchs  who  let  the  Modeste  be  raped  and 
would  have  handed  over  Gavi;  the  ramparts  of  Genoa  would  no  longer 
be  the  ramparts  of  a  neutral  people  and  the  government  of  the  Genoese 
republic  would  cease  to  exist.  But  I  do  not  think  that  is  to  be  feared, 
Citizen  Minister.  Write  to  me  often;  let  me  know  your  position  and 
ideas  and  I  will  take  care  of  the  Austrians  and  Piedmontese.  Please 
send  spies  into  Piedmont  who  will  keep  me  informed  of  the  strength 
and  movement  of  the  enemy. 

Your  wife  is  well,  and  the  little  niece  is  as  flirtatious  as  ever;  she  is 
making  up  to  my  aide-de-camp;  all  she  likes  about  me  is  my  fine 
uniform. 

BONAPARTE 

83 
Order  of  the  Day 

Army  of  Italy  H.Q.,  Menton 

14  Germinal,  Year  IV  (j  Apr,  ijg6) 

The  Commander-in-Chief  repeats  his  order  to  the  generals  com- 
manding divisions  to  hasten  as  much  as  possible  the  work  in  connexion 
with  the  new  organization.  Divisional  commanders  will  inspect  the 
troops  under  their  command  in  order  to  examine  carefully  the  state 
of  their  arms.  Unserviceable  muskets  will  be  replaced.  Generals  and 
adjutants-general  must  not  lose  an  instant  in  procuring  for  the  troops 
such  equipment  as  may  be  necessary.  The  Commander-in-Chief  learns 
that  forage  agents  are  arbitrarily  changing  the  ration  on  the  excuse  of 
lack  of  stocks.  They  are  expressly  forbidden  to  issue  less  than  the 
authorized  ration  without  a  written  order  from  a  war  commissary, 
who  can  give  it  only  after  ascertaining  the  state  of  the  stores.  Chiefs  of 
staff  of  divisions  will,  each  decade,  send  to  the  chief  of  staff  at  Albenga 
the  most  exact  returns  of  the  positions  and  state  of  the  troops  in  their 
divisions.  When  executing  various  troop  movements,  several  generals 
have  forgotten  to  have  detachments  recalled.  They  are  ordered  to  give 

Italy  91 

more  attention  to  die  movements  they  have  to  make,  so  that  no 
detachments  remain  isolated  from  formations  ordered  to  march. 

By  order  of  the  Commander-in-Chief 

84 
To  Citizeness  Josephine  Bonaparte 

Ai  Paris  Port-Maurice 

14  Germinal,  Year  IV  (3  Apr,  1796) 

I  have  received  all  your  letters,  but  none  has  made  such  an  impression 
on  me  as  the  last  How,  my  beloved,  can  you  write  to  me  like  that? 
Don't  you  think  my  position  is  cruel  enough,  without  adding  to  my 
sorrows  and  crushing  my  spirit?  What  a  style !  What  feelings  you  show ! 
They  are  fire,  and  they  burn  my  poor  heart.  My  one  and  only  Jose- 
phine, apart  from  you  there  is  no  joy;  away  from  you,  the  world  is  a 
desert  where  I  am  alone  and  cannot  open  my  heart.  You  have  taken 
more  than  my  soul;  you  are  the  one  thought  of  my  life.  When  I  am 
tired  of  the  worry  of  work,  when  I  fear  the  outcome,  when  men  annoy 
me,  when  I  am  ready  to  curse  being  alive,  I  put  my  hand  on  my 
heart;  your  portrait  hangs  there,  I  look  at  it,  and  love  brings  me  perfect 
happiness,  and  all  is  smiling  except  the  time  I  must  spend  away  from 
my  mistress. 

By  what  art  have  you  captivated  all  my  faculties  and  concentrated 
my  whole  being  in  you?  It  is  a  [illegible],  sweet  friend,  that  will  die 
only  when  I  do.  To  live  for  Josephine,  that  is  the  history  of  my  life. 
I  long,  I  try  to  come  near  you.  Fool!  I  do  not  notice  that  I  am  going 
further  away.  How  many  countries  separate  us!  How  long  before  you 
will  read  these  words,  feeble  expression  of  a  captive  soul  where  you 
are  queen.  Oh,  my  adorable  wife!  I  don't  know  what  fate  has  in  store 
for  me,  but  if  it  keeps  me  apart  from  you  any  longer,  it  will  be  unbear- 
able! My  courage  is  not  enough  for  that.  Once  upon  a  time  I  was 
proud  of  my  courage,  and  sometimes  I  would  think  of  the  ills  destiny 
might  bring  me  and  consider  the  most  terrible  horrors  without  blinking 
or  feeling  shaken.  But,  today  the  thought  that  my  Josephine  may  be 
in  trouble,  that  she  may  be  ill,  above  aH  the  cruel,  die  awful  thought 
that  she  may  love  me  less  blights  my  soul,  stills  my  blood  and  makes 
me  sad  and  depressed,  without  even  the  courage  of  rage  and  despair. 
I  used  often  to  say  men  cannot  harm  one  who  dies  without  regret; 
but,  now,  to  die  not  loved  by  you,  to  die  without  knowing,  would 
be  the  torment  of  hell,  the  living  image  of  utter  desolation.  I  feel  I 
am  suffocating.  My  one  companion,  you  whom  fate  has  destined  to 
travel  the  sorry  road  of  life  beside  me,  the  day  I  lose  your  heart  will 
be  the  day  Nature  loses  warmth  and  life  for  me.  I  stop,  sweet  friend; 
my  soul  is  sad,  my  body  tired,  my  spirit  oppressed.  Men  bore  me. 
I  ought  to  hate  them:  they  take  me  away  from  my  heart. 

92  The  Rise  to  Power 

I  am  at  Port-Maurice,  near  Oneglia;  tomorrow  I  reach  Albenga. 
The  two  armies  are  moving,  trying  to  outwit  each  other.  Victory  to 
the  cleverer.  I  am  pleased  with  Beaulieu;  he  manoeuvres  well  and  is 
stronger  than  his  predecessor.  I  will  beat  him  soundly,  I  hope.  Don't 
be  frightened.  Love  me  like  your  eyes;  but  that  is  not  enough:  like 
yourself,  more  than  yourself,  than  your  thoughts,  your  life,  all  of  you. 
Forgive  me,  dear  love,  I  am  raving;  Nature  is  frail  when  one  feels 
deeply,  when  one  is  loved  by  you. 

BONAPARTE 

Sincere  friendship  to  Barras,  Sucy,  Madame  Tallien;  respects  to 
Madame  CMteau-Renard;  true  love  to  Eugene,  to  Hortense. 

Goodbye,  goodbye!  I  shall  go  to  bed  without  you,  sleep  without 
you.  Let  me  sleep,  I  beg  you.  For  several  nights  I  have  felt  you  in 
my  arms;  a  happy  dream,  but  it  is  not  you. 

85 
To  the  Executive  Directory 

H.Q.,  Albetiga 
17  Germinal,  Year  IV  (6  Apr,  1796) 

I  have  transferred  the  headquarters  of  the  army  to  Albenga.  The 
movement  that  I  found  begun  against  Genoa  has  drawn  the  enemy 
out  of  his  winter  quarters.  He  has  crossed  the  Po  and  pushed  outposts 
to  Dego,  following  the  Bormida  and  Bocchetta  and  leaving  Gavi 
behind  Jr?mT  Beaulieu  has  published  a  manifesto  which  I  am  sending 
you  and  which  I  will  answer  after  the  battle.  I  am  extremely  displeased 
and  annoyed  by  this  movement  against  Genoa  which  is  the  more 
unfortunate  in  that  it  has  forced  that  republic  to  adopt  a  hostile  attitude 
and  has  roused  the  enemy  whom  I  might  have  surprised.  It  will  cost 
us  more  men. 

For  his  part,  the  King  of  Sardinia  is  very  active.  He  has  called  young 
men  above  fifteen  to  the  colours,  has  condemned  those  who  do  not 
join  to  be  shot  and  has  in  fact  had  six  shot  at  Turin. 

General  Colli  has  sent  to  Ormea  as  intermediary  an  emigrant  named 
Moulin.  He  was  arrested  and  I  am  having  him  brought  before  a  court 
martial.  No  function  can  render  a  parricide  sacred. 

At  Oneglia  I  have  found  some  marbles  which  are  thought  to  be  of 
value.  I  have  ordered  this  to  be  estimated  and  that  they  be  offered  at 
auction  on  the  Genoese  riviera;  that  may  bring  us  a  sum  of  30,000  to 
40,000  francs. 

The  house  of  Flachat,  which  has  the  contract  for  corn,  and  that  of 
Collot,  which  has  the  meat,  are  doing  well;  they  give  us  very  good 
grain  and  the  soldiers  are  beginning  to  have  fresh  meat  The  army  is 
in  frightening  penury;  I  still  have  great  obstacles  to  overcome,  but  they 
can  be  surmounted.  Misery  has  led  to  indiscipline,  and  without 

Italy 93 

discipline  there  can  be  no  victory.  I  hope  that  will  be  quickly  settled; 
already  everything  is  changing.  In  a  few  days  we  shall  be  in  action. 
The  day  before  yesterday  I  had  a  reconnaissance  made  towards  Cairo; 
the  enemy  outposts  were  all  driven  in  and  we  took  a  few  prisoners. 

The  Piedmontese  army  has  a  strength  of  40,000  infantry  and  5,000 
cavalry.  The  Austrian  has  34,000  infantry  and  3,000  cavalry.  I  have 
available  but  45,000  men  in  all;  many  troops  have  been  held  back  in 
the  rear  and  beyond  the  Rhone. 

Chauvet,  the  Quartermaster-General,  has  died  in  Genoa;  it  is  a  real 
loss  to  the  army,  for  he  was  active  and  enterprising.  The  army  has 
shed  a  tear  in  his  memory. 

BONAPARTE 

86 
To  the  Executive  Directory 

H.Q.,  Albenga 
jp  Germinal,  Year  IV  (8  Apr,  1796) 

Citizen  Directors. . . .  The  Treasury  often  sends  us  letters  of  exchange 
which  are  refused;  this  has  just  happened  to  one  for  162,800  francs 
drawn  on  Cadiz,  which  increases  our  difficulties. 

I  found  this  army  not  only  destitute  of  everything,  but  without 
discipline  and  in  a  state  of  perpetual  insubordination.  Discontent  was 
such  that  renegades  had  taken  charge;  a  Dauphin  company  had  been 
formed  and  counter-revolutionary  songs  were  sung.  I  have  sent  for 
court-martial  two  officers  alleged  to  have  shouted,  'Long  live  the 
King!' 

I  suppose  the  mission  of  M.  Moulin  as  intermediary  had  something 
to  do  with  plots  of  that  kind,  whose  traces  I  am  following  energetically. 
Rest  assured  that  discipline  and  order  will  be  re-established  and  that 
I  shall  mete  out  justice  to  the  few  counter-revolutionaries  who  have 
sprung  up. 

Everything  is  getting  ready;  I  have  just  had  the  important  position 
of  La  Solta  occupied;  when  you  read  this  letter,  we  shall  be  at  grips. 

The  Treasury  has  not  kept  its  word;  instead  of  500,000  francs  it  has 
sent  us  300,000,  and  we  have  heard  nothing  of  a  sum  of  600,000  francs 
which  was  announced.  Despite  all  that,  we  shall  go. 

BONAPARTE 

8? 
To  Major-General  Augereau 

G.O.C.,  Centre  Division,  Army  of  Italy  H.Q.,  Albenga 

22  Germinal,  Year  IV  (11  Apr,  1796) 

General  Augereau  will  leave  today  with  his  two  demi-brigades  and 
four  picked  cavalry  squadrons  and  proceed  by  the  shortest  route  to 

The  Rise  to  Power 

Malkre,  which  he  will  reach  before  midnight.  He  will  take  bread  or 
biscuit  for  the  23rd  and  24th  and  eighty  cartridges  per  man. 

The  auxiliary  companies  and  cavalry  will  perform  duty  services  and 
escort  the  convoys.  At  the  chapel  of  San  Giacomo  General  Augereau 
will  collect  an  artillery  reserve  of  four  8-pounders,  four  4-pounders, 
two  3-pounders  and  a  howitzer  which  will  accompany  the  division. 

He  will  leave  Mallare  at  5.0  a.m.  tomorrow  and  proceed  to  Cairo. 
He  will  reconnoitre  his  left  flank  and  occupy  the  chapel  of  Santa 
Giulia  between  Carcare  and  Cairo.  If  the  enemy  is  there,  he  will  be 
attacked  and  driven  out. 

Once  beyond  Cairo  he  will  occupy  the  mountains  on  the  left  and 
will  send  patrols  to  Rochetta,  halfway  to  Dego,  when  he  will  receive 
further  orders.  He  will  communicate  with  the  troops  of  General 
Dommartin,  which  will  camp  on  the  heights  of  Montefreddo.  He 
will  ensure  that  nothing  is  done  to  warn  the  enemy  and,  above  all, 
that  no  fires  are  lit  on  the  hills. 

He  will  attack  and  destroy  the  enemy  if  he  meets  him  on  the  road, 
and  he  will  report  his  arrival  to  headquarters,  which  will  be  at  Altare. 

BONAPARTE 

To  Major-General  Mass£na 

G.O.C.,  Right  Division,  Amy  of  Italy  H.Q.,  Albenga 

22  Germinal  Year  IV  (11  Apr,  1796) 

General  Massena  will  order  Brigadier-General  Menard  to  stand  by 
to  proceed  to  Altare  with  the  troops  which  are  on  the  Barracone  and 
at  Cadibona  and  Quiliano.  They  will  carry  all  the  cartridges  they  have. 
He  will  take  command  of  these  troops  and  will  try  to  cut  off  the  enemy 
between  Carcare,  Altare  and  Montenotte. 

Brigadier-Generals  Joubert  and  Dommartin  will  join  him  during  the 
night.  When,  as  a  result  of  this  diversion,  the  [enemy]  troops  which 
have  attacked  Monte-Legino  are  no  longer  on  the  offensive,  head- 
quarters will  move  to  Altare. 

General  Massena  will  inform  me  of  his  arrival  at  Altare  and  of  the 
enemy's  movements.  He  will  give  such  further  orders  as  he  thinks 
necessary  to  carry  out  the  dispositions  of  this  order. 

BONAPARTE 

89 
To  Major-General  Massena 

G.O.C.,  Right  Division,  Army  of  Italy  H.Q.,  Albenga 

22  Germinal,  Year  IV  (ll  Apr,  1796) 

You  will  have  General  Dommartin  leave  with  two  battalions  of  his 
demi-brigade  so  as  to  reach  the  heights  of  Montefreddo  before  mid- 

95 

night.  The  battalions  at  Finale  will  take  bread  for  the  23rd  and  24th; 
those  at  Melogno  will  collect  bread  at  the  chapel  of  San  Giacomo 
where  there  will  be  supplies  before  5.0  p.m.  Each  man  of  these 
battalions  will  carry  eighty  cartridges,  forty  in  pouches,  forty  in  the 
haversack. 

He  will  leave  Montefreddo  at  dawn  for  Carcare,  where  he  will 
arrive  before  8.0  a.m.  He  will  await  further  orders  on  the  heights  to  the 
right  of  Carcare.  From  Montefreddo  he  will  send  an  aide-de-camp  or 
staff  officer  with  news  of  his  arrival  to  Altare,  where  headquarters 
will  be. 

General  Joubert,  with  the  troops  under  his  orders,  will  proceed  by 
the  shortest  route  to  Altare,  which  he  will  reach  before  7.0  p.m.  He 
will  send  news  of  his  arrival  by  a  staff  officer.  He  will  take  all  the 
cartridges  at  his  disposal;  each  soldier  will  carry  eighty.  He  will  seize 
all  the  mules  he  can  find  to  transport  the  two  3-pounders  which  are 
at  San  Giacomo;  by  leaving  some  of  the  ammunition  they  can  be 
drawn  by  six  mules.  If  he  cannot  obtain  mules  by  force  or  payment 
he  will  leave  the  guns  and  warn  Finale  to  have  them  fetched. 

He  will  take  the  sappers  with  him  and  all  the  bread  and  brandy 
possible.  He  will  receive  further  orders  at  9.0  p.m.  at  Altare. 

General  Menard  will  proceed  immediately  to  Altare  with  all  the 
troops  under  his  command  in  conformity  with  the  order  already 
given.  He  will  press  the  enemy,  who  is  at  Monte-Legino,  by  out- 
flanking him  at  Montenotte. 

BONAPARTE 

90 
To  Major-General  Laharpe 

G.O.C.,  Advance-Guard,  Army  of  Italy  H.Q.,  Albenga 

22  Germinal,  Year  IV  (n  Apr,  1796) 

Major-General  Laharpe  is  ordered  to  leave  tomorrow,  23  Germinal, 
so  as  to  arrive  one  hour  before  dawn  at  the  position  of  Monte-Legino, 
where  he  will  join  the  troops  already  there  and  will  attack  the  enemy 
in  accordance  with  the  plans  which  I  have  agreed  with  him  and 
General  Massena. 

He  will  at  once  have  the  troops  of  the  I5th  Demi-brigade  which 
are  at  La  Stella  withdrawn  to  Monte-Legino. 

He  will  take  care  to  pkce  a  battalion  in  reserve  at  La  Madonna  di 
Savona  so  that  he  can  move  on  the  redoubt  of  Monte-Cucco  in  case 
General  Massena's  troops  are  forced  to  fall  back,  and  can  prevent  the 
enemy  advancing  between  Altare  and  Monte-Legino  with  the  object 
of  turning  General  Massena's  right.  This  plan  is  not  likely,  but  it  is 
wise  to  prepare  against  it. 

96  The  Rise  to  Power 

Following  the  movements  observed  on  his  left  he  will  advance  and 
take  all  steps  he  may  see  fit  to  combine  his  operations  with  those  of 
the  troops  on  his  left  and  put  the  enemy  to  flight.  .  .  . 

As  soon  as  he  judges  that  the  enemy  can  do  nothing  against  the 
right  of  General  Massena,  he  will  recall  the  battalion  left  in  reserve  at 
La  Madonna. 

He  will  distribute  eighty  cartridges  per  man  and  carry  bread  or 
biscuit  for  the  23rd  and  24th.  He  wUl  give  orders  and  take  all  steps  to 
ensure  that  ammunition,  brandy,  food  and  the  whole  of  the  ambulance 
follow  the  movement  of  his  troops. 

BONAPARTE 

To  Major-  General  SSrurier 

G.O.C.,  Left  Division,  Army  of  Italy  H.Q.,  Albenga 

22  Germinal,  Year  IV  (11  Apr,  1796) 

I  must  inform  you,  General,  that  the  enemy  in  superior  strength 
yesterday  attacked  our  outposts  at  Voltri,  which  retired  on  Savona 
after  a  most  lively  and  honourable  defence.  The  enemy  continued  his 
challenge  and  appeared  at  Monte-Legino  with  even  krger  forces. 
There  has  been  fighting  since  8.0  a.m.,  and  the  brave  resistance  of  our 
troops  has  forced  him  to  retreat  on  Montenotte.  I  have  decided  to 
attack  myself.  Consequently,  General  Menard  is  leaving  Cadibona  and 
Quiliano  for  Montenotte  this  evening  with  4,000  men.  Generals 
Joubert  and  Pom  martin  are  leaving  San  Giacomo  with  5,000  men  to 
join  the  troops  of  General  Menard.  At  the  same  time  General  Augereau, 
with  6,000  men,  should  move  off  at  midnight  to  Mallare  and  thence 
to  Cairo,  so  as  to  turn  and  attack  the  enemy  forces  directed  against 
Montenotte  and  Sassello. 

General  Laharpe  with  the  advance  guard,  amounting  to  about 
7,000  men,  will  march  to  the  heights  of  Montenotte. 

General  Rusca  must  hold  La  Solta  and  Monte-Spinarda  and  defend 
Bardinetto  and  Melogno.  Apart  from  the  two  demi-brigades  he  already 
has,  he  will  have  under  command  a  battalion  of  the  84th  which  is  at 
Melogno.  This  general  is  under  your  orders,  and  you  will  give  him 
such  reinforcements  as  you  think  necessary. 

For  your  part,  you  should  make  demonstrations  that  will  alarm  the 
enemy,  but  without  exposing  your  troops.  I  will  let  you  know  his 
further  movements. 

You  will  pass  the  above  order  to  General  Rusca. 

Tomorrow  we  shall  attack  the  enemy  at  all  points  towards  the  right. 
The  following  day  we  may  be  at  your  side, 

Be  prepared  to  carry  out  all  movements  that  may  be  ordered. 

BONAPARTE 

Italy  97 

92 
To  Major-General  Laharpe 

G.O.C.,  Advance-Guard^  Army  of  Italy  H.Q.,  Carcare 

23  Germinal,  Year  IV  (12  Apr,  1796) 

I  congratulate  you,  General,  on  the  fine  conduct  of  your  troops  and 
on  the  happy  results  ever  accompanying  your  talents  and  bravery. 

I  have  just  inspected  the  battlefield;  on  all  sides  I  saw  nothing  but 
prisoners  and  many  dead.  Massena's  division  is  completely  successful; 
he  has  beaten  General  Argenteau  outright.  You  had  to  do  with 
Beaulieu  himself. 

Send  all  prisoners  to  Savona.  Have  the  I4th  Demi-brigade  collect 
bread  at  La  Madonna,  where  there  is  some,  and,  with  all  your  troops, 
take  up  positions  that  appear  to  threaten  the  enemy  at  Sassello;  it 
would  be  a  good  thing  if  before  nightfall  you  send  out  a  patrol  to 
observe  his  movement  and  hasten  his  withdrawal,  thus  putting  the 
magazines  at  Sassello  at  your  disposal. 

General  Massena  is  moving  to  the  heights  of  Cairo;  he  will  send 
troops  into  the  town  to  levy  a  contribution.  It  is  essential  that  you 
reconnoitre  his  position  before  nightfall  so  as  to  be  able  to  communi- 
cate easily.  Headquarters  will  be  at  Carcare.  Come  yourself  this  evening 
or  send  an  aide-de-camp  to  inform  me  of  your  position,  of  the  enemy 
movements  and  of  all  you  have  done  during  the  day. 

Augereau,  Dommartin  and  Joubert,  who  are  in  the  plain,  will  move 
tomorrow  towards  Montezemolo  to  fight  the  Piedmontese,  unless 
your  report  this  evening  makes  me  change  my  dispositions. 

BONAPARTE 

93 
To  Major-General  Mass&na 

G.O.C,  Right  Division,  Army  of  Italy  H.Q.,  Carcare 

23  Germinal^  Year  IV  (12  Apr, 

As  soon,  General,  as  you  are  certain  of  the  enemy's  flight,  move 
towards  Carcare  with  your  forces.  You  will  send  an  adjutant-general 
to  reconnoitre  the  positions  threatening  those  of  General  Laharpe  at 
Sassello  and  Dego.  You  will  set  up  an  intermediate  post  to  serve  the 
communications  between  that  general  and  Carcare,  You  will  send  a 
senior  officer  to  Altare  to  act  as  commander  there  and  to  send  up  your 
food  supplies;  he  must  also  collect  transport  to  move  what  you  may 
need  and  must  establish  your  communications  with  our  rear. 

If  the  enemy  is  still  threatening  General  Laharpe's  division,  it  is 
essential  that  you  take  up  positions  to  support  his  left.  He  left  an  hour 
after  midnight  to  climb  to  the  bastion  of  Monte-Legino  with  the  yoth 
and  99th  Demi-brigades;  so  you  see,  he  is  in  strength. 

Augereau  left  at  9.0  p.m.  I  have  sent  for  news  of  Joubert  and 

98  The  Rise  to  Power 

Dommartin.  When  I  know  what  to  be  at  with  them  and  am  sure  of  the 
position  of  their  troops,  it  is  my  intention  that  you  should  attack  the 
800  men  said  to  be  at  the  chapel  of  Santa  Giulia;  in  any  case  we  will 
meet  at  Carcare,  where  I  shaft  return  as  soon  as  there  is  a  battalion, 
either  of  yours  or  Joubert's,  to  cover  me  there.  Beaulieu  was  in  person 
at  the  attack  on  Monte-Legino;  he  reckoned  on  capturing  Savona. 

Everything  assures  us  that  today  and  tomorrow  will  stand  out  in 
history. 

BONAPARTE 

94 
Order  of  the  Day 

Army  of  Italy  H.Q.,  Carcare 

23  Germinal,  Year  IV  (12  Apr,  1796} 

Long  live  the  Republic!  Today,  23  Germinal,  the  divisions  of 
Generals  Massena  and  Laharpe  attacked  the  Austrians,  who  were 
occupying  the  important  position  of  Montenotte  to  the  number  of 
13,000  men  commanded  by  General  Beaulieu  in  person  and  Generals 
Argenteau  and  Roccavina.  The  Republicans  have  completely  defeated 
the  Austrians  and  have  killed  or  wounded  some  3,000  of  them. 
General  Roccavina  is  among  the  wounded.  The  details  of  this  action 
will  be  published  to  the  army  as  soon  as  complete  information  con- 
cerning this  glorious  affair  has  been  collected. 

By  order  of  the  Commander-in-Chief 

95 
To  the  Executive  Directory 

H.Q.,  Carcare 
25  Germinal,  Year  IV  (14  Apr,  1796) 

The  Italian  campaign  has  begun.  I  have  to  report  to  you  the  battle 
of  Montenotte. 

After  three  days  of  movements  intended  to  mislead  us,  General 
Beaulieu  had  a  division  of  10,000  men  attack  the  right  of  the  army, 
which  was  stationed  at  Voltri.  General  Cervoni,  who  was  in  command 
there,  withstood  the  fire  with  the  courage  usual  in  the  soldiers  of 
liberty. 

I  was  not  misled  as  to  the  enemy's  real  intentions.  As  soon  as  I  was 
informed  of  the  attack  on  the  right  I  ordered  General  Cervoni  to 
await  nightfall  and  then,  hiding  his  movement  from  the  enemy,  to 
retire  by  a  forced  march,  on  to  my  centre,  which  was  posted  on  the 
heights  of  the  Madonna  di  Savona. 

At  4.0  a.m.  on  the  2ist  Beaulieu  in  person  with  15,000  men  attacked 
and  overran  all  the  positions  protecting  the  centre  of  the  army;  at 
1.0  p.m.  he  attacked  the  redoubt  of  Monte-Legino,  which  was  our 

99 

last  entrenchment.  Several  times  they  returned  to  the  charge,  but 
owing  to  the  courage  of  its  defenders  that  redoubt  held  by  1,500  men 
was  impregnable.  At  the  height  of  the  fire  Colonel  Rampon  made  the 
troops  swear  that  they  would  all  die  in  the  redoubt.  The  enemy  was 
within  pistol  range  the  whole  night. 

Under  cover  of  darkness  General  Laharpe  with  all  the  troops  from 
the  right  took  up  position  behind  Monte-Legino.  One  hour  after  mid- 
night I  left  with  Generals  Berthier  and  Massena,  Commissioner  Saliceti 
and  some  of  the  troops  from  the  centre  and  left  and  proceeded  through 
Altare  on  to  the  flank  and  rear  of  the  enemy.  At  dawn  on  the  22nd 
Beaulieu,  who  had  received  reinforcements,  and  Laharpe  attacked  each 
other  with  vigour  and  varying  success  until  General  Massena  appeared 
and  sowed  death  and  terror  on  the  flank  and  rear,  where  General 
Argenteau  was  commanding. 

The  rout  of  the  enemy  is  complete.  Two  of  his  generals,  Roccavina 
and  Argenteau,  are  gravely  wounded.  His  losses  are  between  3,000  and 
4,000  men,  including  over  2,000  prisoners.  Our  loss  is  less  than  400. 

When  I  have  received  all  the  reports  and  am  less  overwhelmed  with 
work,  I  will  send  you  a  detailed  account  giving  the  names  of  those 
to  whom  the  nation  owes  particular  gratitude.  Generals,  officers, 
soldiers,  all  upheld  the  glory  of  France  on  this  memorable  day, 

BONAPARTE 

96 
Order  of  the  Day 

Army  of  Italy  H.Q.,  Lesegno 

3  Floreal,  Year  IV  (22  Apr,  1796) 

Long  live  the  Republic!  The  left  wing  of  the  army,  comprising  the 
divisions  of  Generals  Meynier  and  Serurier,  and  supported  by  that  of 
General  Massena,  has  defeated  the  enemy  at  Mondovi  on  2  FloreaL 

General  Colli,  commanding  the  Piedmontese  army  in  person,  has 
been  forced  to  retreat.  The  result  of  this  victory  has  been  the  capture 
of  Mondovi,  1,600  prisoners,  including  a  lieutenant-general,  ten  flags, 
large  stores  of  food  and  forage,  two  howitzers,  four  4-pounders,  four 
8-pounders  and  12  limbers. 

The  army  is  occupying  Dego,  Mombarcaro,  the  entrenched  camp 
of  Ceva,  Castellino  and  the  positions  at  Mondovi. 

The  army  is  warned  that  the  enemy  has  scattered  bags  of  cartridges 
whose  balls  are  made  of  inflammable  material  which  burns  up  while 
leaving  the  barrel  and  does  no  harm  even  at  point  blank  range.  Divi- 
sional commanders  will  ensure  that  bags  of  cartridges  collected  in  the 
camps  or  trenches  occupied  by  the  enemy  are  examined  and  are  used 
only  if  it  is  certain  that  the  balls  are  of  lead. 

By  order  of  the  Commander-in-Chief 

The  Rise  to  Power 

97 
Order  of  the  Day 

Army  of  Italy  H.Q.,  Lesegno 

'  3  Florid,  Year  IV  (22  Apr,  1796) 

The  Commander-in-Chief  expresses  to  the  army  his  satisfaction  at 
its  bravery  and  the  successes  which  it  daily  obtains  over  the  enemy. 
But  it  is  with  horror  that  he  sees  the  fearful  looting  indulged  in  by 
wicked  men  who 'reach  their  units  only  when  the  battle  is  over  in 
order  to  commit  excesses  that  utterly  dishonour  the  army  and  the 
name  of  France. 

In  consequence,  he  orders: 

1.  The  Chief  of  Staff  will  report  to  him  within  twenty-four  hours 
on  the  moral  conduct  of  the  adjutants-general  and  other  officers 
attached  to  the  staff. 

2.  Divisional  commanders  will  within  twenty-four  hours  send  to  the 
Commander-in-Chief  a  note  on  the  conduct  since  the  opening  of  the 
campaign  of  the  senior  officers  under  their  command. 

3.  The  Quartermaster-General  will  make  a  similar  report  on  the 
war  commissaries. 

4.  The  Commander-in-Chief  will  decide  the  action  to  be  taken  in 
the  case  of  senior  officers  or  war  commissaries  against  whom  complaints 
are  made. 

5.  Colonels  and  battalion  commanders  will  report  to  their  brigadier- 
general  and  prepare  a  note  on  the  officers  of  each  demi-brigade  and 
their  conduct  since  the  opening  of  the  campaign.  The  brigade  com- 
mander will  forward  these  notes  to  the  divisional  commander  together 
with  his  own  observations. 

Divisional  commanders  are  authorized  to  dismiss  at  once,  and  even 
to  send  under  arrest  to  the  castle  at  Antibes,  officers  who  have,  by  their 
example,  condoned  the  horrible  looting  of  the  last  few  days.  They  are 
authorized  to  have  shot  officers  or  soldiers  who  in  future  encourage 
others  to  pillage,  thereby  destroying  discipline,  disorganizing  the  army 
and  compromising  its  glory  and  security. 

Any  officer  or  n.c.o.  who  does  not  follow  the  colours  and  is,  without 
legitimate  reason,  absent  at  the  time  of  batde  will  be  dismissed  and  his 
name  sent  to  his  Department,  so  that  he  may  be  branded  as  a  coward 
in  the  opinion  of  his  fellow  citizens. ... 

Any  soldier  convicted  of  not  being  present  in  battle  will  lose  his 
seniority  and,  if  a  grenadier  or  carabinier,  will  be  removed  from  the 
company.  Any  soldier  convicted  of  being  twice  absent  in  battle  will 
be  degraded  at  the  head  of  the  battalion;  he  will  be  stripped  of  his 
uniform  and  sent  beyond  the  Var  to  work  on  the  roads  for  the  dura- 
tion of  the  campaign.  ... 

By  order  of  the  Commander-in-Chief 

Italy  101 

98 

To  General  Colli 

C.-w~C.,  Piedmontese  Army  H.Q.,  Carrii 

4  Floreal  Year  TV  (23  Apr, 

Sir,  the  Executive  Directory  reserves  to  itself  the  right  to  negotiate 
for  peace:  the  plenipotentiaries  of  the  King,  your  master,  must,  there- 
fore, either  proceed  to  Paris  or  wait  at  Genoa  for  plenipotentiaries  to  be 
sent  there  by  the  French  Government. 

The  military  and  moral  position  of  the  two  armies  makes  a  simple 
suspension  of  arms  impossible.  Although  I  am  myself  convinced  that 
the  Government  will  grant  reasonable  conditions  of  peace  to  your 
king,  I  cannot  halt  my  march  on  the  basis  of  vague  suppositions.  There 
is,  however,  one  means  of  attaining  your  object,  in  conformity  with 
the  true  interests  of  your  court,  and  so  preventing  further  bloodshed 
that  would  be  useless  and  therefore  contrary  to  reason  and  the  laws  of 
war:  that  is  to  place  in  my  power  two  of  the  three  fortresses  of  Cuneo, 
Alessandria  and  Tortona,  at  your  choice.  "We  can  then,  without 
hostilities,  await  the  negotiations.  This  proposal  is  most  moderate.  The 
mutual  interest  of  Piedmont  and  the  French  Republic  make  me  wish 
to  see  your  country  spared  the  miseries  of  all  kinds  that  are  threatening 
it. 

BONAPARTE. 

99 
To  the  Executive  Directory 

H.Q.,  Cmh 

5  Floreal,  Year  IV  (24  Apr,  1796) 
.  .  .  You  can  have  no  idea  of  the  military  and  administrative  situation 

of  the  army.  When  I  arrived  it  was  a  prey  to  every  kind  of  trouble- 
maker, without  food,  without  discipline,  without  obedience.  I  made 
examples  and  used  all  means  to  improve  the  supply  services,  and  victory 
has  done  the  rest.  Nevertheless,  our  kck  of  wagons,  poor  horses  ana 
greedy  administrators  mean  that  we  are  short  of  everything.  My  life 
here  is  inconceivable;  I  come  in  tired  and  must  spend  die  whole  night 
in  administration  and  go  everywhere  to  restore  order. 

The  hungry  soldiers  are  committing  excesses  that  make  one  blush 
to  be  human.  The  capture  of  Ceva  and  Mondovi  may  give  us  the  means 
to  put  this  right,  and  I  am  going  to  make  some  terrible  examples.  I  will 
restore  order  or  I  will  give  up  the  command  of  these  brigands. 

With  only  34,000  infantry  and  3,500  cavalry,  I  have  100,000  men 
against  me.  The  enemy  has  strong  fortresses  and  a  plentiful  and  perfectly 
equipped  artillery;  the  campaign  is  not  yet  decided,  therefore.  The 
enemy  is  desperate,  numerous  and  fights  well.  He  knows  my  state  of 
need  and  places  his  hopes  in  the  weather;  I  place  mine  in  the  genius  of 

L.D.N. — E 

IO2  The  Rise  to  Power 

the  Republic,  the  courage  of  the  soldiers,  the  co-operation  of  the 
leaders  and  the  confidence  shown  in  me. 

In  a  few  days  the  fate  of  Piedmont  will  be  decided.  But  I  beg  you  to 
send  me  the  artillery  officers  I  asked  for:  the  engineers  granted  to  me 
but  not  one  of  whom  has  arrived:  a  quartermaster-general,  as  I  have 
only  Lambert  here,  which  is  not  enough:  1,000  cavalry  and  6,000 
infantry.  Specify  clearly  my  relations  with  the  Army  of  the  Alps,  for  in 
a  few  days  I  shall  be  in  touch  with  it.  ... 

BONAPARTE 

100 
To  the  Executive  Directory 

H.Q.,  Carru 

5  Flortal,  Year  IV  (24  Apr,  1796) 

I  send  you  a  request  for  an  armistice  that  I  have  received  from  the 
Piedmontese  general  together  with  my  reply.*  I  hope  this  conforms 
with  your  intentions. 

Tliis  proposal  of  an  armistice  for  one  month,  during  which  we  remain 
in  control  of  all  that  the  army  has  conquered  and  with  two  fortresses 
as  guarantee,  would  be  very  advantageous  to  the  Republic.  During 
that  time  I  would  be  able  to  seize  the  whole  of  Austrian  Lombardy  up 
to  Mantua  and  to  drive  Beaulieu  from  Italy. 

lam  sending  my  brother  Joseph  with  these  important  dispatches  so 
that  you  can  let  him  know  your  intentions  as  to  their  contents. 

BONAPARTE 

101 
To  Citizen  Petiet 

Minister  of  War  H.Q.,  Carrh 

5  Florid,  Year  IV  (24  Apr,  1796) 

I  am  sending  you,  Citizen  Minister,  twenty-one  flags  taken  from  the 
enemy  by  the  Army  of  Italy. 

I  cannot  hide  from  you  how  much  my  operations  are  harmed  by  the 
counter-order  you  have  given  to  the  light  artillery  company  I  had  had 
leave  Paris  for  Nice. 

Nothing  has  arrived  of  what  should  have  been  sent  to  me  by  the 
artillery  and  engineer  section:  not  one  of  the  artillery  or  engineer 
officers  I  asked  for,  not  one  artisan,  not  one  company  of  horse  artillery. 
The  arms  of  the  Republic  are  being  compromised,  and  I  can  impute 
it  only  to  malice  on  the  part  of  the  artillery  section.  If  I  had  some  fight 
artillery  I  would  not  have  lost  the  brave  General  Stengel  and  I  would 
not  find  myself  held  up  in  the  plain  by  a  cavalry  more  numerous  and 
better  mounted  than  my  own. 

*No.98. 

Italy  103 

I  beg  you  to  send  me  six  companies  of  light  artillery  as  soon  as 
possible  and  to  keep  a  hand  on  your  artillery  offices  where  there  are 
trouble-makers  seeking  to  nullify  the  operations  planned  by  the 
Government. 

BONAPARTE 

102 
Order 

H.Q.,  Carru 
5  Floreal,  Year  TV  (24  Apr,  1796) 

All  civil  and  military  authorities  on  the  road  from  Nice  to  Paris  will 
allow  to  pass  freely  Citizen  Junot,  aide-de-camp  to  the  Commander- 
in-Chief  of  the  Army  of  Italy,  who  carries  to  Paris  twenty-one  flags 
captured  from  the  enemy; 

Also  Citizen  Joseph  Bonaparte,  entrusted  by  the  Commander-in- 
Chief  with  dispatches  of  the  highest  importance  for  the  Executive 
Directory. 

Postmasters  will  furnish  them  with  all  the  horses  they  may  need  to 
reach  their  destination  promptly;  in  case  of  refusal  they  will  be  con- 
strained by  force,  which  the  said  Citizens  Junot  and  Bonaparte  will 
demand  from  either  the  military  commandants  or  the  municipal 
authorities  who  are  required  to  comply  immediately  with  their  orders. 

BONAPARTE 

103 
To  Citizeness  Josephine  Bonaparte 

At  Paris         ,  H.Q.,  Carru 

5  Floreal,  Year  IV  (24  Apr,  1796} 

My  brother  will  bring  you  this  letter.  I  have  the  greatest  love  for 
him  and  I  hope  he  will  gain  yours;  he  deserves  it.  Nature  has  given  him 
a  sweet  and  utterly  good  character;  he  is  full  of  good  qualities.  I  am 
writing  to  Barras  to  get  him  appointed  consul  in  some  Italian  port.  He 
wants  to  live  with  his  little  wife  far  away  from  the  hurly-burly  and 
political  afiairs;  I  commend  frim  to  you. 

I  have  your  letters  of  the  i6th  and  2ist.  There  are  many  days  when 
you  don't  write.  What  do  you  do,  then?  No,  my  darling,  I  am  not 
jealous,  but  sometimes  worried.  Come  soon;  I  warn  you,  if  you  delay, 
you  will  find  me  ill.  Fatigue  and  your  absence  are  too  much. 

Your  letters  are  the  joy  of  my  days,  and  my  days  of  happiness  are 
not  many.  Junot  is  bringing  twenty-two  flags  to  Paris. 

You  must  come  back  with  him,  you  understand? — hopeless  sorrow, 
inconsolable  misery,  sadness  without  end,  if  I  am  so  unhappy  as  to  see 
him  return  alone.  Adorable  friend,  he  will  see  you,  he  wOl  breathe  in 
your  temple;  perhaps  you  will  even  grant  him  the  unique  and  perfect 

IO4  The  Rise  to  Power 

favour  of  kissing  your  cheek,  and  I  shall  be  alone  and  far,  far  away.  But 
you  are  coming,  aren't  you?  You  are  going  to  be  here  beside  me,  in 
my  arms,  on  my  breast,  on  my  mouth.  Take  wing  and  come,  come! 
But  travel  gently.  The  road  is  long,  bad,  tiring.  Suppose  you  had  an 
accident,  or  fell  ill;  suppose  fatigue — come  gently,  my  adorable  love, 
but  think  of  me  often. 

I  have  received  a  letter  from  Hortense.  I  will  write  to  her.  She  is 
altogether  charming.  I  love  her  and  will  soon  send  her  the  perfumes 
she  wants. 

Read  [Ossian's]  poem  Carthon  carefully,  and  sleep  well  and  happily, 
far  from  your  good  friend,  but  thinking  of  him. 

A  kiss  on  your  heart,  and  one  lower  down,  much  lower! 

B. 

I  don't  know  if  you  need  money;  you  have  never  talked  about  your 
affairs.  If  so,  you  can  ask  my  brother,  who  has  200  louis  of  mine. 

B. 

104 
Conditions  of  Armistice* 

Between  the  French  and  Piedmontese  Armies  H.Q.,  Cherasco 

8  Floreal,  Year  IV  (27  Apr,  1/pd) 

1.  All  hostilities  between  the  French  army  in  Italy  and  the  army  of 
the  King  of  Sardinia  will  cease  as  from  the  day  on  which  the  following 
conditions  are  fulfilled  until  five  days  after  the  completion  of  the 
negotiations  for  a  definitive  peace  between  the  two  powers. 

2.  The  French  army  will  remain  in  occupation  of  the  territory  it  has 
conquered  along  the  Stura,  from  Demonte  to  Alessandria. 

3.  The  town  and  citadel  of  Cuneo  and  the  town  and  citadel  of 
Tortona,  together  with  all  their  artillery,  ammunition  and  stores,  will 
be  surrendered  to  French  forces.  If  the  town  and  citadel  of  Tortona 
cannot  at  once  be  placed  in  French  hands,  those  of  Alessandria  will  be  so 
provisionally. 

4.  The  French  troops  will  have  the  right  to  cross  the  Po  at  Valenza. 
Until  the  Austrian  troops  have  vacated  his  territory,  the  States  of  the 
King  of  Sardinia  will  be  regarded  as  neutral,  and  passage  into  Lombardy 
will  be  accorded  to  the  French  army  in  order  to  attack  the  army  of  the 
Emperor  in  such  positions  as  it  may  occupy. 

5.  Free  passage  by  the  shortest  route  will  be  allowed  to  such  special 
couriers  and  aides-de-camp  as  the  Commander-in-Chief  of  the  French 
army  may  send  to  Paris,  as  also  for  their  return. 

*  Hiese  were  Bonaparte's  conditions,  handed  to  the  Piedmontese  intermediary. 
They  were  accepted,  and  the  definitive  document,  where  they  are  set  out  in 
somewhat  greater  detail,  was  signed  the  same  night  by  Bonaparte  for  the  French 
and  Lt.-Gen.  Baron  de  la  Tour  for  the  Piedmontese. 

Italy  105 

6.  All  troops,  officers  and  war  material  in  the  pay  of  the  King  of 
Sardinia  but  forming  part  of  the  Austrian  army  in  Italy  will  be  included 
in  the  said  armistice.  The  King  of  Sardinia  will  hold  the  Austrians  in 
his  army  as  hostages. 

7.  The  citadel  of  Ceva  will  be  surrendered  or  else  the  army  will  be 
free  to  continue  the  siege  of  this  fortress. 

BONAPARTE 

105 
To  the  Executive  Directory 

H.Q.,  Cherasco 
9  Floreal,  Year  IV  (28  Apr,  1796) 

You  will  find  attached,  Citizen  Directors, ...  the  terms  of  armistice 
agreed  during  the  night  between  General  La  Tour  and  mysel£  . . . 

If  you  do  not  come  to  terms  with  the  King  of  Sardinia,  I  shall  keep 
the  fortresses  and  march  on  Turin.  My  siege  train  is  proceeding  to 
Cuneo  and  thence  to  Cherasco. 

Meanwhile,  tomorrow  I  shall  march  against  Beaulieu,  force  him  to 
cross  the  Po,  cross  myself  immediately  after  and  seize  the  whole  of 
Lombardy ;  within  a  month  I  hope  to  be  on  the  mountains  of  the  Tyrol, 
in  touch  with  the  Army  of  the  Rhine,  and  to  carry  the  war  in  concert 
into  Bavaria.  Such  a  plan  is  worthy  of  you,  of  the  army  and  of  the 
destinies  of  France. 

If  you  do  not  grant  peace  to  the  King  of  Sardinia,  you  must  warn  me 
in  advance,  so  that,  in  case  I  am  in  Lombardy,  I  can  fall  back  and  carry 
out  my  plans. 

As  to  the  conditions  of  peace,  you  can  dictate  whatever  you  see  fit, 
since  the  principal  fortresses  are  in  my  power. 

Give  orders  that  15,000  men  from  the  Army  of  the  Alps  should 
come  under  my  command  and  join  me;  that  would  then  give  me  an 
army  of  45,000  men,  part  of  which  it  would  be  possible  for  me  to  send 
to  Rome. 

If  you  continue  to  have  confidence  in  me  and  you  approve  of  these 
plans,  I  am  sure  of  success;  Italy  is  yours. 

You  must  not  count  on  a  revolution  in  Piedmont;  that  will  come, 
but  the  spirit  of  this  people  is  not  yet  ripe  for  it. 

I  have  justified  your  confidence  and  the  favourable  opinion  you  have 
formed  of  me.  I  shall  constantly  seek  to  give  you  proofs  of  my  zeal 
and  my  firm  desire  to  deserve  your  respect  and  that  of  the  nation. 

Send  me  twelve  companies  of  light  artillery;  I  have  none;  also  some 
cavalry  and  an  able  quartermaster-general.  I  have  nothing  but  pygmies 
who  are  letting  us  die  of  hunger  in  the  midst  of  plenty. 

BONAPARTE 

io6  The  Rise  to  Power 

106 
To  the  Executive  Directory 

H.Q.,  Tortona 
17  Floreal,  Year  IV  (6  May,  ijgff) 

.  .  .  On  the  I3th  the  Austrian  army  re-crossed  the  Po,  cut  the  bridges 
and  burnt  what  boats  it  could  find. 

At  the  present  moment  General  Serurier's  division  is  camped  between 
Valenza  and  Alessandria;  Massena's  is  at  Sale;  Augereau's  at  Castellazzo; 
Laharpe's  at  Voghera.  Brigadier-General  Dallemagne  is  at  Casteggio 
with  3,000  men  and  1,500  cavalry.  Yesterday  there  was  cannonading 
with  the  enemy  positions  beyond  the  Po.  The  river  is  very  wide  and 
difficult  to  cross.  My  intention  is  to  cross  it  as  near  as  possible  to  Milan, 
so  as  to  have  no  further  obstacles  in  reaching  that  capital.  Thereby  I 
shall  turn  the  three  defence  lines  that  Beaulieu  has  prepared  along  the 
Agogno,  the  Terdoppio  and  the  Ticino.  Today  I  am  marching  on 
Piacenza.  Pavia  is  turned  and  if  the  enemy  persists  in  defending  it  I 
shall  be  between  him  and  his  stores.  Everywhere  we  are  building  boats 
and  rafts;  but  you  know  how  long  all  that  takes  and  how  an  army 
prepared  for  four  years  for  mountain  warfare  must  lack  things  needed 
for  as  active  a  war  in  the  plains  as  we  are  waging.  It  takes  me  twenty 
days  to  have  things  brought  from  Nice;  add  to  that  the  lack  of  wagons 
and  you  will  see  what  time  we  would  lose  if  we  followed  the  ordinary 
rules.  I  am  sure  we  should  not  be  ready  to  cross  the  Po  until  July  were 
I  to  wait  until  we  have  two  boat  bridges,  so  I  intend  to  cross  it  by 
rafts  and  fly-bridges.  Be  certain  we  shall  do  everything  that  can  be 
done,  and  I  am  sure  of  your  confidence.  You  know  better  than  anyone 
how  to  appreciate  obstacles  that  cannot  be  surmounted  at  once  and 
you  do  not  listen  to  armchair  soldiers  who  think  you  can  cross  great 
rivers  by  swimming.  I  may  be  accused  of  rashness,  but  not  of  sloth; 
even  so,  one  must  have  reasonable  chances  on  one's  side. 

When  shall  we  cross  the  Po?  Where  shall  we  cross  it?  I  do  not  know. 
If  our  march  on  Piacenza  decides  BeauHeu  to  evacuate  the  Lomelina 
I  shall  cross  it  peacefully  at  Valenza.  If  he  does  not  learn  of  our  move  to 
Piacenza  for  twenty-four  hours  and  I  find  boats  and  material  for  rafts 
there,  I  shall  cross  during  the  night.  But  I  still  see  many  difficulties  about 
that.  All  the  boats  have  been  burned  by  the  Austrians  and  the  King  of 
Sardinia  has  no  more. 

If  I  cross  the  Po  I  shall  have  driven  the  Imperial  army  from  the 
Sardinian  states  lying  beyond  that  river,  and  they  will  be  conquered 
territory.  I  have  just  suggested  to  the  King  that  he  should  give  me  the 
boats  and  gear  needed  to  build  two  bridges,  600  harnessed  dragoon 
horses  and  1,400  wagons;  on  these  conditions  I  am  promising  to 
restore  his  estates  beyond  the  Po  as  soon  as  I  have  conquered  them, 
provided  that  he  puts  a  garrison  of  6,000  men  there.  This  would  suit  us 

Italy  107 

well,  since  if  we  ever  quarrel  I  shall  hold  these  6,000  men  as  hostages; 
I  shall  of  course  keep  control  of  the  Po  bridges.  I  will  let  you  know  the 
result  of  this  negotiation. 

If  I  do  not  cross  the  Po  for  a  few  days,  I  intend  to  send  4,000  men 
from  Piacenza  to  Bologna  to  hold  the  roads  out  of  that  city,  to  demand 
6  millions  from  the  Duke  of  Modena  and  frighten  Rome  and  the 
Grand  Duke  of  Tuscany.  You  will  have  learned  of  the  revolting  way 
he  has  behaved;  he  is  protecting  emigrants  and  letting  our  ships  be 
seized  under  the  very  guns  of  Leghorn.  .  .  .  These  princelings  need  to 
be  properly  handled;  they  take  more  notice  of  a  note  from  the  army 
than  from  our  diplomatists;  fear  alone  makes  them  honest  and  respect- 
ful, one  might  almost  say  fawning. 

General  Kellermann  says  he  is  sending  me  10,000  men:  with  that  I 
can  pay  a  visit  to  the  Pope  and  at  the  same  time  to  the  Milanese  or  the 
King  of  Sardinia.  It  is  only  the  Austrian  cavalry  that  is  formidable. 
They  have  about  6,000. 

It  would  be  useful  if  you  were  to  send  me  three  or  four  well-known 
artists  to  choose  what  should  be  seized  and  sent  to  Paris. 

BONAPARTE 

107 
To  the  Executive  Directory 

H.Q.,  Tortona 
ij  Florlal,  Year  IV  (6  May,  1796] 

I  have  received  the  answer  to  the  first  dispatch  I  sent  you.*  I  beg  you 
to  express  the  gratitude  of  the  army  to  the  Legislative  Corps  for  the 
honourable  decree  it  has  just  passed;  f  it  is  the  sweetest  reward  that  the 
army  can  gain  from  its  successes.  As  for  myself  nothing  can  add  to 
the  respect  and  devotion  I  shall  at  all  times  show  towards  the  Constitu- 
tion and  the  Government.  I  saw  it  set  up  in  the  midst  of  the  most 
revolting  passions,  all  alike  tending  towards  the  destruction  of  the 
Republic  and  the  French  empire;  I  was  even  able  to  be  of  some  use  in 
the  circumstances  of  its  birth.  My  motto  will  ever  be  to  die  in  defence 
of  it. 

Since  the  beginning  of  the  campaign  General  Berthier,  Chief  of 
Staff,  has  always  spent  the  day  at  my  side  in  the  fight  and  the  night  at 
his  desk;  no  man  could  show  more  energy,  willingness,  courage  and 
resource.  I  have  justly  rendered  to  him  one  half  of  the  flattering  and 
honourable  things  you  express  in  your  letters. 

BONAPARTE 

*  No.  95. 

f  A  congratulatory  address  and  the  award  of  the  Millesimo-Dego  medal 
illustrated  on  p.  70. 

io8  The  Rise  to  Power 

108 
To  Citizen  Letourneur 

President  of  the  Executive  Directory  H.Q.,  Tortona 

17  Floreal,  Year  IV  (6  May,  ijgG) 

I  have  received  your  letter,  Citizen  Director,  and  I  owe  you  par- 
ticular thanks  for  the  signs  of  esteem  you  give  me.  The  position  of 
generals  is  more  delicate  after  battles  than  before;  for  then,  having 
been  able  to  follow  but  one  course,  they  find  themselves  criticized  by 
all  those  who  would  have  adopted  others.  Myself,  I  have  tried  to  carry 
out  the  spirit  of  the  Government's  instructions,  and  if,  owing  to  force 
of  circumstance,  the  speed  of  events  and  my  distance  from  you,  I  have 
had  to  take  matters  into  my  own  hands,  it  was  only  with  the  greatest 
repugnance  and  in  complete  conviction  that  that  was  what  you  wished 
to  have  done.  If  I  was  mistaken  I  shall  blame  nobody  but  only  the 
nature  of  things.  In  military  operations  I  have  consulted  no  one  but 
myself;  in  diplomatic  operations  I  have  consulted  everyone,  and  we 
have  all  been  of  one  mind. 

I  beg  you  to  continue  to  show  me  the  friendship  merited  by  the 
sentiments  of  attachment  and  respect  with  which  I  am,  etc. 

BONAPARTE 

P.S,  I  am  fortunate  in  die  Government  Commissioner,  Saliceti;  he 
combines  great  resourcefulness  with  great  enthusiasm. 

109 
To  Adjutant-general  Lanusse 

Commandant  of  Piacenza  H.Q.,  Piacenza 

ig  Mortal,  Year  IV  (8  May,  1796} 

I  have  just  inspected  the  town,  Citizen.  I  did  not  meet  one  of  the 
patrols  that  should  be  constantly  made.  I  repeat  my  order  that  you 
maintain,  at  all  times,  two  patrols  of  a  corporal  and  four  dragoons, 
drawn  from  the  picket  at  your  disposal  in  the  camp  area.  The  patrols 
will  maintain  the  strictest  discipline  and  will  send  all  soldiers  not  on 
duty  there  out  of  the  town  and  back  to  their  units.  They  will  follow 
each  other  in  such  a  way  that  when  one  returns  another  sets  out.  I  shall 
hold  you  personally  responsible  for  the  execution  of  this  order. 

BONAPARTE 

no 
To  Citizen  Lambert 

QJMG,,  Army  of  My  H.Q.,  Piacenza 

19  Flortal,  Year  IV  (8  May,  1796) 

I  am  informed,  Citizen  Commissary,  that  there  are  a  number  of 
wounded  in  different  parts  ofPiacenza  who  have  not  yet  received  any 
succour  owing  to  the  lack  of  a  hospital  and  of  medical  officers. 

Italy  109 

Give  orders  at  once  for  the  immediate  establishment  of  a  military 
hospital  large  enough  and  comfortable  enough  to  receive  the  sick  and 
wounded;  have  it  adequately  equipped  with  medical  officers,  medicines 
and  all  other  things  needed  for  the  care  of  our  comrades  in  arms. 

BONAPARTE 

in 
To  the  Famtty  of  Major-General  Stengel 

H.Q.,  Piacenza 

ig  Floreal,  Year  IV  (8  May,  1796} 

I  enclose,  Citizens,  a  letter  from  the  Executive  Directory  which 
reached  me  only  after  the  death  of  the  brave  General  Stengel,  whom 
we  all  mourn.  This  letter,  dictated  by  the  national  gratitude,  will  prove 
to  you  the  concern  of  the  Directory  at  the  wounding  of  this  worthy 
general  and  will  enable  you  easily  to  feel  what  regret  it  will  have  been 
caused  by  the  news  of  ms  death.  If  there  is  anything  that  may  console 
you  for  so  great  a  loss,  it  will  be  found  in  the  evidence  of  the  nation's 
gratitude  and  in  the  grief  and  homage  of  the  army  which  have  accom- 
panied your  relative  to  the  grave.  I  had  vowed  to  kim  an  inviolable 
friendship  and  I  therefore  feel  the  deepest  personal  sorrow  at  the  tragedy 
which  afflicts  you. 

BONAPARTE 

112 
To  the  Executive  Directory 

H.Q.,  Piacenza 
20  Floreal  Year  IV  (p  May,  1796) 

After  various  marches  and  other  military  and  diplomatic  movements 
designed  to  let  the  enemy  think  I  intended  to  cross  at  Valenza,  I  moved 
with  5,000  grenadiers  and  1,500  cavalry  by  a  forced  march  to  Castel- 
Sait-GiovannL  At  n.o  p.m.  Major  of  Artillery  Andreossy,  Adjutant- 
general  Frontin  and  100  cavalrymen  followed  die  bank  of  the  Po  as  far 
as  Piacenza  and  stopped  five  boats  laden  with  rice,  officers'  baggage, 
500  wounded  and  all  the  enemy's  medical  supplies. 

At  9.0  aan.  [on  the  i8th]  we  reached  the  Po  opposite  Piacenza.  On 
the  other  side  were  two  squadrons  of  hussars  who  showed  signs  of 
wishing  to  dispute  the  crossing.  But  we  threw  ourselves  into  the  boats 
and  raced  to  the  other  side,  and  after  a  few  musket  shots  the  enemy 
cavalry  withdrew.  The  first  ashore  was  Colonel  Lannes,  a  man  as  brave 
as  he  is  intelligent. 

As  soon  as  our  crossing  was  established  the  divisions  of  the  army, 
which  were  all  in  echelon  at  various  distances,  hastened  their  march 
and  crossed  during  the  day. 

When  he  learnt  what  had  happened  Beaulieu  realized  too  kte  that 
his  fortifications  on  the  Ticino  and  his  redoubts  at  Pavia  were  useless 

no  Tht  Rise  to  Power 

and  that  the  French  republicans  were  not  so  inept  as  Francois  I.  He 
ordered  a  force  of  6,000  men  and  2,000  cavalry  to  go  to  meet  us  and 
oppose  our  landing  or  attack  us  if  we  were  not  formed  up;  but  he 
miscalculated.  At  midday  I  learnt  that  an  enemy  force  was  very  close, 
and  we  marched.  The  enemy  was  entrenched  in  the  village  of  Fombio 
with  twenty  guns.  Brigadier-General  Dalleniagne  attacked  on  the 
right,  Adjutant-general  Lanusse  along  the  road  and  Colonel  Lannes  on 
the  left.  After  a  lively  cannonade  and  a  fairly  stubborn  resistance  the 
enemy  was  forced  to  withdraw.  We  pursued  as  far  as  the  Adda;  he  has 
lost  part  of  his  baggage,  300  horses  and  500  dead  or  prisoners. 

The  crossing  of  the  Po  is  one  of  the  most  important  operations. 
There  were  wagers  that  we  would  not  cross  it  in  two  months. 

BONAPARTE 

To  Citizen  Carnot 

Member  of  the  Executive  Directory  H.Q.,  Piacenza 

20  Flortal,  Year  IV  (9  May,  1796) 

At  last  we  have  crossed  the  Po.  The  second  campaign  has  begun. 
Beaulieu  is  thrown  offhis  balance;  he  calculates  poorly  and  constantly 
walks  into  the  traps  that  are  laid  for  him.  Perhaps  he  will  wish  to  give 
batde,  for  he  is  a  man  with  the  courage  of  madness  rather  than  of 
genius;  but  the  6,000  men  whom  we  forced  across  the  Adda  and 
defeated  yesterday  weaken,  him  badly.  One  more  victory  and  we  are 
masters  of  Italy. 

I  have  granted  an  armistice  to  the  Duke  of  Parma;  the  Duke  of 
Mode&a  is  sending  me  plenipotentiaries. 

If  we  had  an  able  quartermaster  we  would  be  as  well  off  as  can  be 
imagined.  We  are  going  to  set  up  big  stores  of  corn  and  herds  of  600 
cattle  in  the  rear.  As  soon  as  we  stop  moving  we  will  have  the  army 
completely  re-clothed;  it  is  still  in  a  frightening  condition;  but  every- 
thing is  improving;  the  soldiers  eat  only  the  best  bread,  good  meat  and 
plenty  of  it,  good  wine,  etc.  Discipline  is  returning  day  by  day;  but 
often  men  have  to  be  shot,  for  there  are  some  who  are  incurable  and 
cannot  control  themselves. 

What  we  have  taken  from  the  enemy  is  beyond  counting.  We  have 
hospital  equipment  for  15,000  sick,  several  stores  of  corn,  flour,  etc. 
The  more  men  you  send  me,  the  more  easily  they  can  be  fed. 

I  am  sending  you  twenty  pictures  by  the  greatest  masters,  by 
Correggio  and  Michelangelo. 

I  owe  you  especial  thanks  for  the  attention  you  are  paying  my  wife; 
I  commend  her  to  you;  she  is  a  sincere  patriot,  and  I  love  her  madly* 

If  things  go  well,  I  hope  to  be  able  to  send  you  some  10  million 
francs  to  Paris;  that  should  be  useful  for  the  Army  of  the  Rhine, 

Italy  in 

Send  me  4,000  dismounted  cavalrymen,  whom  I  will  arrange  to 
remount  here.  I  cannot  hide  from  you  that,  since  the  death  of  Stengel, 
I  have  no  senior  cavalry  officer  who  knows  how  to  fight.  I  wish  you 
could  send  me  two  or  three  adjutants-general  from  the  cavalry  who 
have  spirit  and  a  firm  resolution  never  to  make  masterly  retreats. 

BONAPARTB 

114 
To  the  Executive  Directory 

H.Q.,  Piacenza 
20  Floreal,  Year  IV  (p  May,  ijg$) 

The  complimentary  letters  you  have  written  to  the  generals  are 
producing  a  great  effect;  they  have  not  spared  themselves  since  the 
opening  of  the  campaign,  that  is  for  a  month.  Two  major-generals, 
two  brigadier-generals,  and  several  adjutants-general  are  among  our 
dead. 

The  brave  Stengel  has  died  of  his  wounds.  I  have  sent  your  letter  to 
his  family. 

I  am  now  in  what  is  certainly  the  pleasantest  town  of  Italy.  The 
administrative  gentlemen  would  have  liked  headquarters  to  remain 
here  for  a  few  decades;  it  is  indeed  sad  that  one  hour  after  midnight  we 
must  go  and  live  in  barns  on  the  other  side  of  the  Po. 

You  will  find  attached  the  conditions  of  armistice  that  I  have  accorded 
to  the  Duke  of  Parma.  As  soon  as  possible  I  will  send  you  the  most 
beautiful  pictures  of  Correggio,  among  others  a  Saint-Jerome  that  is 
said  to  be  his  masterpiece.  I  must  say,  this  saint  has  chosen  bad  weather 
to  arrive  in  Paris;  I  hope  you  will  give  him  the  place  of  honour  in  the 
Museum.  I  repeat  my  request  for  a  few  known  artists  to  take  charge  of 
the  choice  and  transport  of  the  fine  things  we  shall  think  fit  to  send  to 
Paris.  All  arrangements  are  made  for  the  10,000  men  from  the  Army 
of  the  Alps.  There  will  be  no  difficulty  over  their  passage. 

BONAPARTE 

Order  of  the  Day 

Army  of  Italy  H1Q.,  Piacenza 

20,  Flore'al,  Year  IV  ($  May,  1796) 

...  A  disastrous  incident  darkened  yesterday's  victory.  Having 
beaten  the  enemy,  the  brave  General  Laharpe  took  steps  for  the 
security  of  the  new  positions  he  had  taken  up.  He  had  ordered  the 
pickets  to  be  on  the  alert  and  had  forbidden  anyone  to  leave  them;  but 
this  order  was  not  carried  out.  An  enemy  patrol  fell  by  chance  on  one 
of  our  posts  where  there  were  guns.  That  patrol  would  have  been  taken 
if  the  guard  had  done  its  duty;  but  it  allowed  itself  to  be  surprised  and 

j  12  The  Rise  to  Power 

the  picket  fled,  General  Laharpe  at  once  proceeded  to  the  abandoned 
position,  seeking  to  rally  troops  to  attack  the  enemy.  Before  leaving  he 
ordered  a  demi-brigade  to  advance  and,  when  it  did  not  arrive,  he 
returned  in  order  to  hasten  its  march;  it  was  moving  up  preceded  by  its 
advance-guard  which  was  unfortunately  commanded  by  an  officer 
who  allowed  it  to  march  in  disorder.  Seeing  the  horses  of  General 
Laharpe  and  his  staff,  some  cowards  cried:  "There  is  the  enemy 
cavalry!'  At  these  words  the  troop  opened  fire  at  point-blank  range. 
Struck  by  several  shots,  Laharpe  fell  dead  at  the  feet  of  those  he  was 
trying  to  lead  once  again  to  victory. 

Tms  truly  republican  general,  beloved  by  his  comrades  in  arms, 
carries  with  him  the  true  regrets  of  the  nation  and  the  army.  May  this 
frightful  incident  recall  officers  and  ILC.O.S  to  the  most  scrupulous 
control;  each  one  must  ensure  that  troops  under  his  command  observe 
the  strictest  discipline. .  .  . 

The  Commander-in-Chief  is  informed  that  soldiers  are  seizing 
horses  belonging  to  inhabitants  of  the  conquered  territory;  he  orders 
the  generals  to  ensure  that  this  abuse  ceases.  It  is  for  the  Commander-in- 
Chief  alone  to  order  the  requisitioning  of  horses;  any  other  order  is  a 
violation  of  the  law,  and  those  who  commit  it  will  be  severely  punished. 
The  sole  valid  prizes  are  horses  captured  in  battle. 

By  order  of  the  Commander-in-Chief 

116 
Order  of  the  Day 

Army  of  Italy  H.Q.,  Lodi 

21  Ploreal,  Year  IV  (10  May,  1796) 

General  Beaulieu  had  assembled  14,000  infantry  and  4,000  cavalry 
at  Lodi.  As  soon  the  Commander-in-Chief  learnt  this,  he  sent  the 
advance-guard  of  grenadiers  and  carabiniers,  the  divisions  of  Generals 
Massena  and  Augereau  and  part  of  the  cavalry  to  Casale.  At  midday 
the  attack  began.  The  enemy  outposts  were  overrun  and  were  pursued 
and  driven  out  of  the  town  of  LodL  Beaulieu's  army  had  crossed  the 
Adda  and  occupied  a  formidable  position  on  the  left  bank  with  twenty 
guns  covering  the  bridge. 

An  artillery  duel  took  place  while  a  column  of  carabiniers  and 
grenadiers  was  formed  to  carry  the  bridge  by  storm. 

Hie  order  was  given:  at  once  the  impetuous  column  hurled  itself 
onto  the  bridge  and  crossed  it  at  die  double  despite  the  fire  of  the 
enemy.  Once  across  the  river,  the  republicans  carried  the  batteries, 
charged  the  line  and  completely  routed  it.  Ilie  enemy  was  pursued 
until  dark.  He  has  lost  twenty  guns  and  more  than  3,000  men.  . .  . 
This  battle  was  one  of  the  sharpest  of  the  campaign. 

By  order  of  the  Commander-in-Chief 

113 

117 
To  the  Executive  Directory 

H.Q.,  Lodi 

21  Floreal,  Year  IV  (10  May,  1796) 

I  had  thought  that  the  crossing  of  the  Po  would  be  the  boldest 
operation  of  the  campaign  and  that  the  batde  of  Millesimo  would  be 
the  hardest  fought;  but  I  have  now  to  inform  you  of  the  batde  of  LodL 
Headquarters  reached  Casale  at  3.0  a.m.  on  the  2ist.  At  9.0  a.m. 
our  advance-guard  encountered  the  enemy  who  was  defending  the 
approaches  to  Lodi.  I  at  once  ordered  all  the  cavalry  into  the  saddle 
with  four  pieces  of  light  artillery  which  had  just  arrived  and  were  har- 
nessed to  carriage  horses  of  the  nobles  of  Piacenza.  General  Augereau's 
division,  which  was  at  Borghetto,  and  General  Massena's,  which  was 
at  Casale,  also  moved  off  at  once.  Meanwhile,  the  advance-guard  over- 
ran all  the  enemy  positions,  capturing  one  gun.  We  entered  Lodi  in 
pursuit  of  the  enemy,  who  had  already  crossed  the  bridge  over  the 
Adda.  I  had  the  whole  of  my  artillery  brought  into  action,  and  for 
several  hours  there  was  a  very  heavy  cannonade.  As  soon  as  the  army 
came  up  it  was  formed  into  close  column,  the  2nd  battalion  of  Cara- 
biniers  in  the  van  followed  by  all  the  grenadier  battalions.  At  the 
charge  and  with  cries  of  'Long  live  the  Republic'  they  advanced  onto 
the  bridge,  which  is  200  yards  long.  The  enemy's  fire  was  terrible  and 
the  column  seemed  to  pause.  A  moment's  hesitation  would  have  been 
fatal,  and  Generals  Berthier,  Massena,  Cervoni  and  Dallemagne, 
Colonel  Larmes  and  Major  Dupas,  realizing  this,  ran  to  the  front  and 
decided  the  still  doubtful  outcome. 

That  formidable  column  overthrew  everything  that  opposed  it;  all 
the  batteries  were  quickly  carried  and  BeauKeu's  line  of  battle  broken; 
fear,  flight  and  death  were  sown  on  all  sides;  in  a  flash  the  enemy  army 
was  scattered.  As  soon  as  their  divisions  came  up,  Generals  Rusca, 
Augereau  and  Beyrand  crossed  and  completed  the  victory.  The 
cavalry  crossed  the  Adda  by  a  ford,  but,  since  this  was  very  bad,  it  was 
much  delayed  and  was  unable  to  come  into  action. 

To  cover  the  retreat  of  the  infantry,  the  enemy  cavalry  tried  to 
charge  our  troops,  but  it  did  not  find  them  easy  to  frighten.  The  onset 
of  darkness  and  the  extreme  fatigue  of  the  troops,  many  of  whom  had 
covered  more  than  ten  leagues  in  the  course  of  the  day,  prevented  us 
from  maintaining  the  pursuit.  The  enemy  lost  twenty  guns  and  2,000 
to  3,000  killed,  wounded  and  prisoners;  we  have  150  dead  or  wounded. 
Captain  Latour,  aide-de-camp  to  General  Massena,  received  several 
sabre  wounds;  I  request  the  rank  of  major  for  this  brave  officer  ____ 

If  I  were  required  to  name  all  the  soldiers  who  distinguished  them- 
selves on  this  remarkable  day,  I  should  be  forced  to  name  all  the 
carabiniers  and  grenadiers  of  the  advance-guard  and  almost  all  the 

H4  The  Rise  to  Power 

officers  of  the  staff.  But  I  must  not  omit  the  intrepid  Berthier,  who, 
during  the  course  of  the  day,  was  gunner,  cavalryman  and  grenadier. 
The  commander  of  the  artillery,  Colonel  Sugny,  did  very  well. 

Beaulieu  is  fleeing  with  the  remains  of  his  army;  already  the  whole 
of  Lombardy  can  be  regarded  as  belonging  to  the  Republic.  At  the 
moment  he  is  crossing  Venetian  territory,  where  several  cities  have 
closed  their  gates  to  him.  I  hope  soon  to  send  you  the  keys  of  Milan 
and  Pavia. 

Although  we  have  had  hard  battles  since  the  beginning  of  the 
campaign,  and  the  army  of  the  Republic  has  had  to  put  all  to  the 
hazard,  yet  nothing  has  approached  the  terrible  crossing  of  the  bridge 
of  Lodi.  If  we  have  had  few  losses,  we  owe  it  to  the  speed  of  the  action 
and  the  sudden  effect  produced  on  the  enemy  by  the  mass  and  fire  of 
our  intrepid  column. ...  As  soon  as  we  are  in  the  same  place  for  two 
days  on  end,  I  will  report  to  you  on  the  men  who  have  most  dis- 
tinguished themselves. 

The  Government  Commissioner  was  always  at  my  side;  the  army 
owes  him  true  gratitude. 

BONAPARTE 

118 
To  Citizen  Carnot 

Member  of  the  Executive  Directory  H.Q.,  Lodi 

22  Floreal  Year  IV  (11  May,  1796) 

The  battle  of  Lodi,  my  dear  Director,  gives  the  whole  of  Lombardy 
to  the  Republic.  The  enemy  has  left  2,000  men  in  the  castle  of  Milan, 
which  I  must  necessarily  invest.  You  can  reckon  as  if  I  were  at  Milan. 
I  am  not  going  there  tomorrow,  since  I  want  to  follow  Beaulieu  and 
take  advantage  of  his  discomfiture  to  try  to  beat  him  again. 

I  may  soon  attack  Mantua.  If  I  capture  that  fortress,  there  is  nothing 
else  to  stop  me  from  entering  Bavaria;  in  two  decades  I  could  be  in  the 
heart  of  Germany.  Could  you  not  co-ordinate  my  operations  with 
those  of  our  two  armies  there?  I  imagine  that  by  now  there  is  fighting 
on  die  Rhine;  if  the  armistice  were  to  continue,  the  Army  of  Italy 
would  be  crushed.  If  the  two  armies  on  the  Rhine  take  the  field,  please 
let  me  know  their  position  and  what  you  hope  they  will  be  able  to  do, 
so  that  I  can  use  this  as  a  guide  either  to  enter  the  Tyrol  or  remain  on 
the  Adige. 

It  would  be  worthy  of  the  Republic  to  sign  the  treaty  of  peace  with 
the  three  armies  united  in  the  heart  of  Bavaria  or  of  an  astonished 
Austria.  As  for  me,  I  will  cross  the  Tyrol  before  the  Emperor  has 
seriously  suspected  it,  if  it  is  part  of  your  plans  that  the  armies  on  the 
Rhine  should  advance. 

If  it  were  possible  to  have  a  good  quartermaster,  the  one  here  would 

Italy  us 

make  a  good  second;  but  he  has  not  enough  energy  or  brains  to  be  in 
charge. 

BONAPARTE 

119 
To  Citizen  Faypoult 

French  Minister  to  Genoa  H.Q.,  Lodi 

24  Floreal,  Year  IV  (13  May,  1796) 

I  am  much  obliged  for  the  drawings  you  sent  me,  which  will  give 
the  army  great  pleasure.  Please  send  twenty-five  louis  on  my  behalf  to 
the  young  man  who  did  them;  get  him  to  draw  the  amazing  crossing 
of  the  bridge  of  Lodi. 

Since  Montogio  is  not  an  imperial  fief,  it  is  not  included  in  the  order 
I  have  made  for  a  contribution  from  those  fiefs. 

Yesterday  we  captured  the  town  of  Pizzighettone;  we  took  300 
prisoners  and  four  guns.  Beaulieu  is  running  away  at  full  speed. 

BONAPARTE 

120 
To  Citizeness  Josephine  Bonaparte 

At  Paris  H.Q.,  Lodi 

24  Floreal,  Year  IV  (15  May,  Ijg6] 

So  it  is  true  that  you  are  pregnant.  Murat  has  written  to  me;  but  he 
tells  me  it  is  making  you  ill  and  that  he  thinks  it  unwise  for  you  to 
undertake  so  long  a  journey.  So  I  must  still  be  deprived  of  the  joy  of 
holding  you  in  my  arms!  I  must  still  spend  several  months  far  from  all 
that  I  love!  Is  it  possible  that  I  shan't  have  the  pleasure  of  seeing  you 
with  your  little  belly?  That  should  make  you  interesting!  You  write 
that  you  have  changed.  Your  letter  is  short  and  sad  and  shakily  written. 
What  is  it,  my  adorable?  What  can  be  upsetting  you?  Oh!  don't  stay 
in  the  country;  go  to  town,  try  to  amuse  yourself,  and  remember  that 
there  is  no  truer  torment  for  my  soul  than  to  know  you  unwell  and 
unhappy.  I  thought  I  was  jealous,  but  I  swear  to  you  that  I  am  not.  I 
think  I  would  rather  myself  give  you  a  lover  than  know  you  to  be 
miserable.  So  be  gay  and  cheerful,  and  remember  that  my  happiness 
depends  on  yours.  If  Josephine  is  unhappy,  if  she  lets  herself  be  sad  and 
discouraged,  then  she  doesn't  love  me.  Soon  you  are  going  to  bring 
into  the  world  another  being  who  will  love  you  as  much  as  I — No, 
that  is  impossible,  but  your  children  and  I  will  always  be  around  you 
to  convince  you  of  our  love  and  care.  You  won't  be  horrid,  will  you? 
No  tantrums! ! !  except  as  a  joke.  And  then  just  two  or  three  pouts; 
nothing  is  prettier,  and  a  little  kiss  puts  everything  right. 

He  courier  has  brought  your  letter  of  the  i8th.  How  sad  it  makes 
me!  Can't  you  be  happy,  darling  Josephine?  Is  there  something  you 

116  The  Rise  to  Power 

want?  I  am  waiting  impatiently  for  Murat  to  know  all  the  details  of 
what  you  are  doing,  what  you  are  saying,  whom  you  are  seeing,  what 
you  are  wearing.  Everything  to  do  with  my  adorable  is  dear  to  my 
heart,  which  only  longs  to  know. 

Things  are  going  well  here;  but  my  heart  is  indescribably  heavy. 
You  are  ill  and  far  away  from  me.  Be  gay  and  take  great  care  of  your- 
self, you  who  are  worth  more  than  all  die  universe  to  me.  The  thought 
that  you  are  ill  makes  me  very  unhappy. 

Please,  my  sweet,  tell  Freron  that  my  family  does  not  wish  him  to 
marry  my  sister  [Pauline],  and  that  I  am  determined  to  take  steps  to 
prevent  it.  Please  tell  my  brother. 

B. 

121 

To  the  Executive  Directory 

H.Q.,  Lodi 
25  Floreal,  Year  IV  (14  May,  i/ptf) 

I  have  just  received  the  mail  which  left  Paris  on  the  i8th.  Your 
hopes  are  realized,  for  at  this  moment  the  whole  of  Lombardy  belongs 
to  the  Republic.  Yesterday,  I  sent  a  force  to  invest  the  castle  of  Milan. 
Beaulieu  is  at  Mantua  with  his  army;  he  has  flooded  all  the  surrounding 
country.  He  will  succumb  there,  for  it  is  the  unhealthiest  part  of  Italy. 

Beaulieu  still  has  a  numerous  army,  having  begun  the  campaign  with 
much  superior  forces.  The  Emperor  is  sending  him  reinforcements  of 
10,000  men,  who  are  on  the  march. 

I  think  it  would  be  most  unwise  to  divide  the  Army  of  Italy  into 
two,  and  it  is  equally  against  the  interests  of  the  Republic  to  put  two 
different  generals  here. 

The  expedition  to  Leghorn,  Rome  and  Naples  is  no  great  matter;  it 
should  be  carried  out  by  divisions  in  echelon,  so  that  we  could,  by  a 
counter-march,  appear  in  force  against  the  Austrians  and  threaten  to 
envelop  them  at  die  least  movement. 

That  needs  not  only  a  single  general,  but  also  that  nothing  shall 
interfere  with  his  movements  and  operations.  I  have  carried  on  this 
campaign  without  consulting  anyone;  I  should  have  done  no  good  had 
I  had  to  come  to  terms  with  the  viewpoint  of  another.  Lacking  every- 
thing, I  have  got  the  better  of  far  superior  forces  because,  in  the  belief 
that  I  had  your  confidence,  my  movements  have  been  as  rapid  as  my 
thought. 

If  you  place  all  kinds  of  fetters  on  me;  if  I  must  refer  each  step  to  the 
Government  Commissioners;  if  they  have  the  right  to  change  my 
dispositions,  to  take  away  or  send  me  troops,  look  for  no  good  result. 
If  you  weaken  your  strength  by  dividing  your  forces,  if  you  break  the 
unity  of  military  thought  in  Italy,  I  must  tell  you  with  sorrow  that  you 

Italy  117 

will  have  lost  the  finest  opportunity  of  bringing  Italy  under  your 
rule. 

In  the  present  situation  of  the  Republic  in  Italy,  it  is  essential  that 
you  have  a  general  in  whom  you  have  complete  confidence.  If  it  is  not  I, 
I  shall  not  complain  but  shall  deport  myself  with  ever  more  zeal  to 
earn  your  regard  in  whatever  post  you  may  place  me.  Each  one  has  his 
own  way  of  making  war.  General  Kellermann  has  more  experience  and 
will  do  it  better  than  I;  but  the  two  of  us  together  will  do  it  very  badly. 

I  can  render  important  services  to  our  country  only  if  I  have  your 
complete  and  absolute  confidence.  It  needs  much  courage  to  write  you 
this  letter,  for  it  would  be  so  easy  to  accuse  me  of  ambition  and  pride; 
but  I  owe  you  the  recital  of  all  my  feelings,  for  I  cannot  forget  that 
you  have  always  given  me  evidence  of  your  regard. 

The  various  divisions  are  occupying  Lombardy.  When  you  receive 
this  letter  we  shall  already  be  on  the  march,  and  your  reply  will  prob- 
ably reach  us  near  Leghorn.  Your  decision  in  this  affair  will  be  more 
decisive  for  the  outcome  of  the  campaign  than  15,000  reinforcements 
that  the  Emperor  might  send  to  Beaulieu. 

BONAPAXTE 

122 

To  Citizen  Carnot 

Member  of  the  Executive  Directory  H.Q.,  Lodi 

25  Floreal,  Year  IV  (14  May,  i*jg6) 

By  the  time  I  received  the  Directory's  letter  of  the  i8th  your  inten- 
tions had  been  carried  out;  the  Milanese  is  ours.  Soon  I  shall  march 
on  Leghorn  and  Rome  to  carry  out  your  orders.  That  will  not  take 
long. 

I  have  written  to  the  Directory  about  the  idea  of  dividing  the  army. 
I  assure  you  that  therein  I  have  thought  only  of  the  public  good.  In  any 
case,  you  will  find  I  always  take  the  straight  course.  I  owe  it  to  the 
Republic  to  sacrifice  all  my  own  ideas.  If  anyone  tries  to  influence  you 
against  me,  my  answer  is  in  my  heart  and  my  conscience. 

Since  it  is  possible  that  this  letter  to  the  Directory  might  be  mis- 
interpreted and  since  you  have  shown  me  some  friendship,  I  am  taking 
the  course  of  sending  it  to  you  with  the  request  that  you  will  make 
such  use  of  it  as  your  wisdom  and  your  attachment  to  me  may  suggest. 

Kellennann  will  command  the  army  as  well  as  I  can,  for  no  one  is 
more  convinced  than  I  that  victories  are  due  to  the  courage  and  bold- 
ness of  die  troops.  But  I  believe  that  to  combine  Kellermann  and  myself 
in  Italy  would  be  to  run  the  risk  of  losing  all.  I  cannot  serve  willingly 
with  a  man  who  thinks  himself  the  first  general  in  Europe;  and  besides, 
I  think  it  would  be  better  to  have  one  bad  general  than  two  good  ones. 
War  is  like  government,  a  matter  of  tact. 

n8  The  Rise  to  Power 

I  can  be  useful  to  you  only  if  you  have  the  same  confidence  in  me 
that  you  showed  in  Paris.  I  care  not  whether  I  fight  here  or  elsewhere; 
to  serve  the  nation,  to  earn  from  posterity  a  page  in  our  history,  to  give 
proof  of  my  loyalty  and  devotion  to  the  Government,  that  is  my  sole 
ambition.  But  I  have  it  much  at  heart  not  to  lose  in  a  week  the  fruit  of 
two  months'  fatigue,  hardship  and  danger  and  not  to  find  myself 
thwarted.  I  have  begun  with  a  little  glory  and  I  desire  to  go  on  being 
worthy  of  you.  Rest  assured  that  nothing  will  tarnish  the  regard  you 
inspire  in  those  who  know  you. 

BONAPARTE 

123 
To  Citizen  Joseph  Bonaparte 

At  Paris  H.Q.,  Lodi 

25  Floreal,  Year  IV  (14  May,  ljg6] 

All  goes  well.  Please  arrange  matters  about  Paulette.  It  is  my  inten- 
tion that  Freron  should  not  marry  her;  tell  him  so.  We  are  masters  of 
the  whole  of  Lombardy. 

Goodbye,  my  friend;  I  embrace  you.  Send  me  news  of  my  wife; 
they  say  she  is  ill,  and  that  tears  my  heart. 

BONAPAHTE 

124 
To  Lieutenant-Colonel  de  Lamy 

Governor  of  the  Citadel  of  Milan  H.Q.,  Milan 

27  Floreal,  Year  IV  (16  May,  1796) 

You  are  surrounded  and  in  no  condition  to  make  a  prolonged 
defence;  your  army  has  recrossed  the  Mincio;  any  resistance  you  may 
make  would  be  contrary  to  the  true  laws  of  war.  The  city  of  Milan, 
which  should  be  dear  to  you  for  so  many  reasons,  would  be  com- 
promised were  you  to  hold  the  fortress  longer.  Hie  Commander-in- 
Chief  summons  you  to  surrender  it  to  the  troops  of  the  Republic; 
otherwise  he  hoick  you  responsible  for  all  the  ills  which  may  afflict  this 
large  and  beautiful  city  and  he  will  allow  you  no  capitulation. 

By  order  of  the  Commander-in-Chief 

125 
To  the  Lombard  Communes 

H.Q.,  Milan 

27  Floreal,  Year  IV  (16  May,  1796) 

Within  twenty-four  hours  of  the  receipt  of  this  order  the  communes 
of  Lombardy  are  required  to  send  to  headquarters  their  act  of  sub- 
mission and  oath  of  obedience  and  fidelity  to  the  French  Republic. 

BONAPARTE 

Italy  119 

126 
To  the  Executive  Directory 

H.Q.,  Milan 
28  Floreal,  Year  IV  (17  May,  1796) 

The  Tricolour  flies  over  Milan,  Pavia,  Como  and  all  the  towns  of 
Lombardy.  The  castle  of  Milan  is  surrounded  on  all  sides.  It  contains  a 
garrison  of  3,000  men.  We  are  forming  a  siege  train  at  Tortona,  and  as 
soon  as  our  artillery  arrives  the  castle  will  be  taken. 

The  Austrian  army  is  beyond  the  Mincio.  It  has  already  had  6,000 
reinforcements  and  is  awaiting  a  further  10,000  who  are  on  the  way. 
That  will  serve  only  to  increase  the  glory  of  Republican  arms. 

Milan  is  very  eager  for  liberty;  there  is  a  club  of  800  members,  all 
businessmen  or  lawyers.  We  are  going  to  leave  the  existing  forms  of 
government  in  being,  only  changing  the  individuals,  who  cannot  enjoy 
our  confidence,  since  they  were  appointed  by  Ferdinand.  We  will  draw 
20  millions  in  contributions  from  this  country;  the  land  is  one  of  the 
richest  in  the  universe,  but  exhausted  by  five  years  of  war.  From  here 
will  be  sent  out  the  journals  and  other  literature  which  will  set  all  Italy 
aflame. 

If  these  people  ask  to  set  themselves  up  as  a  republic,  should  that  be 
allowed?  That  is  a  question  which  you  must  decide  and  as  to  which  it 
is  desirable  that  you  let  your  intentions  be  known.  It  is  a  far  more 
patriotic  country  than  Piedmont  and  is  closer  to  liberty. 

BONAPARTE 

127 
To  Citizen  LaUement 

French  Minister  to  Venice  H.Q.,  Milan 

28  Floreal,  Year  IV  (17  May,  1796) 

I  thank  you  infinitely,  Citizen  Minister,  for  the  interesting  details 
you  give  me  of  the  enemy's  position.  I  am  sending  you  6,000  francs 
to  meet  the  expenses  of  the  spies  you  will  be  sending  out.  It  will  be 
useful  if  I  have  news  from  you  daily.  Send  spies  to  Trent,  to  Mantua 
and  to  the  roads  from  the  Tyrol,  and  let  me  know  when  the  boats  from 
Trieste  have  left  for  Mantua, 

Spare  neither  money  nor  trouble;  that  is  what  the  national  interest 
demands.  I  will  see  you  are  repaid  whatever  you  spend. 

Send  me  an  exact  and  very  detailed  map  of  the  Venetian  states. 

There  are  many  people  in  Milan  disposed  to  make  a  revolution  there. 

You  should  have  received  a  letter  from  the  Government  Commis- 
sioner from  LodL  Make  your  letters  frequent  and  informative;  I  rely 
on  you  for  news.  Establish  a  rate  for  the  couriers  so  that  when  they 
arrive  within  a  certain  time  they  receive  a  bonus. 

BONAPARTE 

120  The  Rise  to  Power 

128 
Order  of  the  Day 

Army  of  Italy  H.Q.,  Milan 

28  Floreal,  Year  IV  (17  May,  i*jg€) 

The  Commander-in-Chief  requires  divisional  and  brigade  com- 
manders to  use  the  short  rest  which  he  is  granting  to  the  army  to 
procure  to  our  brothers  in  arms  everything  of  which  they  stand  in 
need.  In  consequence,  they  will  without  delay  refer  to  the  Chief  of 
Staff  of  the  army  and  to  the  Quartermaster-General  a  detailed  return 
of  the  requirements  of  each  unit  in  respect  of  arms,  clothing  and  equip- 
ment. Orders  have  been  issued  that  the  divisions  are  to  be  supplied  with 
all  they  need  so  as  to  enable  them  shortly  to  renew  their  operations  and 
carry  them  out  with  the  speed  and  keenness  which  have  assured  our 
victories.  The  Commander  relies  on  the  efforts  of  generals  to  improve 
the  condition  of  their  troops.  He  is  already  convinced  that  it  is  their 
wish  to  seek  new  battles;  but  in  the  midst  of  the  abundance  won  by 
our  successes  the  republican  soldier  must  understand  his  happy  position 
and  refrain  from  disorders  which  only  tarnish  his  laurels;  he  must 
respect  and  defend  the  inhabitants  of  the  land  he  has  conquered.  The 
Commander-in-Chief  has  too  lively  a  desire  to  uphold  the  honour  of 
the  army  to  suffer  anyone  to  exceed  the  limits  of  good  order. 

By  order  of  the  Commander-in-Chief 

129 
To  the  Executive  Directory 

H.Q.,  Milan 

29  Floreal,  Year  IV  (18  May,  1796) 
Tomorrow,  Citizen  Directors,  there  leave  for  Paris  twenty  superb 

pictures,  chief  of  which  is  the  famous  Saint  Jerome  of  Correggio,  which 
I  am  assured  was  sold  for  20,000  francs.  I  will  have  about  as  many 
again  sent  from  Milan,  including  those  fay  Michelangelo.* 

BONAPARTE 

130 
To  the  Executive  Directory 

H.Q.,  Milan 

2g  Floreal,  Year  IV  (18  May,  1796} 

I  have  had  sent  to  Tortona  at  least  2  millions'  worth  of  ingot  silver 
and  jewels,  the  product  of  various  contributions.  They  wifl  remain 
there  until  you  give  orders  for  their  final  destination. 

BONAPARTE 

*  Presumed  of  this  date  is  a  list  of  'works  of  art  and  science  selected  by  General 
Bonaparte  to  be  transported  to  Pans',  which  contains  pictures,  drawn  from  Milan, 
Parma  and  Piacenza,  by  Raphael,  Rubens,  Luini,  Giorgioni,  Leonardo  da 
Vinci  (the  Mcma  Lisa),  Titian,  Coneggio  and  others. 

Italy  121 

To  Lieutenant-Colonel  de  Lamy 

Governor  of  the  Citadel  of  Milan  H.Q.,  Milan 

29  Floreal,  Year  IV  (18  May,  ijg€} 

Sir,  the  Commander-in-Chief  of  the  army  requires  me  to  notify  you 
that  he  accepts  the  proposal  you  have  made  to  respect  the  city  of  Milan 
and  undertake  no  military  action  in  that  direction.  The  French,  equally, 
will  make  no  attack  from  that  side. 

By  order  of  the  Commander-in-Chief 

132 
To  the  Municipality  of  Milan 

H.Q.,  Milan 
2$  Floreal,  Year  IV  (iSMay,  1796) 

I  have  reported  to  the  Commander-in-Chief  on  the  abuses  which 
have  occurred  at  the  national  palace  of  Milan  where  many  citizens 
have  caused  meals  to  be  served  to  them. 

The  Conimander-in-Chief  instructs  me  to  inform  you  that  he 
requires  for  himself  a  table  for  forty  persons,  served  in  such  a  style  that 
the  cost  does  not  exceed  four  francs  per  head  in  French  money.  He 
wishes  that  as  from  today  dinner  should  consist  of  a  single  course.  All 
other  private  tables  should  henceforward  be  suppressed.  I  will  inform 
you  should  any  special  circumstances  arise.  Please  give  orders  in 
accordance  with  these  instructions  and  admit  no  demand  unless  it  is 
authorized  by  the  Commander-in-Chief  or  myself. 

The  Republican  character  consists  in  order  and  economy  in  the  use 
of  public  funds,  which  should  be  expended  in  the  interests  of  the  army, 
the  Government  and  die  people. 

You  will  inform  the  Chief  of  Staff  of  all  abuse  which  may  come  to 
your  knowledge;  the  Commander-in-Chief  will  give  him  orders  to 
suppress  them. 

By  order  of  the  Commander-in-Chief 

133 
To  the  People  of  Lombardy 

H.Q.,  Milan 

30  Floreal,  Year  IV  (ig  May,  ijg6) 

The  French  Republic,  which  has  sworn  hatred  towards  tyrants,  has 
also  sworn  brotherhood  towards  the  peoples.  This  principle,  sanctified 
in  the  Republican  Constitution,  is  that  of  the  army. 

The  despot  who  has  so  long  held  Lombardy  enslaved  has  done  great 
evil  to  France;  but  Frenchmen  know  that  the  people  do  not  support 
the  cause  of  kings.  The  victorious  army  of  an  insolent  monarch  must 
doubtless  spread  terror  among  the  nation  it  has  conquered;  a  republican 

122  The  Rise  to  Power 

army,  forced  to  wage  war  to  the  death  against  the  kings,  swears  friend- 
ship to  the  peoples  whom  its  victories  free  from  Tyranny. 

Respect  for  property  and  for  persons;  respect  for  the  religion  of  the 
people:  these  are  the  sentiments  of  the  Government  of  the  French 
Republic  and  of  the  victorious  army  in  Italy.  The  clearest  proof  is  the 
good  discipline  it  has  kept  since  its  entry  into  Lombardy. 

If  the  victorious  French  seek  to  treat  the  people  of  Lombardy  as 
brothers,  these  owe  them  a  just  return. 

The  army  has  to  continue  its  victories;  it  has  to  drive  the  despot  who 
held  Lombardy  in  chains  out  of  the  whole  of  Italy,  The  independence 
of  Lombardy,  which  should  bring  it  happiness,  depends  on  the  success 
of  the  French;  it  must  aid  them. 

To  assure  their  march  the  troops  need  provisions  which  cannot  be 
drawn  from  France,  which  is  so  far  away;  they  must  find  them  in 
Lombardy,  whither  their  conquests  have  led  them.  The  laws  of  war 
assure  this;  friendship  should  make  haste  to  offer  it. 

Twenty  millions  of  francs  must  be  contributed  by  the  various 
provinces  of  Austrian  Lombardy;  the  needs  of  the  army  require 
them. .  . .  That  is  a  very  small  contribution  for  such  fertile  lands,  above 
all  in  view  of  the  advantage  which  should  ensue  for  them.  The  assess- 
ments might  have  been  carried  out  by  agents  of  the  French  Govern- 
ment; that  would  have  been  legal.  But  the  French  Republic  does  not  so 
intend;  it  delegates  it  to  the  local  authority,  the  State  Congress.  It  does 
no  more  than  indicate  a  basis:  this  contribution,  which  must,  in  die  first 
place,  be  spread  among  the  provinces  in  the  same  proportion  as  the 
taxes  were  levied  which  Lombardy  paid  to  the  Austrian  tyrant,  should 
fall  upon  the  rich,  the  truly  well-to-do,  and  on  the  ecclesiastical  bodies, 
those  who  for  too  long  have  believed  themselves  privileged  and  have 

succeeded  in  evading  every  tax;  the  indigent  classes  must  be  spared 

BONAPARTE.  SALICETI 

134 
Decree 

H.Q.,  Milan 

30  Floreal,  Year  IV  (ig  May,  1796) 

The  Commander-in-Chief  of  the  Army  of  Italy  and  the  Com- 
missioner of  the  Executive  Directory  attached  to  the  Armies  of  Italy 
and  of  the  Alps,  decree: 

I.  SUPPRESSION  OF  AUTHORITIES 

ARTICLE  i.  The  junta  established  by  the  Archduke  at  the  moment  of 
his  flight  on  9  May  last,  whose  function,  according  to  the  edict 
establishing  it,  was  to  exercise  sovereign  government,  is  suppressed. 
The  President  of  the  Supreme  Tribunal,  the  Presidents  of  Appeal  and  of 
Hrst  Instance  and  the  President  of  the  Magistracy,  who  had  been 

Italy  123 

appointed  by  the  Archduke  to  compose  this  junta,  are  forbidden  to 
continue  their  functions. 

ART.  2.  The  General  Council  of  the  Decurions,  restricted  to  a 
privileged  class  and  with  functions  which  circumstances  have  rendered 
useless,  is  also  suppressed.  The  same  prohibition  applies  to  the  sixty 
nobles  and  patricians  composing  it. 

Art.  3.  The  Magistracy  known  as  Magistrate  politico  camerale,  whose 
complicated  functions  have  equally  become  useless  and  could  only 
interfere  with  the  smooth  working  of  the  administration,  is  also 
suppressed. 

H.  REPLACEMENT  OF  SUPPRESSED  AUTHORITIES 

ART.  4.  The  authorities  suppressed  by  the  various  articles  of  the 
preceding  section  will  be  provisionally  replaced  by  a  military  agency 
of  three  persons. 

HI.  AUTHORITIES  RETAINED 

ART.  6.  The  Congress  of  State  of  thirteen  members  charged  with  the 
administration  of  the  whole  of  Lombardy  is  provisionally  confirmed 
in  its  functions. 

ART.  7.  It  will  carry  them  out  in  the  name  of  the  French  Republic 
under  the  supervision  and  authority  of  the  military  agents,  to  whom  it 
will  be  required  to  report, 

ART.  8.  The  municipal  administrations  are  provisionally,  confirmed 
in  each  commune  of  Lombardy. 

ART.  9.  The  existing  municipal  council  at  Milan  is  also  provisionally 
maintained  under  the  tide  Municipality  of  the  City  of  Milan. 

ART.  10.  The  commandant  of  the  garrison  of  Milan  will  be  president 
of  the  municipal  council;  he  will  be  responsible  for  the  police  and  will 
exercise  all  the  functions  assigned  by  French  laws  to  commanders  of 
fortresses  in  a  state  of  siege. 

IV.   GENERAL  DISPOSITIONS 

ART.  12.  The  acts  and  deliberations  of  all  authorities  created  or 
retained  by  the  present  decree  will  be  headed:  'In  the  name  of  the 
French  Republic'. 

BONAPARTE,  SALICETI 

135 
To  the  Army  of  Italy 

H.Q.,  Milan 

l  Prairial,  Year  IV  (20  May9  ijgti) 
Soldiers, 

You  have  rushed  like  a  torrent  from  the  heights  of  the  Apennines; 
you  have  overthrown,  dispersed  and  scattered  everything  that  opposed 
your  advance. 

124  The  Rise  to  Power 

Delivered  from  the  Austrian  tyranny,  Piedmont  has  returned  to  its 
natural  love  of  peace  and  friendship  towards  France. 

Milan  is  yours,  and  the  republican  flag  floats  over  the  whole  of 
Lombardy.  The  Dukes  of  Parma  and  Modena  owe  their  political 
existence  to  your  generosity. 

The  army  which  so  proudly  threatened  you  knows  no  further 
rampart  against  your  courage.  The  Po,  the  Ticino,  die  Adda  could  not 
halt  you  a  single  day;  the  vaunted  bulwarks  of  Italy  were  useless  and 
you  crossed  them  as  quickly  as  the  Apennines. 

Such  success  has  brought  joy  to  the  heart  of  our  country;  your 
representatives  have  ordered  a  festival  dedicated  to  your  victories  to  be 
celebrated  in  every  commune  of  the  Republic,  There,  your  fathers, 
your  mothers,  your  wives,  your  sisters,  your  sweethearts  are  rejoicing 
in  your  successes  and  proudly  proclaim  that  they  belong  to  you. 

Yes,  soldiers,  you  have  done  much;  but  is  there  not  still  much  to  do? 
Shall  it  be  said  of  us  that  we  knew  how  to  conquer,  but  not  how  to 
exploit  victory?  Shall  posterity  reproach  us  with  finding  Capua  in 
Lombardy?  But  already  I  see  you  run  to  arms;  slothful  inactivity  wearies 
you,  and  days  lost  to  glory  are  lost  to  your  happiness.  Well  then,  let  us 
go!  There  are  still  forced  marches  to  be  made,  enemies  to  be  defeated, 
laurels  to  be  won,  insults  to  avenge. 

Let  them  tremble  who  sharpened  the  daggers  of  civil  war  in  France, 
who  shamefully  murdered  our  ministers  and  burned  our  ships  in 
Toulon;  the  hour  of  vengeance  has  struck. 

But  let  the  people  have  no  fear;  we  are  friends  to  all  peoples,  and 
particularly  to  the  descendants  of  Brutus,  of  Scipio  and  the  great  men 
whom  we  have  taken  for  models.  To  rebuild  the  Capitol  and  place  in 
honour  there  the  statues  of  the  famous  heroes,  to  awaken  the  Roman 
people  benumbed  by  centuries  of  slavery,  such  will  be  the  fruit  of  your 
victories.  You  will  have  the  immortal  glory  of  changing  the  face  of 
the  loveliest  part  of  Europe. 

Hie  French  people,  free  and  respected  throughout  the  world,  will 
bring  to  Europe  a  glorious  peace  which  will  repay  them  for  the  mani- 
fold sacrifices  they  have  made  for  six  years.  Then  you  will  return  to 
your  homes,  and  your  fellow  citizens  will  point  you  out  and  say:  *He 
was  of  the  Army  of  Italy!' 

BONAPARTE 

136 
To  Citizen  BarthSlemy 

French  Minister  to  Switzerland  H.Q.,  Milan 

l  Prdrial,  Year  IV  (20  May,  1796) 

We  are  masters  of  Lombardy.  Hiough  few  in  number  and  destitute 
of  everything,  die  troops  of  the  Republic  have  surmounted  every 

Italy  125 

obstacle.  Hie  enemy  has  withdrawn  to  Mantua.  Our  main  body  will 
be  here  tomorrow.  I  am  anxious  to  advance  and  beg  you  to  inform  me 
of  the  movements  of  the  Army  of  the  Rhine  and  those  of  the  Imperial 
army  in  Bavaria  and  Swabia. 

Can  the  Emperor  weaken  his  Rhine  army  to  reinforce  that  in  Italy? 
What  troops  could  he  still  send  into  the  Tyrol?  Please  let  me  know 
what  information  you  have  about  this  and  send  agents  to  all  parts  so 
that  you  can  instruct  me  precisely  what  forces  could  be  sent  into  Italy. 

I  am  delighted,  Citizen  Minister,  that  this  circumstance,  etc. 

BONAPARTE 

137 
To  Citizen  Ramel 

Minister  of  Finance  H.Q.,  Milan 

2  Prairial,  Year  IV  (21  May,  1796) 

The  Army  of  Italy  is  in  the  direst  need;  it  is  without  funds  and 
destitute  of  the  most  essential  materials;  each  day  sees  it  reinforced  and 
its  requirements  grow  in  proportion. 

The  Executive  Directory,  which  appointed  me  to  command  this 
army,  has  ordered  offensive  operations  demanding  prompt  measures 
and  extraordinary  resources. 

The  pay  of  two  sous  in  silver  for  the  soldiers  and  of  eight  francs  for 
the  officers  is  in  arrears,  which  has  angered  and  discouraged  the  army. 
I  beg  you  to  look  into  the  matter  and  to  be  good  enough  to  inform  me 
whether  I  can  count  on  the  Treasury  ensuring  that  the  pay  is  not  lack- 
ing. Of  all  expenditure,  that  is  the  most  sacred.  The  Army  of  Italy  is 
the  only  one  in  which  the  pay  is  in  arrears. 

According  to  the  attached  memorandum,  the  Minister  of  War  has 
on  various  dates  authorized  for  the  account  of  Pluviose  and  part  of 

Ventose  the  sum  of ,  and  for  the  artillery  service  10,000  francs  in 

cash  and  500,000  in  assignats  and,  on  19  Ventose,  30,000  in  cash  and 
1,500,000  in  assignats. 

There  are  complaints  in  the  army  at  having  received  only  a  small 
part  of  this  sum.  Please  note  what  is  still  to  be  sent  in  accordance  with 
these  instructions  and  let  me  know  what  you  hope  to  do  to  secure  the 
entire  payment. 

BONAPARTE 

138 
To  Brigadier-General  Dujard 

Qfr.,  Artillery,  Army  of  Italy  H.Q.,  Milan 

2  Prairial,  Year  IV  (21  May,  1796) 

The  Commander-in-Chief  instructs  me  to  inform  you  mat  he  is 
displeased  with  the  way  in  which  the  artillery  is  being  provisioned  and 
that  the  orders  he  has  had  passed  to  you  have  been  carried  out  badly. 

126  The  Rise  to  Power 

Consequently,  he  orders  you  to  proceed  in  person  to  Lodi  to  ensure 
the  execution  of  the  dispositions  you  should  have  made  as  a  result  of 
yesterday's  order.  It  appears  that  Citizen  Faultrier  has  not  done  all  he 
should. 

By  order  of  the  Commander-in-Chief 

139 
To  the  Executive  Directory 

H.Q.,  Milan 
3  Prairial,  Year  IV  (22  May,  ij$6) 

Citizen  Directors,  I  have  just  received  the  mail  which  left  Paris  on 
the  26th.  It  has  brought  us  the  glorious  terms  of  peace  which  you  have 
concluded  with  the  King  of  Sardinia.  Please  receive  my  congratulations. 

Commissioner  Saliceti  will  send  you  a  return  of  the  contributions 
we  have  imposed.  You  can  now  count  on  6  to  8  millions  in  gold  or 
silver  ingots  or  jewels,  which  are  at  your  disposal  in  Genoa.  This 
sum  is  lodged  with  one  of  the  leading  bankers  and  is  superfluous  to  the 
needs  of  the  army.  If  you  wish,  I  wnl  have  a  million  sent  to  Basle  for 
the  Army  of  the  Rhine.  I  have  sent  10,000  francs  in  silver  to  General 
Kellermann;  tomorrow  I  will  send  him  200,000. 

The  troops  are  satisfied;  they  receive  half  their  pay  in  silver.  Looting 
has  been  stopped,  and,  with  plenty,  this  glorious  army  is  returning  to 
discipline. 

Nine  thousand  men  from  the  Army  of  the  Alps  will  arrive  in  ten 
days;  I  shall  not  await  them,  for  already  the  troops  are  moving  off 
towards  the  gorges  of  the  Tyrol. 

llie  Austrian  army  is  daily  receiving  reinforcements;  but  I  imagine 
that  our  Army  of  the  Rhine  will  not  allow  the  Emperor  to  weaken 
himself  too  much  on  that  front. 

You  will  find  attached  some  letters  of  the  greatest  importance; 
among  others,  one  referring  to  the  contact  between  Louis  XVHI  and 
several  of  our  positions  in  the  Army  of  the  Rhine.  News  of  these  talks 
is  repeated  in  all  the  letters  from  emigrants.  I  feel  it  is  urgently  neces- 
sary to  take  the  matter  in  hand. 

The  return  is  attached  of  what  we  have  captured  at  Pavia,  which  is 
very  considerable.  We  have  stores  at  Tortona,  Cuneo,  Ceva  and 
Mondovi.  The  Duke  of  Parma  having  no  muskets,  nor  guns,  nor 
fortresses,  we  have  not  been  able  to  demand  anything  of  that  kind 
from  him. 

You  will  find  attached  an  address  to  the  army.*  Also  the  armistice 
I  have  granted  to  the  Duke  of  Modena;  you  will  see  that  that  means 
10  millions  more  for  the  Republic. . . . 

BONAPABTE 
*  No.  135. 

Italy  127 

P.S.  Among  the  attached  letters  from  emigrants  you  will  find  one 
from  a  priest  who  writes  from  Paris  to  Cardinal  Zelada.  Although  it  is 
not  signed,  it  will  be  easy  to  find  him,  since  he  says  he  dined  with 
General  Dumuy  the  day  before  the  latter  left.  As  soon  as  the  Minister 
of  Police  knows  who  is  this  correspondent  of  the  cardinal,  it  will  be 
easy  for  him  to  discover  others  by  having  him  followed  for  a  few  days. 
You  will  also  find  the  name  of  a  merchant  of  Lyons  who  is  passing 
funds  to  the  emigrants. 

140 
To  Citizeness  Josephine  Bonaparte 

At  Paris  Milan 

4  Prairial,  Year  IV  (23  May,  1796) 
Josephine,  no  letter  from  you  since  the  28th!  The  mail  which  left 

Paris  on  the  2yth  has  arrived,  and  I  have  got  no  answer,  no  news  of  my 
dear  friend!  Has  she  forgotten  me,  or  doesn't  she  know  that  there  is  no 
greater  torment  than  not  to  get  a  letter  from  mio  doke  amort  Here  they 
have  given  a  great  ball  for  me,  with  500  or  600  pretty  and  elegant 
creatures  trying  to  please  me;  but  not  one  was  like  you;  not  one  had 
that  sweet,  harmonious  figure  that  is  so  well  graven  on  my  heart.  I 
saw  only  you,  thought  only  of  you.  That  made  me  quite  insupportable; 
and  half  an  hour  after  arriving  I  went  off  sadly  to  bed,  saying  to  myself: 
*It  is  empty,  the  place  of  my  adorable  little  wife/  Are  you  coming? 
How  is  your  pregnancy?  Oh,  take  care  of  yourself,  my  darling,  be 
happy,  take  exercise,  don't  distress  yourself  about  anything,  don't 
worry  at  all  about  your  journey;  make  short  stages.  I  am  always 
imagining  seeing  you  with  your  Ktde  belly;  it  must  be  charming;  but 
that  wretched  heartburn,  have  you  still  got  it? 
Goodbye,  lovely  friend,  and  think  sometimes  of  Him  who  is  always 

thinking  of  you. 

B. 

141 

To  Citizen  Oriani 

Astronomer,  of  Milan  Milan 

5  Prairial,  Year  IV  (24  May,  1796) 
Science, which  ennobles  the  human  intelligence,  and  the  arts,  which 

embellish  life  and  transmit  great  events  to  posterity,  ought  to  be  especially 
honoured  by  free  governments.  All  men  of  genius,  all  those  who  have 
attained  a  distinguished  place  in  the  republic  of  letters,  are  Frenchmen, 
whatever  may  have  been  the  country  of  their  birth. 

in  Milan  die  learned  have  not  enjoyed  the  consideration  due  to  them. 
Withdrawn  in  their  laboratories,  they  have  counted  themselves  happy 
if  the  kings  and  priests  have  not  done  them  positive  harm. 

128  The  Rise  to  Power 

That  is  not  so  today;  thought  in  Italy  has  become  free.  There  is  no 
longer  inquisition,  or  intolerance,  or  despots.  Invite  the  men  of  learn- 
ing to  meet  and  to  inform  me  of  their  needs  and  their  views  on  the 
steps  that  should  be  taken  to  give  new  life  and  a  new  existence  to  the 
sciences  and  the  fine  arts.  All  who  wish  to  go  to  France  will  be  wel- 
comed with  honour  by  the  Government,  The  acquisition  of  a  clever 
mathematician,  a  painter  of  repute,  or  a  distinguished  man,  whatever 
his  profession,  is  rated  higher  by  the  French  people  than  that  of  the 
richest  and  most  populous  city. 

Be  then,  Citizen,  the  bearer  of  these  sentiments  to  the  distinguished 
men  of  learning  in  Milan. 

BONAPARTE 

142 
To  the  Municipalities  of  Milan  and  Pavia 

Milan 

5  Prairial,  Year  IV  (24  May,  1796) 
I  desire,  Gentlemen,  that  the  justly  celebrated  university  of  Pavia 

should  resume  the  course  of  its  studies.  Inform  the  learned  professors 
and  the  numerous  students  of  this  university,  therefore,  that  I  invite 
them  to  return  at  once  to  Pavia  and  to  inform  me  what  measures  they 
think  desirable  to  give  a  yet  more  brilliant  existence  to  the  university. 

BONAPARTE 

143 
To  the  People  of  Lombardy 

Milan 

6  Prairial,  Year  IV  (25  May,  1796) 
In  several  communes  a  misguided  mob  with  no  real  means  of 

resistance  is  committing  wild  excesses,  misunderstanding  the  Republic 
and  braving  an  army  that  has  triumphed  over  kings.  Such  incredible 
madness  is  to  be  pitied;  these  poor  people  are  being  misled  that  they 
may  be  led  to  their  doom.  Faithful  to  the  principles  of  the  French 
nation,  which  does  not  make  war  on  the  people,  the  Commander-in- 
Chief  desires  to  leave  a  way  open  for  repentance;  but  any  who,  within 
twenty-four  hours,  have  not  laid  down  their  arms  and  again  sworn 
obedience  to  the  Republic  will  be  treated  as  rebels;  their  villages  will 
be  burnt  Let  the  terrible  example  of  Binasco  open  their  eyes!  All 
towns  and  villages  which  persist  in  revolt  will  share  its  fate.* 

BONAPARTE 

*  Hie  municipal  council  of  Binasco  had  been  shot  and  the  village  burnt.  The 
•worst  outbreak  of  revolt  was  at  Pavia  and  Bonaparte  ordered  the  town  to  be 
sacked;  but  die  sight  so  horrified  him  that  after  two  hours  he  countermanded 
the  order. 

Italy  129 

144 

To  Brigadier-General  Despinoy 

Commandant  of  Milan  Milan 

6  Prairial,  Year  IV  (25  May,  1796} 

Brigadier-General  Despinoy  is  ordered  to  set  up  immediately  a 
court  martial  composed  of  five  officers  of  the  garrison  to  try,  widiin 
twenty-four  hours,  the  persons  arrested  carrying  arms  during  the  riot 
which  took  place  at  Milan  on  the  4th,  and  to  have  shot  those  convicted 
of  having  taken  part,  directly  or  indirectly,  in  the  rising. 
The  execution  will  take  place  the  same  day  in  the  Ticino  suburb. 

BONAPARTE 

145 
To  Captain  Bessteres 

Q.C.,  Company  of  Guides*  H.Q.,  Peschiera 

13  Prairial,  Year  IV  (ljune,  ijgfy  9*0  p.m. 

The  Company  of  Guides,  at  present  at  headquarters  at  Peschiera,  is 
ordered  to  proceed  tomorrow,  I4th,  with  arms  and  baggage  to  Milan, 
in  order  to  draw  all  the  clothing,  arms  and  equipment  which  it  lacks. 
The  commander  of  this  company  will  neglect  no  steps  tending  to 
procure  all  these  objects  as  promptly  as  possible.  He  will  be  held 
personally  responsible,  if,  through  his  negligence,  this  company  is  not 
quickly  provided  with  everything  necessary. 

By  order  of  the  Commander-in-Chief 

146 
To  the  Executive  Directory 

H.Q.,  Verona 

15  Prairial,  Year  IV  (3  June,  1796) 
I  have  reached  this  city,  Citizen  Directors,  only  to  leave  tomorrow. 

*  This  is  the  first  extant  order  to  the  famed  and  favoured  body  of  men  which 
accompanied  Bonaparte  in  all  subsequent  campaigns  and  became  successively  the 
Consular  and  Imperial  Guard,  growing  steadily  from  a  company  into  an  army 
corps  and  from  a  captain's  into  a  marshal's  command. 

An  autobiographical  note  from  St.  Helena  reads:  'During  the  battle  of  Bor- 
ghetto  [30-31  May,  1796]  when  the  army  was  pursuing  the  fleeing  enemy, 
Napoleon  felt  unwell  Returning  to  headquarters,  he  put  his  feet  in  warm  water. 
A  moment  later  a  patrol  of  Austrian  nhfam  passed  the  door,  which  raised  the 
alarm.  He  mounted  his  horse  without  boots  or  stockings,  within  a  hair's  breadth 
of  being  sabred.  By  such  things  is  history  made!  That  made  hirn  feel  the  need  to 
create  for  himself  a  company  of  Guides,  which  Captain  Bessieres  organized,  and 
which  later  became  the  mounted  chasseurs  of  the  Guard.  The  Duke  of  Istria 
[Bessieres]  was  always  responsible  for  guarding  him  in  bivouac,  at  headquarters, 
on  the  march  and  in  battle.  Nothing  is  more  necessary  to  a  Commander-in-Chief 
than  a  company  of  two  hundred  brave  and  well-mounted  dare-devils,  men  and 
horses,  alike,  of  the  best." 

130  The  Rise  to  Power 

It  is  large  and  beautiful.  I  am  leaving  a  good  garrison  so  as  to  remain 
master  of  the  three  bridges  which  cross  the  Adige  here. 

I  have  not  hidden  from  the  inhabitants  that  had  the  king  of  France 
not  evacuated  their  city  before  I  crossed  the  Po,  I  would  have  set  fire 
to  a  city  so  foolhardy  as  to  believe  itself  the  capital  of  the  French 
empire. 

I  have  just  visited  the  amphitheatre ;  it  is  a  worthy  relic  of  the  Romans. 
I  could  not  help  feeling  shame  at  the  meanness  of  our  Champ-de-Mars. 
Here  100,000  spectators  can  be  seated  and  easily  hear  the  orator  address- 
ing them. 

The  emigrants  are  fleeing  from  Italy;  more  than  1,500  left  before  we 
arrived.  They  are  carrying  their  troubles  and  shame  off  to  Germany. 

BONAPARTE 

147 
To  the  Executive  Directory 

H.Q.,  Milan 
20  Prairial,  Year  IV  (8  June,  1796) 

Citizen  Directors,  after  the  battle  of  Borghetto,  the  passage  of  the 
Mincio,  the  capture  of  Peschiera  and  the  flight  of  the  enemy  into  the 
Tyrol,  we  invested  the  city  of  Mantua. 

This  fortress,  situated  in  the  midst  of  the  lake  of  the  same  name,  is 
inaccessible  at  the  moment  owing  to  the  flooding  of  the  rivers  and  the 
increased  water  produced  by  the  melting  of  the  snows.  Four  causeways 
connect  it  with  the  mainland:  one,  which  ends  at  the  San  Giorgio 
suburb,  is  protected  by  fortifications  and  a  well  laid  out  bridgehead; 
another,  to  the  Cerese  suburb,  is  defended  by  a  castellated  tower, 
several  batteries  and  the  Cerese  entrenchments;  the  third  leads  to 
Pradella  and  the  fourth  to  the  fort  of  Mantua. 

At  5.0  a.m.  on  the  i6th  General  Dallemagne  and  Colonel  Lannes, 
with  600  grenadiers,  approached  the  San  Giorgio  suburb.  I  myself  went 
to  La  Favorite,  a  superb  palace  of  the  Duke  of  Mantua  half  a  league 
from  the  fortress.  I  sent  forward  one  demi-brigade  under  General 
Scrurier  to  support  General  Dallemagne,  who,  on  seeing  the  enemy  in 
the  San  Giorgio  entrenchments,  had  attacked  him  and  occupied  the 
suburb  and  bridgehead.  Despite  the  case-shot,  of  the  fortress,  the 
grenadiers  were  already  advancing  in  open  order  on  the  causeway; 
they  even  began  to  form  column  as  if  to  storm  Mantua  and,  when  the 
enemy  batteries  on  the  ramparts  were  pointed  out,  they  said:  "There 
were  many  more  at  Lodi*  But  the  circumstances  were  not  the  same, 
and  I  had  diem  withdrawn.  . . . 

General  Augereau  attacked  the  suburb  of  Cerese;  he  carried  the 
entrenchments  and  tower  and  forced  the  enemy  to  retire  into  the 
body  of  the  fortress.  A  twelve-year-old  drummer,  whose  name  I  will 

Italy  131 

send  you,  particularly  distinguished  himself;  he  climbed  to  the  top  of 
the  tower  under  fire  so  as  to  open  the  gate. 

The  other  two  causeways  are  defended,  in  one  case  by  a  fort,  in  the 
other  by  a  very  good  hornwork;  the  rise  of  the  Po,  which  is  greater 
than  it  has  been  for  twenty  years  and  is  flooding  a  radius  often  leagues, 
makes  any  attack  impossible  for  the  moment.  .  .  . 

I  must  not  keep  from  you  one  incident  which  shows  the  barbarity 
still  reigning  in  this  country.  At  San  Giorgio  there  is  a  convent  of  nuns, 
who  had  fled  as  it  was  exposed  to  the  gunfire.  Our  soldiers  entered  it  to 
seek  cover  and  take  up  position.  They  heard  cries  and,  running  to  an 
inner  court  and  breaking  into  a  miserable  cell,  found  a  young  woman 
seated  on  a  rough  chair,  her  hands  pinioned  with  iron  chains.  The 
wretched  creature  begged  for  her  life.  They  broke  her  chains.  From 
her  face  she  seemed  some  twenty-two  years  old  and  she  had  been  in 
that  state  for  four  years  for  having  wanted,  at  the  age  and  in  the 
country  of  love,  to  escape  and  follow  the  dictates  of  her  heart.  Our 
grenadiers  took  great  care  of  her,  and  she  showed  much  interest  in  the 
French.  She  has  been  beautiful  and  combines  the  gaiety  of  the  dimate 
with  the  melancholy  of  her  sufferings.  Whenever  anyone  entered  she 
appeared  frightened  and  it  was  soon  clear  that  she  feared  the  return  of 
her  tyrants.  She  begged  to  be  allowed  to  breathe  the  fresh  air  and 
when  it  was  pointed  out  that  shot  was  raining  round  the  house,  she 
said:  *Oh,  to  stay  here  is  to  die.' 

BONAPARTE 

148 
To  Citizen  Petiet 

Minister  of  War  H.Q.,  Milan 

20  Prairial,  Year  W  (8 June,  ijg6) 

I  owe  you  tfrank.s  Citizen  Minister,  for  the  gracious  things  you  have 
said  about  me  to  the  Directory.  This  sign  of  your  regard  is  most 
precious  to  me.  I  hope  to  find  means  of  showing  you  my  gratitude. 

Here  we  are  very  well  placed;  we  lack  nothing  and  the  administra- 
tive services  have  everything. 

The  city  of  Mantua  and  the  castle  of  Milan  are  blockaded. 

Beaulieu  and  his  army  are  in  the  Tyrol,  beyond  the  Adige. 

BONAPARTE 

149 
To  Major-General  Clarke 

Director,  Topographical  Office,  Paris  H.Q.,  Milan 

20  Prairial,  Year  IV  (8  June,  1796) 

Your  young  cousin  reached  me  yesterday;  he  appears  to  me  energetic, 
though  still  rather  young.  I  will  keep  him  with  me;  he  will  soon  be 

332  The  Rise  to  Power 

ready  to  face  clanger  and  distinguish  himself,  I  hope  he  will  be  worthy 
of  you,  and  that  I  shall  have  a  good  report  to  give  you.  I  am  very 
happy  to  do  something  to  please  you. 

Here,  all  goes  well  enough;  but  the  dog-days  will  soon  be  upon  us, 
and  there  is  no  remedy  against  their  dangerous  influence.  How  wretched 
we  humans  are,  who  can  only  watch  nature,  not  overcome  it! 

The  Italian  campaign  began  two  months  too  kte,  and  we  are  forced 
to  remain  in  the  most  unhealthy  part  of  the  country.  I  see  only  one  way 
of  avoiding  being  beaten  in  the  autumn;  that  is  to  arrange  matters  so 
that  we  axe  not  obliged  to  march  into  the  south  of  Italy. 

According  to  all  the  information  reaching  us,  the  Emperor  is  sending 
many  troops  to  his  Italian  army.  We  wait  impatiently  for  news  from 
the  Rhine.  If ,  as  I  hope,  our  army  is  successful  the  Emperor  must  be 
made  to  pay  for  his  stubbornness. 

Meanwhile,  I  trust  you  will  accept  my  fraternal  respect. 

BONAPARTE 

150 

To  Citizen  Lambert 
Q.M.G.,  Amy  of  Italy  H.Q.,  Milan 

20  Prairial,  Year  IV  (SJune,  ijg6] 

It  is  urgent,  Citizen  Quartermaster,  that  you  take  steps  to  ensure 
the  regular  distribution  of  brandy  and  vinegar  to  the  field  troops  of 
the  army.  Since  the  blockade  of  Mantua  forces  them  to  bivouac  in 
marshy  and  unhealthy  country,  disease  is  beginning  to  attack  our 
soldiers;  too  many  precautions  cannot  be  taken  to  preserve  them  from 
the  natural  effect  on  their  health  of  living  in  areas  surrounded  by 
marsh.  I  urge  this  matter  upon  you  as  essential  to  the  health  of  the 
army.  Brescia  and  Verona  should  provide  you  with  supplies  for  this 
distribution;  it  must  not  be  interrupted. 

By  order  of  the  Commander-in-Chief 

151 
Order  of  the  Day 

Army  of  Italy  H.Q.,  Milan 

20  Prairial,  Year  IV  (SJune,  1796) 

Hie  Coinmander-in-Chief  is  informed  that  many  soldiers,  instead 
of  staying  with  their  demi-brigades  when  on  the  march,  wait  in  the 
rear  in  order  to  indulge  in  pillage,  rejoining  their  units  only  long  after- 
wards, and  that  to  excuse  their  absence  they  allege  that  they  have  been 
in  hospital,  where  they  have  in  fact  been  admitted,  although  not  sick, 
since  the  majority  remain  there  but  one  or  two  days. 

He  expressly  forbids  the  directors  of  military  hospitals  or  ambulances, 
on  pain  of  dismissal,  to  admit  soldiers  of  whatever  rank  into  their 

133 

hospitals  unless  they  are  furnished  with  a  certificate  of  sickness  from  the 
unit  surgeon,  countersigned  by  die  company  commander  and  approved 
by  the  battalion  commander,  ,  .  . 

Commanders  of  garrisons  and  of  military  posts  on  die  lines  of  com- 
munication of  the  army  will  take  care  to  assemble  daily  all  isolated 
soldiers  passing  through  their  areas;  after  providing  for  their  sub- 
sistence, they  will  place  them  under  the  command  of  an  officer  or, 
feiling  that,  of  a  n.c.o.  and  will  direct  them  with  a  inarch  order  to  the 
points  where  their  units  are  stationed,  making  them  travel  in  good 
order  in  detachments  and  preventing  them  from  forcing  the  inhabitants 
to  give  them  food.  Detachments  of  men  the  whereabouts  of  whose 
units  are  unknown  will  be  directed  to  general  headquarters.  A  record 
will  be  kept  of  the  officers  and  nx.o.s  conducting  these  detachments, 
and  they  will  be  held  responsible  if  disorders  are  committed  by  troops 
under  their  command. 

General  officers  and  garrison  commanders  are  required  to  arrest  any 
soldier  travelling  alone  without  a  march  order  or  a  certificate  of  dis- 
charge from  hospital  or  a  leave  pass;  they  will  be  assembled  and  sent 
under  escort  to  their  units  to  be  judged  as  deserters. 

By  order  of  the  Commander-in-Chief 

152 
To  General  Kellermann 

C.-w-C,  Army  of  the  Alps  H.Q.,  Milan 

21  Prairial,  Year  IV  (p  June,  1796) 

I  have  inspected  the  derni-brigades  you  have  sent  to  me  with  the 
greatest  pleasure;  they  are  well-found  and  well  disciplined. 

I  hope  I  do  not  abuse  your  kindness;  I  am  sending  you  an  artillery 
officer  with  the  funds  necessary  to  provide  for  the  transport  of  5,000 
muskets,  which  I  beg  you  to  have  delivered  to  us  from  the  magazine 
at  Brianc.on  together  with  twelve  6-inch  howitzers  and  twelve  8- 
pounders  from  the  park  at  Gap. 

I  am  waiting  urgently  for  your  reply  as  to  the  1,800  men  I  asked  you 
to  send  to  Cuneo  so  that  I  can  withdraw  the  garrison.  .  .  . 

I  am,  my  dear  General,  with  feelings  of  esteem  and  regard,  etc. 

BONAPARTE 

153 
To  Colonel  Chasseloup 

Cdr.,  Engineers,  Army  of  Italy  H.Q.,  Milan 

22  Prairial,  Year  IV  (10  June,  1796) 

You  will  please,  Citizen  Commander,  carry  out  a  reconnaissance  at 
Porto-Legnago  on  the  Adige. 

You  will  report  to  me  on  the  state  of  the  fortifications  and  die 
number  of  men  necessary  to  defend  this  position. 

L.D.N. — F 

134  The  Rise  to  Power 

The  bed  of  the  Adige  is  higher  than  the  level  of  the  ground  round 
Mantua.  That  makes  it  possible  to  flood  a  great  part  of  the  duchy, 
Visit  the  banks  of  the  Adige  between  Badia  and  Verona  and  let  me 
know  whether  we  could  use  such  flooding  to  make  the  country 
between  Mantua,  the  Po  and  the  Adige  inaccessible  to  the  enemy. 

What  effect  would  this  terrible  flood  have  on  the  fortress  of  Mantua? 

Bring  your  usual  energy  and  diligence  to  the  solution  of  these 
questions,  which  are  of  the  greatest  importance. 

BONAPARTE 

154 
To  Citizen  Lambert 

Q.M.G.,  Army  of  Italy  H.Q.,  Milan 

22  Prairial,  Year  IV  (lojune,  1796) 
I  have  received  your  letter  of  the  2Oth,  Citizen  Quartermaster.  You 

must  draw  as  much  as  you  can  from  Venetian  territory,  paying  for 
nothing.  The  intention  of  the  Government  is  that,  in  die  present 
situation,  so  long  as  the  army  remains  on  Venetian  territory  that 
country  should  supply  its  needs. 

BONAPARTE 

155 
To  the  Executive  Directory 

H.Q.,  Milan 

23  Prairial,  Year  IV  (lljune,  1796) 
General  Laharpe  was  from  the  canton  of  Bern,  Citizen  Directors. 

The  aristocrats  of  that  canton  confiscated  his  goods  at  the  beginning 
of  the  revolution.  I  beg  you  to  concern  yourselves  with  having  them 
restored  to  his  children. 

The  Swiss  have  asked  us  to  export  to  them  several  thousand  quintals 
of  rice;  we  have  allowed  it  only  on  condition  that  the  canton  of  Bern 
returns  his  property  to  young  Laharpe,  I  hope  you  will  approve  this. 

BONAPARTE 

To  General  Moreau 

C.-m-C.»  Army  of  the  Rhine  H.Q.,  Milan 

23  Prairial,  Year  IV  (njuney  1796) 

I  am  sending  you  a  million  francs  to  be  drawn  on  Basle  through 
Citizen  Barth&emy,  ambassador  of  the  Republic  to  Switzerland,  to 
whom  I  am  ordering  it  to  be  addressed, 

Hie  Army  of  Italy  has  asked  the  permission  of  the  Directory  to 
transfer  this  money,  the  product  of  war  indemnities,  in  order  to 
succour  our  brothers  in  arms  of  the  Army  of  the  Rhine. 

BONAPARTE 

135 

157 
To  Citizen  Comeyras 

French  Minister  to  Graubunden  H.Q.,  Milan 

23  Prairial,  Year  IV  (iijune,  1796) 

I  will  have  3,000  quintals  of  com  supplied  to  Graubunden  on  condi- 
tion that  they  give  us  horses  in  payment.  At  your  request  I  have  had 
the  fort  of  Fuentes  destroyed.  I  will  send  you  all  that  you  ask.  You 
must  keep  the  closest  watch  on  the  Valtellina  so  as  to  know  Beaulieu's 
movements  and  warn  me  in  time. 

It  would  be  easy  to  send  you  a  few  thousand  sporting  guns;  but 
would  they  really  be  used  by  our  friends,  and,  if  it  is  true  that  the 
chiefs  of  the  Leagues  have  sold  themselves  to  the  house  of  Austria, 
would  it  not  be  dangerous  to  increase  their  means  of  doing  damage? 

BONAPARTE 

158 
To  Major-General  Berthier 

Chief  of  Staff,  Army  of  Italy  H.Q.,  Tortona 

26  Prairial,  Year  IV  (14  June,  1796} 

You  will  appoint  a  court  martial  today  to  judge  the  prisoners  taken 
last  night  by  Adjutant-general  Leclerc.  They  are  all  alleged  to  have 
murdered  Frenchmen.  Their  case  must  be  settled  before  midday 
tomorrow. 

You  will  have  the  municipal  council  of  Bosco  imprisoned  and 
informed  by  an  adjutant-general  that,  if  they  do  not  immediately 
name  the  murderers  in  their  commune  and  provide  a  list  of  at  least  a 
dozen  persons,  I  shall  have  them  shot  at  once. 

BONAPAKTE 
159 

To  Citizen  Lambert 

Q.M.G.,  Army  of  Italy  H.Q.,  Tortona 

26  Prairial,  Year  IV  (14  June,  1796} 

Citizen  Quartermaster,  complaints  are  reaching  the  Commander-in- 
Chief  from  all  sides  as  to  the  burdens  being  placed  on  the  unhappy 
people  of  the  conquered  country  by  the  requisitioning  of  horses  and 
bullocks  by  the  transport  contractor.  It  is  said  that  simple  employees 
go  to  the  length  of  imprisoning  officials,  and  the  misery  of  the  poorest 
people  around  Mantua  is  such  that  they  are  inclined  to  emigrate  with 
all  their  beasts. 

Find  out  how  far  these  complaints  can  be  trusted.  Put  a  stop  to  the 
cupidity  of  the  employees  and  agents.  Sucy,  who  has  come  from 
Genoa,  and  many  others  protest  at  the  number  of  agents  or  employees 
in  that  town  and  at  the  brazenness  with  which  horses  requisitioned 

136  The  Rise  to  Pouw 

for  service  with  the  army  are  being  sold  there.  Join  all  your  means 
to  ours  to  stop  vexations  and  losses;  they  seem  to  be  at  a  peak. . . . 

By  order  of  the  Commander-in-Chief 

160 
To  the  Executive  Directory 

H.Q.,  Bologna 
jMessidor,  Year  IV  (21  June,  1796) 

You  will  find  attached  a  strength  return  of  the  active  army;  you 
will  see  that  it  is  not  so  strong  as  you  might  think, 

An  intercepted  letter  from  Vienna  announces  that  General  Wurmser 
is  coming  to  command  the  army  in  Italy  and  is  replaced  in  the  Rhine 
army  by  General  Hohenlohe.  Already  one  division  of  Wurmser's  army 
has  occupied  the  defiles  of  Graubiinden  and  it  is  possible  that  he  plans 
to  enter  Lombardy  from  that  direction.  Beaulieu  is  daily  receiving  new 
forces  in  the  Tyrol:  he  has  already  received  10,000  men  since  the  battle 
of  Borghetto. .  .  . 

We  have  very  few  sick  so  far.  I  continue  to  be  satisfied  with  the 
discipline  and  bearing  of  the  army  and  of  the  generals.  As  for  the 
administrative  branch,  that  scarcely  functions  at  all;  there  is  no  order, 
no  method,  no  energy. 

I  have  no  idea  how  the  money  coining  in  from  the  contributions 
is  distributed.  Even  the  contributions  themselves  have  almost  ceased 
as  the  method  of  levying  them  is  constantly  changed.  The  municipal 
authorities  and  patriots  who  support  France  do  not  know  whom  to 
obey  and  are  pulled  in  every  direction.  You  can  tell  what  effect  that 
will  have  in  a  country  where  we  already  have  too  many  enemies. 

The  great  operations  we  have  carried  out  and  have  still  to  carry  out 
and  the  rich  harvest  to  be  gathered  on  all  sides  demand  speed  of  move- 
ment and  as  much  rapidity  of  thought  as  of  action.  Today  the  whole 
of  Italy  is  French,  and  everything  has  to  be  done  with  a  modest  army: 
hold  the  German  armies,  besiege  fortresses,  protect  our  rear,  control 
Genoa,  Venice,  Tuscany,  Rome,  Naples;  everywhere  we  must  be  in 
force.  There  must  therefore  be  unity  of  military,  diplomatic  and 
financial  thought.  Here  we  must  burn  and  shoot  to  establish  terror 
and  make  a  resounding  example.  There  we  must  pretend  not  to  see 
what  is  going  on  because  the  time  is  not  ripe.  Thus,  at  the  moment, 
diplomacy  in  Italy  is  in  truth  wholly  military. 

You  will  realize  that,  when  each  authority  and  each  municipality 
approaches  one  of  the  three  commissioners  and  myself  indiscriminately 
and  when  each  one  answers  in  accordance  with  his  own  views,  unity 
of  thought  and  the  pursuit  of  a  single  plan,  are  impossible,  particularly 
as  your  agents  multiply  and  are  not  in  agreement. 

None  of  our  kws  lays  down  the  manner  in  which  conquered 

137 

territories  are  to  be  governed;  the  general  instructions  given  to  your 
commissioners,  which  were  permissive,  are  contradicted  by  the  special 
instructions  you  have  given  them. 

I  therefore  think  it  essential  for  the  general  good  that  you  should 
regulate  the  functions  of  your  various  commissioners  and  agents  with 
the  Army  of  Italy,  and  especially  that  you  define  my  relations  with 
them  and  the  extent  of  my  authority  in  diplomatic  and  financial 
matters. 

BONAPARTE 

STRENGTH  RETURN  OF  THE  ARMY  OF  ITALY  ON  3  MESSIDOR,  YEAR  IV 

Division  of  Gen.  Massena     13,660  defending  the  line  of  the  Adige 
Division  of  Gen.  Sauret          4,460  at  Salo,  between  lakes  Sero  and 

Garda 

Division  of  Gen.  Serurier       4,700  at  the  siege  of  Mantua 
Division  of  Gen.  Augereau    4,820  at  Bologna  and  Ferrara 
Division  of  Gen.  Vaubois       5,500  in  Tuscany 
Grenadiers  at  H.Q.  2,100  at  Roverbella 

Division  of  Gen.  Despinoy     5,200  at  the  siege  of  Milan 
Total  active  army  40,440  men. 

161 

To  the  Executive  Directory 

H.Q.,  Bologna 
3  Messidor,  Year  IV  (21  June,  1796) 

In  my  preceding  letter  I  spoke  to  you  of  our  military  position;  in 
this  I  shall  discuss  our  political  situation  with  the  Pope  and  the  Senate 
of  Bologna. 

The  cardinal  legate,  whom  we  took  prisoner  at  Bologna,  has  been 
given  permission  to  go  to  Rome  on  parole.  I  told  him,  that,  if  the 
Pope  were  promptly  to  send  us  proposals  which  convinced  us  of  his 
determination  to  maJce  good  the  outrage  done  to  the  French  Republic 
by  the  assassination  of  Basseville  and  were  he  at  once  to  pay  us  a 
contribution  proportionate  to  the  enormous  expenses  this  war  has  cost 
us,  he  might  still  find  in  the  French  Republic  a  refuge  against  the  laws 
of  war. 

I  imagine  that  we  shall  be  receiving  a  plenipotentiary  from  His 
Holiness  within  two  days.  M.  d'Azara,  the  Spanish  ambassador,  who 
is  coming  from  Milan,  will  act  as  mediator.  He  reckons  that  we  shall 
be  appeased  with  4  or  5  millions,  but  I  have  refused  all  discussion  until 
the  Pope  sends  us  someone  vested  with  his  full  powers. 

Tte  Republic  of  Bologna  used  to  enjoy  very  great  privileges  which 
the  Popes  have  progressively  invaded.  In  order  to  frighten  the  court 
of  Rome  and  show  it  that  its  influence  over  the  people  will  have  no 

138  The  Rise  to  Power 

effect  on  us,  I  have  authorized  the  Senate  to  treat  as  null  and  void  all 
the  Roman  decrees  infringing  its  liberty.  That  has  given  great  pleasure 
in  this  country,  and  will  thereby  be  the  more  effective  at  Rome. 
Furthermore  it  leaves  the  way  open  for  you  to  do  whatever  seems  to 
you  proper  with  this  country  at  the  final  peace.  As  long  as  the  armistice 
lasts  we  shall  have  no  need  to  keep  troops  here,  for,  from  the  way  I 
am  embroiling  them  with  the  court  of  Rome,  they  will  always  fear 
revenge.  ... 

I  am  today  sending  an  adjutant-general  to  the  Senate  to  make  it 
swear  obedience  to  the  French  Republic. 

I  am  most  impatient  to  be  done  with  all  these  operations,  which 
seriously  weaken  the  army.  The  heat  is  excessive,  and  no  time  should 
be  lost  in  recrossing  the  Po,  so  as  to  be  able  to  collect  our  forces  against 
the  Austrians,  who  are  being  reinforced  to  an  alarming  extent. 

I  shall  be  at  Leghorn  on  the  loth,  and  I  assume  that  by  then  the 
armistice  with  the  Pope  will  be  concluded.  If  not,  I  shall  make  a  two- 
day  march  on  Rome  through  Florence  while  the  division  at  Bologna 
marches  into  the  Romagna;  that  will  settle  any  doubts  the  court  of 
Rome  may  have  and  force  it  to  sign  the  armistice. 

Since  this  armistice  is  with  the  summer  rather  than  with  the  papal 
army,  I  think  you  should  be  in  no  hurry  to  make  peace;  then,  in 
September,  if  our  affairs  go  well  in  Germany  and  north  Italy,  we  shall 
be  able  to  occupy  Rome. 

BONAPARTE 

162 
To  the  Grand  Duke  of  Tuscany 

H.Q.,  Pistoia 
5  MessiJor,  Year  IV  (23  June,  ljg6) 

The  flag  of  the  French  Republic  is  being  constantly  insulted  in  the 
port  of  Leghorn;  the  property  of  French  merchants  is  violated;  daily 
there  is  some  outrage  against  France  that  is  contrary  no  less  to  the  law 
of  nations  than  to  the  interests  of  the  Republic.  The  Executive  Direc- 
tory has  frequently  complained  to  Your  Royal  Highness's  minister  at 
Paris,  who  has  been  forced  to  admit  that  Your  Royal  Highness  is 
unable  to  resist  the  English  and  maintain  the  neutrality  of  Leghorn. 

The  Executive  Directory  thereupon  decided  that  it  was  its  duty  to 
meet  force  with  force  in  order  to  protect  its  trade,  and  it  has  ordered 
me  to  send  a  division  of  the  army  I  command  to  take  possession  of 
Leghorn. 

I  have  the  honour  to  inform  Your  Royal  Highness  that  a  division 
of  the  army  will  enter  Leghorn  on  the  loth  of  this  month.  It  will 
behave  there  in  accordance  with  the  principles  of  neutrality  which  we 
are  intervening  to  uphold;  the  flag,  the  garrison  and  the  property  of 

Italy  139 

Your  Royal  Highness  and  of  your  subjects  will  be  scrupulously 
respected. 

I  am  further  directed  to  assure  Your  Royal  Highness  of  the  desire 
of  the  French  Government  to  see  a  continuance  of  the  friendship 
uniting  our  two  states  and  of  its  conviction  that,  being  powerless  to 
remedy  the  abuses  daily  committed  by  English  ships,  Your  Royal 
Highness  will  applaud  the  just  and  necessary  measures  taken  by  the 
Executive  Directory. 

BONAPARTE 

163 
To  Citizen  Lallement 

French  Minister  to  Venice  H.Q.,  Bologna 

5  Messidor,  Year  IV  (23  June,  1796) 

I  beg  you,  Citizen  Minister,  to  be  more  energetic  over  your  secret 
correspondence  and  to  arrange  to  send  me  each  day  a  report  on  the 
strength  and  movements  of  the  enemy.  You  should  have  spies  at  Trent, 
Roveredo  and  Innsbruck  and  daily  reports  from  these  places;  that  is 
what  Citizen  Barthelemy  is  doing  at  Basle  and  thereby  rendering 
important  services  to  the  Republic.  I  have  learned  from  an  indirect 
source  that  Venice  is  arming,  yet  you  do  not  tell  me  what  is  the  nature 
and  strength  of  these  armaments.  You  will  realize  how  important  it  is 
that  I  should  learn  of  such  matters  at  once. 

BONAPABTE 

164 
To  the  Executive  Directory 

H.Q.,  Pistoia 

SMessidor,  Year  IV  (26  June,  1796) 

You  will  find  attached  the  armistice  agreement  concluded  with  the 
Pope.  M.  d'Azara,  with  whom  in  reality  we  negotiated,  had  the 
impudence  to  offer  us  5  millions  in  cash  and  3  in  goods.  I  held  out  for 
40  millions,  of  which  10  should  be  in  goods.  Seeing  that  he  could  not 
beat  me  down,  he  went  off  to  the  Government  Commissioners  with 
such  success  that  he  wrung  from  them  the  secret  that  we  were  not  in 
a  position  to  go  to  Rome,  After  that  we  could  get  only  20  millions 

out  of  them  and  that  by  making  a  night  march  on  Ravenna This 

triangular  method  of  negotiating  is  most  harmful  to  the  interests  of 
the  Republic,  for  a  clever  man  goes  around  and  gains  from  one  what 
he  could  not  get  from  the  other.  These  proceedings,  in  which  the 
Republic  has  lost  10  millions,  have  been  very  unsatisfactory  to  me 
since  my  movement  on  Bologna  has  been  partly  compromised.  But 
I  am  consoled  by  the  fact  that  the  results  still  surpass  your  instructions. 
We  keep  the  richest  lands  and,  apart  from  that,  shall  draw  from  the 
Papal  States:  in  cash,  24,500,000;  in  goods,  10,200,000;  total,  34,700,000. 

I4O  T/if  Rise  to  Power 

There  was  no  difficulty  about  all  the  other  conditions.  They  sub- 
mitted to  everything  with  fairly  good  grace,  except  for  the  manu- 
scripts, which  they  did  not  want  to  give  up;  there,  too,  we  had  to 
accept  500  instead  of  2,000  or  3,000. 

The  Legation  of  Bologna  is  one  of  the  richest  parts  of  the  Papal 
States.  You  can  have  no  idea  of  the  hatred  this  city  has  for  the  Pope's 
rule;  the  present  Pope  has  withdrawn  most  of  their  privileges,  to  which 
they  seem  very  attached.  As  they  have  seen  that  their  fate  depends  on 
the  peace  treaty,  they  propose  to  send  deputies  to  you. 

To  garrison  the  citadel  of  Ancona  will  not  cost  us  400  men. 

Controlling  the  port  of  Ancona  we  shall  have  superiority  in  the 
Adriatic  and,  apart  from  ruining  Trieste,  we  can  overawe  the  Republic 
of  Venice,  since  eight  or  ten  privateers  could  destroy  their  commerce 
if  they  break  with  us.  If  at  any  time  you  think  it  would  be  to  your 
interest  to  keep  Ancona  permanently,  I  will  undertake  to  send  an 
engineer  there  to  improve  the  defences. . . . 

BONAPARTE 

165 
To  Citizeness  Josephine  Bonaparte 

At  Milan  Marmirolo 

29  Messidor,  Year  IV  (17  July,  1796) 

I  have  received  your  letter,  my  adorable;  it  has  filled  my  heart  with 
joy.  I  am  grateful  for  the  trouble  you  have  taken  to  give  me  your 
news.  Your  health  should  be  better  today;  I  feel  sure  you  have 
recovered.  I  urge  you  to  go  riding;  that  can't  fail  to  do  you  good. 

I  have  been  sad  ever  since  I  left  you.  My  happiness  is  to  be  with 
you.  All  the  time  I  am  remembering  your  kisses,  your  tears,  your 
sweet  jealousy,  and  the  incomparable  Josephine's  charms  set  a  fire 
burning  in  my  heart  and  senses.  When  shall  I  be  free  of  all  work  and 
worry  and  able  to  be  with  you  every  moment,  with  nothing  to  do 
but  love  you  and  savour  the  pleasure  of  telling  you  and  proving  it 
to  you? 

I  will  send  your  horse;  but  I  hope  you  will  soon  be  able  to  join  me. 
A  few  days  ago  I  thought  I  loved  you;  but  since  I  last  saw  you  I  feel 
I  love  you  a  thousand  times  more.  All  the  time  I  have  known  you  I 
adore  you  more  each  day;  that  just  shows  how  wrong  was  La  Bruyere's 
maxim,  that  love  comes  all  at  once.  Everything  in  Nature  has  its  own  life 
and  different  stages  of  growth.  I  beg  you,  let  me  see  some  of  your 
faults:  be  less  beautiful,  less  graceful,  less  kind,  less  good;  but,  above 
all,  never  be  jealous  and  never  cry;  your  tears  drive  me  mad  and  burn 
my  blood.  Be  sure  I  can't  have  a  thought  except  of  you  or  an  idea  I 
don't  tell  you  about. 

Italy  141 

Rest  thoroughly  and  get  well.  Come  and  join  me;  before  we  die 
let  us  at  least  be  able  to  say:  *We  had  so  many  happy  days!!* 

Millions  of  kisses,  and  even  some  for  Fortune,*  despite  his  bad 
manners. 

BONAPARTE 

166 
To  Citizen  Garrau 

Government  Commissioner  H.Q.,  Castiglione 

2  ThermiJor,  Year  IV  (20  July,  1796) 

The  demand  which  you  have  addressed  to  General  Vaubois,  Citizen 
Commissioner,  is  contrary  to  the  instructions  given  to  me  by  the 
Government.  I  beg  you  henceforward  to  keep  within  the  limits  of  the 
functions  prescribed  for  you  by  the  ruling  of  the  Executive  Directory; 
otherwise  I  shall  be  compelled  to  forbid,  through  the  daily  orders  of 
the  army,  compliance  with  your  instructions.  We  are  all  what  we  are 
only  through  the  law;  whoever  wishes  to  give  commands  and  to 
usurp  functions  which  it  does  not  grant  to  him  is  no  republican. 

When  you  were  a  Representative  of  the  People  you  had  unlimited 
powers;  everyone  made  it  his  duty  to  obey  you.  Today  you  are  a 
Government  Commissioner  and  invested  with  great  authority;  but 
your  functions  are  regulated  by  definite  instructions;  adhere  to  them. 
I  know  you  will  suggest  that  I  shall  behave  like  Dumouriez;  it  seems 
that  a  general  who  has  the  presumption  to  command  the  army 
entrusted  to  him  by  the  Government  and  to  issue  orders  without  the 
approval  of  the  Commissioners  can  be  nothing  but  a  conspirator. 

BONAPARTE 

167 
To  Citizen  Miot 

French  Minister  to  Tuscany  H.Q.,  Castiglione 

2  Thermidor,  Year  IV  (20  July,  1796) 

Citizen  Minister,  I  have  received  your  various  letters  regarding  the 
English  occupation  of  Porto-Ferraio. 

As  long  as  there  was  hope  of  persuading  the  Grand  Duke  to  put 
that  place  in  a  state  of  defence,  you  did  right  to  speak  strongly  to  mm 
today,  like  you,  I  think  threats  would  be  impotent  and  useless.  It  will 
be  best  to  drop  die  matter  and  show  no  sign  of  resentment,  while 

*  Josephine's  dog.  Arnault  states  in  his  Memoirs  that  Bonaparte,  pointing  at 
Fortune,  once  said:  *You  see  that  gentleman;  he's  my  rivaL  He  was  in  occupation 
of  Madame's  bed  "when  I  married  her.  I  wanted  to  throw  him  out.  A  hopeless 
claim!  I  was  told  I  must  agree  to  share  or  sleep  elsewhere.  That  made  me  angry,  hut 
it  was  a  case  of  take  it  or  leave  it.  I  agreed.  The  favourite  was  less  accommodating; 
I  have  the  proof  on  this  leg.' 

142  The  Rise  to  Power 

waiting  for  events  and  the  orders  of  the  Government  to  enable  us  to 
act  instead  of  talking.  .  .  . 

BONAPARTE 

168 
To  Citizeness  Josephine  Bonaparte 

At  Milan  H.Q.,  Castiglione 

4  Thermidor,  Year  IV  (22  July,  1796) 

10.0  p.tn. 

I  am  sending  a  courier  to  Paris.  He  will  pick  up  your  letters  in 
passing.  Despinoy  has  arrived  and  assures  me  your  health  is  restored. 
Although  you  wrote  me  so,  the  details  he  has  added  have  filled  me 
with  joy.  So  you  are  quite  better,  my  adorable  Josephine;  I  burn  for 
the  pleasure  of  seeing  you.  He  also  tells  me  that  Dubayet  and  his  nice 
aides-de-camp  have  reached  Milan.  You  should  have  received  the 
letter  I  sent  you  this  morning.  I  count  the  days  till  the  yth.  Still  three 
days!  In  an  hour  I  am  off  to  inspect  various  posts  of  my  army;  and  I 
know  well  enough  who  will  be  first  at  the  rendez-vous  on  the  yth. 
Murat  is  upset.  That  goddess  of  the  ball,  Madame  Rugat,  has  caught 
him  properly.  I  have  sent  him  to  Brescia,  and  he  is  furious;  he  wants 
to  publish  his  affaire  in  the  papers.  Please  tell  Joseph  this  and  advise 
him  to  stick  to  his  Julie;  he  will  be  happier  and  better  off  that  way. 
Other  people  on  the  staff  are  moaning  over  Madame  ViscontL*  Good 
God!  What  women!  What  morals!  I  will  tell  you  something  frankly 
and  without  shrinking:  they  say  young  Caulaincourt  visited  you  at 
eleven  in  the  morning,  though  you  don't  get  up  till  one;  of  course  he 
only  wanted  to  talk  about  his  mother  and  sister,  but  you  should  have 
chosen  a  more  suitable  hour. 

The  heat  is  excessive.  My  very  soul  is  burnt  up.  I  am  beginning  to 
believe  that  to  be  sane  and  well  one  must  not  feel  or  give  oneself  the 
happiness  of  knowing  the  incomparable  Josephine.  Your  letters  are 
cold;  your  warmth  is  not  for  me  Oh,  no!  I  am  only  the  husband 
Another  must  be  the  lover.  You  have  got  to  be  like  everyone  else. 
Woe  to  anyone  who  comes  into  my  sight  with  the  title  of  being  loved 
by  you!  But  stop,  there  I  am  being  jealous.  Good  God!  I  don't  know 
what  I  am !  But  I  do  know  that  without  you  there  is  no  more  happiness, 
no  more  life — Without  you,  you  hear?  I  mean,  completely.  If  there  is 
a  single  feeling  in  your  heart  that  is  not  for  me,  if  there  is  a  single  one 
that  I  can't  know,  my  life  is  poisoned,  and  stoicism  my  only  refuge. 
Tell  me,  love  me,  and  receive  a  thousand  kisses  in  the  imagination  and 
all  the  assurances  of  love. 

Ite  7th  at  Brescia,  then? 

B. 
*  She  became  Berthier's  life-long  mistress. 

H3 

169 
To  Citizen  Carnot 

Member  of  the  Executive  Directory  H.Q.,  Verona 

22  Thermidor,  Year  IV  (p  Au&  1796} 

One  of  my  brothers  [Lucien],  a  war  commissary  at  Marseilles,  has 
gone  to  Paris  without  leave.  This  young  man  is  intelligent  but  wrong- 
headed;  all  his  life  he  has  had  a  passion  for  meddling  in  politics.  At  a 
moment  when  it  seems  to  me  that  a  great  many  people  wish  to  harm 
me  and  use  every  kind  of  intrigue  to  spread  stupid  and  damaging 
rumours,  I  beg  you  to  do  me  the  important  service  of  ordering  him 
to  proceed  to  one  of  the  armies  within  twenty-four  hours.  I  should  like 
it  to  be  the  Army  of  the  North. 

I  recommend  the  one  [Joseph],  my  aide-de-camp,  whom  I  sent  to 
you  on  the  eve  of  the  battle  of  Lonato.  This  brave  young  man  will 
deserve  the  regard  I  hope  you  will  show  him, 

The  heat  here  is  excessive,  my  health  not  too  good.  If  there  is  a  single 
pure  and  honest  man  in  France  who  can  suspect  my  political  intentions 
or  throw  doubt  on  my  conduct,  I  will  this  very  instant  renounce  the 
happiness  of  serving  my  country.  Three  or  four  months  of  obscurity 
wufcalm  envy,  restore  iny  health  and  make  me  the  more  fit  to  occupy 
such  posts  as  the  confidence  of  the  Government  may  wish  to  confide 
to  me.  It  is  only  by  leaving  Paris  in  time  that  I  have  been  able  to 
render  the  Republic  good  service.  When  the  moment  comes,  it  will 
be  only  by  leaving  the  Army  of  Italy  in  time  that  I  shall  be  enabled 
to  devote  the  rest  of  my  life  to  the  defence  of  the  Republic* 

The  great  art  of  government  consists  in  not  letting  men  grow  old. 

In  entering  on  a  public  career,  I  adopted  the  principle:  AU  for  my 
country. 

I  beg  you  to  believe  the  feelings  of  respect  and  affection  that  I  have 
vowed  to  you. 

BONAPARTE 

170 
To  the  Municipality  of  Milan 

H.Q.,  Verona 
22  Thermidor,  Year  IV  (p  Aug,  1796) 

When  the  army  was  in  retreat  and  the  partisans  of  Austria  and  the 
enemies  of  liberty  believed  it  lost  without  hope,  at  a  time  when  you 
yourselves  could  have  no  suspicion  that  this  retreat  was  but  a  ruse, 
you  have  shown  attachment  to  France  and  love  of  liberty;  you  have 
exhibited  zeal  and  character  which  have  won  the  respect  of  the  army 
and  will  bring  you  the  protection  of  the  French  Republic. 

Each  day  your  people  become  more  worthy  of  liberty;  each  day 
they  gain  in  energy;  die  day  will  undoubtedly  come  when  they  will 

144  The  Rise  to  Power 

appear  with  glory  upon  the  stage  of  the  world.  Receive  this  evidence 
of  my  satisfaction  and  of  the  sincere  desire  of  the  French  people  to  see 
you  free  and  happy. 

BONAPARTE 

171 
To  the  Municipality  of  Brescia 

H.Q.,  Brescia 
25  Thermidor,  Year  IV  (12  Aug,  1796) 

Two  thousand  French  and  Austrian  sick  are  in  the  streets  of  Brescia; 
humanity  demands  that  they  be  cared  for.  I  have  just  ordered  300  of 
them  to  be  placed  in  each  convent.  Please  take  measures  to  have  them 
nursed  and  treated  as  they  should  be.  The  sick  in  the  hospitals  of  Brescia 
lack  everything.  During  the  course  of  today  you  must  secure  for  them 
all  possible  help;  necessity,  humanity  and  religion  command  it.  In 
consequence,  you  will  please  furnish  during  the  day  to  the  director- 
general  of  hospitals  three  thousand  yards  of  linen  for  dressings,  30,000 
pints  of  good  wine,  10  casks  of  vinegar,  1,500  pints  of  brandy,  i  ton 
of  sugar,  3,000  lemons,  6,000  shirts. 

These  things,  like  all  to  be  provided  by  the  city  of  Brescia,  will  be 
paid  for;  but  it  is  essential  that  they  be  provided  during  the  day, 
failing  which  I  shall  impose  a  contribution  of  3  millions  on  the  city 
and  shall  be  forced  to  have  seized  what  you  will  not  provide. 

BONAPAKTE 

172 
To  the  Executive  Directory 

H.Q.,  Brescia 

27  Thermidor,  Year  IV  (14  Aug,  ij$6) 

Citizen  Directors,  I  feel  it  may  be  useful  to  give  you  my  opinion  on 
the  generals  employed  in  this  army;  you  will  see  that  there  are  very 
few  who  can  serve  me  well. 

Berthier:  a  strong  character,  talented,  energetic,  brave;  everything  in 
his  favour. 

Augereau:  plenty  of  character,  courage,  firmness,  action;  has  the  feel 
of  war,  liked  by  the  soldiers,  successful  in  his  operations. 
Massena:  active,  tireless,  bold;  has  sound  judgement  and  quick  decision. 
Serurier:  fights  like  a  private;  takes  no  responsibility;  severe;  has  too 
poor  an  opinion  of  his  troops;  is  sick. 

Despinoy:  soft,  inactive,  timid;  unsuited  to  war,  disliked  by  the 
soldiers,  does  not  lead  in  action;  otherwise  has  dignity,  intelligence  and 
sound  political  principles;  good  in  a  home  command. 
Sauret:  good,  excellent  soldier;  not  bright  enough  to  be  a  general 
Abbatucci:  not  fit  to  command  fifty  men. 

Gamier,  Mcunier,  Casablanca:  incapable;  not  fit  to  command  a 
battalion  in  a  war  as  active  and  serious  as  this  one. 
Macquart:  a  brave  man  without  talent. 
Gaultier:  good  in  an  office;  has  no  experience  of  war. 
Vaubois  and  Sahuguet  have  been  in  garrison  commands;  I  have  just 
called  them  to  the  army  and  will  know  how  to  judge  them.  They  liave 
done  very  well  in  everything  I  have  given  them  so  far,  but  the  example 
of  General  Despinoy,  who  was  very  good  at  Milan  and  very  bad  at 
the  head  of  his  division,  leads  me  to  judge  men  by  their  actions. 

BONAPARTE 

173 
To  the  Executive  Directory 

H,Q.,  Brescia 

zj  Thermidor,  Year  IV  (14  Aug,  1796} 

I  have  received  with  gratitude,  Citizen  Directors,  the  new  evidence 
of  esteem  which  you  have  given  me  by  your  letter  of  13  Thermidor. 
I  do  not  know  what  the  journalists  want  of  me;  they  have  attacked  me 
at  the  same  time  as  the  Austrians.  You  have  crushed  them  with  the 
publication  of  your  letter;  I  have  completely  beaten  the  Austrians: 
thus,  so  far,  these  double  attempts  by  our  enemies  have  not  been  happy. 

BONAPARTE 

To  Major-General  Sauret 

G.O.C.,  Reserve  Division  Milan 

S  Fructidor,  Year  IV  (25  Aug,  1796} 

It  is  only  consideration  for  your  health  that  has  made  me  give  you 
command  of  the  reserve  and  replace  you  at  the  head  of  your  present 
division.  That  division  is  still  destined  for  movements  whose  speed  is 
incompatible  with  your  present  condition;  but  you  will  find  useful 
work  in  the  post  where  I  am  placing  you,  which  is  no  less  essential, 
though  it  is  less  hard  and  more  suitable  for  you. 

The  reserve  should  meet  the  enemy,  but  will  reach  him  by  less 
difficult  routes.  The  services  you  have  rendered  should  assure  you  that 
this  change  casts  no  reflection  on  you;  it  is  utterly  foreign  to  any 
lessening  of  my  confidence  in  your  courage  and  patriotism. 

BONAPARTE 

175 
To  the  Executive  Directory 

Milan 

9  FructiJor,  Year  IV  (26  Aug,  Jt/ptf) 

...  It  has  been  essential  to  give  the  troops  a  few  days'  rest,  to 
rally  units  scattered  after  so  violent  a  shock  and  to  reorganize  the 

146  The  Rise  to  Power 

administrative  services,  which  are  in  utter  confusion;  there  are  some  of 
those  gentlemen  who  retreated  in  one  bound  as  far  as  the  gulf  of  Spezia. 

War  commissary  Salva  deserted  the  army.  His  mind  deranged,  he 
saw  enemies  everywhere;  he  crossed  the  Po  and  passed  on  his  terror 
to  all  he  met,  believing  the  uhlans  at  his  heels;  he  travelled  in  vain  for 
two  days  and  nights,  for  nothing  could  reassure  him.  Crying  every- 
where, Sattve  qui  pent,  he  got  within  two  leagues  of  Genoa,  where  he 
died  after  twenty-four  hours  of  violent  fever,  during  which  he  believed 
himself  wounded  with  a  hundred  sabre  thrusts — always  from  the 
terrible  uhlans.  Nothing  equals  such  cowardice  but  the  courage  of  the 
soldiers.  Many  war  commissaries  were  no  braver. 

Such,  Citizen  Directors,  is  the  harmful  effect  of  the  law  requiring 
that  war  commissaries  should  be  civilians,  whereas  they  need  more 
courage  and  military  habits  even  than  the  officers.  Courage  is  the  fruit 
of  familiarity  with  danger.  I  have  therefore  felt  how  important  it  is 
that  only  men  who  have  served  several  campaigns  in  the  line  and  have 
given  proof  of  courage  should  be  admitted  to  the  post  of  war  com- 
missary. No  man  who  rates  life  above  national  glory  and  the  respect 
of  his  comrades  ought  to  belong  to  the  French  army.  It  is  revolting  to 
hear  members  of  the  various  services  daily  admitting  and  almost 
glorying  in  having  been  afraid. 

We  have  15,000  sick  in  the  army;  only  fifteen  or  twenty  die  each 
day.  But  they  say  that  September  is  the  time  when  diseases  are  most 
dangerous:  hitherto  they  have  been  only  light  fevers.  I  have  just  visited 
the  hospitals  at  Milan,  with  which  I  was  very  satisfied;  that  is  in  part 
due  to  the  zeal  and  energy  of  Citizen  Burisse,  the  principal  agent.  . . . 

If  the  6,000  men  of  General  Chateauneuf-Randon  and  the  13,000 
men  long  promised  me  from  the  Army  of  the  Ocean  had  arrived,  my 
army  would  have  been  nearly  doubled  and  I  would  have  swept  up 
the  Austrian  army  before  me.  If  these  reinforcements  arrive  during 
the  month  we  shall  continue  to  be  in  a  respectable  position,  and  even 
in  a  state  to  put  a  stop  to  the  Neapolitan  nonsense;  but  I  fear  that  your 
orders  for  these  movements  are  being  badly  carried  out . . . 

We  await  die  first  news  of  General  Moreau  to  advance  into  the 
Tyrol;  but  if  that  is  still  dekyed  for  a  few  days  we  shall  advance 
provisionally  as  far  as  Trent.  I  am  assured  that  General  Wurmser  has 
been  recalled  and  replaced  by  General  Wins. 

Tlie  King  of  Sardinia  having  disbanded  his  provincial  regiments, 
the  Barbets*  have  increased,  A  wagon  carrying  silver  has  been  pillaged. 
General  Dujard  has  been  killed  while  on  his  way  to  Nice.  I  have 

organized  a  mobile  column  with  a  tribunal  against  the  Barbets  to 
t   •       f  *     • 

bring  them  to  justice. ... 

BONAPARTE 
*  Bandits  operating  in  the  mountains  on  die  Franco-Piedmontese  frontier. 

147 

176 

To  the  Executive  Directory 

Milan 
p  Fructidofj  Year  IV  (26  Aug,  I?g6) 

I  have  begun  negotiations  at  Venice.  I  have  asked  them  for  food- 
stuffs to  supply  the  army.  You  will  find  attached  a  copy  of  Citizen 
Lallement's  fetter.  As  soon  as  I  have  occupied  the  Tyrol  I  shall  open 
negotiations  in  conformity  with  your  instructions;  at  the  moment  that 
would  not  succeed.  Those  people  have  a  powerful  navy  and  their 
capital  is  sheltered  from  all  attacks.  It  would  probably  be  difficult  to 
make  them  seize  English  and  Imperial  goods. 

I  have  called  Citizen  Faypoult  to  Milan  and  we  have  agreed  on 
preparatory  measures  to  be  taken  in  execution  of  your  instructions  on 
Genoa.  As  soon  as  we  are  at  Trent  and  the  Army  of  the  Rhine  is  at 
Innsbruck  I  will  myself  go  to  Genoa  and  your  order  will  be  carried 
out  exactly. 

As  to  the  Grand  Duke  of  Tuscany,  we  must  still  dissimulate.  I  have 
changed  the  garrison  troops  at  Leghorn  so  as  to  upset  calculations  as 
to  their  number  and  to  make  a  movement  into  the  interior  of  Italy 
which  will  add  force  to  the  rumours  I  am  putting  out  to  restrain  the 
Roman  populace  and  the  Neapolitans. 

BONAPABTE 

177 
To  the  Executive  Directory 

H.Q.,  Brescia 
14  Fructidor,  Year  IV  (31  Aug,  17$6) 

The  Flachat  company,  Citizen  Directors,  is  composed  of  very 
intelligent  and  energetic  men.  The  disposal  of  the  merchandise  taken 
from  the  enemy  by  the  Army  of  Italy  could  not  have  been  placed  in 
better  hands.  But  it  had  not  been  laid  down  how  the  sales  should  be 
carried  out.  It  is  known  that  estimated  prices  are  generally  faulty.  At 
my  request  the  Government  Commissioners  have  now  laid  down  that 
the  various  agents  of  the  Republic  in  the  different  commercial  centres 
will  be  informed  of  the  dates  of  sales  so  as  to  establish  a  necessary 
competition.  Tie  highest  price  offered  will  always  replace  the  estimated 
price,  and  by  that  means  the  greatest  possible  benefit  will  be  gained 
from  dbe  merchandise. 

The  contract  this  company  has  obtained  from  the  treasury  accords 
it  5  per  cent,  on  cadi  sent  to  Huningue  and  on  ingots  sent  to  Paris. 
Only  the  bankers  can  decide  if  5  per  cent,  is  too  much  for  sums  fur- 
nished in  cash;  it  is  certainly  excessive  for  ingots.  In  fact  one  million 
francs  in  ingots  occupies  five  wagons,  which,  for  the  journey  to  Paris, 
would  not  cost  500  louis  and  would  arrive  in  less  than  ten  days,  five 

148  The  Rise  to  Power 

per  cent  on  one  million  is  50,000  and  they  are  required  to  carry  it  out 
only  in  a  month:  you  will  see  that  this  article  needs  revision. 

I  am  surrounded  by  thieves,  despite  the  efforts  of  the  Quartermaster- 
General,  with  whom  I  am  well  pleased.  It  is  no  small  matter  to  sup- 
press those  fellows.  I  send  a  few  for  court  martial,  but  that  is  a  feeble 
remedy:  it  needs  two  weeks  doing  nothing  but  turning  the  various 
stores  and  garrisons  inside  out.  Since  I  cannot  do  it  myself^  I  have 
thought  it  right  to  have  it  done  by  a  commission  which  I  have 
appointed,  composed  of  honest  and  generally  respected  men. 

BONAPARTE 

i?3 

To  General  Moreau 

C.-fo-C,  Army  of  the  Rhine  H.Q.,  Brescia 

14  Fructidor,  Year  IV  (31  Aug9  1796) 

At  last,  Citizen  General,  we  are  in  a  position  to  meet  and  combine 
our  operations. 

On  the  i6th  the  Army  of  Italy  marches  on  Trent,  which  it  will 
reach  on  the  i8th  or  ipth. 

General  Wurmser  seems  to  intend  to  cover  Trieste  and  consequently 
he  has  taken  up  a  position  on  the  Brenta  with  one  division  of  his  army. 
It  is  possible  that  the  division  at  Trent  will  retire  on  Brixen  and  thence 
along  the  road  to  Lienz.  That  will  be  the  only  possible  movement  for 
it  if  you  advance  in  force  on  Innsbruck.  I  shall  try  to  estimate  your 
progress  from  the  enemy's  manoeuvres,  but  it  is  essential  that  I  have 
news  from  you. 

General  Berthier  is  sending  your  chief  of  staff  a  cipher  so  that  we 
can  correspond  more  safely. 

If  you  occupy  Innsbruck  in  force,  it  will  be  easy  for  us  to  communi- 
cate and  concert  our  subsequent  operations. 

BONAPARTE 

179 
To  Major-General  Berthier 

Chief  of  Steff,  Army  of  Italy  H.Q.,  Due-Castelli 

30  Fructidor,  Year  IV  (16  Sept,  1796) 

Hie  32nd  Demi-brigade  and  the  i8th  Light  will  leave  tomorrow 
and  proceed  to  Roverbella.  General  Massena  will  review  the  officers 
and  n.c.o.s  and  also  die  arms  and  clothing.  Hie  4th  Light  will  proceed 
to  Porto-Legnago.  Hie  battalion  of  the  sist  which  is  in  that  town  will 
move  to  Govenaolo.  Hie  sist  and  4th  of  the  Line  will  proceed  to 
Govemolo  on  2  Veaademiaire. 

Hie  i8di  of  the  TJne  will  remain  at  San  Giorgio  until  it  is  replaced 
by  the  nth  of  die  Line;  then  it  will  go  to  join  the  32nd  at  Roverbella. 
You  wiB  give  orders  so  that  this  exchange  can  be  carried  out  as  soon 

Italy  149 

as  possible.  Hie  5th  of  the  Line  will  take  up  position  at  La  Favorite, 
where  it  will  remain  until  further  orders. 

General  Kilmaine  will  be  in  charge  of  the  blockade  of  Mantua.  He 
will  have  Major-Generals  Sahuguet  and  Dallemagne  under  his  orders. 
The  former's  division  will  extend  from  Formigosa  to  Notre-Dame- 
des-Graces;  the  ktter's  will  comprise  the  whole  of  II  Serraglio. 
Brigadier-Generals  Lasalcette  and  Hazard  will  be  under  the  orders  of 
the  first,  Brigadier-Generals  Landoz  and  Lebley  of  the  second.  General 
Landoz  will  remain  provisionally  at  Governolo  with  the  troops  that 
are  under  his  orders  there.  General  Kilmaine  will  distribute  the  troops. 
He  will  have  in  all:  the  5th,  6th,  nth,  I2th,  ipth,  45th  and  69th  of 
the  Line. 

The  I2th  Light  will  remain  provisionally  at  the  blockade  of  Mantua; 
but  as  soon  as  we  are  masters  of  II  Serraglio  you  will  give  it  orders 
to  assemble  at  Roverbella. 

General  Beaumont  will  command  General  Kilmaine's  cavalry.  He 
will  have  under  command  the  ist  and  5th  Cavalry,  the  8th  and  2Oth 
Dragoons,  the  ist  Hussars  and  the  24th  and  25th  Chasseurs. 

You  will  order  the  5th  Dragoons  to  assemble  at  Verona.  Tltis 
regiment  will  form  part  of  General  Murat's  brigade  and  will  be  fully 
equipped  with  firearms,  as  well  as  the  pth  and  I5th  Dragoons,  in 
preference  to  any  other  unit. 

You  will  order  the  Commander  of  artillery  to  appoint  an  officer 
to  command  the  artillery  of  General  Kilmaine's  division  and  two 
majors  to  be  attached  to  Generals  Sahuguet  and  Dallemagne.  There  will 
be  the  same  organization  for  the  engineers.  Four  pieces  of  light  artil- 
lery will  be  attached  to  General  Beaumont's  cavalry,  two  to  General 
Murat's. . . . 

I  shall  send  instructions  to  General  Kilmaine  and  the  Commanders 
of  artillery  and  engineers  on  what  they  have  to  do  concerning  die  siege. 

General  Kilmaine  will  still  command  the  cavalry  of  the  army. . . . 

BONAPARTE 

180 
To  Major-General  Kilmaine 

Ofr.,  Cavdry,  Army  of  Italy  H.Q.,  Dut-Costetti 

30  Fructtior,  Year  IV  (16  Sept,  179$ 

Hie  staff  will  have  informed  you,  Citizen  General,  that  I  have  chosen 
you  to  command  the  blockade  and  siege  of  Mantua.  You  will  continue 
to  command  the  army  cavalry,  which  will  be  divided  into  two  brigades: 
the  first,  commanded  by  Brigadier-General  Beaumont,  will  be  em- 
ployed in  die  blockade  of  the  city  and  in  covering  all  die  surrounding 
country;  the  second,  commanded  by  Brigadkr-Goieral  Murat,  is  des- 
tined to  take  part  in  die  active  operations  of  the  army.  Itis  will  receive 

150  The  Rise  to  Power 

orders  direct  from  the  general  staff  of  the  army,  but  the  general  officer 
commanding  will  be  required  to  inform  you  of  all  his  movements. 

The  troops  taking  part  in  the  siege  of  Mantua  will  be  under  your 
command  and  that  of  two  divisional  generals.  The  staff  will  forward 
army  orders  and  all  administrative  documents  dkect  to  these  officers, 
but  it  will  correspond  with  you  regarding  movements  and  operations. 

The  blockade  of  Mantua  consists  in  the  investment  of  the  citadel  and 
in  the  occupation  of  San  Giorgio  and  of  the  Cerese  and  PradeUa  gates. 

By  tomorrow  you  must  give  precise  orders  to  Major-General 
Sahuguet  for  the  investment  of  die  citadel,  for  the  occupation  and 
defence  of  San  Giorgio  and  for  observation  to  be  maintained  along  the 
lake  so  as  to  allow  no  surprise. 

The  Cerese  and  Pradella  gates  can  be  occupied  only  after  possession 
has  been  gained  of  II  Serraglio.  You  will  also  be  responsible  for  this 
most  important  operation,  which  cannot  be  undertaken  for  three  or 
four  days.  It  is  essential,  therefore,  that  until  that  time  you  use  cavalry 
forces  to  observe  the  movements  of  the  garrison  beyond  the  Po  between 
the  Oglio  and  the  Mincio  and  to  retain  control  of  the  Governolo 
bridge. . .  . 

A  combined  attack  from  Governolo  and  Marcaria  is  the  sole  means 
of  occupying  the  Cerese  and  Pradella  gates,  and  a  few  days  are  needed 
to  rally  the  troops  before  that  will  be  possible.  I  will  send  you  orders 
as  to  the  date  and  plan  for  that  operation.  Meanwhile,  take  your  pre- 
cautions and  give  orders  to  carry  out  the  objectives  laid  down  in  my 
letter. 

Although  the  4th  and  5ist  Demi-brigades  and  the  5th  Light  do  not 
form  part  of  the  forces  intended  to  be  under  your  command,  they  will 
be  so  provisionally,  since  they  will  be  responsible  for  defending  the 
Governolo  bridge. 

Please  inform  me  of  all  your  dispositions. 

The  Commanders  of  artillery  and  engineers  have  orders  to  confer 
with  you  respecting  all  operations  to  be  undertaken  that  concern  their 
arms. 

Set  up  a  strong  watch  along  the  lake  so  that  no  landing  can  be  made 
which  might  take  San  Giorgio  by  surprise. 

BONAPARTE 

181 
To  the  Sardinian  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs 

HIQ.,  Milm 

5&  Complementer?  Day,  Year  IV  (21  Sept,  1796) 
I  am  JK>  diplomatist,  Sir,  I  am  a  soldier;  you  will  pardon  my  frank- 
ness. M  different  parts  of  His  Majesty's  States  the  French  are  being 

Italy  151 

murdered  and  robbed.  By  the  treaty  of  peace  the  King,  who  is  bound 
to  accord  us  passage  across  his  States,  must  make  this  safe  for  us;  it  is 
only  to  that  end  that,  contrary  to  the  spirit  of  the  treaty,  I  have  taken 
it  upon  myself  to  return  to  him  not  only  the  civil  but  even  the  military 
government  of  the  part  of  his  lands  restored  to  him  by  the  Republic. 
At  Vinadio,  at  Limone,  under  the  eyes  of  the  garrison  of  Demonte 
and  the  troops  commanded  by  M.  Frachar  at  Borgo-San-Dalmazzo, 
there  are  daily  outrages  which  seem  to  be  not  only  tolerated  but  even 
encouraged  by  the  government. 

I  ask  you  therefore  for  a  simple  answer: 

I.  Should  not  the  King  be  obliged  to  indemnify  and  make  good  the 
losses  caused  to  the  French  by  offences  committed  on  his  territory 
where  these  occur  in  broad  daylight  and  by  organized  bodies  of  200 
to  300  persons? 

2*  With  25,000  men  under  arms,  has  the  King  enough  force  to 
control  the  brigands  in  his  states  and  to  ensure  respect  for  the  laws  of 
justice,  humanity  and  treaties? 

Men,  Sir,  are  judged  only  by  their  actions.  The  King's  loyalty  is 
generally  known;  but  one  is  forced  to  tbinV  that  there  may  be  political 
reasons  for  encouraging,  or  at  least  tolerating  such  revolting  atrocities. 

I  have  written  to  His  Majesty  personally  and  I  beg  you  to  give  him 
my  letter.  The  French  Government  will  do  nothing  either  openly  or 
secretly  which  would  tend  to  destroy  or  weaken  the  influence  of  the 
King's  government  with  his  people,  but  you  must  know  that  that 
would  be  easy  and  certain  of  success.  Hie  day  you  sincerely  determine 
to  destroy  the  brigands  infesting  our  communications  between  Cuneo 
and  Barcdfonnette,  they  will  no  longer  exist. 

I  beg  you  to  believe  me,  etc. 

BONAPARTE 

182 
To  the  Senate  of  Bologna 

H.Q.,  Milan 
5  VetuMmirire,  Year  V  (26  Sept,  1796} 

Citizens,  I  have  received  your  letter  with  the  printed  manifesto 
enclosed.  It  has  earned  your  indignation  and  my  contempt.  I  notice 
the  manifesto  is  not  signed,  which  leads  me  to  believe  that  it  does  not 
come  from  the  Pope,  but  from  some  enemies  of  religion  seeking  to 
make  it  appear  bloodthirsty  and  therefore  odious. 

Woe  to  those  who  bring  down  upon  themselves  the  anger  of  the 
French  army!  Woe  to  Ravenna,  Faenza  and  Rimini,  if  ever  they  are 
misled  into  disavowing  the  respect  they  owe  to  the  victorious  army 
and  the  friends  of  popular  liberty!  Hie  fanatics  and  dupes  would  pass 
like  criminals.  Parts  of  Italy  shall  remain  free. 

152  The  Rise  to  Power 

The  time  has  come  for  Italy  to  take  her  place  with  honour  among 
the  nations.  Lombardy,  Bologna,  Modena,  Reggio,  Ferrara,  perhaps 
the  Romagna,  if  it  shows  itself  worthy,  will  one  day  astonish  Europe 
and  re-create  the  great  days  of  Italy. 

Run  to  arms!  The  free  part  of  Italy  is  populous  and  rich.  Strike 
fear  into  the  enemies  of  your  rights  and  liberty.  I  do  not  forget  you. 
The  Republicans  will  show  you  the  way  to  victory;  they  will  teach 
you  how  to  overthrow  tyrants.  I  will  direct  your  battalions,  and  in 
part  your  happiness  will  be  your  own  "work.  Above  all,  tell  the  mad- 
men  who  dare  to  brave  the  wrath  of  the  French  Nation  that  it  protects 
the  people  and  religion,  but  is  as  terrible  as  the  angel  of  death  to  the 
proud  and  foolhardy. 

BONAPARTE 

183 

To  Major-General  Berthier 

Chief  of  Staff,  Amy  of  Italy  H.Q.,  Milan 

6  Vendemiaire,  Year  V  (27  Sept,  1796) 

I  learn,  Citizen  General,  that  as  the  result  of  an  intrigue  several 
Genoese  merchants  have  left  Genoa  and  taken  refuge  in  Milan,  loudly 
spreading  it  abroad  that  they  know  the  French  are  going  to  bombard 
Genoa.  Please  order  them  to  leave  Lombardy  at  once  and  return  to 
Genoa,  for  it  is  important  to  prevent  trouble-makers  from  disquieting 
the  good  people  there,  to  whom  the  Army  of  Italy  has  important 
obligations  both  for  the  corn  they  procured  for  us  in  times  of  difficulty 
and  for  the  friendship  tfaev  have  always  shown  towards  the  Republic. 

They  have  a  special  right  to  our  protection  at  a  moment  when  they 
have  just  closed  their  port  to  the  English  and  dismissed  the  Emperor's 
minister,  who  had  stirred  up  the  rebellion  of  the  imperial  fiefs. 

BONAPARTE 

184 
To  Colonel  Chasseloup 

Glr.,  Engineers,  Army  of  Italy  H.Q.,  Milan 

7  Vendewiaire,  Year  V  (28  Sept,  1796} 

You  will  please,  Citizen,  have  the  dikes  at  Governolo  cut,  so  that 
when  the  Fo  floods  it  will  drive  the  \vaters  of  the  Mincio  into  the  city 
of  Mantua,  which  will  do  much  damage  to  the  besieged.  There  is  not 
a  moment  to  lose  in  carrying  out  this  operation,  for  the  Po  will  soon 

Copy  of  these  instructions  to  General  Kilmaine,  with  orders  to 
ensure  tJncflr  ^i^c^cffiEfoti* 

BONAPARTE 

153 

185 
To  Major-General  Berthier 

Chief  of  Staff,  Army  of  Italy  H.Q.,  Milan 

g  Vendcmiaire*  Year  V  (30  Sept,  1706) 

The  latest  victories  of  the  army,  Citizen  General,  the  capture  of  San 
Giorgio,  Porta-Cerese  and  Porta-Pradella,  which  absolutely  blockades 
Wurmser  in  Mantua,  and  the  patriotism  spreading  daily  among  the 
mass  of  tie  Lombard  people  leave  no  handle  to  the  Austrian  intriguers 
and  partisans.  The  usual  wartime  custom  of  taking  hostages  as  a 
guarantee  of  public  tranquillity  is  now  pointless  in  the  case  of  the 
Milanese  and  the  city  of  Cremona.  Give  immediate  orders  to  the 
commanders  at  Antibes  and  Nice  that  the  hostages  taken  there  be 

released. 

As  for  the  hostages  from  the  province  of  Pavia,  the  commandant  of 
Lombardy  will  call  for  a  report  on  those  who  can  be  released  without 
danger.  As  soon  as  the  University  of  Pavia  is  opened  and  public 
opinion  makes  some  progress  in  the  town,  it  will  be  possible  to  release 
afi  die  hostages  taken  there. 

BONAPABTB 

186 
To  H.M.  the  Emperor,  King  of  Hungary  and  Bohemia 

H.Q.,  Milan 

11  Vendtmiaire,  Year  V  (2  Oct,  1796} 

Your  Majesty,  Europe  desires  peace.  Tliis  disastrous  war  has  con- 
tinued for  too  long. 

I  have  die  honour  to  inform  Your  Majesty  that,  if  plenipotentiaries 
are  not  sent  to  Paris  to  open  peace  negotiations,  the  Executive  Direc- 
tory has  ordered  me  to  destroy  the  port  of  Trieste  and  seize  all  Your 
Majesty's  establishments  on  the  Adriatic.  I  have  hitherto  refrained  from 
carrying  out  this  plan  in  the  hope  of  preventing  an  increase  in  the 
number  of  innocent  victims  of  this  war. 

I  wish  Your  Majesty  to  understand  the  dangers  threatening  Your 
Majesty's  subjects  and  to  give  peace  and  repose  to  the  world, 
I  am,  widi  respect,  Your  Majesty's  etc. 

BONAPARTE 

187 

To  Field-Marshal  Count  Wurmser 
C.HHf-C,  Austrian  forces  in  Mantua  H.Q.,  M&tena 

25  Ven&miaire,  Year  V  (16  Oct,  179$ 

Hie  siege  of  Mantua,  Sir,  is  a  greater  disaster  for  humanity  than  two 
campaigns.  Brave  men  must  face  danger,  but  not  the  diseases  of  a 
swamp.  Your  valuable  cavalry  is  without  forage;  your  large  garrison 

154  Tfo  Rise  to  Power 

is  short  of  food;  thousands  of  sick  need  clean  air,  abundance  of  medi- 
cines and  a  healthy  diet.  It  would,  I  believe,  be  in  the  true  spirit  of 
warfare  and  the  interest  of  both  armies  to  come  to  an  arrangement 
Return  your  person  and  your  cavalry  and  infantry  to  the  Emperor; 
surrender  Mantua  to  me:  we  shall  both  gain  thereby,  and  humanity 
more  than  either. 

But,  since  you  may  think  I  have  special  reasons  for  making  this  pro- 
posal other  than  humanity  and  the  true  interests  of  the  two  armies, 
I  realize  that  you  will  wish  to  know  the  condition  and  position  of  my 
army  of  observation.  Accordingly  I  see  no  difficulty  in  making  arrange- 
ments in  accordance  with  custom  and  the  spirit  of  warfare  whereby 
you  can  learn  the  situation  of  my  army  in  the  Tyrol  and  on  the  Brenta. 

I  pray  you,  Sir,  to  believe  the  sentiments  of  regard  and  high  con- 
sideration with  which  I  have  the  honour  to  be,  etc. 

BONAPARTE 

188 
To  Citizen  Garrau 

Government  Commissioner  H.Q.,  Modena 

25  Vendemiaire,  Year  V  (16  Orf,  179$) 
Ike  Flachat  company  has  not  yet  made  any  sales,  although  it  has 

large  quantities  of  silks  and  other  merchandise  in  Lombardy  and  at 
Tortona.  The  sales  taking  place  at  Leghorn  are  outside  its  control;  it  is 
essential  that  the  consul  of  the  Republic  intervenes.  Although  it  has 
a  capital  of  14  or  15  millions  the  company  is  not  meeting  its  bills 
on  die  excuse  that  it  has  no  money,  but  in  reality  so  as  to  have  them 
negotiated  by  a  third  party  at  15  or  20  per  cent,  discount. .  , . 

I  request  you  to  keep  a  strict  eye  on  this  company.  Everywhere 
there  are  complaints  against  it,  and  all  its  agents  are  so  blatantly 
unpatriotic  that  I  am  tempted  to  believe  many  of  them  are  enemy  spies. 
Please  tell  the  company  that  if  M.  Peragallo,  a  despicable  Frenchman 
who  disavows  his  nation,  comes  to  Lombardy  I  shall  have  him  put 
in  prison.  I  have  strong  reasons  to  believe  that  tids  man  has  connexions 
with  the  Russian  minister  at  Genoa,  and  besides  I  am  informed  that 
I  am  surrounded  by  spies.  Most  of  its  employees  at  Leghorn  are 
emigrants. 

BONAPARTE 

189 
To  the  Executive  Directory 

H.Q.,  Modem 

26  Vendtmimret  Year  V  (17  Otf,  i/prf) 
Yoo  will  find  attached,  Citizen  Directors,  the  letter  I  have  just 

itcdhrcd  from  General  GentilL  From  that  it  seems  that  the  Mediter- 
ranean is  going  to  become  free.  Rjestored  to  the  Republic,  Corsica 

fafy 155 

will  offer  resources  to  our  navy  and  a  recruiting  ground  for  our  light 
infantry.  Saliceti,  the  Government  Commissioner,  is  leaving  this 
evening  for  Leghorn  en  route  for  Corsica.  I  am  ordering  the  8th 
District  to  hold  a  battalion  ready  to  be  embarked  at  Toulon  to  garrison 
the  fortresses;  I  shall  also  send  a  battalion  from  Leghorn,  which  together 
with  two  forces  of  gendarmerie  will  be  enough  to  keep  order. 

General  Gentili  will  provisionally  command  the  23rd  Distict.  I  am 
giving  him  instructions  for  the  organization  of  the  gendarmerie  and 
authorizing  him  temporarily  to  raise  several  mobile  columns  to  pro- 
vide the  Government  Commissioner  with  forces  to  occupy  the 
fortresses  until  the  French  troops  arrive.  ...  I  am  sending  an  artillery 
and  an  engineer  officer,  but,  since  the  five  or  six  fortresses  on  the  island 
are  weak  and  useless,  I  am  instructing  them  to  incur  no  expense  but 
only  to  draw  up  plans  for  the  defence  of  the  Gulf  of  Saint-Florent. 
This  is  die  one  really  important  point,  where  it  would  be  well  in  future 
to  concentrate  the  whole  defence  of  the  island,  installing  a  garrison 
and  permanent  fortifications  and  employing  there  the  sums  that  would 
be  needed  to  repair  and  maintain  the  useless  fortresses  of  Bastia,  Corte, 
Calvi,  Ajaccio  and  Bonifacio;  simple  coastal  batteries  will  suffice  for 
these.  The  English  would  never  have  occupied  the  island  if  we  had 
had  a  fortress  at  Saint-Florent  and  concentrated  our  forces  there. 

But  since  the  establishment  at  Saint-Florent  is  still  in  the  air,  I  think 
you  ought  to  fix  the  whole  military  administration  at  Ajaccio,  which 
is  the  most  important  point  on  the  island  until  Saint-Florent  is 

developed .  Tie  expulsion  of  the  English  from  the  Mediterranean 

can  have  a  great  influence  on  the  success  of  our  military  operations  in 
Italy:  harder  conditions  should  be  demanded  from  Naples,  and  that 
will  have  a  great  effect  on  the  mind  of  the  Italians,  ensure  our  com- 
munications and  make  the  Neapolitans  tremble  even  in  Sicily. 

BONAPARTE 

190 
To  Citizen  Cacault 

French  Ambassador  to  Rome  H.Q.,  MoJena 

26  Vendemidre,  Year  V  (17  Qrf,  1796) 

I  have  just  received  the  news  that  the  English  are  evacuating  the 
Mediterranean.  They  have  already  left  Corsica,  which  has  raised  die 
tricolour  and  sent  deputies  to  me  to  swear  the  oath  of  obedience. 

A  courier  from  Toulon  informs  me  that  our  fleet  of  eighteen  ships 
of  the  line  and  ten  frigates  is  already  in  the  outer  harbour  and  on  the 
point  of  setting  sail  with  a  convoy  of  sixty  sail  carrying  landing  troops. 
Tie  strange  delirium,  of  die  country  you  are  in  will  not  last  long;  a 
quick  remedy  will  soon  be  there.  Ttat  madness  will  pass  like  a  dream 

156  The  Rise  to  Power 

and  what  will  be  left  will  be  the  freedom  of  Rome  and  the  well-being 
of  Italy.  I  salute  you. 

BONAPARTE 

P.S.  A  hundred  deputies  from  Bologna,  Modena,  Reggio  and 
Ferrara  have  been  meeting  here  for  some  days.  Throughout  die  whole 
region  there  is  an  enthusiasm  such  as  we  had  no  right  to  expect.  Hie 
first  Lombard  legion  is  already  formed;  the  first  Italian  legion  is  now 
forming  with  General  Rusca  in  command.  You  will  understand  that 
I  have  put  in  it  a  number  of  experienced  officers  who  are  used  to 
command  and  to  victory. 

Stay  in  Rome  for  the  time  being.  The  Government's  intention  is  to 
spare  no  effort  to  show  those  people  in  the  wrong. 

191 
To  Cardinal  Mattel 

Archbishop  of  Ferrara  H.Q.,  Ferrara 

30  Vende'miaire,  Year  V  (21  Oct9  1796) 

Tlie  court  of  Rome  has  refused  the  conditions  of  peace  offered  to  it 
by  the  Directory;  it  has  broken  the  armistice  by  ceasing  to  carry  out 
its  terms;  it  is  arming  and  seeking  war;  it  shall  have  it.  But  before 
envisaging  in  cold  blood  the  ruin  and  death  of  the  madmen  who  wish 
to  place  obstacles  in  the  way  of  the  republican  phalanxes,  I  owe  it  to 
my  nation,  to  humanity  and  to  myself  to  make  a  last  effort  to  bring 
the  Pope  to  the  more  moderate  frame  of  mind  that  accords  with  his 
true  interests,  with  his  sacred  position  and  with  reason.  You,  Sir,  know 
the  might  of  the  army  I  command:  to  destroy  the  temporal  power 
of  the  Pope  I  have  but  to  say  the  word.  Go  to  Rome;  see  the  Holy 
Father,  and  enlighten  him  as  to  his  true  interests.  Snatch  him  from  the 
intrigues  of  those  who  seek  his  and  the  court's  ruin.  The  French 
Government  will  still  allow  me  to  reopen  peace  negotiations;  events 
can  still  be  forestalled. 

War,  which  is  so  cruel  to  the  people,  brings  terrible  results  to  the 
defeated;  save  the  Pope  from  great  ills.  You  know  how  much  I 
personally  wish  to  settle  by  peace  a  struggle  that  to  settle  by  war 
would  bong  me  neither  glory  nor  danger.  I  wish  you,  Sir,  the  success 
in  your  mission  that  the  purity  of  your  motives  deserves. 

BONAPARTE 

192 
To  the  Executive  Directory 

H.Q.,  Verona 

3  Bwmaire,  Year  V  (24  Qtf,  1796) 
I  am  distressed,  Citizen  Director  that  your  letter  o 
reached,  me  too  kte.  I  beg  you  to  recall  the  situation  in  which  I  found 

157 

myself:  Rome  was  printing  fanatical  manifestoes;  Neapolitan  troops 
were  on  the  march;  the  Regency  at  Modena  was  showing  ill-will  and 
breaking  the  armistice  by  secreting  supplies  into  Mantua.  The  French 
Republic  was  flouted  and  threatened.  The  vigorous  step  of  denouncing 
the  armistice  with  Modena  restored  public  opinion  and  united  Bologna, 
Ferrara,  Modena  and  Reggio.  Fanaticism  was  foiled  and  the  people 
realized  we  were  still  there.  The  Republic  had  the  right  to  denounce 
an  armistice  that  was  not  being  fulfilled;  even  the  Regency  itself  did 
not  deny  sending  aid  to  Mantua. 

Meeting  in  a  congress,  Modena,  Reggio,  Ferrara  and  Bologna  have 
decreed  a  levy  of  2,800  men  with  the  tide,  1st  Italian  Legion.  There  is 
great  enthusiasm;  the  peasants  who  were  carrying  food  into  Mantua 
themselves  came  to  show  us  the  secret  routes  they  were  using.  There 
is  perfect  harmony  between  us  and  the  people. 

At  Bologna,  a  city  of  75,000  souls,  enthusiasm  is  extreme;  the  lowest 
class  has  even  been  committing  excesses.  To  restore  order,  I  had  to 
pronounce  strongly  in  favour  of  the  Senate,  which  they  did  not  want 
to  recognize  any  more. 

At  Ferrara  die  cardinal  bishop,  a  Roman  prince  with  150,000  francs, 
has  given  it  all  to  the  people  and  remained  in  the  church.  I  have  sent 
him  to  Rome,  nominally  to  negotiate,  but  in  reality  to  get  rid  of  him: 
he  was  pleased  with  the  mission, 

Tlie  Pope's  foolishness  is  unequalled;  but  the  news  from  Naples  and 
the  Mediterranean  will  change  it.  My  plan,  as  soon  as  I  can  do  so,  is 
to  go  to  Ancona  under  the  terms  of  the  armistice  and  only  then  to  take 
up  a  hostile  attitude.  .  .  . 

I  congratulate  you  on  the  treaty  signed  with  Genoa;  it  is  useful  on 
every  count.  .  ,  . 

BONAPARTE 

193 
To  Citizen  Cacault 

French  Ambassador  to  Rome  H.Q.,  Verona 

3  Brumdrt,  Year  V  (24  Qrf,  iy$€) 

You  will  find  attached  a  letter  from  the  Minister  [of  Foreign  Affairs], 
Delacroix.  Hie  Directory  informs  me  that  you  are  required  to  continue 
negotiations  with  Rome.  You  will  keep  me  carefully  informed  of  your 
actions,  so  that  I  can  pick  the  best  time  to  carry  out  the  intentions  of 
the  Government.  You  will  understand  that,  in  view  of  the  peace  with 
Naples  and  Genoa,  our  good  relations  with  the  King  of  Sardinia,  the 
reoccupation  of  Corsica  and  our  decided  superiority  in  die  Mediter- 
ranean, I  shall  only  await  the  most  favourable  moment  to  march  on 
Rome  and  avenge  the  national  honour.  Hie  great  thing  now  is  to  gain 
time.  .  .  .  What  is  needed  is  to  keep  the  ball  in  the  air  so  as  to  deceive 

158  The  Rise  to  Power 

that  old  fox.  It  would  be  a  good  thing  if  you  can  get  them  to  begin 
carrying  out  the  armistice  terms,  but  that  will  be  difficult,  I  think. 

Our  affairs  are  looking  up  now,  and  victory  seems  to  be  returning 
to  our  standards. 

BONAPAXTE 

194 
To  Citizen  Carnot 

Member  of  the  Executive  Directory  H.Q.,  Verona 

4  Brumaire,  Year  V  (25  Oct,  1796) 

I  have  your  letter  of  17  Vendemiaire,  my  dear  Director.  You  will 
have  seen,  simply  by  reading  my  brother  [Lucien's]  letter,  what  a  hot- 
head the  young  man  is.  He  compromised  himself  several  times  in  '93, 
despite  the  advice  I  constantly  gave  him.  He  wanted  to  pky  the 
Jacobin  and  would  have  found  himself  in  the  little  group  of  national 
scoundrels,  had  his  eighteen  years  not,  luckily  for  him,  been  some 
excuse. 

For  him  to  be  at  Marseilles  would  be  dangerous  not  only  to  him 
but  to  the  public  good.  Intriguers  would  certainly  get  hold  of  him, 
and  his  old  connexions  in  the  area  are  very  bad.  As  Corsica  is  now 
fiee,  you  would  greatly  oblige  me  by  ordering  Ktm  to  go  there,  since 
he  is  not  prepared  to  stay  with  the  Army  of  die  Rhine.  He  could  be 
of  use  to  the  Republic  there. 

I  must  beg  your  pardon  for  burdening  you  with  these  little  domestic 
troubles.  But  when  I  see  the  different  factions  passing  off  as  my  words 
or  actions  whatever  suits  them;  when  I  see  a  man  who  is  murdered 
in  Lyons  at  once  accounted  one  of  my  agents  or  relations,  though  I 
have  never  heard  of  him,  I  feel  I  must  exercise  some  supervision  over 
the  political  behaviour  of  those  near  me. 

Here  we  are  awaiting  the  promised  reinforcements  with  some 
impatience.  Peace  with  Naples  and  Genoa  and  the  destruction  of  the 
Regency  at  Modena  have  much  improved  our  position.  The  weather 
is  temble.  We  are  now  in  the  rainy  season  when  wise  men  in  Italy 
keep  quiet.  But  the  enemy  is  beginning  to  move.  That  is  because 
Mantua  is  at  its  last  gasp  and  on  the  point  of  starving;  we  shall  see 
how  things  will  turn  out  for  them.  My  plan  is  to  blockade  Mantua 
until  15  December,  then  beat  the  Austrian  army,  bring  up  my  siege 
artillery  and  besiege  it.  Calculations  show  there  is  no  doubt  Mantua 
will  be  ours  before  the  end  of  January.  But  there  is  every  reason  to 
believe,  and  the  enemy's  haste  in  inarming  to  its  help  goes  to  prove  it, 
that  if  their  movements  do  not  succeed  Mantua  will  not  withstand  the 
blockade  fee  a  month;  it  is  now  very  tight 

Hece  everyAing  is  beginning  to  take  a  favourable  turn.  The  peace 
with.  Naples  and  Genoa  is  making  our  enemies  despair.  Everyone 

159 

believes  that  the  destiny  of  Italy  has  changed  for  ever.  I  think  even  the 
disorder  in  the  administrations  has  diminished. 

It  is  a  great  pity  the  island  of  Elba  was  not  ceded  to  us  under  the 
treaty  with  Naples.  I  have  given  orders  at  Leghorn  that  a  garrison  is 
to  be  put  onto  the  island  as  soon  as  the  English  evacuate  it.  In  the 
secret  articles  I  am  required  to  conclude  with  the  Grand  Duke  of 
Tuscany,  restoring  Leghorn  to  him,  I  will,  if  the  Directory  approves, 
obtain  Elba  against  an  equivalent  indemnity  from  papal  territory. 
From  every  point  of  view  Porto-Ferraio  is  necessary  to  us. 

Please  give  my  respects  to  your  family. 

>     BONAPARTE 

195 
To  the  Army  of  Italy 

H.Q.,  San-Massimo 
21  Brumiaire,  Year  V  (11  Nov,  179$) 

Soldiers! 

Mantua  is  without  bread,  meat  and  forage.  Wurmser  and  the  debris 
of  the  army  you  shattered  on  the  Bormida,  at  Bassano,  San-Giorgio 
and  Governolo  are  ready  to  fall  into  your  power.  The  freedom  of  Italy 
and  the  welfare  of  France  depend  on  your  courage. 

A  crowd  of  fugitives,  reinforced  with  the  Emperor's  last  reserves, 
once  more  dares  to  face  you  in  the  hope  of  snatching  from  you  the 
fruit  of  six  months  of  victory. 

The  generals  will  do  their  duty:  they  will  throw  everything  against 
the  enemy;  sometimes  they  will  lead  you  forward,  sometimes  they 
will  carry  out  a  feint  retreat;  they  will  omit  nothing  that  will  make 
your  victory  brilliant. 

But  when  the  drum  sounds  for  battle  and  you  must  march  against^ 
the  enemy  with  bayonets  fixed  and  in  the  dread  silence  that  heralds     * 
victory,  then,  soldiers,  remember  to  be  worthy  of  yourselves.  I  will 
say  only  two  words;  they  are  enough  for  Frenchmen:  Italy!  Mantua! 
Ike  peace  of  Europe  and  die  happiness  of  your  families  will  be  the 
outcome  of  your  courage.  Let  us  do  once  again  what  we  have  done  so 
often,  and  Europe  will  not  dispute  our  tide  as  the  bravest  and  most 
powerful  nation  on  earth. 

BONAPARTE 

196 
To  the  Executive  Directory 

H.Q.,  Verona 

23  Brumaire,  Year  V  (13  Nov,  1796) 

I  owe  you  an  account  of  the  operations  that  have  taken  place  since 
the  I2di;  if  it  is  unsatisfactory,  do  not  lay  the  blame  on  the  army;  its 

i6o  The  Rise  to  Power 

inferiority  and  the  loss  of  the  bravest  men  fill  me  with  fear.  Perhaps 
we  are  on  the  eve  of  losing  Italy.  None  of  the  expected  help  has  arrived. 
The  $3rd  has  not  left.  All  reinforcements  coming  from  the  departments 
are  held  up  at  Lyons  and,  above  all,  Marseilles.  They  think  that  to 
halt  them  for  eight  or  ten  days  does  not  matter  and  do  not  realize 
that  meanwhile  the  destinies  of  Italy  and  Europe  are  being  decided 
here.  Hie  whole  of  the  Empire  has  been  in  movement  and  still  is. 
Only  the  energy  of  our  Government  at  the  beginning  of  the  war  can 
give  an  idea  of  the  way  they  are  behaving  at  Vienna.  Not  a  day  passes 
but  5,000  men  arrive,  and  yet,  during  the  two  months  it  has  been  clear 
that  we  need  reinforcements,  we  have  received  but  one  battalion  of 
the  40th,  a  poor  unit  unused  to  fire,  while  our  old  soldiers  of  the  Army 
of  Italy  rot  in  idleness  in  the  8th  District. 

Tte  army  does  its  duty  and  I  do  mine.  My  soul  is  in  anguish,  but 
my  conscience  is  calm.  Help,  help!  But  you  must  not  play  at  it;  it  is 
men  present  under  arms  we  need,  not  paper  establishments.  If  you 
promise  6,000  men,  the  Minister  of  War  announces  6,000  on  paper 
and  3,000  under  arms;  when  they  reach  Milan  they  are  reduced  to 
1,500 

On  the  loth  I  learnt  that  a  corps  of  25,000  Austrians  was  advancing 
from  Carinthia  and  was  already  encamped  on  the  Piave.  I  sent  General 
Mass£na  with  an  observation  force  to  Bassano  on  the  Brenta  with 
orders  to  retire  on  Vicenza  the  moment  the  enemy  crossed  the  Piave. 
I  ordered  General  Vaubois  to  attack  the  enemy  posts  in  the  Trentino 
and,  ia  particular,  to  drive  him  from  his  positions  between  the  Avisio 
and  the  Brenta.  Tte  attack  took  place  on  the  I2th  against  strong 
resistance.  General  Guieu  carried  Saint-Michel  and  burned  the  enemy 
bridges;  but  they  frustrated  our  attack  on  Segonzano,  and,  despite  its 
bravery,  the  85th  Demi-brigade  was  badly  mauled  there. . .  . 

On  the  isth  I  ordered  a  renewal  of  the  attack  on  Segonzano,  which 
we  had  to  have,  and,  learning  at  the  same  time  that  the  enemy  had 
crossed  tie  Piave,  I  left  with  the  Augereau  division,  joined  the  Massena 
division  at  Vicenza  and,  on  the  15th,  came  upon  the  enemy  who  had 
crossed  the  Brenta,  It  had  to  be  a  case  of  descending  upon  him  like 
thunder  and  sweeping  him  away  at  his  first  step.  The  day  was  fierce 
and  fcloody,  but  the  advantage  was  with  us;  the  enemy  recrossed  the 
Brenta  and  the  field  remained  ours. . . . 

On  tte  isth,  however,  the  enemy  had  attacked  General  Vaubois  at 
several  points  which  threatened  to  turn  him  and  forced  him  to  retire 
on  la  Pietra  with  his  right  backing  on  mountains  and  his  left  at  MorL 
On  the  i6th  the  enemy  did  not  appear,  but  on  the  17th  the  fighting 
was,  very  stubborn.  By  nightfall  we  had  already  taken  two  guns  and 
1,300  prisoners  wfaen  a  panic  took  hold  of  our  troops;  the  rout  became 
general  On  th«  i8A,  by  a  bridge  I  had  purposely  had  made,  the 

Italy  161 

division  took  up  position  at  Rivoli  and  la  Corona.  In  the  retreat  we 
lost  six  guns  and  3,000  men.  .  .  . 

The  weather  continues  bad  and  the  whole  army  is  exhausted  with 
fatigue  and  without  boots.  I  have  withdrawn  it  to  Verona. 

One  enemy  column,  commanded  by  Laudon,  is  advancing  on 
Brescia,  another  on  Chiusa  to  join  the  main  army.  To  resist  all  that  I 
have  only  Massena's  6,000  men,  Augereau's  5,000  and  Vaubois's  7,000: 
18,000  in  all.  The  enemy  has  at  least  50,000 

Today  the  troops  are  resting;  tomorrow  we  shall  act  according  to 
the  enemy  movements.  I  despair  of  being  able  to  avoid  raising  the 
siege  of  Mantua,  which  would  have  been  ours  in  a  week.  If  that 
disaster  happens  and  no  new  troops  reach  me  we  shall  soon  be  behind 
the  Adda  and  beyond. 

The  wounded  are  the  elite  of  the  army;  all  our  senior  officers,  all 
our  best  generals  are  out  of  action;  new  ones  who  have  arrived  are 
incompetent  and  do  not  have  the  confidence  of  the  troops.  Reduced 
to  a  handful,  the  Army  of  Italy  is  worn  out.  The  heroes  of  Lodi, 
JMillesimo,  Castiglione  and  Bassano  have  died  for  their  country  or  are 
in  hospital.  All  the  units  have  left  is  their  reputation  and  their  pride. 
Joubert,  Lannes,  Lanusse,  Victor,  Murat,  Chabot,  Dupuy,  Rampon, 
Pigon,  Chabeau,  Saint-Hrlaire  and  Menard  are  wounded. 

We  are  abandoned  in  the  depths  of  Italy. ...  I  have  not  lost  many 
men  in  this  war,  but  they  were  all  of  the  best  and  irreplaceable.  With 
such  tiny  forces  amid  such  continuous  hazards  the  brave  men  who  are 
left  look  forward  to  inevitable  death.  Perhaps  the  hour  is  about  to 
strike  for  brave  Augereau,  for  intrepid  Massena,  for  Berthier,  for  me. 
Then  what  will  become  of  their  valiant  men?  That  thought  is  making 
me  careful;  I  no  longer  dare  face  the  death  that  would  bring  misfortune 
and  discouragement  to  those  in  my  care. 

In  a  few  days  we  will  make  a  last  effort.  If  fortune  smiles,  Mantua 
will  be  taken  and  with  it  Italy.  Reinforced  by  my  siege  army,  there  is 
nothing  I  could  not  attempt.  If  I  had  received  the  83 rd  Demi-brigade, 
3,000  strong  and  known  to  the  army,  I  would  have  answered  for 
everything.  Soon,  perhaps,  40,000  will  not  be  enough. 

BONAPARTE 

197 
To  the  Executive  Directory 

H.Q.,  Verona 

29  Brutnaire,  Year  V  (ig  Nov,  1796) 

I  am  so  worn  out  with  fatigue,  Citizen  Directors,  that  I  cannot 
inform  you  of  all  the  military  events  preceding  the  battle  of  Arcola, 
which  has  just  decided  the  fete  of  Italy. 

Turning  that  Heldr-Marshal  Alvinzi  was  approaching  Verona  so  as 
to  join  up  with  his  divisions  in  the  Tyrol,  I  marched  down  the  Adige 

162  The  Rise  to  Power 

with  the  Augcreau  and  Massena  divisions-  During  the  night  of  the 
24th  to  25th  I  had  a  boat  bridge  built  at  Ronco,  where  we  crossed. 
!  hoped  to  reach  Villanova  in  the  morning  and  from  there  capture  the 
enemy's  artillery  parks  and  baggage  and  attack  his  army  on  the  flank 
and  rear.  General  Alvinai's  headquarters  were  at  Caldiero.  But  the 
enemy  had  heard  of  our  movement  and  had  sent  a  Croat  and  some 
Hungarian  regiments  into  the  village  of  Arcola,  a  very  strong  position 
in  the  midst  of  marshes  and  canals.  This  village  held  up  the  advance- 
guard  the  whole  day.  In  vain  did  the  generals,  knowing  the  importance 
of  time,  rush  to  the  front  to  force  our  columns  to  cross  the  little  bridge: 
too  much  courage  did  only  harm;  almost  all  were  wounded  and 
Generals  Verdier,  Bon,  Verne  and  Lannes  were  put  out  of  action. 
Seizing  a  flag,  Augereau  carried  it  to  the  very  end  of  the  bridge: 
'Cowards/  he  cried  to  his  troops,  *are  you  so  afraid  of  death?*  and  he 
stayed  there  several  minutes  without  producing  any  effect.  Yet  we  had 
to  cross  this  bridge  or  make  a  detour  of  several  leagues  which  would 
have  nullified  our  whole  operation;  I  went  up  myself  and  asked  the 
soldiers  if  they  were  still  die  victors  of  Lodi;  my  presence  had  an 
effect  that  decided  me  to  attempt  the  crossing  once  more. 

Already  twke  wounded,  General  Lannes  returned  and  received  a 
third  and  more  dangerous  wound;  General  Vignolle  was  also  wounded. 
We  had  to  give  up  the  idea  of  taking  the  village  by  frontal  assault  and 
await  the  arrival  of  a  column  commanded  by  General  Guieu  that  I 
had  sent  by  Albaredo.  It  did  not  come  up  until  the  night,  but  it 
occupied  the  village  and  took  four  guns  and  several  hundred  prisoners. 
Meanwhile  General  Masscna  was  attacking  a  division  which  the  enemy 
had  sent  from  his  headquarters  onto  our  left;  he  drove  it  back  and 
routed  it  completely. 

During  the  night  we  decided  to  evacuate  die  village  of  Arcola,  and 
we  prepared  to  be  attacked  at  dawn  by  the  whole  enemy  army,  which 
had  had  time  to  bring  up  its  artillery  and  supplies  and  to  fell  back 
to  meet  us, 

At  first  light  the  action  began  everywhere  widi  the  greatest  violence. 
Massena,  -who  was  on  the  left,  put  the  enemy  to  flight  and  pursued  him 
to  die  gates  of  Caldiero,  General  Robert,  who  was  on  the  central 
causeway  widi  the  75th,  overthrew  the  enemy  with  the  bayonet  and 
covered  the  battlefield  with  dead. 

I  ordered  Adjutant-general  Vial  to  move  down  the  Adige  with  a 
dcmi-brigade  so  as  to  turn  the  enemy's  left.  But  the  terrain  presents 
insuperable  obstacles.  The  brave  adjutant-general  plunged  into  the 
wader  up  to  his  neck,  tot  in  vain,  for  only  eighty  grenadiers  were  able 
to  foDow  him  and  that  could  not  make  a  sufficient  diversion.  During 
Ac  aigiat  of  the  2ddi  to  27th  I  had  bridges  thrown  over  the  canals 
and  marshes,  aid  General  Augcreau  crossed  widi  his  division.  At 

Itolf  163 

.m,  we  were  in  action,  General  Massena  being  on  the  left,  General 
rt  in  the  centre,  General  Augcrcau  on  the  right. 
:  enemy  attacked  the  centre  vigorously  and  forced  it  to  give 
id.  I  then  withdrew  the  3^nd  from  the  left  and  placed  it  in  ambush 
ae  woods,  and  at  the  moment  when  the  enemy  by  driving  back 
sntre  was  on  the  point  of  turning  our  right  General  Gardanne 
s  ambush  at  the  head  of  the  32nd  taking  the  enemy  in  the  flank 
oing  a  horrible  slaughter.  The  enemy's  left  was  supported  by 
es  and  was  overpowering  our  right  by  superior  numbers.  I 
xl  Citizen  Hercule,  an  officer  of  my  Guides,  to  choose  twenty- 
sen  of  his  company  and  ride  half  a  league  down  the  Adige  and 
the  marshes  covering  the  enemy's  left  flank  and  then  to  fall 
him  from  behind  at  the  gallop  sounding  several  trumpets-  This 
uvre  succeeded  perfectly:  the  enemy  infantry  wavered,  and 
al  Augereau  seized  the  moment.  But  although  retreating,  it  still 
d  until  a  little  force  of  800  or  900  men  with  four  guns  which  I 
at  through  Porto-Legnano  to  take  up  position  behind  the  enemy 
on  his  rear  and  completed  the  rout.  General  Massena,  who  had 
I  to  the  centre,  marched  straight  on  the  village  of  Arcola, 
ed  it  and  pursued  the  enemy  up  to  the  village  of  San  Bonifacio; 
jhtfall  prevented  us  from  going  further, 
fruits  of  the  batde  of  Arcola  are  4,000  to  5,000  prisoners,  4  flags, 
is.  The  enemy  has  lost  at  least  4,000  dead  and  as  many  wounded; 
7e  had  900  men  wounded  and  about  200  killed,  .  . . 
nwhile  General  Vaubois  was  attacked  and  defeated  at  Rivoli, 
x>rtant  position  covering  Mantua.  We  left  Arcola  at  dawn;  I 
5  cavalry  through  Vicenza  to  pursue  the  enemy  and  went  myself 
ona  where  I  had  left  General  Kilmaine  with  3,000  men. 
re  now  rallied  and  reinforced  the  Vaubois  division,  which  is  at 
K>VO,  8,000  strong.  Augereau  is  at  Verona,  Massena  at  Villanova. 
row  I  shall  attack  the  division  which  beat  Vaubois,  chase  it  into 
:ol  and  await  the  surrender  of  Mantua,  which  cannot  hold  more 
fortnight.  l£  as  things  now  are,  you  send  me  the  help  you  have 
romised,  I  will  promise  to  force  the  Emperor  to  make  peace 
six  weeks  and  also  go  to  Rome. 

not  hide  from  you  that  I  have  not  found  among  the  soldiers 
danxes  of  Lodi,  Millesimo,  Castiglione;  fatigue  and  the  loss  of 
ve  have  removed  that  dash  with  which  I  could  have  hoped  to 
Jvinzi  and  the  greater  part  of  his  army.  General  Vaubois  lacks 
sr  and  experience  in  lymfflfpg  big  divisions.  .  .  , 
generals  and  officers  of  the  staff  showed  unexampled 
irage;  twelve  or  fifteen  have  been  killed:  it  was  indeed  a ; 
ieatk... 

The  Rise  to  Power 

198 
To  Major-Genera!  Clarke 

Government  Commi$sioner*  H.Q.,  Verona 

2$  Bwmaire,  Year  V  (19  Noi>,  I7ptf) 

Your  nephew  Elliot  was  killed  on  the  field  of  Arcola.  The  young 
man  had  grown,  accustomed  to  arms  and  several  times  marched  at  the 
head  of  columns;  in  due  course  he  would  have  been  an  admirable 
officer.  He  dkd  with  glory  in  face  of  the  enemy;  he  did  not  suffer  a 
moment  What  sensible  man  would  not  envy  such  a  death?  Who, 
amid  the  changes  of  life,  would  not  choose  thus  to  leave  a  world  so 
often  detestable?  Who  among  us  has  not  a  hundred  times  regretted 
not  being  thus  withdrawn  from  the  influence  of  calumny  and  envy 
and  all  those  hateful  passions  which  seem  almost  alone  to  guide  human 
conduct? 

BONAPARTE 

199 

To  Citizen  Garrau 

Government  Commissioner  H.Q.,  Verona 

2$  Brumaire,  Year  V  (ip  Nov,  ijptf) 

Tie  army  is  without  boots,  pay,  clothing;  the  hospitals  lack  every- 
thing; our  wounded  lie  on  the  floor  in  die  most  horrible  want.  All  this 
arises  from  lack  of  money,  and  that  at  a  moment  when  we  have  just 
acquired  4,000,000  francs  at  Leghorn  and  when  the  goods  we  have 
at  Tortona  and  Milan  could  provide  substantial  resources!  Modena 
should  also  have  given  us  1,800,000  francs  and  Ferrara  large  contri- 
butions. But  there  is  neither  order  nor  uniformity  in  the  scheme 
of  the  contributions,  which  are  your  special  concern.  The  evil  is  so 
great  that  a  remedy  must  be  found.  Please  answer  within  the  day 
whether  you  can  provide  what  the  army  lacks, . .  .  It  is  the  intention 
of  the  Government  that  its  commissioners  should  pay  special  attention 
to  the  needs  of  the  army,  and  I  regret  to  see  that  you  pay  no  attention 
to  them  but  leave  that  duty  to  a  foreigner  whose  character  and  inten- 
tiom  arc  very  suspectf 

Citizen  Saliceti  decrees  one  dung,  you  another,  with  the  result  that 
these  is  no  understanding  and  BO  money,  The  1,500  men  we  have  at 
Leghorn  are  costing  us  more  than  an  army.  Thanks  to  all  these  muddles 
we  are  CHI  die  point  of  lacking  what  is  essential.  Already  our  soldiers 
sac  without  dungs  that  they  should  not  lack  in  so  rich  a  country  and 
after  the  successes  they  have  had. 

BONAPARTE 

*Qbffce  bad  been  appointed  special  Govwnmettf  Commissioner  to  negotiate 
&  die  Austrian  court  on  is  November  and  -was  now  on  his  way  to  Italy. 
f  HaBcr,  special  Commissoacr  for  coatribatioos. 

200 

To  Citizeness  Josephine  Bonaparte 

At  Milan  Verona 

3  Frimaire,  Year  V  (23  Nov,  1796) 

I  don't  love  you  at  all  any  more;  on  the  contrary,  I  detest  you.  You 
arc  a  vile,  mean,  beastly  slut.  You  don't  write  to  me  at  all;  you  don't 
love  your  husband;  you  know  how  happy  your  letters  make  him,  and 
you  don't  write  him  six  lines  of  nonsense. 

What,  then,  Madam,  do  you  do  all  day?  What  important  affaire 
stops  you  writing  to  your  lover?  What  is  this  affection  that  stifles  and 
brushes  aside  the  love,  the  tender  and  constant  love  that  you  promised 
him?  Who  can  he  be,  this  hero,  this  new  love  who  occupies  your  every 
moment,  who  rules  your  days  and  stops  you  from  thinking  of  your 
husband?  Josephine,  take  care:  one  fine  night  and  the  doors  will  burst 
open  and  I  shall  be  there! 

Truly,  sweet  friend,  I  am  worried  at  not  hearing  from  you;  write  me 
four  pages  quickly  of  those  nice  things  that  fill  my  heart  with  affection 
and  happiness. 

Soon,  I  hope,  I  will  be  holding  you  in  my  arms;  then  I  will  cover 
you  with  a  million  hot  kisses,  burning  like  the  equator. 

BONAPARTE 

201 
To  Major-General  Berthier 

Chief  of  Staff,  Army  of  My  Milan 

18  Frimaire,  Year  V  (B  Dec,  1796} 

Please  issue  orders  to  the  various  demi-brigades  that  they  are  to  send 
me  histories  of  the  actions  in  which  each  has  taken  part  since  the 
start  of  the  campaign.  They  must  arrive  by  the  end  of  the  month. 

BONAPARTE 

202 
To  Citizen  Ausou 

Chief  forage  agent.  Army  of  Italy  {under  arrest)  Milan 

18  Frimaire,  Year  V  (8  Dec,  i?ofy 

I  have  received  the  two  letters  you  wrote  me,  Citizen. 

If  I  have  not  already  informed  you  of  the  reason  for  your  arrest, 
that  is  because  I  was  awaiting  the  installation  of  the  new  courts 
martial,  which,  being  composed  of  officers,  will  give  you  more 
intelligent  judges  and  be  more  ready  to  hear  you. 

I  complain  of  you  because  your  service  has  never  been  organized  or 

carried  out;  because  Peschiera  was  never  provisioned;  because  you 

have  never  provided  your  sub-contractors  with  the  necessary  funds, 

and  because  you  allowed  the  service  to  fail  at  a  critical  moment  for  the 

L.D.N.— a 

166  The  R&r  to  Power 

army.  You  were  never  at  headquarters  when  your  presence  there  was 
necessary,  that  is  to  say,  when  the  enemy  was  on  the  point  of  attacking. 
It  is  through  your  culpable  negligence  that  we  have  lost  several 
hundred  horses,  that  the  service  of  tie  artillery  has  suffered  severely 
and  that,  forced  to  forage  in  the  fields  and  farms,  the  cavalry  has  com- 
mitted excesses  likely  to  alienate  the  inhabitants.  Yet  since  the  start  of 
the  campaign  your  service  has  received  1,800,000  francs  of  which  you 

have  certainly  not  spent  a  third 

BONAPABTE 

203 
To  Citizen  Joseph  Bonaparte 

At  Ajxdo  Milan 

20  Frimaire,  Year  V  (10  Dec,  i?$6} 

Peace  with  Parma  has  been  signed.  I  await  every  moment  the  news 
that  you  have  been  appointed  there.  Come  back  as  soon  as  possible; 
do  not  meddle  at  all  or  very  little  in  Corsican  politics;  put  our  private 
afiairs  in  order,  especially  the  house,  which,  whatever  happens,  I  want 
to  see  in  good  condition  and  worthy  to  be  lived  in;  it  must  be  restored 
as  it  was  before,  with  Ignazio's  room  joined  on.  Do  what  you  can  to 
make  the  street  more  inhabitable. 

I  expect  Fesch  and  Paulette  at  Milan  in  a  fortnight.  Miot  is  destined 
for  Turin,  Cacault  for  Florence. 

BONAPARTE 

204 
To  Citizens  Peragallo,  Flachat  and  Co. 

Milan 

23  Frimaire,  Year  V  (13  Dec,  1796) 

Gentlemen,  you  have  received  the  money  intended  for  the  niam-- 
tenance  of  the  army,  whose  needs  are  most  pressing.  Tte  pay  is  two 
weeks  in  arrears;  dus  is  the  responsibility  of  die  Treasury,  with  whidb 
you  have  a  contract  specifically  setting  aside  for  that  purpose  the 
receipts  from  all  the  contributions  and  merchandise  arising  from  the 
conquests  of  die  Army  of  Italy.  It  is  notorious  that  you  have  received 
5  millions,  for  which  you  have  accounted  to  nobody.  I  wish  to  believe 
that  you  will  at  o»oe  provide  die  600,000  francs  needed  for  the  pay 
awj  I  most  inform  you  that  bills  of  exchange  for  this  amount  have 

nfyyynrM^tf  1  y  lnyti  JjLaWii  OH.  YOU. 

I£  with  inconceivable  bad  fifth,  you  have  the  impudence  to  refuse 
payment  of  these  bills  you  will  be  responsible  for  the  consequences  and 
for  the  barm  clone  to  the  army,  and  I  shall  instruct  Citizen  Faypoult  to 
consider  yon  bankrupt  and  to  treat  yon  as  sock 

BONAPARTE 

Italy  167 

205 
To  Major-General  Berthier 

Chief  of  Staff,  Army  of  Italy  Vtrona 

jo  Frimaire,  Year  V  (20  Z>c,  J/ptf) 

You  will  please,  Citizen  General,  replace  the  commandant  of  Casat* 
Magjriorc  and  order  him  to  proceed  to  Milan  to  report  the  reason  why 
he  sold  seventeen  bullocks  belonging  to  the  Republic. 

BONAPARTE 

206 
To  the  Executive  Directory 

Milan 
$  Nivose,  Year  V  (2$  Dec,  i/ptf) 

Hiere  are  three  parties  in  Lombardy  at  die  present  time:  i.  that 
which  accepts  French  control;  2.  that  which  desires  independence  and 
is  even  showing  some  impatience;  3.  the  party  friendly  to  the  Austrians 
and  hostile  to  the  French.  I  support  and  encourage  the  first,  I  contain 
the  second  and  I  repress  the  third. 

It  is  not  true  that  I  have  increased  the  Lombard  contribution  by  8 
millions,  and  Laporte,  who  told  you  this,  would  do  better  to  repay  the 
5  millions  he  and  his  partners  stole  from  the  army  and  owe  to  the 
Republic  than  to  talk  about  a  country  where  their  company  has  made 
itself  universally  distrusted  by  the  numerous  sharp  practices  it  has  used. 

lie  Cispadane  republics  are  divided  into  three  parties:  i.  the  friends 
of  their  former  government;  2.  the  partisans  of  an  independent,  but 
rather  aristocratic  constitution;  3.  the  partisans  of  the  French  constitu- 
tion or  of  pure  democracy.  I  repress  the  first,  I  support  the  second  and 
moderate  the  third.  I  do  so  because  the  second  is  tie  party  of  die  rich 
land-owners  and  the  priests,  who  in  the  long  run  will  end  by  winning 
the  support  of  the  mass  of  the  people  which  it  is  essential  to  rally  around 
the  French  party.  Tlzis  last  is  composed  of  young  people,  of  writers  and 
men  who,  as  in  France  and  everywhere  else,  love  liberty  and  wish  to 
change  the  government  only  to  bring  about  a  revolution. 

Tlie  Germans  and  the  Pope  are  concerting  their  influence  to  bring 
about  a  rising  in  the  Apennines;  their  efforts  are  fruitless.  However, 
part  of  die  Garfagnana  and  the  litde  town  of  Carrara  revolted,  I  have 
sent  a  small  mobile  column  to  bring  those  people  to  reason  and  make 
some  terrible  examples  that  will  teach  these  mountaineers  not  to  play 
widi  us.  If  a  revolt  of  the  Apennines  were  to  happen  when  we  were  at 
grips  with  the  enemy,  it  would  be  most  embarrassing,  for  die  mountains 
extend  to  Tortoioa  and  the  inhabitants  could  interfere  with  our  con>- 
menications.  I  have  my  eye  on  this  constantly.  — 

The  Cispadane  republics  are  now  meeting  in  a  congress  at  Reggio. 

BONAPARTE 

168  The  Rise  to  Power 

207 
To  Brigadier-General  Lespinasse 

Off.,  Artillery,  Army  of  Italy  Milan 

Presumed  10  Nivose,  Year  V  (30  Dec,  1796) 

I  have  just  visited  the  arms  magazines  in  the  citadel  of  Milan.  No 
one  could  ever  understand  the  returns.  They  call  English  what  is  in  fact 
Spanish,  Austrian  what  comes  from  Leghorn;  things  cannot  go  on  like 
that.  You  must  go  to  the  fort  tomorrow,  inspect  your  magazines  and 
put  them  in  better  order.  Send  20,000  bayonets  to  Peschiera,  from  where 
they  will  be  sent  to  the  divisions,  which  are  in  great  need  of  them, 
Please  report  to  me  why  the  equipment  for  Bergamo  has  not  yet  left; 
I  intended  it  to  leave  yesterday.  You  must  accustom  your  sub- 
ordinates to  make  no  distinction  between  night  and  day;  everyone 
must  be  ready  at  every  moment.  Please  show  me  tomorrow  the 
organization  of  the  artillery  in  Milan  and  ensure  that  the  gunners 
necessary  both  for  the  workshops  and  the  pieces  are  in  the  castle.  Hie 
artillery  in  this  area  is  in  great  disorder. 

BONAPARTE 

208 
To  the  Executive  Directory 

H.Q.,  Roverbella 
28  Nivose,  Year  V  (17  Jan,  1797) 

Since  the  23rd  there  have  been  operations  of  such  importance  and 
with  so  many  actions  that  I  shall  not  be  able  to  give  you  a  detailed 
account  before  tomorrow.  Today  I  will  simply  report  them. 

Oa  23  Nivose  die  enemy  attacked  General  Masse*na's  division  before 
Verona,  which  produced  the  action  of  San  Michele  in  which  we  beat 
him  completely,  taking  600  prisoners  and  three  guns.  The  same  day 
he  attacked  our  forward  positions  on  Monte-Baldo  which  gave  rise  to 
tfae  action  of  la  Corona;  he  was  repulsed  and  lost  no  prisoners. 

Qa  die  morning  of  the  24tfa  a  very  strong  enemy  column  moved 
through  Montagna  and  Caprino,  which  forced  General  Joubert's 
division  to  evacuate  k  Corona  and  concentrate  at  RivolL  I  had  fore- 
seen this  movement  and  went  there  during  the  night.  On  die  25th  and 
2<5di  took  place  the  battle  of  Rivoli,  wtkh  we  won  after  a  most 
stubborn  resistance,  taking  13,000  prisoners  and  several  flags  and  guns. 
General  Aivinzi  escaped  with  difficulty  and  almost  alone. 

At  mtthtight  on  die  24th  die  enemy  division  which  had  been  estab- 
lished since  tbe  ipd*  at  Bevibcqua,  from  where  it  had  driven  back 
General  Augereau's  outposts,  suddenly  tfaiew  a  bridge  across  die 
Adigc  a  league  from  Porto-Legnano,  opposite  Anglian.  On  the  25th 
General  Gtaeo  attacked  k  at  Anghiari,  trymg  to  destroy  it  bef^^ 
completed  die  crossing.  He  did  not  succeed,  but  took  300  prisoners. 

/to*/  169 

On  the  26th  General  Augereau  attacked  in  a  second  action  at 
Anghiari.  He  took  2,000  prisoners  and  sixteen  guns  and  burnt  all  the 
bridges  on  the  Adige;  but  nightfall  enabled  the  enemy  to  slip  away 
towards  Mantua.  He  reached  to  within  cannon  range  of  the  fortress 
and  attacked  San  Giorgio,  but  could  not  carry  it,  for  we  had  fortified 
it  carefully.  During  the  night  I  arrived  with  reinforcements  and  there 
followed  the  battle  of  la  Favorite;  I  am  writing  from  the  field.  The 
fruit  of  that  battle  is  7,000  prisoners,  flags,  guns,  all  the  army's  baggage, 
a  regiment  of  hussars  and  a  big  convoy  of  corn  and  cattle  the  enemy 
was  hoping  to  get  into  Mantua.  Wurmser  attempted  a  sortie  to  attack 
the  left  wing  of  our  army,  but  he  was  received  as  usual  and  forced  to 
return. 

In  three  or  four  days,  therefore,  the  Emperor's  fifth  army  has  been 
entirely  destroyed.  We  have  taken  23,000  prisoners. . . .  Their  flags 
were  embroidered  by  the  hands  of  the  Empress. 

More  than  three  months  ago  you  announced  10,000  men  coming 
from  the  Ocean.  So  far  only  the  64th  Demi-brigade,  1,800  strong,  has 
arrived.  The  Emperor  will  have  organized  a  new  army  in  Italy  before 
I  receive  these  10,000  men. 

BONAPARTE 

209 
To  Cardinal  Mattel 

Archbishop  ofFerrara,  at  Rome  H.Q.,  Verona 

3  Pluviose,  Year  V  (22 >'jm,  1797) 

Hie  foreigners  who  are  influencing  the  court  of  Rome  have  tried 
and  are  still  trying  to  ruin  that  lovely  land;  the  words  of  peace  I  asked 
you  to  carry  to  the  Holy  Father  have  been  smothered  by  these  men, 
who  care  nothing  for  the  glory  of  Rome  and  are  quite  sold  to  the 
courts  employing  them.  Tlie  last  scene  of  this  ridiculous  comedy  is 
opening.  You  know  the  value  I  placed  on  peace  and  how  much  I 
wished  to  spare  you  the  horrors  of  war.  The  letters  I  am  sending  you 
will  convince  you  of  the  blindness,  the  perfidy  and  the  rashness  of  those 
who  at  present  control  the  Roman  court,  I  beg  you,  Cardinal,  to 
assure  His  Holiness  that  whatever  may  happen  he  can  remain  at  Rome 
without  fear.  As  the  first  minister  of  religion  he  will  find  protection 
for  himself  and  the  Church.  At  the  same  rime  assure  all  the  inhabitants 
of  Rome  that  in  the  French  army  they  will  meet  friends  who  will 
welcome  victory  only  in  so  far  as  it  improves  the  lot  of  the  people  and 
frees  Italy  from  the  domination  of  foreigners.  It  will  be  my  personal 
care  to  prevent  any  change  being  m?/fc  in  the  religion  of  our  fathers. 

Rest  assured,  Eminence,  that  I  shall  make  it  my  duty  in  all  circum- 
stances to  show  you  the  regard  and  attachment  with  which  I  am,  etc. 

BONAPARTE 

170  The  Rise  to  Power 

210 
To  Major-General  Berthier 

Chuf  of  Staff,  Army  of  Italy  H.Q.,  Verona 

7  Pluviose,  Year  V  (26  Jan,  1707) 

We  must  give  numbers  to  the  field  divisions  of  the  army,  Citizen 
General.  They  cannot  be  numbered  according  to  the  order  of  battle, 
which  changes  with  every  movement;  so  please  obtain  from  the 
generals  copies  of  their  commissions  as  major-generals  so  that  you  can 
number  the  divisions  according  to  the  seniority  of  generals  command- 
ing them. 

BONAPARTE 

211 
Proclamation 

H.Q.,  Bologna 
Ij  Pluviose,  Year  V  (i  Feb9  ijgj} 

ARTICLE  i.  The  Pope  has  formally  refused  to  carry  out  articles  8  and 
9  of  the  armistice  agreed,  with  Spanish  mediation,  at  Bologna  on  2 
Mcssidor  and  solemnly  ratified  at  Rome  on  27  June,  1796. 

ART.  2.  Hie  Roman  court  has  not  ceased  from  arming  and  issuing 
manifestoes  calling  the  people  to  a  crusade;  its  troops  have  approached 
within  ten  miles  of  Bologna  and  threatened  to  enter  the  town. 

ART.  3.  The  Roman  court  has  engaged  in  negotiations  hostile  to 
France  with  the  court  of  Vienna,  as  is  proved  by  the  letters  of  Cardinal 
Busca  and  the  mission  to  Vienna  of  the  prelate  AlbanL 

AST.  4.  Tte  Pope  has  entrusted  the  command  of  his  troops  to 
Austrian  generals  and  officers  sent  by  the  court  of  Vienna. 

A*T.  5.  Hie  Pope  has  refused  to  answer  the  official  requests  to  open 
peace  negotiations  made  to  him  by  Citizen  Cacault,  Minister  of  the 
french  Republic. 

ART.  6.  He  treaty  of  armistice  has  therefore  been  violated  and 
infringed  by  the  Roman  court;  in  consequence,  I  declare  that  the 
armistice  concluded  on  2  Messidor  between  the  French  Republic  and 
dbe  court  of  Rome  is  broken. 

BONAPARTE 

212 
To  die  Executive  Directory 

H.Q.,  Bologna 

13  Pbmdse,  Year  V  (i  Feb,  1797) 

You  wffi  fiad  attached,  Citizen  Directors,  the  kiter  Marshal  Wurmser 
has  written  me.  I  replied  that  I  could  not  grant  the  capitulation  he 
asks,  and  that  so  far  as  he  is  concerned  I  will  allow  him  to  leave  with 
500  men  of  his  choke,  on  condition  that  they  do  not  serve  against  the 

171 

Republic  for  three  months,  but  that  the  rest  must  become  prisoners. 
I  gave  my  instructions  to  General  Serurier  and  left  for  Bologna. 

General  Serurier  has  just  informed  me  that  he  has  received  a  new 
intermediary  through  whom  [  Wurmser]  offers  die  fortress  on  condi- 
tion that  he  can  leave  with  his  garrison,  and  he  will  undertake  not  to 
serve  against  the  Republic  for  a  year,  I  am  going  to  tell  General  Scruricr 
that  I  hold  to  my  first  proposal  and  that  if  General  Wurmser  does  not 
accept  it  Before  die  1  5th  I  shall  withdraw  and  allow  him  no  capitulation 
other  than  as  a  prisoner  of  war  with  his  garrison. 

Today  I  have  had  General  Victor's  division  proceed  to  Imola,  the 
first  town  in  the  Papal  States.  You  will  find  attached  my  proclamation 
and  other  printed  pieces  for  the  occasion. 

If  we  go  as  far  as  Rome,  could  we  not  unite  Modena,  Ferrara  and  the 
Romagna  into  a  republic  which  would  be  sufficiently  strong?  Could 
we  not  give  Rome  to  Spain,  on  condition  that  she  guaranteed  the  new 
republic?  Then  we  could  restore  the  Milanese  and  Mantua  to  the 
Emperor  and  give  him  the  Duchy  of  Parma,  if  we  had  to  go  so  far  in 
order  to  bring  about  the  peace  we  need.  Ilie  Emperor  would  lose 
nothing,  Spain  would  gain  much  and  we  should  gain  even  more;  we 
would  have  a  natural  ally  in  Italy  which  would  become  powerful  and 
by  which  we  could  correspond  through  Massa-Cairara  with  the 
Adriatic. 

BONAPABIE 

213 
To  Major-General  Macquart 

H.Q.,  Botogiw 

13  Pluviose,  Year  V  (l  Feb,  1797) 

I  learn  with  regret,  Citizen  General,  that  you  are  leaving  the  Army 
of  Italy,  which,  reckoned  you  among  its  bravest.  When  you  read  of  our 
successes,  we  shall  still  be  thinking  of  you.  As  for  me  personally,  my 
good  wishes  will  accompany  you  in  your  honourable  retirement. 
You  will  always  find  me  ready  to  oblige  you, 

BONAPARTE 

214 
To  the  Executive  Directory 

H.Q.,  Faenza 

15  Pluviose,  Year  V  (5  Feb,  1797) 

...  I  have  been  at  pains  to  show  French  generosity  towards 
Wurmser,  a  seventy-year-old  general  to  whom  fortune  has  been  very 
cruel  this  campaign,  but  who  has  never  ceased  to  show  constancy  and 
courage  that  will  be  noted  by  history.  Surrounded  on  all  sides  at  the 
battle  of  Bassano,  losing  his  army  and  part  of  the  Tyrol  at  one  blow, 

172  The  Rise  to  Power 

he  yet  dared  hope  to  be  able  to  take  refuge  in  Mantua,  four  or  five 
days'  march  away;  he  passed  the  Adige,  overthrew  our  outposts  at 
Ccrea,  crossed  the  Molinella  and  readied  Mantua.  Shut  up  in  that 
town,  he  made  two  or  three  sorties;  all  were  unsuccessful,  but  he  was 
at  the  head  of  each.  Apart  from  the  very  considerable  obstacles  pre- 
sented by  our  lines  of  entrenchment,  bristling  with  guns,  which  he  had 
to  surmount,  he  had  to  act  with  soldiers  discouraged  by  so  many 
defeats  and  weakened  by  the  pestilential  sickness  of  Mantua.  All  those 
who  always  rush  to  sneer  at  misfortune  will  not  fail  to  persecute 
Wurmser. 

General  Serurier  and  General  Wurmser  should  yesterday  have  had 
a  conference  to  fix  the  date  of  execution  of  the  capitulation.  . . . 

BONAPARTE 

215 
To  the  Captain  Regent 

Republic  of  San  Marino  H.Q.,  Rimini 

17  Pluviose,  Year  V  (5  Feb,  1797) 

Sir,  the  Commander-in-Chief  of  the  Army  of  Italy,  Bonaparte,  has 
just  arrived  here;  he  learns  that  Monsignor  Ceretti,  Bishop  of  Rimini, 
has  withdrawn  onto  the  territory  of  your  Republic  after  having 
preached  violence  and  murder  against  the  French,  and  that  by  all 
accounts  he  has  abandoned  his  sacred  role  in  order  to  stir  up  the  people 
against  us.  Hie  Commander-in-chief  requires  and  expects,  as  a  result 
of  the  good  relations  which  should  exist  between  the  French  Republic 
and  yours,  that  as  soon  as  you  receive  this  letter  you  will  have  Mon- 
sigiK>r  Ceretti  arrested  with  all  the  effects  and  treasure  he  has  carried 
off  with  him. 

Tomorrow  morning  the  Commander-in-Chief  will  send  2,000  men 
to  fetch  him,  unless  you  prefer  to  said  Hm  here  yourself  under  a  sure 
escort  which  will  be  answerable  for  him.  If  he  is  not  at  San-Marino, 
he  is  at  Serraville.  I  await  your  reply  during  die  night,  Sir. 

Since  he  is  certain  of  Monsignor  Ceretti's  whereabouts,  General 
Bonaparte  requires  you  to  take  all  precautions  that  his  arrest  be  carried 
oat  ia  compile  secrecy  and  that  he  receive  no  warning  in  advance,  for 
the  responsibility  will  necessarily  fall  on  you. 

By  orJer  of  the  Commander-in-Chief 

216 
To  the  Executive  Directory 

H.Q.,  Ancona 

22  P&w&e,  Year  V  (10  Feb,  179?) 

Yoa  wiD  find  attached  the  capitulation  of  Mantua,  Citizen  Directors. 
Qsr  troops  occupied  tfae  citadel  on  die  1 5th  and  today  the  town  is 

entirely  evacuated  by  the  Austrians.  I  will  send  you  the  inventories  of 
the  artillery  and  engineers  and  the  roll  of  the  garrison  as  soon  as  they 
readh  me.  It  was  General  Serurier  who  besieged  Mantua  the  first  time; 
General  Kilmaine,  who  commanded  the  second  blockade,  has  rendered 
great  services;  it  was  he  who  ordered  the  fortification  of  San  Giorgio, 
which  has  since  served  us  so  well.  Tlie  garrison  has  eaten  5,000  horses, 
which  means  that  we  have  found  very  few,  I  request  the  rank  of 
brigadier-general  for  Citizen  Chasseloup,  commanding  the  engineers 
of  the  army.  He  besieged  the  casde  of  Milan  and  the  town  of  Mantua 
and  was  already  installing  the  breaching  batteries  when  I  ordered  the 
siege  to  be  raised;  during  the  campaign  he  has  fortified  Peschiera, 
Legnano  and  Pizzeghettone.  .  . . 

BONAPABTE 
217 
To  the  Executive  Directory 

HQ.,  Tokntino 

1  Ventose,  Yaar  V  (19  Ftb,  1797} 

The  committee  of  scholars  has  reaped  a  good  harvest  at  Ravenna, 
Rimini,  Pesaro,  Ancona,  Loretto  and  Perugia.  Joined  to  what  we  shall 
be  sending  from  Rome,  that  will  give  us  everything  of  beauty  in  Italy 
except  for  a  few  things  at  Turin  and  Naples. 

BONAPARTE 

218 
To  the  Executive  Directory 

H.Q.,  Tokntino 

l  Ventosc,  Year  V  (ip  Feb,  ijgj] 
You  will  find  attached,  Citizen  Directors,  the  treaty  of  peace  which 

has  just  been  concluded  between  the  French  Republic  and  the  Pope 

I  am  sending  my  aide-de-camp,  Mannont,  to  Rome;  he  will  bring 
bade  the  Pope's  ratification,  which  I  will  send  to  you  at  once. 
My  reasons  for  concluding  this  treaty  were: 

1.  It  is  better  to  have  three  provinces,  the  best  of  the  ecclesiastical 
states,  given  by  the  Pope,  than  to  have  all  his  states  subject  to  ratifica- 
tion at  the  general  peace,  whore  we  already  have  so  much  to  settle; 

2.  Because  the  King  of  Naples  seemed  determined  to  intervene; 

3.  Because  30  millions  are  worth  ten  times  more  to  us  than  Rome, 
where  we  should  not  have  got  5  millions,  everything  having  been 
packed  up  and  sent  to  Terracina; 

4.  Because  my  presence  with  the  army  is  essential; 

5.  Because  it  could  be  a  step  towards  general  peace. 

In  my  opinion  Rome,  once  deprived  of  Bologna,  Ferrara  and  the 
Romagna  and  of  the  30  millions  we  are  taking,  can  no  longer  exist; 
that  archaic  marhmr  will  break  down  of  its  own  accord. 

174  The  Rise  to  Power 

I  did  not  mention  religion,  because  it  is  clear  that  by  persuasion  and 
raising  their  hopes  we  can  make  these  people  do  many  tilings  that  will 
really  help  our  internal  tranquillity.  If  you  will  tell  me  your  intentions, 
I  will  work  on  this  and  make  such  approaches  to  the  court  of  Rome  as 
you  think  necessary. 

Letters  from  Venice  and  from  the  divisional  commanders  make  it 
clear  that  the  enemy  is  moving  and  that  Prince  Charles  has  reached 
Trieste,  I  leave  tonight  for  Mantua  and  Bassano.  I  may  begin  negotia- 
tions with  the  Venetians,  and  it  will  not  be  long  before  we  cross  the 
Have  and  put  our  plan  into  operation. 

General  Clarke,  who  has  just  left,  is  going  to  Turin  to  carry  out 
your  orders.  Our  secretary  of  the  embassy  at  Turin  has  no  standing 
nor  anything  to  excite  consideration.  In  general,  our  diplomatic 
agents  neglect  appearances  and  forms  too  much;  they  do  not  know 
what  is  going  on  and  are  generally  little  respected. 

Tlie  Republic  has  thus  acquired  without  doubt  the  best  part  of 
Italy:  Ferrara,  Bologna  and  the  Romagna.  It  is  possible  that  I  have 
been  mistaken  in  what  I  have  done;  but  I  cannot  be  accused  of  sacrific- 
ing the  interest  of  my  country  to  my  glory. .  . . 

I  request  the  post  of  minister  to  Rome  or  to  Florence  for  Citizen 
Cacault  and  the  other  of  these  posts  for  my  brother  [Joseph],  who  has 
the  necessary  talents,  bearing  and  dignity  and  a  proved  patriotism  and 
honesty. . . . 

I  will  send  you  immediately  the  ten  flags  we  have  taken  from  the 
Pope  in  various  actions. 

BONAPARTE 

219 
To  H  JL  Pope  Pius  VI 

H.Q.,  Totentino 

l  Ventose,  Year  V  (ip  Feb,  1797) 

Most  Holy  Father,  I  must  thank  Your  Holiness  for  the  kind  things 
contained  in  the  letter  Your  Holiness  has  deigned  to  write  me. 

Peace  between  the  French  Republic  and  the  court  of  Rome  has 
just  been  signed;  I  am  happy  to  have  been  able  to  contribute  towards 
Your  Holiaess's  personal  repose. 

I  beg  Your  Holiness  to  beware  of  those  at  Rome  who  are  sold  to 
tfee  enemies  offence  or  wbo  let  themselves  be  guided  by  those  hateful 
passions  wticfa  inevitably  lead  to  the  fall  of  states. 

Al  Europe  knows  Year  Holiaess's  pacific  animations  and  concilia- 
tory airo.  Hie  French  BjepaUk  wifl  be,  I  hope,  among  the  truest 
fekaadsof  Rome. 

[Marmont],  to  express  the 

175 

and  I  beg  to  express  my  desire  on  all  occasions  to  give  proo&  of  the 
respect  and  veneration  with  which  I  have  the  honour  to  be  Your 
Holiness's  most  obedient  servant. 

BONAPAftTE 
220 

To  Citizeness  Josephine  Bonaparte 

At  Bologna  H.Q.,  Tolcntino 

1  Ventcx,  Year  V  (ip  Feb,  1797) 

Peace  with  Rome  has  just  been  signed.  Bologna,  ftrrara  and  the 
Romagna  are  ceded  to  the  Republic.  Hie  Pope  will  shortly  be  giving 
us  30  millions  and  some  works  of  art. 

Tomorrow  I  leave  for  Ancona  and  from  there  for  Rimini,  Ravenna 
and  Bologna,  If  you  are  well  enough  come  to  Rimini  or  Ravenna;  but 
take  care  of  yourself,  I  beg  you. 

Not  a  word  from  you;  good  God!  What  have  I  done?  To  think 
only  of  you,  to  love  only  Josephine,  to  live  for  nothing  but  my  wife, 
to  enjoy  nothing  but  die  happiness  of  my  beloved,  does  all  that  earn 
me  soch  haish  treatment?  My  love,  please,  &tnlr  of  me  often  and  write 
to  me  every  day.  You  must  be  ill,  or  else  you  don't  love  me!  D  o  you 
think  my  heart  is  made  of  marble?  Are  you  really  so  uninterested  in  my 
worries?  You  can't  know  me  very  well!  But  I  can't  believe  it"  You, 
whom  Nature  has  given  such  intelligence,  gentleness  and  beauty,  you 
who  alone  can  rule  over  my  heart,  you  who  know  only  too  well,  Fm 
sure,  die  utter  mastery  you  have  over  me! 

Write  to  me,  think  of  me,  and  love  me, 

!  am  all  yours,  for  life. 

BONAPAfiTE 
221 

To  the  Army  of  Italy 

H.Q.,  Btss&to 
20  Ventese*  Yt&  V  (10  Mar,  1797) 

Hie  capture  of  Mantua  has  ended  a  campaign  which  has  given  you 
tides  to  the  eternal  gratitude  of  die  nation. 

You  have  won  victory  in  70  actions  and  14  pitched  battles;  you  have 
taken  more  than  100,000  prisoners,  500  field  pieces,  2,000  heavy  guns, 
A.  Dnclffinfi  tfd^TijST 

Hie  contributions  levied  on  die  lands  you  have  conquered  have  fed, 
paid  attrl  maintained  the  army  throughout  die  campaign;  in  addition, 
you  have  sent  30  millions  to  the  Minister  of  Finance  to  assist  the  public 
treasury*  You  have  enriched  tibe  Museum  of  Paris  widi  more  than  300 
masterpieces  of  a*yy*nt  and  modern  Italy  which  it  needed  thirty 
centuries  to  produce, 

ij6  The  Rise  to  Power 

You  have  conquered  the  finest  lands  of  Europe  for  the  Republic; 
the  Lombard  and  Cispadane  Republics  owe  their  liberty  to  you;  for 
the  first  time  the  French  colours  fly  on  the  coast  of  the  Adriatic, 
twenty-four  hours'  sailing  from  ancient  Macedonia;  the  Kings  of 
Sardinia  and  Naples,  the  Pope  and  the  Duke  of  Parma  have  left  the 
coalition  of  our  enemies  and  sought  our  friendship;  you  have  driven 
the  English  from  Leghorn,  Genoa  and  Corsica. 

But  you  have  not  yet  made  an  end;  one  great  destiny  is  reserved  to 
you;  in  you  the  nation  places  its  dearest  hopes;  you  will  continue  to  be 
worthy  of  them. 

Of  ail  the  enemies  who  conspired  to  crush  the  Republic  at  its  birth, 
the  Emperor  alone  remains  before  us.  Degrading  himself  from  the 
rank  of  a  great  power,  that  prince  has  placed  himself  in  the  pay  of  the 
merchants  of  London;  he  no  longer  has  any  policy  or  will  but  that  of 
those  perfidious  islanders,  who  smile  with  pleasure  at  the  ills  of  the 
continent  while  themselves  far  from  the  miseries  of  war. 

Tie  Executive  Directory  has  spared  nothing  to  bring  peace  to 
Europe;  the  moderation  of  its  proposals  did  not  reflect  the  strength  of 
its  armies;  it  did  not  consult  your  courage,  but  humanity  and  the  wish 
to  send  you  back  to  your  families.  It  was  not  harkened  to  in  Vienna. 
There  is  therefore  no  further  hope  for  peace  than  by  seeking  it  in  the 
heart  of  the  hereditary  states  of  the  House  of  Austria.  You  will  find 
there  a  brave  people  weighed  down  fay  the  present  war  and  the  war 
they  have  fought  against  the  Turks.  Tlie  inhabitants  of  Vienna  and  the 
Austrian  states  are  aghast  at  the  blindness  and  irresponsibility  of  their 
government;  there  is  not  one  who  is  not  convinced  that  English  gold 
has  corrupted  the  Emperor's  ministers.  You  will  respect  their  religion 
and  their  customs  and  protect  their  property.  You  will  bring  liberty  to 
the  brave  Hungarian  nation. 

In  every  war  for  three  centuries  the  House  of  Austria  has  lost  part  of 
its  power;  it  outrages  its  subjects  by  suppressing  their  privileges.  At  the 
end  of  this  sixth  campaign  (since  it  forces  us  to  make  it),  it  will  find 
itself  reduced  to  accepting  the  peace  that  we  shall  grant,  and  in  reality 
it  will  descend  to  the  rank  of  die  secondary  powers,  where  it  has  al  ready 
placed  itself  by  accepting  the  bribes  and  control  of  England. 

BONAPARTE 

222 
To  Citizen  Carnot 

Afca&er  <?f  the  Executive  Dfactory  H.Q.,  Gorizia 

5  Germinal,  Year  V  (25  Afar,  1797} 

I  am  sending  you  a  map  of  ftioli,  my  dear  Director,  since  you  may 
aot  have  any  at  Paris. 

As  you  see,  the  campaign  is  being  maintained.  Tomorrow  I  shall 
send  the  Directory  a  dispatch  with  news  of  the  advantages  we  have 
gained  on  the  left,  Joubert  and  Baraguey-d'Hilliers  have  surrounded 
everything  the  enemy  had  on  the  Avisio.  . .  But  since  the  next  day 
should  have  seen  us  in  Botzcn  and  completed  our  predominance  on 
that  side,  I  think  it  wise  that  you  should  not  spread  this  news  until  I 
inform  you  of  the  outcome  or  all  our  operations. 

Have  we  crossed  the  Rhine?  It  is  dear  that  in  four  or  five  days,  when 
my  movement  is  disclosed  and  the  enemy  sees  what  danger  he  is  in, 
they  will  more  or  less  abandon  the  Rhine  in  order  to  fall  upon  me.  If 
Moreau  does  not  then  march  against  the  enemy  with  aU  speed  so  as  to 
catch  and  hold  him  as  soon  as  possible,  I  shall  be  beaten  and  forced  to 
retire  into  Italy.  You  will  see  from  the  intercepted  letters  I  am  forward- 
ing that  the  enemy  hopes  to  open  the  campaign  on  the  Rhine  im- 
mediately; but  as  usual  they  have  made  their  plans  without  thinking 
what  we  can  do.  If  Prince  Charles  has  command  of  the  two  armies  of 
the  Rhine  and  of  Italy,  there  must  necessarily  be  unity  of  command 
on  our  side,  since  we  shall  be  in  Germany. 

As  I  foretold,  of  die  30,000  men  you  announced,  20,000  at  the  most 
have  reached  me.  If  I  had  20,000  more,  I  believe  I  would  be  in  Vienna 
in  a  fortnight  In  any  case,  if  fortune  is  not  unkind  to  us  and  the  Rhine 
is  quickly  crossed,  this  campaign  holds  out  great  hopes. 

My  plan  is  to  advance  on  KJage&fiirt  where  I  hope  to  be  in  three  or 
four  days. 

BONAPABTE 

223 
To  the  Mayor  of  Lienz 

H.Q.,  Villach 

S  Germinal,  Year  V  (28  Mar,  179  j) 

Tlie  Ckmmander-inrChief  Bonaparte,  Mayor,  is  distressed  to  see  the 
alarm  which  precedes  the  French  army.  Let  the  inhabitants  remain  calm 
and  have  no  fear  of  any  kind.  Tie  Commander-inrChief  will  protect 
your  religion,  your  persons,  your  property  and  your  customs. 

By  order  of  the  C0mmanJer-in-Chief 

224 

To  Field-Marshal  the  Archduke  Charles 
Grfc-C,  Austrian  Amy  H.Q.,  Ktyenjwrt 

11  Germinal,  Year  V  (31  Mar,  |/p7) 

Sir,  our  brave  soldiers  make  war,  yet  they  long  for  peace.  Has  not 
this  situation  lasted  for  six  years?  Have  we  not  killed  enough  and  done 
enough  harm  to  humanity?  Everywhere  it  is  crying  out,  Europe, 

178  The  Rise  to  Power 

which  took  up  arms  against  the  French  Republic,  has  laid  them  down. 
Your  nation  alone  remains,  yet  blood  will  flow  more  than  ever. 
Ttere  are  sinister  heralds  of  this  sixth  campaign,  and,  whatever  the 
outcome,  we  shall  kill  a  few  thousand  more  men  on  either  side;  but  in 
time  we  shall  have  to  agree,  since  everything  comes  to  an  end,  even 
the  passion  of  hatred. 

Tne  Executive  Directory  of  the  French  Republic  informed  H.M. 
the  Emperor  of  its  desire  to  end  the  war  which  is  laying  waste  the  two 
peoples:  the  intervention  of  the  court  of  London  prevented  it.  But  is 
there  no  hope  of  an  understanding,  and  must  we  continue  to  destroy 
ourselves  in  the  interests  of  a  country  which  is  spared  the  horrors  of 
war?  You,  Sir,  who  by  your  birth  are  so  dose  to  the  throne  and  above 
the  lesser  passions  that  often  guide  ministers  and  governments,  will  you 
not  decide  to  earn  the  title  of  the  true  saviour  of  Germany  and  bene- 
factor to  the  whole  of  humanity?  Do  not  think,  Sir,  that  I  mean  by 
that  to  imply  that  it  is  impossible  for  you  to  save  it  by  force  of  arms; 
but,  supposing  that  the  fortunes  of  war  turn  in  your  favour,  Germany 
will  be  none  the  less  ravaged.  As  for  myself  if  this  approach  that  I 
have  the  honour  to  rr»alrp  to  you  can  save  the  life  of  a  single  man,  I 
shall  be  prouder  of  the  civic  crown  I  would  deserve  than  of  the  sad 
glory  bestowed  by  military  success. 

Please  believe,  Sir,  the  feelings  of  respect  and  high  consideration  with 
which  I  am,  etc. 

BONAPARTE 

225 
To  Field-Marshal  the  Archduke  Charles 

C-iff-C.,  Austrian  Army  H.Q.,  Klagenjurt 

11  Germinal,  Year  V  (31  Mar,  1797} 

On  reaching  Klagenfurt  the  French  army  found  a.  great  many  sick 
and  wounded  of  your  army  abandoned  in  the  hospitals  to  French 
generosity. 

It  was  with  pain  and  surprise  that  we  saw  that  these  unfortunates 
wene  without  food,  while  the  stocks  of  flour  you  had  in  the  town  had 
been  burned.  General  Bonaparte's  first  care  has  been  to  procure  for 
your  skk  what  they  need,  which  must  inevitably  lay  a  burden  on  the 
inhabitants  of  the  town.  This  conduct  is  contrary  to  the  laws  of  war, 
fbt  in  leaving  m  your  sick  you  presumably  did  not  intend  to  deprive 
them  of  all  means  of  sustenance. 

Hie  ComTmmfa"4oM3faicC  who  believes  that  these  stores  were 
trailed  without  your  orders,  requires  me  to  inform  you  of  it  and  is 
convinced  that  in  future  you  will  give  orders  that  in  places  where  you 
am  obliged  to  leave  ski  the  st^^ 

By  order  of&e  Commander-in-Chief 

226 
To  the  People  of  Carinthia 

H.Q.,  Kkgcnfurt 
12  Germinal,  Year  V  (l  Apr,  1797) 

"The  French  army  is  not  entering  your  country  in  order  to  conquer 
it  or  to  change  your  religion,  beliefs  or  customs.  It  is  die  friend  of  all 
nations  and  particularly  of  the  brave  peoples  of  Germany. 

The  Executive  Directory  of  the  French  Republic  has  spared  no 
effort  to  put  an  end  to  the  calamities  desolating  the  continent  It 
resolved  to  take  the  first  step  and  to  send  General  Clarke  to  Vienna  as 
a  plenipotentiary  to  open  peace  negotiations;  but  the  court  of  Vienna 
refused  to  hear  him  and  even  declared  at  Vicenza  through  M.  de 
Saint-Vincent  that  it  recognized  no  French  Republic.  General  Clarke 
asked  for  a  passport  to  go  and  speak  to  the  Emperor  himself;  but  the 
ministers  at  Vienna  feared,  with  reason,  that  the  moderation  of  the 
proposals  he  was  instructed  to  make  would  incline  the  Emperor  to 
peace.  Corrupted  by  English,  gold,  those  ministers  betray  both 
Germany  and  their  prince  and  have  no  other  will  but  that  of  those 
perfidious  islanders  who  are  the  horror  of  all  Europe. 

People  of  Carinthia,  I  know  that  you  detest  as  much  as  we  do  both 
the  English,  who  alone  gain  from  the  present  war,  and  your  ministry, 
which  is  sold  to  them.  If  we  have  been  at  war  for  six  years,  it  is  against 
the  wish  of  the  brave  Hungarians,  of  the  enlightened  citizens  of  Vienna 
and  of  the  good  and  simple  people  of  Carinthia. 

So,  despite  England  and  the  ministers  of  the  court  of  Vienna,  let  us 
be  friends!  Hie  French  Republic  has  the  rights  of  conquest  over  you; 
but  let  them  disappear  before  a  contract  binning  us  both.  You  will  not 
meddle  in  a  war  you  do  not  support;  you  will  furnish  such  provisions 
as  we  may  need.  For  my  part  I  will  protect  your  religion,  customs  and 
property ;  I  will  levy  no  contribution  from  you.  War  is  horrible  enough 
by  itself.  Innocent  victims  of  the  stupidities  of  others,  are  you  not 
already  suffering  too  much?  All  the  taxes  you  normally  paid  to  the 
Emperor  will  serve  to  compensate  you  for  the  damage  inseparable  from 
the  march  of  an  army  and  to  pay  for  the  pro  v^  . , . 

BONAPARTE 

227 
To  Generals  BeUegarde  and  Merveldt 

Representatives  of  the  ArtMuhc  Charks  H.Q.,  Judenkrg 

18  Germinal,  Year  V  (7  Apr,  1797} 

In  view  of  the  military  position  of  the  two  armies  an  armistice  is 
quite  contrary  to  the  interest  of  the  French  army;  but  if  it  will  be  a 
step  towards  die  peace  so  much  desired  and  needed  by  the  two  peoples, 
I  agree  willingly  to  your  request. 

iSo  The  Rise  to  Power 

The  French  Republic  has  often  shown  its  desire  to  put  an  end  to  this 
cruel  struggle.  It  still  has  the  same  feelings,  and,  after  the  conference  I 
have  had  the  honour  to  have  with  you,  I  do  not  doubt  that  peace  will 
soon  be  restored  between  the  French  Republic  and  His  Majesty. 

I  beg  you  to  believe  the  feelings  of  esteem  and  high  consideration 
with  which,  etc. 

BONAPARTE 

228 
To  Citizen  Fauvelet  de  Bourrienne 

H.Q.,Judenburg 

ip  Germinal,  Year  V  (S  Apr,  1797) 

Citizen  Fauvelet  de  Bourrienne  is  ordered  to  leave  Sens  and  proceed 
at  once  by  mail-coach  to  the  headquarters  of  the  Army  of  Italy.* 

BONAPARTE 

229 
To  the  Doge  of  Venice 

H.Q.,  Judenburg 

20  Germinal,  Year  V  (p  Apr,  l/p/) 

All  the  mainland  of  the  Most  Serene  Republic  of  Venice  is  in  arms. 
Everywhere  the  rallying  cry  of  the  peasants  you  have  armed  is:  'Death 
to  the  French!'  Several  hundred  soldiers  of  the  Army  of  Italy  have 
already  fallen  victim.  It  is  vain  for  you  to  disavow  the  bands  you  have 
organized.  Do  you  believe  that  because  I  am  in  the  heart  of  Germany 
I  am  unable  to  make  the  first  nation  on  earth  respected?  Do  you  believe 
the  legions  of  Italy  will  tolerate  the  massacre  you  have  inspired?  Hie 
Hood  of  my  brothers  in  arms  will  be  avenged,  and  there  is  no  French 
battalion  that  will  not  feel  its  courage  doubled  and  its  powers  trebled 
when  entrusted  with  so  noble  a  task .  Hie  Venetian  Senate  has  answered 
die  chivalrous  treatment  we  have  always  accorded  it  by  the  blackest 
perfidy.  I  am  sending  you  my  first  aide-de-camp  as  bearer  of  this  letter. 
Peace  or  war.  If  you  do  not  immediately  take  steps  to  disperse  the 
bands,  if  you  do  not  have  arrested  and  delivered  to  me  the  authors  of 
die  mtmkrs  that  have  been  committed,  then  war  is  declared.  The 
Turk  is  not  on  your  frontiers,  no  enemy  threatens  you;  you  have 

*  Tltis  order,  which  was  accompanied  by  a  friendly  letter  from  Mannont,  then 
die  CommaTv^-m-Cbiers  aide-de-camp,  was  required  to  rekase  Bourrienne 
from  die  restrictions  as  to  residence  legally  imposed  cm  Him  as  a  returned  emi- 
grant. A  companion  of  Bonaparte  at  Brienne  and  later  in  Pads,  Bourienne  bad 
acoocdbig  to  his  own  Memoirs,  first  been  invited  to  join  him  in  June,  1796,  but 
had  not  done  so  partly  through  disincHnaticsi,  partly  as  a  result  of  legal  difficulties, 
Be  did  so  aow,  reaching  H.Q.  on  19  ApriL  He  was  at  once  appointed  to  be 
Bonaparte's  private  secretary,  a  post  which  he  held  continuously  until  dismissed 
for  ftnanda}  chicanery  in  the  autumn  of  1802. 

181 

i  to  justify  a  rising  directed  against  die  army; 
it  will  be  dissolved  within  twenty-four  hours.  This  is  no  longer  the 
rime  of  Charles  VTIL  If,  against  the  dear  wish  of  the  French  Govern- 
ment, you  force  me  to  make  war,  do  not  think  that  the  French  soldiers 
will  fellow  the  example  of  those  you  have  armed  and  ravage  die  lands 
of  the  unfortunate  and  innocent  people  of  the  mainland;  I  will  protect 
them,  and  one  day  they  will  bless  the  very  crimes  that  wiH  have 
driven  the  French  to  remove  them  from  your  tyrannous  government. 

BONAPAITE 

230 
To  the  Executive  Directory 

H.Q.,  Leoben 

27  Germinal,  Year  V  (16  Apr,  1707) 

I  am  sending  you  by  Adjutant-general  Leclerc  some  very  important 
despatches  on  the  situation  of  the  army  and  the  negotiations  we  have 
begun;  he  will  give  you  verbally  all  the  details  I  may  have  forgotten. 
While  crossing  Germany  he  will  be  able  to  see  the  enemy's  troop 
movements  and  to  inform  Generals  Hoche  and  Moreau  of  them  when 
he  reaches  the  Rhine.  Please  send  him  back  to  me  at  once.  All  the 
officers  I  send  to  Paris  stay  there  too  long;  they  spend  their  money  and 
lose  themselves  in  pleasure. 

I  am  sending  you  a  captain  of  hussars  who  has  seen  eighty  years  of 
service*  with  several  flags  taken  from  the  enemy. 

BONAPARTE 

231 
To  the  Executive  Directory 

H.Q.,  Leoben 
27  Germinal,  Year  V  (16  Apr,  1797) 

General  Merveldt  came  to  see  me  at  Leoben  at  9.0  a.m.  on  the  24th. 
After  seeing  his  full  powers  to  treat  for  peace  we  agreed  to  prolong 
the  armistice  until  the  evening  of  20  ApnL  The  full  powers  were  for 
him  and  the  Marquess  of  Gallo,  Neapolitan  minister  to  Vienna.  I  at 
first  refused  to  admit  M.  Gallo  as  a  plenipotentiary  of  die  Emperor, 
since  he  is  the  ambassador  of  a  friendly  power,  which  is  incompatible 
with  the  other  rok.  On  die  25th  he  himself  arrived,  and  I  thought  it 
best  not  to  persist  in  my  opposition  since  it  would  have  meant  much 
delay  and  he  seems  to  have  die  confidence  of  the  Emperor.  Also  die 
Austrians  and  Hungarians  are  very  irritated  at  seeing  foreigners  play 
the  principal  part  in  so  important  an  afiair,  and  if  we  break  with  diem, 
that  will  be  a  powerful  means  of  rousing  discontent  against  die  govern- 
ment of  Vienna, 

*  Captain  Jantzoo,  Eighty  was  his  age;  be  bad  been  sixty  years  with  the  colours. 

182  The  Rise  to  Power 

Tlfc  first  matter  raised  was  a  reciprocal  promise  not  to  divulge  what- 
ever might  be  said.  A  clause  was  drawn  up;  but  as  these  gentlemen 
stand  on  etiquette  they  wished  always  to  put  the  Emperor  before  the 
Republic,  which  I  flatly  refused.  * 

We  passed  to  the  article  on  recognition,  and  I  told  them  that  the 
French  Republic  had  no  wish  to  be  recognized;  it  is  to  Europe  what 
the  sun  is  to  the  sky,  and  so  much  the  worse  for  anyone  who  does  not 
want  to  look  at  it  and  benefit  from  it. 

They  told  me  that,  even  if  negotiations  were  to  be  broken  off,  the 
Emperor  would  recognize  the  French  Republic  from  today,  on 
condition  that  the  Republic  adopts  the  same  etiquette  towards  the 
Emperor  as  the  former  King  of  France.  I  replied  that  since  we  are 
quite  indifferent  to  matters  of  etiquette  there  would  be  no  quarrel  over 
this  article.  Thereafter  we  had  an  exploratory  discussion  in  afl  directions. 

On  the  26th  M.  Gallo  came  to  me  at  eight  in  the  morning.  He  said 
he  wished  to  neutralize  some  spot  where  we  could  continue  our  COEH 
ferences  in  proper  form.  A  garden  with  a  pavilion  was  chosen,  and  we 
declared  it  neutral,  a  farce  I  was  quite  willing  to  go  through  to  satisfy 
these  people's  puerile  vanity.  This  so-called  neutral  spot  is  surrounded 
by  the  French  army  and  in  the  midst  of  our  bivouacs;  it  would  all  have 
been  right  and  proper  had  it  lain  between  the  two  armies.  Arrived  on 
neutral  territory,  we  began  negotiations;  this  was  the  result, 

1.  Hie  cession  of  Belgium  and  recognition  of  the  frontiers  of  the 
Republic  as  laid  down  fay  the  decree  of  the  Convention;  but  they 
demand  compensations  which  they  necessarily  seek  in  Italy. 

2.  Itey  demand  the  restitution  of  the  Milanese;  so  that  as  a  result  of 
the  first  article  they  wish  for  the  Milanese  and  some  part  of  the  states 
of  Venice  or  the  Legations.  If  I  was  prepared  to  accept  this  proposal, 
they  had  the  power  to  sign  at  once.  Tie  arrangement  did  not  appear  to 
me  to  be  possible. ...  In  the  end  we  drew  up  three  alternative  projects 
whkh  they  have  sent  to  Vienna;  they  will  have  a  reply  in  a  few  days. 

If  one  of  these  projects  is  accepted  by  Vienna,  the  preliminaries  of 
peace  will  be  signed  by  i  floreaL  If  not,  since  the  armies  on  the  Rhine 
have  still  made  no  move,  I  shall  propose  a  simple  armistice  for  the 
three  armies  for  three  months,  during  which  negotiations  can  be 
earned  on.  Meanwhile  we  would  fortify  Klagenfurt  and  Graz,  bring 
up  munitions  and  organize  the  army  perfectly.  You  would  have  time 
to  sesid  40,000  mea  from  the  Army  of  the  RJbine  and  you  would  then 
have  a  very  considerable  army  here  whose  presence  alone  would  force 
the  Emperoc  to  even  greater  sacrifices. 

If  none  of  this  is  accepted,  we  will  fight.  If  the  Army  of  the  Sambre 
and  Meuse  is  on  the  march  by  the  2Oth  it  can  strike  heavy  blows  and 
be  on  the  Rednitz  daring  the  first  days  of  next  month;  the  best  generals 
and  troops  arc  opposite  me.  If  there  is  the  will  to  take  the  field,  nothing 

183 

can  stop  it,  and  never  in  the  history  of  military  operations  has  a  river 
been  a  real  obstacle.  If  Moreau  wants  to  cross  the  Rhine,  he  will  cross 
it.  If  he  had  already  crossed  it  without  raising  difficulties  we  should  now 
be  in  a  position  to  dictate  conditions  of  peace  imperiously  and  without 
any  risk;  but  whoever  is  afraid  of  losing  his  glory  is  certain  to  lose  it. 
I  crossed  the  Julian  and  None  Alps  over  three  feet  of  ice;  I  sent  my 
artillery  over  tracks  where  wagons  had  never  been  and  everyone 
believed  it  impossible.  Had  I  cared  only  for  the  safety  of  the  army  and 
my  own  personal  interests,  I  should  have  stopped  beyond  the  Isonzo; 
I  broke  into  Germany  to  relieve  our  armies  on  die  Rhine  and  prevent 
the  enemy  taking  the  offensive  there;  I  am  at  the  gates  of  Vienna,  and 
that  proud  and  insolent  court  has  sent  plenipotentiaries  to  my  head- 
quarters. The  armies  on  the  Rhine  cannot  have  much  blood  in  their 
veins.  If  they  do  not  support  me  I  shall  return  to  Italy  and  all  Europe 
will  judge  the  different  conduct  of  the  two  armies;  then  they  will  have 
all  the  forces  of  the  Emperor  on  their  backs,  they  will  be  overcome,  and 
it  will  be  their  fault. 

BONAPAfiTE 

232 
Order  of  the  Day 

Army  of  My  H.Q.,  Leoben 

28  Germinal,  Year  V  (17  Apr,  1797) 

The  Commander-in-Chief  has  ordered  that  the  Divisional  Order  of 
14  and  15  Germinal  of  General  Bernadotte,  concerning  female  camp- 
followers  ia  his  Division,  be  placed  on  the  General  Orders  of  the  Army. 

*Afl  women,  unless  authorized  to  remain,  must  leave  the  divisional 
area  within  twenty-four  hours:  foiling  which  battalion  commanders 
will  ensure  that  they  are  arrested,  smeared  with  black  and  exposed  in 
public  for  a  period  of  two  hours.  The  Commander-in^Chief  is  in- 
formed that  the  disorders  occurring  are  caused  by  these  detestable 
women,  who  encourage  the  soldiers  to  pillage.' 

By  order  of  the  Commander-in-Chief 

233 
Order  of  the  Day 

Army  of  My  H.Q.,  Leobcn 

30  Germinal  Year  V  (ip  Apr,  1797} 

Ite  army  is  informed  that  at  3.0  p.m.  yesterday,  29  Germinal, 
preliminaries  of  peace  between  die  French  Republic  and  the  King 
Emperor  were  signed  at  die  headquarters  at  Leoben  by  Major-General 
Count  von  Mcrvddt  and  the  Marquess  of  Gallo,  die  plenipotentiaries 
of  the  Emperor,  and  by  General  Bonaparte,  ConHnan^HnrCiieC  for 
die  ftench  Republic. 

Ey  order  of  the  CommmJer-m-Gkief 

iB4  The  Rise  to  Power 

234 
To  Major-General  Delmas 

G.O.C.,  7th  Division,  Army  of  Italy  H.Q.,  Leoben 

1  Floral,  Year  V  (20  Apr,  ijgi] 

The  Commander-in-Chief  has  learnt  that  you  have  had  several 
soldiers  beaten  with  a  cane.  As  this  punishment  is  quite  contrary  to  our 
principles  and  to  the  methods  of  discipline  in  the  Army  of  Italy,  you 
arc  directed  to  conform  with  both. 

By  order  of  the  Commander-in-Chief 

235 
Order  of  the  Day 

Army  of  Italy  H.Q.,  Palma 

5  Floral,  Year  V  (24  Apr,  1797) 

Yesterday  the  Commander-in-Chief  inspected  the  division  com- 
manded by  General  Serurier.  He  records  his  satisfaction  with  the  keen- 
ness and  precision  of  the  soldiers  in  executing  manoeuvres;  but  it  is 
painful  to  him  not  to  be  able  to  give  the  same  praise  to  all  those  who 
command  them.  In  general,  officers  do  not  give  the  firm,  clear  orders 
on  which  the  precision  and  effectiveness  of  movements  depend. . . . 
Brigadier-General  Charton  commanded  his  brigade  with  indecision. 
In  consequence  the  Commander-in-Chief  orders  that  this  officer  shall 
remain  one  month  at  the  rear  of  the  division;  he  will  not  take  command 
of  the  brigade  unless  he  is  recognized  to  have  acquired  the  necessary 
training.  ... 

The  army  is  warned  that  the  Cbmmander-in-Chief  will  hold 
frequent  inspections  and  will  designate  officers  indiscriminately  to 
command  brigades,  battalions  and  companies. 

By  order  of  the  Commander-in-Chief 

236 
To  the  Executive  Directory 

H.Q.,  Trieste 

11  Floral  Year  V  (30  Apr,  1797) 

Hie  Venetians  are  behaving  worse  every  day,  and  in  practice  war  has 
been  declared;  the  murder  of  Citizen  Laugier,  commander  of  the  picket 
boat  iterator  of  Italy,  i$  the  most  atrocious  event  of  the  century. 

Citizen  Laugier  sailed  from  Trieste  and  was  met  by  the  Emperor's 
flotilla  of  eight  oc  tea  sloops;  he  fought  them  for  part  of  the  day  and 
then  sought  refiige  under  the  guns  of  Venice.  There  he  was  received 
with  case  shot  from  the  fort.  He  ordered  his  ere w  into  the  hold  while  he 
asked  witt  his  megaphone  why  he  was  being  treated  as  an  enemy;  but 
at  that  moment  a  bullet  threw  him  to  die  deck  stone  dead.  A  sailor 
m  the  water  was  pursued  and  killed  with  oars. 

My  IBs 

This  is  but  a  specimen  of  what  is  happening  daily  on  the  mainland. 
By  the  time  you  read  this  letter  the  mainland  will  be  ours,  and  I  shall 
make  some  examples  that  will  be  remembered  there.  As  for  Venice, 
I  have  ordered  that  all  Venetian  ships  at  Trieste  and  Ancona  should  be 
sequestrated  at  once;  there  are  several  here  chartered  for  America  on 
which  a  high  value  is  placed,  as  well  as  some  fifty  others.  I  cannot 
believe  Lallemcnt  will  find  it  within  his  dignity  to  remain  in  Venice, 
like  ML  Quirini  at  Paris. 

If  French  blood  is  to  be  respected  in  Europe,  if  you  do  not  want  it  to 
be  treated  lightly,  the  example  of  Venice  must  be  terrible;  we  must  have 
blood;  the  noble  Venetian  admiral  who  presided  over  this  assassination 
must  be  publicly  executed. 

M.  Quirini  will  try  to  intrigue  in  Paris;  but  the  facts  and  the  infamous 
treachery  of  the  Venetians,  who  sought  to  murder  the  rear  of  the  army 
while  we  were  in  Germany,  are  too  notorious.  I  reckon  that  they  have 
already  killed  more  than  400  of  our  soldiers.  .  .  . 

The  Senate  sent  a  deputation  to  me  at  Graz;  I  treated  it  as  it  deserved, 
They  asked  me  what  I  wanted,  I  told  them  to  set  at  liberty  all  those  they 
have  arrested:  these  are  the  richest  men  of  the  mainland,  whom  they 
suspect  of  being  our  friends,  because  they  received  us  well;  to  disarm 
all  die  peasants;  to  disband  part  of  their  Slavonians,  since  excessive 
armament  is  useless;  to  <fcsmjss  the  English  minister,  who  has  fomented 
these  troubles  and  is  the  first  to  parade  the  lion  of  Saint-Mark  on  his 
gondola  now  that  they  are  murdering  us  ...  to  hand  over  to  us  all 
merchandise  belonging  to  the  English;  to  arrest  those  who  have 
murdered  Frenchmen,  or  at  least  the  principal  Venetian  nobles.  .  .  * 

BONAPARTE 

To  the  Envoys  of  the  Venetian  Senate 

H.Q.,  Trieste 

11  Fhrfal  Year  V  (30  Apr,  1797} 

I  have  read  your  letter  regarding  the  murder  of  Laugier,  Gentlemen, 
only  with  indignation.  You  increase  the  gravity  of  that  outrage*  un- 
exampled in  the  history  of  modern  nations,  by  the  tissue  of  lies  your 
Government  has  invented  to  justify  itsd£ 

I  cannot  receive  you,  Gentlemen;  you  and  your  Senate  drip  with 
French  blood.  When  you  have  placed  in  my  hands  the  admiral  who 
gave  the  order  to  fire,  die  commander  of  the  tower  and  the  inquisitors 
who  control  the  Venetian  police,  I  will  hear  your  explanations.  You 
will  [lease  leave  die  soil  offcaly  widiout  delay. 

If,  however,  the  mail  that  you  have  just  received  concerns  the 
Laugier  afiair,  you  may  attend  at  my  headquarters. 

BONAPARTE 

186  The  Rise  to  Power 

238 
To  Citizen  Lallement 

French  Minister  to  Venice  H.Q.,  Palmanwa 

11  Flortal,  Year  V  (30  Apr,  1797) 

French  blood  has  flowed  in  Venice,  yet  you  are  still  there!  Are  you 
waiting  to  be  driven  out?  Frenchmen  can  no  longer  walk  in  the 
streets  and  are  insulted  and  maltreated,  and  you  remain  a  simple 
spectator !  Since  the  army  has  been  in  Germany  more  thgn  400  French- 
men have  been  murdered  on  the  mainland,  the  fortress  of  Verona  was 
besieged  and  relieved  only  after  a  bloody  fight,  and,  despite  all  that,, 
you  stay  in  Venice!  I  myself  have  refused  to  hear  the  deputies  from 
die  Senate  because  they  are  dripping  with  the  blood  of  Laugier,  and  I 
will  never  see  them  unless  they  first  have  the  admiral  and  the  inquisitors 
who  ordered  that  massacre  arrested  and  placed  in  our  hands.  I  well 
know  that  they  will  try  to  divert  the  vengeance  of  the  Republic  onto  a 
few  miserable  agents  who  have  carried  out  their  atrocities,  but  we  shall 
not  bedeceivecL 

Write  a  short  note  worthy  of  the  greatness  of  the  nation  you 
represent  and  of  the  outrages  it  has  suffered;  then  leave  Venice  and 
come  and  join  me  at  Mantua. 

They  have  done  none  of  the  things  I  demanded.  They  should  have 
released  all  the  prisoners  they  have  taken  since  the  French  army  has  been 
in  Italy  and  not  simply  one,  as  they  have  done. 

BONAPABTE 

239 
To  the  Executive  Directory 

H.Q,,  Palmanova 
12  Floreal,  Year  V  (i  May,  1797) 

I  have  just  received  news  of  the  Cispadane  Republic.  Their  choice 
has  been  very  bad.  Priests  have  influenced  all  the  elections;  cardinals 
and  bishops  have  come  from  Rome  expressly  to  direct  the  people's 
choice;  they  see  well  enough  that  their  hopes  now  rest  only  on  their 
influence  in  the  Legislative  Corps. 

like  iombardy,  Ac  Cispadane  Republic  needs  a  provisional  govera- 
nacnt  for  three  or  four  years,  during  which  the  influence  of  the  priests 
cm.  be  iessGoeel;  odierwise,  you  will  have  done  nothing  by  giving  it 
liberty,  in  die  villages  they  dictate  the  lists  and  control  all  elections, 
Howserrav  in  conformity  with  your  orders  and  the  treaties,  I  shall  start 
by  joining  Lombardy  and  die  Cispadane  under  a  single  provisional 
gOTOnfrtiKfrtf.  Thereafter  I  shall  take  steps  in  harmony  with  their  customs 
&>  enlighten  opinion  and  lessen  the  influence  of  the  priests. 

BONAPARTE 

187 

240 
To  the  Executive  Directory 

Mestrf 
14  Fbrftl,  Year  V  (?  May,  1797) 

I  have  just  had  news  from  Verona.  .  .  . 

As  soon  as  I  had  passed  the  Carinthian  gorges  the  Venetians  thought 
I  was  trapped  in  Germany  and  that  cowardly  government  planned  a 
Sicilian  vespers.  In  the  city  and  on  the  mainland  they  ran  to  arms.  The 
Senate  encouraged  the  priests  to  preach  a  crusade  against  us.  A  horde  of 
Slavonians,  many  guns  and  more  than  150,000  muskets  were  sent  to  the 
mainland.  .  .  .  M.  Pesaro  was  sent  to  me  at  Gorizia  to  try  to  mislead 
me  about  these  arms.  But  I  had  reason  to  distrust  their  atrocious  policies, 
which  I  had  already  got  to  know:  !  declared  that,  if  these  arms  were 
simply  to  bring  order  to  the  towns,  they  could  cease,  since  I  would 
undertake  that,  if  they  would  ask  for  the  mediation  of  the  Republic, 
I  would  bring  the  towns  to  order.  .  .  . 

On  30  Germinal  considerable  Venetian  forces  cut  the  communica- 
tions between  Verona  and  Porto-Legnano.  Several  of  my  couriers  were 
murdered  and  the  dispatches  taken  to  Venice.  More  than  2,000  were 
arrested  on  the  mainland  and  thrown  into  the  dungeons  of  Saint- 
Mark:  all  whom  the  inquisitors  suspected  of  supporting  us.  — 

As  soon  as  I  got  wind  of  what  was  afoot;  i  realized  the  consequences. 
I  gave  General  Kilmaine  command  of  all  Italy.  I  ordered  General 
Vktor  to  move  his  division  fay  forced  marches  into  Venetian  territory. 
...  I  at  once  sent  General  Baragucy-d'Hilliers  there.  ...  1  sent  my 
aide-de-camp,  Junot,  to  Venice  and  wrote  to  the  Senate  the  letter  of 
which  I  have  sent  you  a  copy,* 

Meanwhile  they  had  managed  to  assemble  40,000  armed  ra^n  at 
Verona  and,  at  a  signal  of  several  strokes  of  the  great  bell,  they  set  upon 
all  die  Frendi  and  butchered  them-  Some  were  thrown  into  die  Adige; 
others,  wounded  and  bleeding,  escaped  into  the  fortress,  which  I  had 
long  ago  taken  care  to  repair  and  arm. 

You  will  find  enclosed  General  Balland's  report  ;  you  will  see  that  on 
this  occasion  as  on  so  many  others  the  soldiers  of  the  Army  of  Italy 
covered  themselves  with  glory.  In  the  end,  after  six  days  of  siege,  they 
were  relieved  through  the  steps  taken  by  General  Kilmaioe  ----  At  the 
gam**  time,  at  Venice  they  were  assassinating  Langicr.  ...  So  many 
outrages  and  murders  will  not  go  unpunished;  but  it  is  above  all  for 
you  and  die  Legislative  Corps  to  avenge  the  French  name  in  a  resound- 
ing way.  After  such  horrible  treachery  I  see  no  other  course  than  to 
•wipe  die  name  of  Venice  fiom  die  surface  of  the  earrk  It  will  take  die 
blood  of  all  the  Venetian  nobility  to  appease  die  shades  of  due  French- 
men they  have  had  butchered,  .  .  . 

i88  The  Risf  to  Power 

As  soon  as  I  reach  Trcviso  I  will  have  work  started  on  rafts  so  that  we 
can  force  the  lagoons  and  chase  those  nobles  from  Venice  itself.  .  .  . 

During  Holy  Week  and  Easter  Day  the  bishop  of  Verona  preached 
that  to  kill  Frenchmen  is  meritorious  and  agreeable  to  God.  If  I  catch 
him  I  will  punish  him  in  exemplary  fashion. 

BONAPARTE 

241 
To  the  Bishop  of  Gome 

Milan 
17  Flortal,  Year  V  (6  May,  1797} 

Sir,  I  have  received  the  letter  you  have  taken  the  trouble  to  write  to 
me,  together  with  the  two  broadsheets.  I  notice  with  displeasure  the 
device  that  with  misplaced  patriotic  zeal  has  been  placed  at  the  head  of 
one  of  these.  As  you  well  observe,  ministers  of  religion  should  never 
meddle  in  politics;  they  should  adhere  to  their  true  role,  which,  in 
accordance  with  the  spirit  of  the  Gospel,  must  be  pacific,  tolerant  and 
conciliatory.  You  can  rest  assured  that,  while  continuing  to  hold  this 
view,  the  French  Republic  will  not  permit  any  disturbance  of  the 
practice  of  religion  or  of  the  peace  of  ministers. 

TTirow  water,  never  oil,  on  human  passions;  dispel  prejudice  and 
combat  with  vigour  those  false  priests  who  have  degraded  religion  by 
making  it  the  tool  of  ambitious  men  and  kings. 

Tie  ethic  of  die  Gospel  is  that  of  equality  and  therefore  it  is  favour- 
able to  the  republican  form  of  government  that  your  country  will 
henceforth  have.  I  beg  you,  Sir,  to  believe  the  sentiments,  etc. 

BONAPARTE 

242 
To  the  Executive  Directory 

Milan 
ip  Floreal,  Year  V  (S  May,  1797) 

I  left  Palmanova  on  12  Floreal  and  went  to  Mestre.  I  have  had  the 
divisions  of  Generals  Victor  and  Baraguey-d'Hilliers  occupy  all  tie 
extremities  of  the  lagoons.  I  am  now  not  far  from  Venice  and  am 
preparing  to  enter  it  in  force  if  matters  are  not  settled.  I  have  driven  all 
Venetians  off  the  mainland  which  we  are  now  occupying  completely. 
Hie  people  are  showing  great  joy  at  being  delivered  from  the  Venetian 
aristocracy.  The  lion  of  St.  Mark  is  no  more. 

When  I  was  oa  the  edge  of  the  lagoons  three  deputies  from  the 
Grand  Council  arrived  with  full  powers  to  settle  all  differences;  they 
diotight  I  was  still  in  Germany.  I  had  General  Berthier  answer  them 
witt  the  attached  letter.  I  have  just  received  a  further  deputation. 

The  inquisitors  have  been  arrested;  die  commander  of  the  lido 

fort,  who  killed  Laugier,  has  been  arrested;  the  whole  Governing  Body 
has  been  dismissed  by  the  Grand  Council,  which  has  announced  its 
intention  of  renouncing  its  sovereignty  and  setting  up  a  form  of 
government  to  be  chosen  by  me.  I  intend  to  set  up  a  democracy  and  to 
send  3,000  or  4,000  troops  into  Venice.  I  think  it  is  now  essential  that 
you  dismiss  M.  Quirini. 

Now  that  I  know  Hoche  and  Morcau  have  crossed  the  Rhine  I  am 
sorry  this  did  not  happen  a  fortnight  sooner,  or  at  least  that  Moreau  did 
not  tell  me  he  was  in  a  position  to  do  so. 

Our  military  position  is  as  good  as  ever.  I  still  occupy  Klagenfurt, 
Gorizia  and  Trieste.  The  Venetian  peasants  arc  disarmed,  and  our 
opponents  are  everywhere  under  arrest  and  our  friends  in  power.  Hie 
fortifications  of  Palxnanova  are  being  pushed  ahead  unceasingly. 

Please  designate  Friuli  as  the  area  where  the  Austrians  should  deliver 
the  French  prisoners  to  us.  We  shall  return  their  prisoners  only  as  they 
return  ours. 

The  choice  of  members  of  the  Directory  of  the  Cisalpine  is  pretty 
bad;  it  was  made  in  my  absence  and  was  completely  influenced  by  the 
priests.  But  since  Modena  and  Bologna  are  to  form  a  single  republic 
with  Milan,  I  have  suspended  the  Government  and  am  having  prepared 
here,  by  four  different  committees,  all  the  military,  civil,  financial  and 
administrative  laws  that  must  accompany  the  Constitution.  In  the  first 
instance  I  shall  myself  make  all  appointments,  and  I  hope  that  in  three 
weeks  the  new  Italian  Republic  will  be  completely  organized  and  able 
to  stand  on  its  own  feet, 

My  first  act  has  been  to  recall  all  those  who  had  left  for  fear  of  the 
outcome  of  the  war.  I  have  instructed  the  administration  to  be  cor*- 
tiliatory  and  to  suppress  hatreds.  I  am  cooling  the  hot-heads  and 
wanning  the  cold.  I  hope  that  the  inestimable  gift  of  liberty  will  give 
this  people  a  new  energy  and  enable  it  to  help  the  French  Republic 
substantially  in  such  future  wars  as  we  may  have. 

BONAPARTE 

243 
To  the  Executive  Directory 

Mombfllo 

jo  FforAJ,  Year  V  (ig  May,  1797) 

You  will  find  attached  the  treaty  I  have  made  with  Venice,  as  a 
result  of  which  5,000  to  <5,ooo  men  under  General  Baraguey  d'Hilliers 
occupied  die  town  on  the  27th.  I  had  several  aims  in  concluding  it: 

1.  To  enter  die  town  without  difficulty. . * . 

2.  To  put  us  in  a  position  to  turn  all  the  efforts  of  Venice  to  our 
advantage  if  die  treaty  of  peace  with  die  Emperor  is  delayed 

4.  To  curb  what  might  be  said  in  Europe,  since  it  is  laid  down  that 

190  The  Rise  to  Power 

our  occupation  of  Venice  is  only  a  momentary  operation  and  a  pro- 
tective measure  requested  by  Venice  itself. 

Hie  Pope  i$  very  sick  and  is  eighty-three  years  old. . . ,  What  poiky 
should  !  adopt  if  he  dies? 

The  Genoese  are  crying  out  for  democracy;  the  Senate  has  sent 
deputies  to  sound  my  intentions.  It  is  quite  possible  that  in  ten  or 
twelve  days  the  aristocracy  of  Genoa  will  suffer  the  same  Site  as  that  of 
Venice. 

There  would  then  be  three  democratic  republics  in  Italy,  which  for 
the  moment  could  be  united  only  with  difficulty  in  view  of  the 
intervening  states  of  Parma  and  of  the  Emperor  and  the  inexperience 
of  the  Italians.  But  liberty  of  the  press  and  future  events  will  not  fail  to 
join  the  three  republics  in  one. . . . 

When  the  definitive  peace  is  made  with  the  Emperor,  I  will  take  steps 
to  unite  the  Cispadane  and  the  Cisalpine.  But,  meanwhile  I  must  use 
the  period  of  calm  to  organize  each  of  them  properly,  so  that  if  we 
break  with  the  Emperor  we  can  be  sure  that  our  rear  will  be  quiet,  and 
if  there  is  trouble  at  Rome  through  the  death  of  the  Pope  we  can  use 
them  as  a  base  for  any  necessary  operations. 

BONAPARTE 

244 
To  the  Executive  Directory 

Mombello 
7  Prairial,  Year  V  (26  May,  1797) 

Hie  Pope's  health,  Citizen  Directors,  continues  bad.  Please  send  me 
new  letters  of  credence  to  the  Conclave,  which  when  the  time  comes 
I  can  send  to  the  French  minister  at  Rome,  and  indicate  the  conduct  to 
be  followed  in  these  delicate  circumstances.  We  have  the  right  to 
exclude  one  cardinal,  and  this  exclusion  should  fell  on  Cardinal 
Albani,  if  he  is  in  the  running. 

The  Marquess  of  Gallo  very  much  wants  the  march  of  Ancona  for 
Naples.  You  will  see  that  that  is  quite  dever,  but  it  is  the  last  thing  in 
the  world  that  we  should  agree  to. 

la  die  present  situation  I  think  it  would  be  useful  were  the  King  of 
Spain  to  scad  4,000  or  5,000  Spaniards  to  Parma,  so  that,  at  the  least 
sig^  of  trouble  in  Rome,  I  could  mingle  diem  with  our  troops.  That 
would  prevent  our  appearing  alone  in  opposition  to  the  King  of 
NapJesand  mightevmoaable  us  to  join  Parma  to  the  new  republics  'and 
place  the  Duke  of  Paxma  oil  Roman  lands. . . . 

Since  Spain  has,  through  its  navy ,  a  decided  superiority  over  Naples, 
it  is  essential  to  embroil  them  a  litde  in  Italian  amirs,  llie  Emperor  and 
die  King  of  Naples  deady  have  their  eyes  on  die  Pope's  inheritance. 

Italy  191 

I  think,  therefore,  if  necessary  it  would  be  preferable  to  give  Spain 
5,000  more  men  against  Portugal  and  have  5,000  Spaniards  at  Parma. 

I  am  sending  General  Gcntili  with  1,500  men,  500  or  600  Venetians 
and  part  of  the  fleet  to  occupy  Corfu,  Zante  and  Ccphalonia.  As  to 
Corfu,  I  think  we  should  retain  it  irrevocably. 

General  Vaubois,  with  1,500  men,  has  reached  Corsica,  where 
everything  now  seems  perfectly  quiet 

The  island  of  Malta  is  of  major  interest  for  us.  The  Grand  Master  is 
dying,  and  it  looks  as  though  his  successor  will  be  a  German.  It  would 
take  500,000  or  600,000  francs  to  have  a  Spaniard  made  Grand  Master. 
Would  it  not  be  possible  to  persuade  the  Prince  of  the  Peace  to  take 
step  to  that  end,  which  is  most  important?  Valetta  has  37,000  in- 
habitants who  are  very  well  disposed  towards  the  French;  there  are 
no  longer  any  English  in  the  Mediterranean;  why  should  not  our  fleet 
or  the  Spanish,  before  going  into  the  Atlantic,  sail  to  Valetta  and 
occupy  it?  Hiere  are  only  500  knights  and  the  regiment  of  the  Order 
is  only  600  strong.  If  we  do  not,  Malta  will  fall  into  the  power  of  die 
King  of  Naples.  This  little  island  is  worth  any  price  to  us. ... 

BONAPARTE 

245 
To  Corporal  Moilet 

7th  Company,  2nd  Artillery  Regiment  H.Q.,  Milan 

1$  Prairial,  Year  V  (7  June,  1797) 

Hie  Commander-ia-Chief  has  learned  with  interest  of  the  courage 
and  skill  you  displayed  at  Verona  against  the  fort  containing  a  powder 
magazine.  They  were  such  that  at  die  second  shell-burst  the  explosion 
of  die  magarinc  was  so  great  that  the  whole  was  burned  down  and 
more  than  600  men  were  killed.  Since  he  wishes  to  reward  bravery  and 
encourage  talent,  die  General  requires  me  to  inform  you  that  he  has 
told  General  Lespinasse,  Commander  of  the  Artillery,  of  your  conduct 
and  has  ordered  him  to  promote  you. 

By  order  of  the  Commander-m-Chief 

246 
To  the  Provisional  Government  of  Genoa 

Mombelh 

28  Prairi&lt  Year  V  (itjune,  1797) 

I  have  received  your  letter,  Citizens,  through  Citizen  Balbi. 
The  first  steps  of  your  Government  justify  the  confidence  which  the 
Genoese  nation  has  placed  in  you.  Placed  in  difficult  circumstances, 
provisional  governments  must  consult  only  public  safety  and  the 
interests  of  the  nation. 

Hie  Republic  of  Genoa  lives  by  trade;  trade  depends  on  confidence. 
There  can  be  no  confidence  under  a  weak  government  or  in  a  country 

192  The  Rise  to  Power 

split  by  factions.  A  government  is  weak,  a  state  is  torn  by  faction  when 
several  hundred  citizens  organize  themselves  in  an  exclusive  group* 
take  part  in  all  discussions,  court  popularity,  are  always  extreme  and 
always  seeking  but  to  destroy. 

During  your  provisional  government  a  selected  committee  must 
draw  up  your  constitution  and  the  organic  laws  of  your  Republic, 
Your  principal  duty  is  to  suppress  passions  and  protect  the  committee 
from  pressures,  thereby  ensuring  that  you  are  not  given  a  prejudiced 
constitution  and  laws. 

Wisdom  and  moderation  belong  to  all  countries  and  all  epochs, 
since  both  are  based  on  our  physical  nature,  but  they  are  essential  in 
small  states  and  commercial  cities. 

Throughout  the  whole  duration  of  your  provisional  government 
and  until  you  have  a  stable  constitution  and  laws,  act  as  though  you 
were  in  a  ship  in  a  storm;  insist  that  each  citizen  carries  out  his  functions 
and  that  none  attempts  to  rival  the  Government.  Since  you  do  not 
know  what  your  constitution  will  allow  or  forbid,  prevent  the  citizens 
from  forming  any  kind  of  parties  for  the  time  being.  Your  national 
guard  is  numerous  and  loyal. 

l£  under  your  Government,  the  Republic  loses  any  of  its  trade  or 
happiness,  the  responsibility  will  be  yours  alone. 

I  beg  you  to  believe  the  respect  and  consideration  with  which,  etc. 

BONAPARTE 

247 
To  the  Provisional  Government  of  Genoa 

Mombello 
1  Messidor,  Year  V  (19  June,  1797} 

Citizens,  I  learn  with  the  greatest  displeasure  that  the  statue  of 
Andrea  Doria  has  been  pulled  down  in  a  moment  of  passion. 

Andrea  Doria  was  a  great  sailor  and  statesman;  aristocracy  was  the 
liberty  of  his  time,  Hie  whole  of  Europe  envies  your  city's  precious 
honour  of  having  given  birth  to  this  famous  man.  I  do  not  doubt  that 
you  will  make  haste  to  restore  his  statue.  Please  inscribe  my  name  as  a 
contributor  towards  die  expense,  for  I  wish  to  associate  myself  with 
those  citizens  who  are  most  zealous  for  the  glory  and  happiness  of 
your  country, . „ . 

BONAPAHTE 
248 

To  the  Executive  Directory 

Mombello 

Presumed  12  Messidor,  Year  V  (30  June,  1797) 
Citizen  Directors,  I  have  just  received  the  motion  of  Dumolard 

193 

This  motion  has  been  printed  on  the  order  paper  of  the  Assembly;  it  is 
clear  that  it  is  directed  entirely  against  me. 

After  having  concluded  five  treaties  of  peace  and  given  the  last 
hammer  blow  to  the  coalition,  I  should  have  had  the  right,  if  not  to 
civic  triumphs,  at  least  to  a  quiet  life  and  the  protection  of  the  first 
magistrates  of  the  Republic.  Instead,  I  now  find  myself  denounced, 
persecuted  and  in  every  way  decried,  although  my  reputation  belongs 
to  the  state. 

I  would  have  been  indifferent  to  everything,  but  I  cannot  be  so  when 
it  is  the  first  magistrates  of  the  Republic  who  seek  to  cover  me  with 
this  opprobrium. 

Having  merited  a  decree  that  I  deserve  well  of  the  nation,  I  ought 
not  to  hear  myself  accused  of  an  action  as  absurd  as  it  would  have  been 
atrocious;  I  ought  not  to  find  a  manifesto  inspired  by  an  emigrant 
and  payed  for  by  England  given  more  credence  in  the  Council  of  five 
Hundred  than  the  evidence  of  80,000  men,  or  than  my  own. 

What!  We  have  been  assassinated  by  traitors;  more  than  400  men 
have  died;  and  the  first  assembly  of  the  Republic  pardons  itself  for 
having  for  a  moment  believed  it! 

More  than  400  Frenchmen  were  dragged  in  the  mud  outside  a  great 
city;  they  were  murdered  in  sight  of  the  guards  in  the  fort;  they  were 
stabbed  a  thousand  times  with  stilettos  like  the  one  I  am  sending  you; 
and  representatives  of  the  French  people  have  it  printed  'that,  if  they 
believed  it  an  instant,  they  were  to  be  excused*  ! 

I  would  not  have  complained,  I  would  have  paid  no  attention*  had  it 
been  said  by  cowards  dead  to  patriotism  and  glory:  I  know  well 
enough  that  there  are  societies  where  they  say:  Is  this  blood  so  pure  then! 
But  I  have  the  right  to  complain  when  the  first  magistrates  of  the 
Republic  disparage  those  who,  after  all,  have  increased  die  glory  of  the 
French  name. 

I  repeat,  Citizen  Directors,  rny  request  to  be  allowed  to  resign.  I  need 
to  live  quietly,  if  the  daggers  of  Clichy  will  let  me  live  at  all* 

249 
Reply  to  M.  Duaanf 

Mombfllo 

Presumed  13  Messider,  Year  V  (i  July,  1797) 

So  M.  Ehinan  thinks  the  Army  of  Italy  has  not  done  enough.  It 
should  have  left  the  tiltiag-yard  of  Italy.  Hie  Devil!  It  looks  as  if 

*  This  letter  r"33  only  in  an  unsigned  (but  autograph)  draft  and  may  never 
have  been  sent.  Qichy  was  the  name  of  tite  royalist  dub  in  Paris. 

f  Pseudonym  of  Duvergne  de  Presle,  a  royalist  deputy  and  publicist,  who  had 
attacked  Bonaparte  in  die  Paris  journak  Bonaparte's  reply  was  published  as  an 
anonymous  pamphlet. 

194 

M.  Ehinan  has  a  pretty  small-scale  map!  He  (M.  Dunan  is  speaking  of 
Bonaparte),  he  should  have  left  the  castle  of  Milan  besieged  and 
Mantua  blockaded;  he  should  have  left  behind  him  the  King  ot  Naples, 
the  Pope,  the  immense  country  he  had  just  conquered,  and  have 
advanced  like  the  arm  of  a  compass  to  Germany!  Let  us  see,  let  us 
reason,  M.  Dunan;  let  us  first  of  all  try  to  understand  each  other. 

It  was  wrong,  you  say,  to  concentrate  the  whole  army  to  besiege 
Mantua:  that  is  a  question  of  fact;  you  are  misinformed.  Not  one  more 
man  was  put  to  besiege  Mantua  than  was  necessary  to  blockade  it.  It 
was  besieged  with  artillery  captured  in  nearby  fortresses.  The  army  of 
observation  took  up  the  best  fine  to  cover  the  blockade.  A  few  strong 
columns  were  sent  to  Bologna,  Ferrara,  Leghorn;  they  threatened 
several  powers  and  forced  diem  to  make  peace  and  chased  the  English 
out  of  Leghorn  and,  in  the  result,  out  of  the  Mediterranean.  Returning 
with  the  speed  characteristic  of  the  Army  of  Italy,  they  were  on  the 
Adige  in  time  to  meet  Wurmser  and  his  great  army. 

What  do  you  drink  would  have  been  better?  Should  Germany  have 
been  invaded?  But  then  that  would  have  been  to  abandon  Italy  and 
expose  that  beautiful  land  to  insurrection,  to  a  successful  sortie  from 
Mantua,  to  the  enemy  forces  in  Friuli.  Should  one  just  have  crossed  the 
Tyrol  and  then  returned?  Yes,  no  doubt! 

Hie  Tyrol  which  is  but  three  or  four  inches  on  your  map  is  an 
extremely  mountainous  country,  inhabited  by  warlike  people  and  with 
forty  leagues  of  difficult  defiles  across  the  middle  of  which  passes  the 
continuation  of  the  great  Alpine  chain. 

Moceau  was  still  beyond  the  Rhine  and  Jourdan  on  the  Sieg.  But  it  is 
useless  to  try  to  understand  you;  you  do  not  understand  yourself.  Hiis 
article,  like  the  rest  of  your  work,  is  a  mass  of  wrong  and  ill-conceived 
ideas.  That  is  not  surprising,  since  you  are  speaking  of  a  profession  you 
do  not  understand.  The  philosopher  who  lectured  Hannibal,  I  forget 
at  what  town,  also  thought  himself  a  great  soldier. 

Do  you  thmk  that  if  Caesar,  Turenne,  Montecuculli,  the  great 
Frederick  were  again  to  appear  on  earth  they  would  be  your  pupils? 
Hie  perfection  of  the  system  of  modern  warfare,  you  main  tain,  con- 
sists in  throwing  one  army  corps  to  the  right,  another  to  the  left, 
leaving  die  enemy  in  the  centre,  and  even  to  get  behind  a  fringe  of 
fortresses.  If  these  principles  were  taught  to  die  young  they  would  put 
military  science  back  four  hundred  years;  and  every  time  they  were 
carried  out:  in  face  of  an  active  enemy  with  the  slightest  knowledge  of 
die  tricks  of  war,  he  would  beat  one  of  your  corps  and  cut  the  retreat 
of  dw  edict.  Hie  retreat  of  Moreau  is  so  much  admired  by  experts 
precisely  because  of  die  defects  in  the  plan  of  campaign. 

"Whether  you  credit  Boaaparte  with  a  Httle  valour  and  spirit,  whether 

195 

in  the  admiration  of  his  comrades  in  arms,  of  his  enemies  even,  in  the 
great  results  he  has  obtained,  and  lastly  in  the  vision  that  made  him 
criticize  from  the  start  the  whole  plan  of  operations  for  the  Rhine  and 
die  Irish  expedition. 

In  diis  campaign  the  Army  of  Italy  has  overthrown  die  Sardinian 
army,  hardened  by  four  yean  of  war;  die  army  of  Beaulicu,  so  strong 
that  the  court  of  Vienna  was  sure  it  would  capture  the  county  of 
Nice.  Wurmscr's  army  came  down  from  the  Rhine  with  20,000 
llite  troops,  and  that  alone  enabled  Moreau  to  re-cross  the  Rhine  and 
Hoche  to  advance  to  the  Main:  but,  though  reinforced,  Wunnser  was 
no  better  ofFand  found  himself  headquarters  and  all,  dosely  blockaded 
in  Mantua,  victim  of  a  march  as  bold  as  it  was  skilful,  which,  by  itself, 
would  have  made  this  brave  army  immortal. 

Reinforced  by  all  the  divisions  from  Poland,  Silesia  and  Hungary  and 
with  another  detachment  from  the  Rhine,  Alvintzy  appeared  in  his 
turn-  After  several  days  of  manoeuvring,  he  fell  at  Arcola.  Our  retreat 
on  the  Rhine  enabled  the  enemy  to  send  new  reinforcements  to  the 
Tyrol.  Roused  by  the  nobility,  the  priests  and  their  supporters, 
Hungary  and  Vienna  willingly  sent  their  recruits  to  redouble  the  ranks 
of  our  enemies,  but  die  battlefields  of  Rivoli  and  La  Favorite  and  the 
fall,  a  few  days  later,  of  Mantua,  Bergamo  and  Treviso  only  increased 
the  laurels  of  the  brave  soldiers  of  the  Army  of  Italy. 

What  is  there  so  ridiculous  and  improbable  that  it  will  not  be 
accepted  by  die  credulous  inhabitants  of  a  great  city?  Rather,  what  is  the 
interest  that  leads  clever  men,  with  so  much  evil  cunning,  to  try  to 
denigrate  die  national  glory?  Everywhere  it  has  been  said  and  expected 
that  the  Army  of  Italy  was  lost  and  that  Bonaparte  himself  was  on  the 
way  to  join  the  prisoners  of  Olmutz,i£  happily,  he  had  not  made  peace. 

Bonaparte  catered  Germany  on  three  fronts  simultaneously;  through 
the  Tyrol,  Carinthia  and  Carniok.  He  had  no  fear  of  being  everywhere 
too  weak  through  so  dividing  his  forces,  for  that  was  die  position  the 
enemy  had  taken  up.  In  any  case,  he  was  forced  to  attack  in  that  way 
so  as  to  keep  open  a  line  of  retreat  and  cover  his  magazines  and  depots. 

But  when  me  fleeing  enemy  had  surrendered  to  him  stores,  24,000 
prisoners  and  60  guns;  once  he  held  Trieste,  Gorizia,  Elagenfurt  and 
Brixen,  he  knew  that  he  might  in  turn  be  attacked;  that  the  enemy, 
re-forming  tar  beyond  the  mountains,  could  hide  his  movements  and 
fall  upon  the  separated  divisions  and  beat  them  individually.  He  did  not 
march  his  divisions  to  Innsbruck,  but  withdrew  them  into  Carinthia, 
He  also  withdrew  there  die  division  in  Carniola,  instead  of  sending  it 
into  Istria  as  a  less  able  general  might  have  done.  In  place  of  all  that,  he 
fortified  Klagenfurt  and  pot  his  depots  these, 

Thus,  instead  of  having  three  different  lines  of  communication,  he 
had  but  one;  instead  of  having  to  contain  the  naturally  warlike  and 

The  Rise  to  Power 

rebellious  people  of  the  Tyrol,  he  had  nothing  to  fear  from  them,  and, 
instead  of  occupying  a  front  of  eighty  leagues,  he  collected  the  army  at 
a  single  point  which  threatened  Vienna,  Hungary  and  Bavaria  at  die 
same  time. 

General  Kerpen,  who  had  gathered  his  battered  division  at  Innsbruck 
in  the  belief  that  General  Joubert  intended  to  march  against  him,  no 
sooner  learned  that  that  general  was  moving  down  the  Drava  into 
Carinthia  than  he  re-entered  the  Tyrol.  General  Quosdanovida,  who 
was  defending  Hungary,  rushed  to  Trieste  once  he  knew  die  French 
army  was  assembled  in  Carinthia.  Thus,  while  Bonaparte  had  reunited 
the  whole  of  his  army  at  a  single  spot  in  the  heart  of  the  hereditary 
states  and  was  able  to  move  in  any  direction,  Prince  Charles  had  the 
bulk  of  his  army  divided  between  Salzburg  and  Vienna  and  weakened 
by  the  detachments  sent  into  the  Tyrol  and  Carniola.  This  was  the 
position  when  he  asked  for  an  armistice. 

A  few  days  later  the  preliminaries  of  peace  were  signed.  They  have 
saved  Vienna,  perhaps  die  very  existence  of  the  House  of  Austria.  — 

It  can  be  said  that  Prince  Charles  has  constandy  walked  into  the  traps 
set  for  him  by  General  Bonaparte;  from  the  battle  of  the  TagUamento 
up  to  the  behaviour  of  General  Laudon  in  the  Tyrol  and  General 
Quosdanovich  in  Carniok  he  has  made  nothing  but  a  series  of  mistakes 
and  ill-coordinated  movements,  which  played  into  his  enemy's  hands. 
With  an  inferior  army  the  art  of  war  consists  in  always  having  more 
force  than  the  enemy  at  the  vital  point,  whether  of  attack  or  defence; 
but  that  art  cannot  be  learnt  from  books  or  by  practice;  it  is  an  in- 
stinctive conduct  that  can  properly  be  called  military  genius. 

250 
To  the  Army  of  Italy 

H.Q.,  Milan 
26Messidor,  Year  V  (14  July,  1797} 

Soldiers,  today  is  die  anniversary  of  the  14  July.  You  see  before  you 
die  jiMTtes,  of  our  comrades  in  arms  who  died  on  the  field  of  honour  for 
the  liberty  of  France:  they  have  set  you  an  example.  You  owe  your- 
selves entirely  to  the  Republic;  you  owe  yourselves  entirely  to  die 
happiness  of  30  million  Frenchmen;  you  owe  yourselves  entirely  to  the 
glory  of  diat  name  which  has  received  a  new  lustre  as  a  result  of  your 
victories. 

Soldiers,  I  know  you  are  deeply  concerned  at  the  evils  threatening 
die  nation;  bat  die  country  is  not  in  real  danger.  The  same  men  are 
there  who  made  it  triumph  over  united  Europe.  Mountains  separate 
as  from  France;  but,  weie  it  necessary  in  order  to  uphold  the  Constitu- 
tion to  defend  liberty,  to  protect  the  Government  and  the  republicans, 
tben.  yoa  would  cross  them  with  die  speed  of  the  eagle. 

197 

Soldiers,  the  Government  is  watching  over  the  body  of  laws 
entrusted  to  it.  If  the  royalists  show  themselves  they  will  die  in  that 
moment.  Have  no  fear,  out  let  us  swear  by  the  shadow  of  the  heroes 
who  have  died  at  our  side  for  liberty,  let  us  swear  on  our  new  flags: 
Implacable  War  to  the  Enemies  of  the  Republic  and  of  the  Constitution  of  the 
Year  III! 

BONAPARTE 

251 
To  Major-General  Berthier 

Chief  of  Staff,  Army  of  Italy  H.Q.,  Milan 

26Me$sidor,  Year  V  (14  July,  1707) 

You  will  please  take  steps,  Citizen  General,  to  prevent  the  intro- 
duction into  the  army  of  any  gazette  tending  to  spread  discouragement, 
to  incite  the  soldiers  to  desert  or  to  lessen  enthusiasm  for  the  cause  of 
liberty. 

BONAPARTE 

252 
To  the  Executive  Directory 

H.Q,,  Milan 
27  Afesufcr,  Year  V  (15  July,  1797} 

You  will  find  attached  a  copy  of  the  letter  I  have  received  from 
General  Clarke;  you  will  see  that  they  are  still  playing  out  time,  Hiere 
can  be  no  doubt  that  the  Emperor  wishes  to  see  how  matters  will  turn 
out  in  France,  and  that  the  foreigner  is  more  involved  in  all  these 
machinations  than  it  appears. 

The  army  receives  a  great  many  of  the  journals  printed  in  Paris, 
especially  of  the  worst  kind,  but  that  produces  an  efibct  quite  other 
than  the  one  intended;  indignation  is  at  a  peak.  The  soldiers  are 
demanding  to  know  whether,  once  they  return  home,  the  price  of 
their  labours  and  of  six  yeaxs  of  war  must  be  to  be  murdered,  as  is 
threatened  to  all  patriots.  Matters  are  getting  worse  day  by  day,  and  I 
feel,  Citizen  Directors,  that  you  must  at  once  take  them  in  hand, 

I  enclose  the  proclamation  I  have  made  to  the  army;  it  has  produced 
the  best  possible  effect,  liters  is  not  a  man  here  but  would  rather  die 
with  arms  in  his  hand  than  be  butchered  in  a  Parisian  cul-de-sac. 

As  for  me,  I  am  used  to  the  total  subordination  of  my  own  interests; 
but  I  cannot  be  indifferent  to  the  outrageous  calumnies  spread  every 
day  by  eighty  journals,  without  a  single  one  to  nail  these  lies;  nor  can  I 
be  indifferent  to  die  atrocious  perfidy  of  that  motion  printed  by  ordet 
of  the  Council  of  Five  HuncbxxL  I  can  see  that  the  Clichy  dub  wants  to 
march  over  my  corpse  to  the  ckstroction  of  the  Republic.  Are  there 
tben  no  longer  any  republicans  in  France?  and  must  we  who  have 

L.D.N.  —  H 

The  Rise  to  Power 

conquered  Europe  be  reduced  to  ending  our  sad  days  in  some  remote 
plot  of  land? 

At  a  single  stroke  you  could  save  the  Republic  and  200,000  heads 
bound  to  its  fate  and,  at  the  same  time,  conclude  peace  within  twenty- 
four  hours.  Have  the  emigrants  arrested;  destroy  the  influence  of 
foreigners.  If  you  need  force,  call  upon  the  armies.  Smash  the  presses  of 
the  papers  in  English  pay,  which  are  more  bloodthirsty  than  ever 
Marat  was, 

I  mysel£  Citizen  Directors,  cannot  live  in  the  midst  of  outrageous 
factions;  if  there  is  no  remedy  for  the  ills  of  the  nation,  no  way  of 
putting  a  term  to  assassination  and  the  influence  of  Louis  XVffl,  I  must 
ask  to  resign.  . . . 

But,  in  all  circumstances,  the  constant  signs  you  have  given  me  of 
your  unlimited  confidence  will  never  be  lost  from  my  memory. 

BONAPARTE 

253 
To  Major-General  Clarke 

French  Plenipotentiary  at  Leoben  H.Q.,  Milan 

11  ThermiJor,  Year  V  (29  July,  1797) 

You  will  find  attached,  Citizen  General,  two  notes  that  I  think  it 
essential  to  present  to  H.M.  the  Emperor:  one  concerns  Ragusa,  which 
Ac  Austrian  army  has  occupied;  the  other  concerns  the  money  owed 

by  the  princes  of  Germany  to  the  Army  of  the  Rhine If  we  could 

at  once  draw  one  or  two  millions,  that  would  be  a  great  gain. 

Hoche,  not  being  old  enough,  cannot  be  Minister  of  War;  I  am 
assured  that  Sch&rer  will  be  appointed.  Ttere  is  serious  conflict  between 
die  Council  of  five  Hundred  and  the  Directory. 

Lctiok-Laroche,  being  in  poor  health,  is  to  be  replaced  as  minister 
of  police.  It  seems  that  Hoche  is  to  embark  for  Ireland. 

I  imagine  you  have  a  cipher  to  correspond  with  Ferret;  do  not  forget 
to  tell  bim  to  gain  all  possible  intelligence  of  the  present  military 
situation  of  the  Emperor,  of  the  value  of  his  levies  in  Hungary  and 
elsewhere,  of  the  fortifications  he  may  have  built  at  Graz  and  Klagen- 
fet,  of  the  Drava  and  Sava  bridgeheads  and  of  the  road  from  Klagen- 
itiii  tso  Brock, 

BONAPARTE 

254 
To  die  Executive  Directory 

H.Q.,  Milan 

29  Thermite**  Year  V  (16  Aug9 1 79?) 

The  Emperor  appears  to  be  moving  all  his  forces  towards  Italy;  the 
nxks  he  is  gfylkt-mg  and  now  has  rime  to  train,  combined  with 

the  prisoners  who  have  been  returned  to  him,  will  enable  him  to  bring 
a  formidable  army  against  me.  Perhaps  you  will  think  it  necessary  to 
increase  the  cavalry  of  the  Army  of  Italy  and  to  send  us  a  few  artiBcry 
companies  and  demi-brigades  of  infantry. . .  . 

I  have  sent  the  two  battalions  of  the  79th  to  the  citadel  of  Corfu; 
please  order  General  Sahuguet  to  send  us  the  third,  which  is  at  Avignon 
and  which  I  shall  also  send  to  Corfu. 

The  islands  of  Corfu,  Zante  and  Cephalonia  arc  more  important  for 
us  than  the  whole  of  Italy.  If  we  were  forced  to  choose,  I  believe  it 
would  be  better  to  restore  Italy  to  the  Emperor  and  keep  the  four 
islands,  which  are  a  source  of  wealth  and  prosperity  for  our  trade.  The 
Turkish  empire  is  crumbling  day  by  day,  and  the  possession  of  these 
islands  will  put  us  in  a  position  to  support  it  as  much  as  possible  or  to 
take  advantage  of  it. 

The  rime  is  not  far  distant  when  we  shall  feel  that,  in  order  truly  to 
destroy  England,  we  must  occupy  Egypt.  Tlie  steady  death  of  the  vast 
Ottoman  empire  obliges  us  to  think  in  good  time  of  taking  steps  to 
preserve  our  trade  in  the  Levant. 

The  citadels  of  Corfu,  Zante  and  Cephalonia  are  in  very  good  order 
and  well  equipped  with  artillery;  I  am  having  the  mountings  repaired 
and  I  have  sent  a  year's  supply  of  stores  and  ammunition.  .  „ . 

BONAPARTE 

255 
Order  of  the  Day 

Amy  of  My  H.Q.,  Passarimo 

11  Fntctider,  Year  V  (2$  Aug,  1797) 

The  Ckimmander-in-Chief,  Bonaparte,  wishing  to  give  a  token  of  the 
gratitude  of  the  nation  towards  those  brave  soldiers  who  have  dis- 
tinguished themselves  by  acts  of  gallantry  during  die  last  two  cam- 
paigns, orders: 

AffncuE  i.  The  Chief  of  Staff  will  have  made  ninety  grenadier  and 
ten  cavalry  swords  with  Damascus  blades  and  with  die  hilts  inlaid  with 
gold  and  worked  by  the  finest  craftsmen  of  Italy. 

AST.  2.  On  one  side  of  the  blade  will  be  inscribed  in  letters  of  gold: 

ARMY  OF  ITALY Division Demi-brigok. 

Gf'iwt,  OH  behalf  of  the  Executive  Dire&ory  of  the  French  Republic  by 

General  Bonaparte 
To  Citizen the year 

On  the  other  side  of  the  blade  will  be  inscribed  in  letters  of  gold: 

FRENCH  REPUBLIC 
Liberty  £$*<*% 

and  thereafter  the  action  for  which  the  sword  has  been  given. 

loo  The  Rise  to  Power 

T.  5.  On  I  Vendcmiaire,  Year  VI,  the  Commander-in-Chicf  will 
announce  the  names  of  those  he  believes  to  have  merited  a  sword. 
ART.  6.  Each  soldier  awarded  one  of  these  swords  will  receive 
double  pay. 

BONAPARTE 

256 
To  Citizen  Joseph  Bonaparte 

French  Ambassador  to  Rome  H.Q.,  Passariano 

16  Fmctidor,  Year  V  (2  Sept,  1797) 

You  will  find  attached,  Citizen  Ambassador,  a  copy  of  the  note  I 
have  handed  to  the  papal  envoy  at  Milan. 

I  think  it  essential  for  the  good  of  France  and  even  of  religion  itself 
that  the  Pope  should  issue  a  short  instruction  to  the  prelates  to  obey  the 
laws  of  the  Republic.  Since  you  are  not  authorized  by  the  Minister  of 
Foreign  ASairs  to  make  this  approach,  you  should  do  no  more  than 
just  follow  up  what  my  note  has  begun. 

Please  also  take  unofficial  steps  to  obtain  a  cardinal's  hat  for  the 
Archbishop  of  Milan. 

BONAPARTE 

25? 
To  Citizen  Joseph  Bonaparte 

French  Ambassador  to  Rome  H.Q.,  Passariano 

16  Fructidor,  Year  V  (2  Sept,  ijgj] 

You  will  find  attached,  Citizen  Ambassador,  a  letter  written  to  me 
by  Citizen  Monge;  I  think  it  important  for  the  dignity  of  the  Republic 
and  the  good  of  humanity  that  you  make  the  court  of  Rome  feel  the 
need  to  spare  men  as  universally  esteemed  as  those  mentioned  in  it. 

While  seeking  to  maintain  good  relations  between  the  French 
Republic  and  the  Roman  court,  I  think  it  essential  for  you  to  try  to 
thwart  the  desire  of  several  of  its  ministers  to  oppress  those  who  have 
welcomed  our  artists  or  served  our  ambassadors. 

Adopt  the  tone  befitting  the  nation  you  represent  from  the  outset  of 
your  ministry. 

BONAPARTE 

258 
To  Citizen  Talleyrand 

Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs  H.Q.,  Passariano 

27  Frudidor>  Year  V  (13  Sept,  ijgj] 

You  will  find  attacked,  Citizen  Minister,  a  copy  of  the  letter  I  wrote 
Co  Citizen  Candaux  in  reply  to  the  overtures  made  to  him  by  [Sir 
John}  Acton,  which  he  will  certainly  have  reported  to  you. 

/**//  101 

The  court  of  Naples  dreams  of  nothing  but  expansion  and  grandeur: 
on  the  one  hand  it  wants  Corfu,  Zante,  Ccphalonia  and  Lcvkas,  and, 
on  the  other,  half  the  Papal  States,  and  especially  Ancona.  These  pre- 
tensions are  too  comic;  in  exchange  they  think  of  giving  us  Elba. 

I  think  that  from  now  on  the  great  maxim  of  the  Republic  must 
be  never  to  give  up  Corfu,  Zantc,  etc.  On  the  contrary,  we  ought  to 
establish  ourselves  there  firmly.  They  contain  immense  commercial 
resources  and  will  be  of  great  importance  to  us  in  the  future  movements 
of  Europe. 

Why  should  we  not  occupy  the  island  of  Malta?  Admiral  Brueys 
could  easily  anchor  there  and  take  it.  Four  hundred  knights  and,  at  the 
most,  a  regiment  of  500  men  are  the  sole  defence  of  the  town  of 
Valetta.  The  inhabitants,  of  whom  there  are  more  than  100,000,  are 
very  well  disposed  to  us  and  thoroughly  disgusted  with  their  knights, 
who  are  dying  of  hunger.  I  have  purposely  had  all  their  possessions  in 
Italy  confiscated  With  the  island  of  Saint-Pierre,  which  the  King  of 
Sardinia  has  ceded  to  us,  Malta,  Corfu,  etc.,  we  shall  be  masters  of  the 
whole  Mediterranean. 

If  it  happens  that  when  we  make  peace  with  England  we  have  to 
give  up  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  we  must  occupy  Egypt.  Hut  country 

f?  *          f  —  4  t 

has  never  belonged  to  a  European  nation.  The  Venetians  alone  had  a 
certain,  but  very  precarious  preponderance  there  several  centuries  ago. 
We  could  leave  here  with  25,000  men,  escorted  by  eight  or  ten  ships  of 
the  line  or  Venetian  frigates,  and  take  it.  Egypt  does  not  really  belong 
to  the  Sultan. 

I  shall  be  glad,  Citizen  Minister,  if  you  will  enquire  in  Paris  and  let 
me  know  what  reaction  our  expedition  to  Egypt  would  produce  on 
the  Porte. 

With  armies  such  as  ours,  for  which  all  religions  are  alike,  Mohamr- 
mcdans,  Copts,  Arabs,  pagans,  etc.,  ail  that  is  unimportant;  we  would 
respect  one  as  much  as  another. 

1  salute  you. 

BONAPARTE 

259 
To  Citizen  Talleyrand 

Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs  H.Q.,  Passariano 

jr<?  Complementary  day*  Year  V  (19  Sept,  1/p;) 

Citizen  Minister,  I  have  received  your  confidential  letter  of  22 
Fructidor  regarding  the  mission  you  wish  to  give  Siey£s  in  Italy. 
Like  you  I  believe  his  presence  at  Milan  will  be  as  necessary  as  it  is  in 
Paris  and  could  have  been  in  Holland. 

Despite  our  pride,  our  thousand  and  one  pamphlets,  our  endless 
windy  speeches,  we  are  very  ignorant  in  political  science.  We  have  not 

202  The  Rise  to  Power 

yet  defined  what  we  mean  by  executive,  legislative  and  judicial  power. 
Montesquieu  gave  us  false  definitions,  not  because  that  celebrated  man 
was  unable  to  do  it,  but,  as  he  himself  said,  his  work  is  only  a  kind  of 
analysis  of  what  then  existed  or  had  existed  in  the  past;  it  is  a  summary 
of  notes  made  on  his  travels  and  in  reading. 

He  fixed  his  eyes  on  the  government  of  England  and  defined  their 
executive,  legislative  and  judicial  power  in  general  terms. 

But  why,  in  practice,  should  we  regard  the  right  to  make  war  and 
peace  and  to  fix  the  nature  and  level  of  taxes  as  attributions  of  the 
legislative  power? 

The  constitution  rightly  accords  one  of  these  attributions  to  the 
House  of  Commons  and  in  that  it  does  well,  because  the  English 
constitution  is  only  a  charter  of  privileges;  it  is  a  wholly  black  canvas, 
but  edged  in  gold. 

Since  the  House  of  Commons  is  the  only  one  which,  more  or  less, 
represents  the  nation,  it  alone  must  have  the  right  to  impose  taxes;  that 
is  the  one  dyke  that  could  be  found  to  moderate  despotism  and  the 
insolence  of  courtiers. 

But  in  a  government  where  all  authorities  emanate  from  the  nation 
and  where  the  sovereign  is  the  people,  why  class  as  attributes  of  the 
legislative  power  things  that  are  foreign  to  it? 

I  can  see  only  one  thing  that  we  have  properly  defined  during  the 
past  fifty  years,  and  that  is  the  sovereignty  of  the  people;  but  we  have 
been  no  happier  in  fixing  what  is  constitutional  than  in  the  attribution 
of  the  different  powers.  Thus  the  organization  of  the  French  people  has 
in  truth  only  begun. 

lite  power  of  the  government,  in  all  die  latitude  I  would  give  it, 
ought  to  be  considered  as  the  true  representative  of  the  nation,  which 
should  govern  as  a  result  of  the  constitutional  charter  and  the  organic 
laws.  As  it  appears  to  me,  it  should  naturally  be  divided  into  two  quite 
distinct  magistracies,  one  of  which  would  supervise  but  not  act,  and 

it  all  large  measures,  that  is,  if  I  may  so  call  it,  the  legislation  of  execu- 
tion. Hus  great  magistracy  would  in  truth  be  the  grand  council  of  the 
nation;  it  would  hold  all  die  administrative  and  executive  functions  that 
our  Constitution  accords  to  the  legislative  power. 

By  this  means  the  governmental  power  would  consist  of  two 
magistracies,  one  of  which  would  be  very  numerous  and  would  contain 
only  me&  who  had  already  carried  out  some  of  those  functions  which 
gf^e  mm  maturity  in  political  judgement; 

Hie  legislative  power  would  first  of  all  make  all  the  organic  laws, 
and  would  change  than,  but  not,  as  is  no w  done,  in  two  or  three  days ; 
for  once  an  organic  law  is  in  operation  I  do  not  tfamk  it  should  be 
changed  without  four  or  five  months  of  discussion. 

203 

This  legislative  power,  having  no  rank  in  the  Republic,  impassive, 
with  neither  eyes  nor  ears  for  what  is  going  on  around  it,  would  be 
without  ambition  and  would  no  longer  inundate  us  with  thousands  of 
circumstantial  laws  which  simply  by  reason  of  their  absurdity  arc 
inoperative  and  which  turn  us  into  a  nation  with  three  hundred  books 
of  laws  yet  without  laws. 

That,  I  believe,  is  a  complete  political  code,  which  the  circumstances 
we  find  ourselves  in  make  pardonable.  It  is  a  great  tragedy  for  a  nation 
of  30  million  inhabitants  in  the  eighteenth  century  to  have  to  call  on 
bayonets  to  save  the  state.  Violent  remedies  indict  the  legislator,  for  a 
constitution  given  to  men  should  be  suitable  for  men. 

If  you  see  Sieyis,  please  show  him  this  letter;  I  want  him  to  write 
telling  me  my  errors.  You  will  give  me  real  pleasure  if  you  can  help  to 
send  to  Italy  a  man  whose  abilities  I  admire  and  for  whom  I  have  a 
most  particular  friendship.  I  will  aid  him  by  every  means  and  I  hope 
that  by  combining  our  efforts  we  can  give  Italy  a  constitution  more  in 
time  with  local  conditions,  with  the  customs  of  its  people  and  perhaps 
even  with  right  principles  than  the  one  we  have  already  given  it.  It  was 
difficult  to  do  otherwise  in  the  midst  of  war  and  passion. 

Not  only  do  I  say  to  you  confidentially  that  I  wish  Sieyis  to  come  to 
Italy,  but  I  also  dunk,  and  this  quite  officially,  that  if  we  do  not  give 
Genoa  and  the  Cisalpine  Republic  constitutions  which  suit  them 
France  will  gain  no  advantage  from  them:  bought  by  foreign  gold, 
their  legislatures  will  be  entirely  at  the  call  of  the  House  of  Austria  and 
of  Rome,  In  the  final  result,  it  will  be  like  Holland. 

Since  this  letter  is  neither  a  pkce  of  tactics  new:  a  plan  of  campaign,  I 
beg  you  to  keep  it  for  yourself  and  Sieves  and  to  use  it,  if  you  think 
that  wise,  only  as  to  what  I  have  told  you  of  the  unsuitability  of  the 
constitutions  that  we  have  given  to  Italy. 

You  will  see  in  this  letter,  Citizen  Minister,  both  a  reply  to  your  own 
and  the  entire  confidence  that  I  have  in  you.  I  salute  you. 

BONAPAITE 

260 
To  the  Executive  Directory 

H.Q.,  Passariano 

*p  Vendfmi&K>  Year  VI  (10  Qct,  1797} 

Citizen  Botot*  has  handed  me  your  letter  of  the  ist  Complementary 
Day;  in  accordance  with  it  he  has  told  me,  on  your  behalf,  to  revolu- 
tkauae  Italy  J  asked  him  what  f^ 
fee  example,  was  included  in  the  order. 

I  have  kept  CJti2m  Botot  here  a  few  days,  so  that  he  can  satisfy  hin*- 
self  as  to  the  opinions  of  my  staff  and  all  who  surround  me.  I  should  be 
*  Secretary  to  Barras. 

204  The  Rise  to  Power 

happy  if  he  would  do  the  same  in  the  various  divisions  of  the  army;  he 
would  learn  what  a  spirit  of  patriotism  distinguishes  these  brave  soldiers. 
My  health,  which  is  considerably  weakened,  and  my  morale,  no  less 
affected,  have  need  of  a  little  rest  and  make  me  incapable  of  carrying 
through  the  great  things  remaining  to  be  done.  I  have  already  asked  for 
a  successor;  if  you  have  not  granted  my  request,  I  beg  you,  Citizen 
Directors,  to  do  so.  I  am  no  longer  fit  to  command,  but  have  only  a 
lively  interest  which  will  never  leave  me,  in  the  prosperity  of  the 
Republic  and  the  liberty  of  the  nation. 

BONAPARTE 

261 
To  the  Executive  Directory 

H.Q,9  Passariano 

ig  Vetidemiaire,  Year  VI  (10  Oct,  ijgj) 

At  last  the  peace  negotiations  are  on  the  point  of  ending.  The 
definitive  peace  will  be  signed  tonight  or  negotiations  broken  off. 
Here  are  the  principal  conditions: 

1.  We  shall  have  on  the  Rhine  the  limits  traced  on  the  attached 
map, . . . 

2.  Mainz  with  all  its  fortifications  and  in  its  present  state. 

3.  The  islands  of  Corfu,  Zante,  Cephalonia,  etc.  and  Venetian 
Albania. 

4.  The  Cisalpine  will  be  composed  of  Lombardy,  Bergamo,  Crema, 
Brescia,  Mantua  and  Peschiera,  with  all  the  fortifications  up  to  the 
right  bank  of  the  Adige  and  the  Po,  with  Modena,  Ferrara,  Bologna 
and  the  Romagna.  Tnat  makes  about  3,500,000  inhabitants. 

5.  Genoa  wil  have  the  Imperial  Kefs. 

6.  Tne  Emperor  will  have  Dalmatia  and  Istria,  the  city  of  Venice 
and  the  Venetian  states  up  to  the  Po  and  the  Adige. 

7.  In  accordance  with  the  secret  treaty  with  Prussia,  the  Prince  of 
Orange  will  receive  an  indemnity.  Ine  Duke  of  Modena  will  be  com- 
pensated with  the  Breisgau;  in  return,  Austria  will  take  Salzburg  and 
part  of  Bavaria. . . . 

until  three  weeks  after  the  exchange  of  ratifications  and  when  he  has 
evacuated  Mainz,  Mannheim,  Ingolstadt,  I  Jim,  Ehrenbreitstein  and  the 
"wtole  of  the  Empire. 

9.  FraacewiU^vethebestofwhatwashddby  Venice,  Corfu,  etc. 
and  die  RJhine  frontier,  apart  from  200,000  people  whom  we  can 
obtain  at  the  peace  with  the  Empire.  Ttereby  she  will  gain  4,000,000 
in  population, 

10.  Since  it  will  hold  Mantua,  Peschiera  and  Fenara,  the  Cisalpine 
Repoblk  will  have  very  good  military  frontiers. 

ludy  205 

11.  Thus  the  side  of  liberty  gains,  in  the  Cisalpine,  3,500,000 
inhabitants  and,  in  the  new  frontiers  of  France,  4,000,000:  7,500,000  in 
alt 

12.  The  House  of  Austria  will  gain  1,900,000  inhabitants.  It  will 
lose:  in  Lombardy  1,500,000;  at  Modena  300,000;  in  Belgium  2,500,000: 
4,300,000  in  all  Its  loss  therefore  will  still  be  serious. 

I  have  profited  by  the  powers  you  have  given  me  and  the  confidence 
you  have  placed  in  me  to  conclude  this  peace.  I  have  been  led  to  do  so 
by: 

1.  The  lateness  of  the  season,  which  is  unsuitable  for  offensive  war- 
fare, especially  in  this  area  where  we  must  re-cross  the  Alps  and  enter 
very  cold  country. 

2.  The  weakness  of  my  army,  which  has  all  the  forces  of  the  Emperor 
against  it 

3.  The  death  of  Hoche,  and  the  bad  plan  of  operations  adopted. 

4.  The  distance  of  the  Rhine  armks  from  the  hereditary  states  of  the 
House  of  Austria. 

5.  The  uselessness  of  the  Italians;  I  have,  at  the  most,  1,500  with  me 
and  they  are  a  rabble  from  die  gutters  of  the  big  cities. 

6.  The  new  rupture  with  Bngfottd. 

7.  The  impossibility  of  using  Sardinian  troops,  owing  to  the  failure 
to  ratify  the  treaty  of  alliance  with  the  King  of  Sardinia,  and  die  need  to 
increase  the  garrison  of  Piedmont  and  Lombardy  by  6,000  French 
troops. 

8.  Tte  desire  for  peace  of  the  whole  Republic,  a  desire  showing 
itself  even  among  the  soldiers,  who  would  fight  but  would  far  rather 
see  the  homes  they  lefr  so  many  years  ago,  and  whose  absence  only  tends 
towards  the  establishment  of  military  government. 

9.  Tlic  foolishness  of  risking  French  Hood  and  definite  advantages  on 
behalf  of  unworthy  peoples  who  have  litde  love  for  liberty  and  whose 
tradition,  character  and  religion  cause  them  to  hate  us  profoundly.  It 
is  true  that  there  arc  300  patriots  in  Venice;  but  their  interests  will  be 
protected  in  the  treaty  and  they  will  be  welcomed  in  the  Cisalpine.  Tlie 
wish  of  a  few  hundred  men  is  not  worth  the  death  of  20,000  Frenchmen. 

10.  Finally,  the  war  against  England  will  open  a  larger,  more 
important  and  splendid  field  to  us.  The  English  are  worth  more  than 
the  Venetians,  and  their  liberation  will  ensure  for  ever  the  liberty  and 
happiness  of  France;  or,  if  we  force  that  Government  to  make  peace, 
the  advantages  throughout  the  world  that  we  shall  gain  for  our  trade 
will  be  a  great  step  towards  such  security* 

If  I  are*  ia  error  in  all  these  calculations,  my  heart  is  pure  and  iny 
intentions  honest;  I  have  stilled  die  voice  of  my  own  glory,  vanity  and 
ambition  and  have  regarded  only  die  nation  and  die  Government;  I 
have  responded  worthily  to  die  onlimitedcx)nfi<kiice  reposed  in  me  for 

20<S  The  Rise  to  Power 

two  yean  by  the  Directory.  I  believe  I  have  done  what  each  member 
of  die  Directory  would  have  done  in  my  place. 

My  services  have  merited  the  approval  of  the  Government  and  the 
nation,  and  I  have  repeatedly  received  marks  of  their  esteem.  It  remains 
for  me  only  to  return  to  the  crowd,  to  return,  like  Cincinnatus,  to  the 
plough  and  to  give  an  example  of  respect  for  the  magistrates  and  of 
hatred  of  military  rule,  which  has  destroyed  so  many  republics. 

Be  assured  of  my  devotion  and  my  desire  to  do  anything  for  the 
liberty  of  the  nation. 

BONAPARTE 

262 
To  the  Executive  Directory 

H.Q.,  Passanano 
27  Vtncttmiaire,  Year  VI  (18  Oct,  IJQJ] 

Citizen  Directors,  General  Berthier  and  Citizen  Monge  are  bringing 
you  the  definitive  treaty  of  peace  which  has  just  been  signed  between 
the  Emperor  and  ourselves. 

General  Berthier,  whose  distinguished  abilities  equal  his  patriotism 
and  courage,  is  one  of  the  pillars  of  the  Republic  and  one  of  the  most 
fervent  defenders  of  liberty.  There  has  been  no  victory  by  the  Army  of 
Italy  to  which  he  has  not  contributed.  I  should  have  no  fear  that  friend- 
ship might  make  me  partial  were  I  to  recount  here  the  services  this 
general  has  rendered  to  the  nation;  but  history  will  carry  out  that  task 
and  its  first  evidence  will  be  the  opinion  of  the  whole  army. 

Citizen  Monge,  a  member  of  the  Commission  of  Science  and  the 
Arts,  is  celebrated  alike  for  his  patriotism  and  his  learning.  His  conduct 
in  Italy  has  increased  respect  for  the  French,  and  he  has  earned  a  notable 
place  in  my  friendship.  Hie  sciences,  which  have  revealed  so  many 
secrets  and  destroyed  so  many  prejudices,  are  called  upon  to  render  yet 
greater  services.  New  truths  and  new  discoveries  will  contribute  even 
more  to  the  happiness  of  mankind;  but  it  is  essential  that  we  should 
respect  the  scientists  and  protect  science. 

I  beg  you  to  welcome  with  equal  distinction  the  outstanding  general 
and  the  learned  physicist.  Karfr  adds  to  the  glory  of  the  nation  and  the 
fame  of  the  Fraich  name.  I  cannot  send  you  the  treaty  of  peace  by  two 
mea  moce  distinguished  in  their  different  fields. 

BONAPARTE 

263 
To  the  Executive  Directory 

Milan 

15  Brcimotre,  Year  VI  (5  Nav,  1797} 
I  bave  scat  the  courier  Moustache  to  Vienna  wirib  the  information 

Italy  207 

(<x  Count  Cobcnzl  that  you  have  ratified  the  treaty  of  Campo- 
Formio.  . . . 

I  think  you  can  leave  25,000  men  in  Italy,  take  36,000  for  England 
and  have  the  rest  return  to  Nice,  Chambery  and  Corsica.  .  .  . 

I  am  preparing  everything  for  the  various  troop  movements,  but 
they  cannot  take  place  until  we  have  occupied  Mainz. 

To  carry  out  the  English  expedition  with  some  probability  of  success 
will  need:  i.  Good  naval  officers;  2.  Plenty  of  well  commanded  troops, 
so  as  to  be  able  to  threaten  several  point*  and  supply  the  expedition; 
3.  An  intelligent  and  resolute  admiral:  I  think  Truguet  the  best.  Tlurty 
millions  of  available  francs. 

General  Hoche  had  very  good  maps  of  England,  which  should  be 
requested  from  his  heirs. 

You  could  not  choose  an  officer  more  distinguished  than  Genera! 
Desaix. 

Although  I  truly  need  rest,  I  shall  never  refuse  to  pay  my  tribute  to 
the  nation  so  far  as  it  is  in  my  power. 

BONAFASTE 

264 

To  the  Cisalpine  People 

H.Q.,MiJ*fi 
21  Btumairc,  Year  VI  (n  Nov,  1797) 

As  fiom  I  Frimaire  your  Constitution  will  be  fully  in  force, 

Your  Directory,  your  Legislature,  your  Court  of  Appeal  and  the 
subordinate  administrations  will  be  in  being. 

You  form  the  first  example  in  history  of  a  people  becoming  free 
without  faction,  revolution  and  strife.  We  have  given  you  liberty;  see 
that  you  preserve  it.  You  arc  the  richest  and  most  populous  Republic 
after  France,  and  your  position  calls  you  to  play  a  great  role  in  the 
affairs  of  Europe. 

To  be  worthy  of  your  destiny,  pass  only  wise  and  moderate  laws. 
Have  them  executed  with  force  and  energy.  Respect  religion  and 
promote  dhe  spread  of  education.  Do  not  form  your  battalions  of  feck- 
less men  but  of  citizms  who  understand  the  principles  of  the  Republic 
and  aie  devoted  to  its  prosperity. 

In  general,  yt>u  need  to  steep  yourselves  in  the  realization  of  your 
strength  and  of  the  dignity  becoming  free  men. 

Divided  and  bowed  under  tyranny  for  so  long,  you  could  not  have 
won  your  own  freedom;  left  to  yourselves  for  a  few  years,  there  will  be 
no  power  on  earth  strong  enough  to  take  it  from  you.  Until  then  the 
great  nation  will  protect  you  against  the  attacks  of  your  neighbours.  Its 
political  system  will  be  united  with  yours.  Had  die  Roman  people  used 
its  power  in  the  sane  way  as  die  French,  the  Roman  eagles  would  still 

208  The  Rise  to  Pouvr 

be  on  the  Capitol  and  eighteen  centuries  of  slavery  and  tyranny  would 
not  have  dishonoured  the  human  race. 

To  consolidate  liberty  and  with  the  sole  aim  of  your  happiness  I  have 
carried  out  a  task  such  as  hitherto  had  been  undertaken  only  from 
ambition  and  love  of  power. 

I  have  made  a  number  of  appointments  and  in  so  doing  I  may  have 
overlooked  an  honest  man  and  preferred  an  intriguer.  But  there  were 
serious  objections  to  leaving  these  first  appointments  in  your  hands;  you 
were  not  yet  organized. 

In  a  few  days  I  shall  be  leaving  you.  Only  the  orders  of  my  Govern- 
ment or  some  imminent  danger  to  the  Cisalpine  Republic  will  again 
bring  me  among  you.  But,  wherever  the  service  of  my  country  may 
take  me,  I  shall  always  have  a  lively  interest  in  the  wellbeing  and  glory 
of  your  Republic, 

BONAPARTE 

265 
To  the  Executive  Directory 

ff.Q.,  Milan 
22  Brumairet  Year  VI  (12  Nov9  1797) 

You  will  find  attached  the  redistribution  of  the  Army  of  Italy  into 
armies  of  England,  of  Italy  and  home  establishments. 

I  have  made  all  consequential  arrangements  and  given  the  necessary 
orders,  so  that,  the  moment  the  exchange  of  ratifications  takes  place  and 
we  are  in  Mainz,  our  columns  can  begin  to  march  to  the  Ocean. 

Tomorrow  I  am  sending  Colonel  Andreossy,  of  the  artillery,  to 
Paris  to  arrange  the  casting  of  cannon  of  the  same  calibre  as  the  English 
field  artillery  and  the  building  of  limbers  lighter  and  more  suitable  for 
embarkation  *Ka*r  ours.  We  must  have  guns  of  English  calibre  so  that 
once  in  the  country  we  can  use  their  shot. 

I  am  working  night  and  day  to  complete  the  organization  of  the 
Cisalpine  Republic,  and  to  arrange  Italy  and  the  army  so  that  my 
absence  will  not  be  felt. .  . .  The  Minister  of  Foreign  Afiairs  will 
report  my  recent  actions  in  the  Cisalpine  and  at  Genoa. 

A  large  part  of  the  Genoese  desire  to  be  French.  Ttat  is  an  acquisition 
which  I  believe  would  be  useful  to  us  and  should  not  be  lost  to  sight. 
I  do  not  think  that  the  Constitution  they  have  accepted,  although  I 
have  improved  it  somewhat,  will  prove  satisfactory,  and,  if  we  help  a 
little,  in  two  or  three  years  they  will  come  on  their  knees  to  us  to 
receive  them  as  French  citizens. 

I  kave  seat  Citizen  Poussaelgue  to  Malta  on  die  pretext  of  inspecting 
our  establishments  in  tibe  Levant,  but,  in  reality,  to  give  the  final 
touches  to  oat  plan  fbt  that  island. 

BONAPARTE 

Italy  209 

266 
To  Citizen  Poussielgue 

First  Secretary,  Legation  to  Genoa  H.Q.,  Milan 

22  Bnunaire*  Year  VI  (12  Nor,  1797) 

Since  the  acquisition  by  the  French  Republic  of  the  islands  of  Corfu, 
Zante,  Cephalonia  and  Cerigo  will  bring  new  French  political  and 
commercial  relations  in  the  Mediterranean  and  especially  in  the  Levant, 
and  since  the  Government  wishes  to  establish  these  on  a  regular  and 
satisfactory  basis  as  soon  as  possible,  the  Commandcr-in-Chief  instructs 
Citizen  Poussielgue,  in  the  name  of  the  French  Republic,  to  proceed  at 
once,  with  the  title  of  Inspector  General  of  the  Levantine  posts,  to  visit 
the  various  consuls  and  agents  of  the  Republic  in  the  Levant  and,  in 
general,  to  inspect  all  French  establishments  in  that  area. 

At  each  place  Citizen  Poussielgue  will  study  the  present  position  of 
our  trade  and  relations,  will  note  what  changes  have  occurred  since  the 
revolution  and  will  seek  the  promptest  means  of  restoring  the  former 
prosperity  of  our  trade  and  of  increasing  it  in  accordance  with  the 
advantages  we  now  have.  He  will  examine  the  ways  in  which  it  is 
desirable  to  extend  or  modify  our  political  relations.  Finally,  he  will 
seek  information  as  to  the  surest  means  of  establishing  our  communi- 
cations between  France  and  her  Adriatic  islands  cither  by  setting  up 
intermediate  points  in  Corsica,  Sardinia,  Sicily  or  Malta,  or  overland 
through  Italy  by  way  of  Ancona. 

On  his  return  from  this  mission,  which  Citizen  Poussielgue  will 
hasten  as  much  as  possible,  he  will  report  to  me  on  all  matters  entrusted 
to  him.* 

BONAPAltTE 

267 
To  the  Army  of  Italy 

24  BruJwaiYf,  Year  VI  (14  Nov,  1727) 

Soldiers,  I  leave  tomorrow  for  the  Congress  of  Rastadt. 

In  leaving  the  army  I  shall  be  consoled  by  the  hope  of  being  soon 
among  you  again,  fighting  against  new  dangers, 

Whatever  post  die  Government  may  assign  to  the  soldiers  of  the 
Army  of  Italy,  they  will  ever  be  the  worthy  supporters  of  the  liberty 
and  glory  of  the  French  name. 

Soldiers,  when  talking  of  the  princes  you  have  conquered,  of  the 
peoples  who  owe  you  their  liberty,  of  die  battles  you  have  won,  say: 
10  two  campaigns  we  would  have  done  still  more/ 

BONAPASTE 

*Thc  secret  instractioas  given  to  Poussidgae  concerning  Maka  (cp.  No,  265) 
were  no  doubt  gtvm  wfaafly.  if  written,  they  have  DOC  survived. 

no  The  Rise  to  Power 

268 
To  the  Executive  Directory 

25  Brumaire,  Year  VI  (25  Nov,  1797) 

General  Clarke,  who  is  going  to  Paris,  has  been  employed  in  Italy  for 
several  months.  In  all  the  letters  addressed  to  him  which  have  been 
intercepted  and  shown  to  me  I  have  never  seen  anything  contrary  to 
the  principles  of  the  Republic.  He  has  maintained  these  principles 
during  the  negotiations. 

General  Clarke  is  upright  and  a  hard  worker. 

If  his  relations  with  Carnot  make  him  suspect  in  diplomacy,  I  think 
he  could  be  useful  in  the  army,  especially  in  the  English  expedition. 

If  he  is  in  need  of  indulgence,  I  beg  you  to  grant  him  a  little.  At 
bottom,  General  Clarke  is  a  good  man.  I  kept  htm  at  Passariano  until 
30  Vendemiaire  and  since  then  he  has  been  sick. 

BONAPARTE 

269 
Address  to  the  Executive  Directory 

Paris 
20  Frimaire,  Year  VI  (10  Dec,  1797) 

In  order  to  be  free,  the  French  people  had  to  fight  the  kings.  In  order 
to  obtain  a  constitution  founded  on  reason  it  had  to  overcome  eighteen 
centuries  of  prejudice. 

You  and  die  Constitution  of  the  Year  ffl  have  triumphed  over  all 
these  obstacles. 

For  2,000  years  religion,  feudalism  and  royalism  have  successively 
ruled  Europe;  but  the  era  of  representative  government  dates  from  the 
peace  you  have  just  concluded. 

You  have  succeeded  in  organizing  die  great  nation  whose  vast 
territory  is  circumscribed  only  because  nature  herself  has  imposed 
limits  to  it. 

You  have  done  more.  The  two  most  beautiful  parts  of  Europe, 
formerly  so  famous  for  art  and  science  and  the  great  men  they  cradled, 
arc  now,  with  the  finest  hopes,  seeing  die  genius  of  liberty  rise  from  the 
tombs  of  their  ancestors.  They  are  two  pedestals  whereon  destiny  will 
place  two  powerful  nations. 

I  have  the  honour  to  lay  before  you  the  treaty  signed  at  Campo 
Formic  and  ratified  by  His  Majesty  the  Emperor. 

This  peace  will  ensure  die  liberty,  die  prosperity  and  the  glory  of  the 

hr» 

„  * — *  the  happiness  of  die  French  people  is  founded  on  the  best 
organic  laws,  die  whsok  of  Europe  will  become  free. 

Egypt 

REPUBLIQUE  FHANCAISE. 

xfa  queriitr-gixlrAl  du  KAIRK,  f«r   19  vr«vj«  *n  7 
lieuc  rranc  aistj  unc  et  in£yi*iMc. 

ORDRE  DU  JOUR,  du  1  5  nivose  an  7. 

IUaa  de 

Ordre  du  jour,  du  16  nivose. 

Riea  de 

__ 

Ordre  du  jour,  du   17  nivose. 

IRien  de  nonveau.  __ 

Oidre  du  jour,  du  18  nivose. 

de  noavemit. 

Ordre  du  jour,  du  19  nivose. 

LOOT  officier  de  s&nte  qni  qoitterait  ie  lien  desugie  pour  Tambnlance,  drrant  Fennemi,  sans 
Aec,  ou  qui,  <kus  une  jnaladie  coptagi«ise,  se  refuse  ait  a  porter  aux  mabdes  ses  secwirs  ,  sera 
arrete,  trwduit  devant  te  cmueii  miliiaiiie.,  et  traitc  selon  la.  tide  de  la  bl  rj?hlive  aux  soldats 
«t  flulitaires  qui  out  fill  cfcevant  1'eHaetai.  Aucuu  Fran^ab  ne  doit  cniindre  la  mort  quel  que  solt 
1'etat  q«M  ait  enibrass-e. 

Le  otoyen  Boyer,  ctnrargien  des  blesses  a  Ale^andrie,  qui  a  e'tJ  assez  lAche  poor  refuser  de 
dontter  des  secoors  a  des  bic^es  qui  avaient  en  contact  arec  des  malades  supposes  atteints  de 
aa'adies  cootag*ruses,  est  iadi^Be  de  la  qnalit^  de  CITOYEN  FROC4JS.  II  *>ra  habUle  en  femrae, 
preOHKM^  wr  na  Aae  daos  ies  ru*s  d'Aleiandrie  ,  avec  un  ecritean  stir  le  dos  portant  :  Indigne. 
fltr*  QTOYE»  FRAJ^^fS  ,  il  craint  de  mourir.  Apres  quoi  il  sera  mis  en  prisoa,  et  reaving  ta 
ie  premier  bStuaent 

aadaat  d'Alexacdrie  enverra  tm  esemphire  dudit  Ordre  da  jonr  an  president  de  son 
t  ,  atec  invilattoa  de  te  raver  de  dessas  la  li^tc  des  Oto%  ens 

,  Gcnml  sUDwf^an,  Chef 
Poor  cope  coufoFi»c  an  rpgistre  d'ordres  : 

HATIOHASS. 

Order  of  the  Day  of  the  Army  of  the  East 

Reiuted;  the  actual  document  measures  12  x  8  inches. 

SOMJB  MONTHS  FOLLOWING  HIS  TRIUMPHANT  RETUtN  TO  PAWS 

I-H  Bonaparte  continued  to  be  involved  in  the  troubled  political  and 
i  military  affairs  of  Italy,  and  much  of  his  correspondence  was 
devoted  to  them.  But  his  real  new  assignment  was  the  invasion  of 
England.  It  is  still  far  from  certain  whether  he  ever  seriously  intended 
to  carry  out  this  operation;  the  conquest  of  England  would  have  been 
a  great  triumph,  but  he  was  well  aware  of  the  risks  and  for  some  time 
he  had  been  suggesting  and  preparing  for  an  expedition  to  the  Levant 
(cp.  Nos.  254,  258).  However,  at  the  beginning  of  January  he  began 
the  planning  of  die  invasion,  Nos.  272  to  282  being  most  of  the  sur- 
viving papers  he  wrote  concerning  it  From  the  list  of  senior  officers 
posted  to  die  new  army  (No.  273)— a  roll-call  of  half  the  ablest 
soldiers  of  the  time — die  expedition,  whatever  its  chances,  would  have 
been  formidable.*  But  on  8  February  Bonaparte  went  on  a  personal 
reconnaissance  of  the  coast  and  when  he  returned  he  wrote  a  report 
(No.  280)  in  which  the  slimness  of  those  chances  was  fully  revealed. 
Whether  prompted  solely  by  the  facts  or  also  by  his  own  wish  for  a 
different  theatre  die  arguments  were  unanswerable.  They  were  no  less 
so  six  years  later. 

On  5  March,  at  the  request  of  the  Directors,  be  wrote  a  favourable 
report  (No.  283)  on  the  prospect  of  occupying  Malta  and  Egypt  and 
this  operation  was  approved  die  same  day.  Tlicreaftcr  he  worked  hard 
and  in  a  little  over  two  months  everything  was  ready.  Hae  main  body 
sailed  from  Toulon  on  19  May  to  be  met  by  convoys  from  Italy  and 
Corsica.  Tlie  fleet  consisted  of  13  ships  of  the  line  with  frigates  and 
smaller  craft;  the  army  was  carried  on  some  400  transports.  An 
imaginative  feature  of  die  expedition  was  the  inclusion  of  more  than 
100  scholars  and  scientists  destined  to  explore,  record  and  develop  the 
new  colony. 

Malta  surrendered  after  a  token  resistance,  and  the  effete  sovereignty 
of  dae  Order  of  St.  John  was  brought  to  an  end,  Within  a  week 
Bonaparte  had  transformed  the  entire  government  and  life  of  the 
island,  installed  a  garrison  and  sailed  on  (cp.  Nos.  295-308). 

Egypt  was  fonnally  part  of  due  Turkish  empire,  but  effective  power 
there  had  for  long  been  in  die  hands  of  the  virtually  independent 
Mameluke  beys.  The  French  aim  was  to  exploit  this  situation  by  claim- 
ing that,  far  from  being  a  threat  to  die  sovereignty  of  the  Porte,  diek 
esjx^tk>n  was  designed  to  support  it  by  ridd^  Mame- 

lukes. Bonaparte  was  to  claim  this  cooststendy  in  his  dealings  with  die 
Turks  (e.g.  Nos,  310,  327,  410),  while  a  special  diplomatic  mission  to 
Constantinople  was  to  fry  to  ensure  the  passivity  if  not  the  alliance  of 
die  Porte;  Talleyrand  himself  was  orginally  intended  for  this  role,  but 
in  the  end  it  was  Bescocdhes  who  went 

214-  The  Rise  to  Power 

"The  army  was  successfully  landed  on  i  July,  and  the  occupation  of 
all  Egypt  followed  quickly,  the  troops  suffering  more  through  heat, 
thirst  and  marauding  Arabs  than  from  the  colourful  but  one-sided 
battles  against  the  Mameluke  armies,  The  remnants  of  these  withdrew, 
some  under  Murad  into  Upper  Egypt,  where  they  were  harried  but 
never  quite  destroyed  by  Desaix,  others  under  Ibrahim  into  Syria. 

But  in  two  respects  the  overall  plan  miscarried.  On  i  August 
Nelson  destroyed  Brueys's  fleet  at  the  battle  of  the  Nile  (Nos.  347-51), 
thereby  ensuring  that  no  further  reinforcements  or  supplies  could 
reach  Egypt  from  France.  Isolated  and  a  prey  to  casualties,  accidents  and 
disease,  the  army's  ultimate  fate  was  now  sealed,  though  a  prolonged 
respite  from  serious  fighting  might  have  delayed  the  end  for  many 
years.  But  the  Turks  saw  through  the  flimsy  French  diplomatic  pre- 
tences and,  under  English  and  Russian  pressure,  declared  war. 

Nevertheless,  Bonaparte  set  about  organizing  the  new  colony  with 
all  his  accustomed  energy.  Harassed  by  revolts  and  shortages,  by 
private  misery  (he  at  last  knew  certainly  of  Josephine's  infidelity*  and 
was  not  much  consoled  by  his  own  afiaire  with  Mme  Foures)  and  the 
seething  discontent  of  the  army,  he  yet  succeeded  in  building  an 
administration,  exploring  and  mapping  Egypt,  fortifying  its  frontiers, 
setting  up  the  Institute,  making  contact  with  the  surrounding  rulers 
and  attempting  to  do  so  even  with  Tippoo  Sahib  in  India. 

But  by  the  beginning  of  1799  he  could  no  longer  ignore  the  Turks, 
who  were  planning  simultaneous  invasions  by  land  and  sea,  and  to 
forestall  them  he  was  forced  to  undertake  the  Syrian  campaign.  This 
decisively  crushed  die  immediate  overland  threat,  but  the  desperate 
resistance  of  Acre  imposed  a  terrible  cost  and  unforeseen  delay  while 
the  return  march  across  the  burning,  waterless  desert  with  a  tired, 
starved  and  plague-ridden  army,  burdened  with  hundreds  of  sick  and 
wounded,  was  probably  his  worst  military  experience  until  the  retreat 
from  Moscow. 

The  seaborne  threat  was  more  easily  disposed  of.  At  the  end  of  July 
a  Turkish  army  landed  near  Alexandria  only  to  be  totally  destroyed  at 
tie  batde  of  Aboufcir.  Egypt  was  now  secure  for  another  year,  but  the 
plight  of  the  army  was  serious  (No.  406),  and  on  learning  of  die  French 
defeats  in  Europe  Bonaparte  both  made  overtures  for  peace  (No.  410) 
and  prepared  to  return  to  France.  On  22  August  he  handed  over  the 
command  to  Kl£ber  and  embarked,  luck  and  good  navigation  en- 
abling his  two  frigates  to  avoid  Nelson's  cruisers  and  reach  Frejus  on 

*  There  is  a  reference  to  this  in  No.  329,  which  together  with  No.  330  are  the 
only  two  private  letters  he  wrote  from  Egypt  to  have  survived. 

t  The  'desertion'  has  bcea  much  criticised.  la  so  far  as  it  was  motivated  by  real 
fears  for  France  and  by  realisation  mat  if  his  army  was  to  be  saved  it  could  be 

The  end  of  the  affair  may  be  briefly  told.  Placed  in  an  intolerable 
position,  Kleber's  first  aim  was  to  get  his  army  home.  To  this  end 
he  withdrew  to  the  coast  and  on  27  January,  1800,  negotiated  with 
Sir  Sidney  Smith  the  convention  of  El  *  Arish  by  which  he  was  to  evacu- 
ate Egypt  with  the  honours  of  war  and  safe  conduct  to  France. 
This  angered  Bonaparte,  although  he  had  specifically  authorized 
Klcber  to  make  such  terms  (Nos.  411,  513,  584);  it  also  angered  the 
British  government,  which  repudiated  Smith's  signature  as  to  safe 
conduct  Richer  then  reoccupied  Egypt,  defeating  another  Turkish 
army  at  Hcliopolis.  But  on  14  June  he  was  assassinated  and  succeeded 
by  Mcnou,  a  man  of  far  less  ability.  Even  so,  die  crumbling  French 
army  held  out  for  another  year,  but  was  unable  seriously  to  resist 
Abercromby's  English  expeditionary  force,  which  landed  at  Aboukir 
in  March,  i&oi.  It  finally  surrendered  in  September  and  was  evacuated 
to  France  under  the  treaty  of  Amiens. 

The  Egyptian  expedition  was  far  from  being  a  fiasco,  but  it  was 
undoubtedly  a  failure  from  which  Bonaparte  extricated  himself 
without  immediate  loss  of  prestige,  but  with  somewhat  tarnished 
honour.  It  failed  owing  to  English  naval  supremacy  in  die  Mediter- 
ranean, but  Bonaparte  can  hardly  be  blamed  for  not  foreseeing  this, 
for  when  he  set  out  the  naval  forces  were  roughly  equal  and  Nelson 
was  not  yet  accounted  die  giant  he  was  to  become.  The  expedition  was 
undoubtedly  hazardous,  but  had  it  not  been  for  die  batde  of  die  Nile 
there  is  no  reason  why  a  successful  French  impcrium  could  not  have 
been  built  up  in  the  Levant.  As  it  was,  die  immediate  positive  results 
were  ncglibfe  (the  negative  results  were  probably  considerable,  for  the 
events  of  1798  and  1799  would  surely  have  been  different  had  Bonaparte 
and  his  first-rate  troops  been  available  in  Europe).  The  long-term 
results  were  immense:  Bonaparte's  experience  was  widened  and  his 
imagination  stimulated  with,  lasting  effect;  die  study  of  egyptology 
and  die  Empire  style  were  born,  and  Ac  foundations  were  kid  for  a 
century  and  a  half  of  Anglo-French  rivalry  in  the  Near  East. 

ORDER  OF  BATTLE  OF  THE  ARMY  OF  THE  EAST 
as  at  i  July,  1798  (abridged) 

C.-w-C:  Bonaparte 

Poussieigae 

C.ofS:  Berdaer 

Grfr.,  Cavahy:  Dumas  €*.,  Art&erf:  Dooiimrtin 

I«jp.-G«L,  Gantry:  Dugoa  C.  cfS-,  Ariilfay:  Sugny 

sarcd  ooty  on  Boropean  haflirAt^  k  TO  ti»  rigjbt  dcc«k>^  But  it  is  hard  to 
avoid  the  snspicion  tbat  fee  afao  knew  diat  in  Egypt  the  game  was  op  and  tibat  by 
icttinimg  be  opjad  botfa  lay  cac  ptagac  foe  die  idtfattatc  oebgclc  on  otbcts  and  serve 
tbe  catwe  of  his  own  ambitions. 

216  The  Rise  fa  Power 

C.  ofS.*  Ctfw&y;  Almeras  O.C,  Park:  Soogis 

C&.,  Engineers:  Caf&reHi  O.C,  Bridging  Train:  Andreossy 

QJ&G.:  Sucy  Pkysituin-Gen.:  Desgenettes 

Dfcpw/y  Q.M.G.;  d'Aure  Surgeon-Gen.:  Larrey 

Paymaster-Gen.:  Esteve  Brig*-Gens.,  G.S.;  Lanusse,  Menard; 

Adjts.-Gen.:  Durnuy,  Dupuy,  Escak,  Grezieu,  Lagrange,  Zajonchck 

Division:  K16ber 

Brig.-Gens.:  Verdier,  Lannes    C.  of  S.:  Damas 
2nd  Light    25th  TJjy    75^h  Line 

Division:  Desair 

Brig.-Gens.:  Belliard,  Friant    C.  ofS.:  Donzelot 
2 ist  Light    6ist  Line    88th  line 

Division:  "Boa 

Brig.-Gens,:  Mannont,  Rampon    C.  of  S.;  Valentin 
4th  Light    i8th  Line    32nd  Line 

Division:  Menou 

5.:  Veaux,  Vial    C.  ofS.:  Rambeaud 
22nd  Light    I3th  Line    6pth  Line 

Division:  Reynier 

Brig.-Gen.:  Fugiere    C  of  S.:  Juliien 
9th  Line    8fth  Line 

Division:  Vaubois  (garrison  of  Malta) 

.:  Chanez,  Casalta    C.  ofS.:  Brouard 
23rd  Light    ipth  Line    45di  Line 

CAVALRY 

Brigade:  Lederc 

7th  Hussars    3rd  Dragoons 

Brigade:  Mireur 
22nd  Chasseuzs    2Oth  Dragoons 

Brigade:  Murat 
1 5th  Dragoons    I4th  Dragoons 

Brigade;  Davout 
i8di  Dragoons 

THE  FDSET 
C-»nC«  Brueys 

Rear-Admirals:  Blanquct  du  Chayla,  Villcneuve 
Commodores:  Ganteaume,  Perree 

Flag  Captain:  Casabianca 

Skips  of  the  Line:  Orient  (i2Ognns,  flag),  Franklin,  Spartiate,  Guemer,  Conquerant, 
Peaj^Souverain,  Hetaeux,  Tonnant,  Generetix,  GuiHaume-Tell,  Timoieon, 
Mcrcorc,  Aqtrikm  (all  74'$);  Causse,  EHibois  (Venetian  74*5) 

Bigwfts:  Mootoiotte,  Mantoue,  Artemise,  Justice,  Junon,  Cancmniere,  Negresse, 
DHEDC,  Carretc,  Muiron,  Leoben,  Akeste 

COMMISSION  OF  SCIENCE  AMD  THE  ARTS 

(Principal  mtembers:) 

Artist:  Rigaod;  Astronomers:  Dangos,  Duc-Lachapdle;  Mathematicians:  Costaz, 
Fooricr,  Moiard,  Mcxigc;  Bio&g&s:  Ddisk,  Gcoftcy  Saint-Hikirc,  Thonin; 
Doiomicu;  Chamsts:  BcrtboQct,  Chaptal;  Archaeologist:  Dupuis; 
Secretary  to  the  C.-wt-C.:  Bourriennc 

217 

EGYPT  AND  SYRIA 
Maka 

218  The  Rise  to  Power 

270 

To  Citizen  Barras 

President  of  the  Executive  Directory  Paris 

3  Nivose,  Year  VI  (23  Dec,  ijgj] 

I  have  the  honour  to  send  you,  Citizen  President,  a  copy  of  a  letter 
which  I  have  received  from  the  Bey  of  Tunis,  with  tie  names  of 
eighteen  Frenchmen  whom  he  has  had  set  at  liberty. 

"While  I  was  in  Italy  I  took  every  opportunity  of  showing  our  good 
friends  the  Turks  the  friendship  that  the  French  Republic  has  for  mem. 

The  provisional  Government  of  the  Ligurian  Republic  has  also  set 
free  the  Turkish  slaves  in  the  Genoese  galleys  and  has  sent  them  back 
to  their  country. 

Since  we  have  been  in  occupation  of  the  Ionian  islands,  Ali,  Pasha 
of  Janina,  the  Pasha  of  Scutari,  the  Turks  of  the  Morea  and  even  the 
Divan  have  not  only  welcomed  us,  but  have  taken  every  opportunity 
of  showing  their  regard  for  the  French. 

No  sooner  had  our  ambassador,  Aubert-Dubayet,  informed  the 
Porte  that  our  troops  were  at  Corfu,  Zante,  Cephalonia,  etc.,  than 
considerable  cargoes  of  corn  were  sent  to  supply  them. 

As  a  result  of  the  new  possessions  we  have  acquired,  our  commerce 
with  the  Levant  will  not  only  find  an  assured  protection,  but  it  will 
be  treated  by  all  the  subjects  of  die  Porte  with  special  favour. 

BONAPARTE 

271 

To  Major-General  Bernadotte 

Ai  Milan  Paris 

ijNivose,  Year  VI  (6]m,  1798) 

I  thank  you,  Citizen  General,  for  the  reports  you  sent  me  on  the 
French  establishments  in  the  Ionian  sea.  You  do  not  waste  your  time, 
but  spend  ia  study  all  that  peace  prevents  you  from  spending  on  the 
battlefield. 

I  would  much  have  liked  to  have  you  with  me  in  England;  but  it 
appears  that  the  Government  thinks  your  presence  necessary  to  com- 
inaad  Italy.  Ttxat  post  is  so  important,  that  it  would  ill  become  me  to 
resist  You  wifl  serve  the  Republic  in  Kghting  tibe  way  for  the  new 
republicans  of  Italy.  Believe  that,  whatever  happens,  I  will  give  you 
proo&  of  the  respect  yon  have  inspired  in  me. 

I  salute  you. 

BONAPABTE 

272 
To  General  Sch4rer 

Minister  of  War  ^  Paris 

20  Nivose,  Year  VI  (&Jan,  1798} 

Citizen  Minister,  I  have  kid  before  the  Executive  Directory  various 
requests  concerning  die  organization  of  the  Army  of  England.  As  soon 
as  you  send  me  a  copy  of  the  Government's  decrees  I  will  forward  to 
you  the  destination  of  each  unit  and  each  general  composing  that  army, 
so  that  you  may  send  them  orders  to  proceed  by  the  shortest  route. 

But  the  organization  of  the  artillery  being  most  urgent,  since  that 
arm  always  takes  much  longer  to  prepare,  I  think  I  should  teO  you  at 
once  of  die  work  needed  in  this  connexion. 

Orders  must  be  sent  to  General  Lcspinasse  and  to  Citizens  Songis 
and  Faultrier  to  leave  the  Army  of  Italy  at  once  and  join  die  Army  of 
England.  Hie  artillery  in  Italy  could  be  commanded  by  General  Sugny 
and  die  park  directed  by  Colonel  Gu&dot. 

All  die  various  detachments  of  the  ist  Regiment  of  foot  artillery 
and  die  2nd  Regiment  of  horse  artillery  must  be  ordered  to  proceed 
at  once  to  Douai . . .  [mmy  farther  movements  of  troops  tad  office]. 

The  train  of  120  guns  dial  I  have  proposed  to  the  Directory  for  the 
Army  of  England  must  be  divided  into  two  parks,  of  which  one  should 
assemble  at  Douai,  die  other  at  Rennes. 

Generals  Dulauloy  and  Dommartin  must  be  given  the  necessary 
orders  and  powers  to  organize  immediately  at  Douai  and  Rennes 
parks  each  composed  of  fifteen  12-poundm,  thirty  8-poundm,  fifteen 
howitzers,  ten  Pjiglisfo  guns  and  a  train  of  thirty  pontoons. 

Double  field  stores  must  be  contained  in  portable  boxes  and  loaded 
onto  extremely  light  wagons  such  as  will  be  least  difficult  to  embark. 
I  wish  the  infantry  supplies  also  to  be  packed  in  portable  boxes  placed 
on  carts. 

Each  of  these  trains  will  need  1,200  artillery  horses,  which  must  be 
of  the  best.  About  1,200  will  be  coming  from  the  Army  of  Italy,  which 
can  be  destined  for  Rennes,  and  1,200  of  the  best  horses  in  the  Army 
of  the  Rhine  can  be  chosen  for  Douai 

The  train  at  Douai  must  be  ready  to  move  off  by  i  Ventose  for 
embarkation  at  some  point  on  die  coast;  that  at  Rennes  by  the  25th 
of  tie  same  month- 
Citizen  Andr&ssy  will  act  as  director  of  the  bridging  train  of  the 
Army  of  England.  I  would  wish  you  to  g£ve  him  orders  to  leave  on 
the  23rd  of  this  month  to  proceed  widi  Citizen  Forfeit  for  Le  Havre 
and  dicnce  along  the  coast  to  carry  out  a  special  mission  as  to  which 
I  wiH  give  him  separate  instnictkm, . . . 

I  salute  you. 

BONAPAJtTE 

22O  The  Rise  to  Power 

273 
Decree 

Paris 
23  Nivose,  Year  VI  (12  Jan,  1798) 

The  Executive  Directory  decrees: 

That  Major-Generals  Berthier  (Chief  of  Staff),  Kilmaine  (com- 
manding the  cavalry),  Kl£ber,  Gouvion  Saint-Cyr,  Lefebvre,  Cham- 
pionnet,  Massena,  Senirier,  Victor,  Brtme,  Dumas,  Marescot  (com- 
manding the  engineers),  Baraguey  d'Hilliers,  Dallemagne,  d'Hautpoul, 
Duhesme,  Grenier,  Lespinasse  (commanding  the  artillery); 

Tliat  Brigadier-Generals  Lannes,  Rampon,  Menard,  Verdier,  Point, 
Duphot,  Lanusse,  Chambarlhac,  Belliard,  Veaux,  Monnier,  Friant, 
Pijoo,  Dessolle,  Kellermann,  Leclerc,  Cervoni,  Murat,  Mireur,  Wal- 
thcr,  Dommartin,  Dulauloy,  Sorbier,  Tharreau,  Girard  the  elder, 
Montrichard,  E>avout,  Decaen,  La  Boissiere,  Lecourbe,  Oudinot, 
Gardanne,  Vandamme,  Mermet,  Olivier,  Soult,  Richepanse,  Chasse- 
loup,  Cafiarelli-Diifalga,  Boisg^rard,  Legrand,  Humbert,  Klein,  Ney, 
Hardy,  Damas,  Vial; 

That  Adjutants-general  Argod,  Boyer,  Escale,  Sarrazin,  Lorcet, 
Rivaud,  BeuEand,  Denzelot,  Gudin,  Heudelet,  Jullien,  I>aultanne, 
Debilly,  Dudheyron,  Coulange,  Smith*,  Simon,  Levasseur,  Gilly  the 
younger,  Mortier,  Charpentier; 

Hiat  artillery  Ck>lonels  Gassendi  (Director  of  the  park),  Lariboisiere, 
Andreossy  (bridging  train),  Songis  (Chief  of  Staff),  Latoumerie, 
Eaultrier,  Salva,  Doumic,  Allix,  Gueriot-Saint-Martin,  Manscourt, 
Darencey,  Saint-Laurent; ,  .  . 

That  engineer  Colonels  Cretin,  Poitevin,  Sanson,  Maubert,  will 
form  part  of  the  Army  of  England. 

274 
To  General  Schfirer 

Minister  of  War  Paris 

iS  Plumose,  Year  VI  (6  Feb,  1798} 

I  have  received  with  gratitude,  Citizen  Minister,  the  flag  and  the 
sword  you  have  sent  me. 

It  b  die  Army  of  Italy  that  the  Government  thus  honours  through 
its  generaL 

Please  receive  my  particular  thanks  for  the  handsome  letter  ac- 
companying your  gift. 

I  salute  you. 

BONAPARTE 

*  Wolfe  Tone. 

275 

To  Brigadier-General  Lannes 

Paris 
i  S  Plumose,  Year  VI  (6  Fcb,  179$) 

The  Legislature,  Citizen  General,  has  awarded  me  a  flag  in  memory 
of  the  batde  of  Arcola. 

It  has  sought  to  honour  the  Army  of  Italy  through  its  general. 
Tlicrc  was  a  moment  on  the  field  of  Arcola  when  the  still  uncertain 
victory  demanded  boldness  from  the  leaden.  With  three  wounds  and 
covered  in  blood  you  left  the  ambulance,  resolved  to  conquer  or  die. 
Throughout  that  day  I  saw  you  constantly  in  the  front  rank  of  the 
brave.  It  was  you,  too,  at  the  head  of  the  infernal  column,  who  were 
the  first  to  reach  Dego,  the  first  across  die  Po  and  the  Adda.  It  is  for 
you  to  be  die  depository  of  this  honourable  flag,  which  covers  in  glory 
die  grenadiers  you  continually  commanded.  Henceforth  you  will  un- 
furl it  only  when  all  retreat  is  useless  and  victory  depends  on  remaining 
master  of  the  field. 

BONAPAXTE 

276 
To  General  Sch&rer 

Minister  of  War 

*p  Pluviose,  Year  VI  (7  Ffi,  1798) 

I  leave  tomorrow  to  visit  die  ocean  coast,  Citizen  Minister.  I  shall 
be  back  in  twelve  days. 

General  Desaix  is  going  to  Brest,  General  Kl£ber  to  Le  Havre,  We 
ought  to  occupy  the  Saint-Marcouf  islands. 

I  request  you  to  put  30,000  francs  at  die  disposal  of  General  Desaix, 
[provisional]  CommanderHb-Chief  of  Ac  Army  of  England,  for  the 
extraordinary  expenses  of  diat  army. 

I  salute  you, 

BONAPARTE 

277 

To  Brigadier-General  CaffarelH 
AtDm&bk  Dunkirk 

24  PWt&f,  Year  VI  (12  FA,  i/jtf) 

General  CafiardM  will  proceed  to  Boulogne,  He  will  take  steps  to 
improve  die  poet,  so  that  it  can  hold  50  gunboats,  from  six  to  nine 
divisions  each  of  50  fishing  boots  drawing  six  to  seven  feet  of  water, 
ewe  or  two  divisions  of  50  boots  carrying  horses,  6  boats  of  100  tons 
for  the  staf£  6  for  the  artillery,  6  for  the  supply  services,  6  for  the 

222  The  Rise  to  Power 

Citizen  Forfait  will  have  15,000  francs  sent  to  the  agent  for  roads 
and  bridges  at  the  port  of  Boulogne,  with  which  General  Caffarelli  will 
at  once  put  work  in  hand.  He  will  proceed  to  Etaples  and  Ambleteuse 
and  will  see  whether  it  is  possible  to  put  each  of  these  ports  into  a  con- 
dition to  hold  a  division  of  fishing  boats.  He  will  inspect  the  batteries 
defending  Boulogne  and  have  them  increased  if  necessary,  so  as  to  en- 
able them  to  withstand  any  attack.  He  will  also  inspect  the  port  of 
Calais  and  have  any  necessary  work  carried  out  to  enable  it  to  hold 
400  boats. 

General  CafTarelli  will  send  me  a  detailed  report  on  these  two  ports 
and  on  the  time  needed  to  bring  them  to  the  required  state.  I  will  have 
the  necessary  money  sent  to  him. 

He  will  send  privateers  with  engineer  officers  on  board  to  recon- 
noitre the  English  coast  from  Folkestone  to  Rye  to  find  out  the  true 
state  of  this  coast  and  the  batteries  that  must  be  captured  or  avoided 
in  order  to  carry  out  a  landing  there. 

BONAPARTE 

278 

To  Citizens  Forfait  and  Andr6ossy 

Dunkirk    . 
24  Pluviose,  Year  VI  (12  Feb,  1798} 

Citizens  Forfait  and  Andr£ossy  will  proceed  to  the  Hague. 

They  will  hand  the  attached  letters  to  the  [Dutch]  Executive  Direct- 
ory and  to  the  French  Minister  and  French  general  at  the  Hague. 

They  will  themselves  indicate  the  ships  we  require,  after  which  they 
will  go  to  Dunkirk  where  they  will  receive  further  orders. 

Holland  is  said  to  be  rich  in  flat  boats  which  sail  well;  from  150  to 
250  must  be  procured  for  us,  with  as  many  armed  sloops  as  possible. 
These  various  boats  must  go  at  once  to  Dunkirk  and  be  ready  to  leave 
there  in  a  month. 

If  Holland  is  really  interested  in  this  expedition  and  is  in  a  position 
to  provide  what  we  need,  as  much  as  possible  must  be  drawn  from 
there. 

Have  work  on  the  horse  transports  started  in  Holland,  at  Dunkirk 
and  Le  Havre,  so  that  we  have  space  for  4,000  to  5,000  horses. 

Have  an  embargo  placed  on  the  fishing  boats  and  others  that  we 
can  use,  to  give  us  enough  to  embark  50,000  men,  with  the  artillery, 
supplies,  etc.  Group  all  these  boats  in  divisions  of  fifty. 

Have  the  sloops  and  gunboats  armed  at  once,  so  that  in  fifteen  or 
twenty  days  all  can  get  under  way  for  the  port  of  assembly. 

BONAPARTE 

___ Egypt 223 

279 
To  the  Executive  Directory 

Of  the  Batavian  [Dutch]  Republic  Dunkirk 

24  Pluviose,  Year  VI  (12  Feb,  1798} 

Citizen  Directors,  the  Executive  Directory  has  given  me  command 
of  the  army  destined  to  effect  a  landing  in  England. 

My  hope  of  succeeding  in  this  important  mission  rests  in  part  on 
the  support  which  I  hope  for  from  your  brave  nation  and  in  particular 
from  its  illustrious  rulers. 

Apart  from  your  Texel  fleet  and  the  transports  to  embark  the  troops 
under  your  orders,  it  is  indispensable  that  I  should  have  from  200  to 
250  fishing  boats,  each  capable  of  carrying  80  to  100  men,  and  20  or 
30  gunboats. 

I  wish  this  flotilla  to  be  divided  into  divisions  of  fifty  boats,  each 
commanded  by  one  of  your  naval  officers  and  to  be  at  Ostend  in 
twenty  or  twenty-five  days. 

I  am  sending  Citizens  Forfait  and  Andreossy,  officers  of  the  highest 
merit  who  have  my  entire  confidence,  to  confer  with  you  on  the 
necessary  measures  and  to  receive  your  orders.  I  am  distressed  that 
for  the  moment  I  am  unable  to  come  myself. 

I  await  your  reply  with  impatience  and  am  confident  that  the  com- 
bined Dutch  and  French  flotillas,  supported  by  the  fleets  from  Brest 
and  the  Texel,  will  quickly  reconquer  the  Cape  and  your  other 
establishments  and  humble  this  enemy  of  our  common  liberty. 

Believe,  Citizen  Directors,  the  high  consideration  with  which  I  am, 
etc. 

BONAPARTE 

280 
To  the  Executive  Directory 

Paris 
5  Ventose,  Year  VI  (23  Feb,  1798} 

I 

Whatever  efforts  we  may  make  we  shall  not  attain  naval  supremacy 
for  several  years. 

To  carry  out  a  descent  on  England  without  mastery  of  the  sea 
would  be  the  boldest  and  most  difficult  operation  ever  undertaken. 

If  possible  at  all,  it  will  be  only  by  a  surprise  crossing,  either  by 
avoiding  the  squadron  blockading  Brest  or  the  Texel,  or  by  arriving 
in  small  boats  at  points  in  the  counties  of  Kent  or  Sussex  during  the 
night  after  a  crossing  of  seven  or  eight  hours. 

Such  an  operation  needs  long  nights,  therefore  winter;  nothing  can 
be  done  after  April, 

224  The  &*se  to 

Any  operation  attempted  with,  sloops  during  summer  calms  is  im- 
practical since  the  enemy  would  offer  insurmountable  obstacles  to  the 
landing  and,  above  all,  to  the  crossing. 

Our  navy  is  today  as  litde  ready  as  it  was  when  the  Army  of  England 
was  created,  that  is  to  say,  four  months  ago.  There  are  only  ten  armed 
battleships  at  Brest  and  tney  are  without  crews  and  very  far  from  being 
ready  for  sea.  The  English  blockade  us  there  with  a  few  ships.  Where- 
ever  I  have  been  I  have  heard  sailors'  gibes  about  the  lack  of  energy 
in  our  armament.  The  dockyards  are  busy  building  privateers;  me 
workers  on  the  great  rivers  and  canals,  who  are  enlisted  into  the  navy 
in  every  emergency,  have  not  even  been  recorded.  Litde  commerce 
raiders  of  thirty  or  forty  tons  have  crews  of  from  sixty  to  eighty  sailors. 
All  the  crews  of  neutral  ships  in  our  ports  are  one-third  and  even  one- 
half  French.  Many  sailors  are  quietly  at  home. 

In  the  arsenal  at  Dunkirk  there  are  six  superb  frigates  whose  arma- 
ment is  all  in  store;  not  one  is  yet  equipped.  Some  sixty  men  are  at 
work  caulking  the  first.  The  others  have  not  been  touched,  and  every 
day  an  English  frigate  or  corvette  comes  within  gunshot  of  our  ships. 

We  have  gunboats  at  Nantes,  Brest,  Lorient,  Cherbourg,  where 
they  are  not  necessary;  orders  have  not  yet  been  given  for  them  to 
assemble  at  Le  Havre  or  Dunkirk  In  this  last  port  there  are  twelve 
sloops  or  gunboats,  disarmed;  no  one  seems  ready  to  start  work  arming 
them.  During  four  months  not  one  new  sloop  has  been  completed;  120 
have  just  been  laid  down. 

The  expedition  against  England  does  not,  therefore,  seem  possible 
before  next  year,  and  then  difficulties  arising  on  the  continent  will 
probably  prevent  it.  The  right  moment  to  prepare  for  this  expedition 
has  been  lost,  perhaps  for  ever. 

n 

Our  ports  from  Le  Havre  to  Antwerp  contain  the  ships  necessary 
to  carry  50,000  infantry  and  4,000  cavalry.  There  are  100  sloops  or 
gunboats  between  Bordeaux  and  Ostend.  There  are  120  under  con- 
struction, which  would  be  useful  but  are  not  absolutely  essential,  and 
therefore  their  completion  need  not  be  awaited.  AH  that  is  needed  is: 

1.  To  arm  and  assemble  at  Le  Havre  and  Dunkirk  all  the  sloops  and 
gunboats  at  present  between  Bayonne  and  Ostend. 

2.  To  place  an  embargo  on,  charter  and  start  work  on  the  ships  to 
be  used  as  horse  transports, 

3 .  To  place  an  embargo  on  and  charter  the  ships  between  Cherbourg 
and  Antwerp  which  have  been  indicated  by  Citizens  Forfait  and 
Andreossy.  (The  proposals  in  articles  2  and  3  were  carried  out  by 
Citizens  Forfeit  and  Andreossy:  the  minister  has  lifted  the  embargo.) 

4.  Urge  the  Dutch  Republic  to  provide  the  boats  for  which  I  have 
asked  it. 

225 

5.  Place  an  embargo  on  the  best  privateers  of  less  than  100  tons  on 
the  coast  between  Bordeaux  and  Antwerp  and  have  them  proceed  to 
Le  Havre  and  Dunkkk;  since  they  will  be  used  as  transports,  only  the 
necessary  crews  will  be  left  in  them. 

If  all  the  material  mentioned  in  the  above  articles  were  to  be  as- 
sembled at  Le  Havre,  Dunkirk  and  Ostend  during  the  month  of  March, 
which  is  quite  possible,  the  English  expedition  would  still  be  feasible. 
To  achieve  this  object,  it  is  necessary: 

1.  To  appoint  a  rear-admiral  inspector  of  the  coast  from  Cherbourg 
to  Antwerp. 

2.  To  appoint  Citizen  Forfait  naval  commissioner  for  this  same  part 
of  the  coast. 

3.  To  appoint  Citizen  Andreossy  brigadier-general  in  charge  of  the 
military  armament  of  these  ships. 

4.  To  form  these  three  officers  into  a  committee  which  will  receive 
orders  directly  from  the  general  commanding  the  expedition. 

5.  To  instruct  the  Ministers  of  Marine  and  War  to  provide  all  the 
junior  officers  whom  this  committee  may  need  for  its  organization 
and  service. 

6.  To  appropriate  4  million  francs,  payable  at  the  rate  of  800,000  per 
decade,  for  the  use  of  this  committee;  that  sum  will  suffice. 

7.  There  are  thirty  ships  of  the  line  at  Brest;  within  a  month  twenty- 
five,  with  as  many  frigates,  must  be  ready  to  leave.  That  seems  to  me 
possible.  The  step  the  Government  is  taking  of  sending  the  Minister  of 
Marine  there  cannot  but  expedite  considerably  the  work  in  that  port. 

8.  Take  the  sailors  from  all  privateers  that  we  shall  not  be  using. 

9.  Arrest  all  French  and  English  sailors  on  neutral  ships. 

10.  Appoint  commanders  to  all  the  ships  and  squadrons. 
Relieved  of  the  whole  expense  of  the  Channel  expedition,  the  Mini- 

ster of  Marine  should  be  able  to  support  the  armament  of  Brest  out  of 
his  ordinary  funds.  The  chartering  of  transports  and  other  expenses 
connected  with  the  invasion  cannot,  so  far  as  Brest  is  concerned, 
amount  to  more  than  a  million  or  a  million  and  a  half  francs. 

In  addition  300,000  francs  per  decade  must  be  set  aside  for  the  special 
expenses  of  the  army  in  addition  to  the  ordinary  expenditure  of  the 
Ministry  of  War.  (This  300,000  includes  the  special  expenses  for 
the  staff,  engineers,  artillery,  the  embarkation  of  the  cavalry  and  the 
repairs  to  the  ports  of  Boulogne  and  Calais.) 

It  would  be  essential: 

1.  To  forbid  any  foreigner,  and  above  all  any  Anglo-American,  to 
enter  the  towns  of  Brest,  Le  Havre,  Boulogne,  Calais  and  Dunkirk. 

2.  To  divert  the  English  mail-boats  to  Gravdines,  so  that  they  no 
longer  touch  at  Calais. 

3.  Finally,  to  direct  all  troops  destined  for  the  Army  of  England 

226  The  Rise  to  Power 

which  are  now  retained  in  Switzerland  or  at  Lyons  or  Nimes  to  join 
that  army. 

If  it  is  not  possible  to  obtain  all  the  money  required  in  this  memor- 
andum or  if,  in  view  of  the  present  state  of  our  navy,  it  is  not  thought 
possible  to  secure  the  speed  of  action  which  the  circumstances  demand, 
then  any  expedition  against  England  should  in  fact  be  abandoned, 
though  the  appearance  of  it  should  be  kept  up,  and  all  attention  and 
resources  should  be  fixed  on  the  Rhine  so  as  to  try  to  seize  Hanover 
and  Hamburg  from  England.  It  will  be  realized  that,  if  either  of 
these  ends  is  to  be  attained,  no  large  army  must  be  maintained  at  a 
distance  from  Germany. 

Or  else  an  expedition  could  be  made  into  the  Levant  which  would 
threaten  the  commerce  of  India. 

If  none  of  these  three  operations  is  feasible,  I  see  no  other  way  out 
than  to  make  peace  with  England.  I  believe  they  would  now  accept  the 
proposals  rejected  by  Malmesbury. 

In  that  case  the  negotiations  at  Rastadt  would  be  more  favourable 
to  us.  Were  peace  to  be  concluded  with  England  during  the  course  of 
the  congress,  we  should  naturally  be  in  a  position  to  demand  much 
more  from  the  German  Empire. 

BONAPARTE 

281 
To  Brigadier-General  Caffarelli 

At  Boulogne  Paris 

7  VentSse,  Year  VI  (25  Feb,  1798} 

On  reaching  Paris  I  received  the  various  letters  you  have  sent  me, 
Citizen  General.  I  was  not  at  all  surprised  at  the  difficulties  you  are 
meeting;  but  both  I  and  the  Government  were  surprised  at  the  stupidity 
of  this  [Naval  Commissioner  at  Dunkirk]  M.  David. 

I  have  not  thought  it  proper  to  have  the  Government  make  the 
regulation  you  suggest.  It  would  be  very  a  bad  arrangement  for 
the  expedition  we  are  undertaking.  The  whole  of  the  navy  situated  in 
the  area  of  the  Army  of  England  must,  like  the  other  arms,  be  entirely 
in  the  hands  of  the  general  commanding  the  army. 

Citizen  Forfait  has  been  appointed  naval  commissioner;  his  authority 
will  extend  from  Antwerp  to  Cherbourg.  Rear- Admiral  Lacrosse  will 
also  be  coming  as  inspector  of  this  section  of  the  coast.  Citizen 
Andreossy  is  promoted  brigadier-general  of  artillery  and  will  be  in 
charge  of  all  matters  of  military  armament. 

These  three  officers  will  form  a  committee  which  will  receive  orders 
direct  from  the  general  commanding  the  expedition. 

The  Directory  is  placing  800,000  francs  per  decade  at  the  disposal 
of  this  committee.  A  further  300,000  francs  per  decade  will  be  set  aside 

^ Egypt 227 

for  the  engineers,  artillery  and  extraordinary  expenses  of  the  army. 
The  sums  necessary  to  rehabilitate  the  ports  will  be  taken  from  these 
funds. 

Desaix  has  arrived  and  will  be  going  to  Boulogne  in  a  few  days. 
The  troops  are  on  the  march. 

I  salute  you. 

BONAPARTE 

282 
To  Brigadier-General  Caffarelli 

At  Boulogne  Paris 

8  Ventose,  Year  VI  (26  Pel,  1798) 

Citizen  General,  the  result  to  be  obtained  from  the  work  at  the 
ports  in  the  Pas-de-Calais  is  that  the  greatest  possible  number  of  boats 
can  leave  on  the  same  tide. 

Only  Calais,  Ambleteuse,  Boulogne  and  Etaples  can  be  counted  on, 
and  I  should  regret  having  to  use  Calais,  at  least  for  the  transport  of 
the  first  30,000  men. 

It  would  be  pointless  to  undertake  long  and  costly  work  at  Boulogne 
to  enable  it  to  hold  more  boats  than  can  leave  on  one  tide.  If  this 
number  is  100  or  150  boats,  no  more  work  should  be  done  than  will 
enable  it  to  hold  that  number.  The  same  applies  to  Calais. 

Work  must  be  pushed  forward  at  Ambleteuse  so  that  it  can  hold  all 
the  boats  that  can  leave  on  one  tide. 

Please  let  me  know  what  use  can  be  made  of  Etaples,  in  the  light  of 
both  its  present  condition  and  its  geographical  situation. 

If  the  channels  at  Boulogne  and  other  ports  were  parallel  with  the 
edge  of  the  sea,  it  is  clear  that  all  the  ships  would  receive  the  water  of 
the  tide  at  the  same  moment  and  could  leave  at  once;  it  is  therefore  on 
those  parts  of  the  ports  nearest  the  sea  that  work  must  be  done  . .  . 

Could  we  not  beach  all  the  little  boats  carrying  only  forty  or  fifty 
men  and  carry  out  work  on  the  beaches  to  facilitate  that  operation? 
On  the  Mediterranean  I  have  often  seen  boats  of  forty  or  fifty  tons 
drawn  up  twenty-five  or  thirty  yards  on  the  beach  and  they  are 
refloated  in  a  quarter  of  an  hour. 

Since  not  as  many  ships  as  we  shall  need  can  leave  Boulogne  on  one 
tide,  we  will  put  the  horse  transports,  supply  ships  and  heavy  gunboats 
there  for  preference.  We  will  put  the  gunboats  drawing  less  than  three 
feet  of  water  at  Ambleteuse.  Three  to  four  hundred  boats  will  be 
beached  in  the  bay  of  Saint-Jean;  these  will  not  be  laden  at  all  since 
they  will  be  carrying  only  men  and  two  or  three  sacks  of  biscuit. 

Please  choose  the  part  of  the  coast  between  Ambleteuse  and  Boulogne 
most  suitable  for  this  beaching,  and  let  me  know  what  work  can  be 
done  to  make  the  operation  easier. 

228  The  Rise  to  Power 

As  for  Calais  and  Dunkirk,  we  will  use  them  for  the  rest  of  the  army, 
the  trains  and  supplies. 

I  have  been  told  that  by  cutting  a  bridge  at  Calais  a  great  many 
boats  could  be  put  in  the  Channel  without  other  work. 

You  will  pay  particular  attention  to  the  coastal  batteries  at  Boulogne 
and  Ambleteuse  and  those  we  must  instal  in  the  area  where  the  boats 
will  be  beached.  You  will  write  to  General  Dulauloy,  at  Douai,  who 
will  send  you  300  or  400  gunners  with  the  mortars  and  guns  you  think 
you  need. 

I  salute  you. 

BONAPARTE 

283 
To  the  Executive  Directory 

Paris 
15  Ventose,  Year  VI  (5  Mar,  1798} 

To  occupy  Egypt  and  Malta  would  require  from  20,000  to  25,000 
infantry  and  from  2,000  to  3,000  dismounted  cavalry. 

These  troops  could  be  found  and  embarked  in  France  and  Italy  as 
follows: 

At  Civita-Vecchia:  the  2ist  Light,  6ist  and  88th  of  the  line,  with 
Generals  Belliard  and  Friant,  5,200  men;  2Oth  Dragoons,  yth  Hussars, 
General  Mireur,  800. 

At  Genoa  ...  In  Corsica  ...  At  Marseilles  ...  At  Toulon  . . .  At 
Nice  and  Antibes  . .  .  Total  24,600  infantry,  2,800  cavalry. 

The  demi-brigades  with  their  companies  of  gunners; 

The  cavalry  with  harness,  but  without  horses,  each  man  armed  with 
a  musket; 

All  units  with  their  [forward]  depots; 

One  hundred  cartridges  per  man; 

Water  on  board  for  a  month;  food  for  two  months. 

These  troops  would  have  to  be  embarked  in  the  various  ports  and 
ready  to  move  at  the  beginning  of  Floreal,  proceeding  to  the  gulf  of 
Ajactio  and  assembled  ready  to  leave  there  before  the  end  of  Floreal. 

To  these  troops  must  be  added:  sixty  field  guns,  forty  heavy  siege 
guns,  two  companies  of  sappers,  an  artillery  battalion,  two  companies 
of  labourers,  a  pontoon  battalion,  which  would  be  embarked  in  French 
and  Italian  ports  as  follows  .  .  . 

At  Civita-Vecchia  General  Massena  can  be  instructed  to  charter  the 
largest  ships  he  can,  find  in  the  port,  to  embark  the  troops  and  artillery 
and  send  dbem  at  once  to  the  port  of  Ajaccio,  where  they  would  remain 
till  further  orders.  The  expenses  of  this  convoy  can  be  borne  out  of  the 
Roman  contributions;  all  Papal  galleys  capable  of  putting  to  sea  should 
be  used  for  it. 

__ Egypt 229 

The  general  commanding  in  the  Cisalpine  can  carry  out  the  same 
order  at  Genoa,  and  General  Baraguey  d'Hilliers  can  proceed  there  for 
this  purpose.  The  necessary  money  must  first  be  sent. 

Trie  Executive  Directory  of  the  Cisalpine  Republic  will  be  asked 
for  two  galleys  which  will  help  to  transport  the  troops  and  escort  the 
convoy. 

As  for  Nice,  Antibes  and  Marseilles,  the  Minister  of  Marine  must: 
i.  Charter  enough  of  the  largest  merchant  ships  to  carry  the  troops 
and  artillery  set  out  above;  2.  Have  the  necessary  provisioning  put  in 
hand.  The  Minister  of  War  must  give  orders  for  the  troops,  with  the 
artillery  and  other  supplies,  to  proceed  there. 

At  Toulon  we  have  six  ships  of  the  line  and  some  frigates  and  cor- 
vettes; six  tartans  mounting  cannon  must  be  added.  Together,  these 
ships  would  be  sufficient  to  carry  the  troops  to  be  embarked  at  Toulon. 

According  to  the  report  of  the  Minister  of  Marine,  this  squadron 
will  be  ready  to  sail  in  a  fortnight,  though  it  lacks  sailors.  Therefore, 
it  is  necessary  only  to  embargo  and  charter  the  boats  needed  to  trans- 
port the  artillery. 

To  succeed  in  this  expedition  an  extraordinary  expenditure  of  5 
millions  must  be  envisaged  apart  from  ordinary  expenses  for  supply- 
ing, arming  and  paying  the  fleet,  for  the  pay,  food  and  clothing  of 
the  troops  and  for  the  cost  of  the  artillery  and  engineers,  which  it  is 
essential  to  equip  effectively;  that  means  in  all  a  sum  of  from  8  to  9 
millions  tobeborne  by  theGovernment  between  now  and  20  Germinal. 

BONAPARTE 

284 
Decree* 

Paris 
15  Ventose,  Year  VI  (5  Mar,  1798) 

The  Executive  Directory  decrees: 

ARTICLE  i.  Rear-Admiral  Blanquet  du  Chayla  is  appointed  inspector 
of  the  Mediterranean  coasts  and,  together  with  the  citizens  named 
below,  will  form  the  committee  for  toe  armament  of  the  coasts. 

ART.  2.  Citizen  Le  Roy,  naval  commissioner  at  Le  Havre,  will  carry 
out  the  functions  of  naval  commissioner  for  the  Mediterranean  coasts. 

ART.  3.  General  Dommartin  is  appointed  inspector  of  artillery  for 
the  Mediterranean  coasts. 

ART.  4.  Quartermaster  Sucy  is  appointed  Quartermaster-General 
and  member  of  the  said  committee. 

ART.  5.  The  National  Treasury  will  appoint  a  paymaster  to  form 
part  of  this  committee* 

*  This  Decree  and  also  Nos.  289  and  290  were  written  by  Bonaparte,  though 
signed  by  the  Directors. 

230  The  Rise  to  Power 

ART.  6.  All  expenses  in  connexion  with  the  army  will  be  authorized 
by  Q.M.G.  Sucy,  those  in  connexion  with  the  navy  by  Commissioner 
Le  Roy. 

ART.  7.  The  committee  will  take  all  steps  to  secure  sailors  and  will 
carry  out  forthwith  the  instructions  it  will  receive. 

ART.  8.  All  civil,  military  and  naval  officers,  the  Government  com- 
missioners attached  to  local  authorities  and  the  officers  commanding 
the  various  sectors  of  the  coast  will  carry  out  the  demands  made  of 
them  by  the  committee. 

ART.  9.  The  Ministers  of  War,  Marine  and  Finance  are  charged, 
each  in  so  far  as  he  is  concerned,  with  the  immediate  execution  of  the 
present  decree,  which  will  not  be  published. 

285 
To  Citizen  Talleyrand 

Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs  Paris 

24  Ventose,  Year  VI  (14  Mar,  ijgg) 

I  have  just  learned,  Citizen  Minister,  that  the  Empke  has  at  last 
agreed  to  accept  the  left  bank  of  the  Rhine  as  the  basis  of  the  treaty  of 
Rastadt.  Citizens  Treilhard  and  Bonnier  will  have  no  difficulty  in 
completing  what  they  have  begun  so  successfully.  From  now  on  my 
intervention  would  be  superfluous,  so  I  beg  you  to  authorize  me  to 
have  brought  back  from  Rastadt  that  part  of  my  household  that  I  left 
there,  since  my  presence  at  Paris  is  necessary  as  a  result  of  various  orders 
and  in  view,  of  certain  expeditions. 

BONAPARTE 

286 
To  Citizen  B£nezech 

Minister  of  the  Interior  Paris 

6  Germinal,  Year  VI  (26  Mar,  1798} 

Citizen  Minister,  the  director  of  the  Printing  Office  of  the  Republic 
and  Citizen  Langles  are  extremely  unco-operative.  Please  give  definite 
orders  that  all  the  arabic  characters  actually  in  existence,  but  not  the 
matrices,  be  packed  at  once  and  that  Citizen  Langles  should  accompany 
them. 

In  the  first  interview  I  had  with  him,  Citizen  Langles  seemed  to  me 
very  willing  to  come;  in  any  case,  the  Republic  has  the  right  to  demand 
obedience  from  him,  since  it  has  educated  and  long  supported  him. 

Please  also  give  orders  that  the  Greek  characters  be  packed;  there 
are  some,  for  at  this  very  moment  Xenophon  is  being  printed,  and  it 
will  do  no  great  harm  if  Xenophon  is  dekyed  for  three  months,  by 
which  time  further  characters  can  be  made,  since  the  matrices 
remain. 

231 

Please  also  give  orders  to  pack  the  characters  for  three  French  presses. 
Ordinary  type  will  suffice. 

BONAPARTE 

287 
To  the  Executive  Directory 

Paris 

7  Germinal,  Year  VI  (27  Mar  ,1798) 

Citizen  Directors,  the  public  papers  report  that  you  have  had  several 
members  of  the  councils  of  the  Cisalpine  Republic  arrested  and  that 
it  is  now  intended  to  arrest  Moscati  and  Paracusi,  two  members  of  the 
Executive  Directory  of  that  Republic. 

As  a  citizen  who  has  had  some  knowledge  of  people  and  events  in 
Italy  during  the  past  two  years,  I  feel  it  my  duty  to  tell  you  that  France 
and  liberty  have  no  truer  friends  than  these  two  Directors. 

Citizen  Paradisi,  who  was  a  well-known  professor  at  Reggio,  is  the 
only  Italian  who  has  rendered  fighting  service  to  the  French  army.  In 
the  middle  of  the  first  campaign,  when  Mantua  was  still  in  the  hands 
of  the  Austrians,  he  dared  to  lead  200  of  his  compatriots  against  200 
Austrians  who  had  withdrawn  into  a  castle  and  took  them  prisoner. 
He,  his  family  and  the  whole  town  of  Reggio  were  thereafter  seriously 
threatened  by  the  Austrians,  who  were  much  angered  by  this  incident. 

Citizen  Moscati  was  known  as  one  of  the  most  celebrated  of  Euro- 
pean medical  men,  with  a  deep  knowledge  of  moral  and  political 
science.  He  devoted  himself  entirely  to  the  service  of  the  army,  and 
it  is  to  him  and  his  advice  that  we  owe  perhaps  20,000  men  who  would 
otherwise  have  died  in  our  hospitals  in  Italy. 

Disparagement  of  the  Cisalpine  Government  at  the  very  moment 
of  its  birth  and  the  loss  of  its  best  citizens  would  be  a  real  misfortune 
for  France  and  a  triumph  for  the  Emperor  and  his  partisans. 

I  beg  you  to  see  in  this  letter  my  desire  to  pkce  all  my  knowledge 
at  the  service  of  the  nation. 

I  salute  you. 

BONAPARTE 

288 
To  Citizen  J.  B.  Say 

Paris 

8  Germinal,  Year  VI  (28  Mar,  1798) 

I  thank  you,  Citizen,  in  the  name  of  General  Bonaparte,  for  your 
kindness  in  undertaking  the  purchase  and  packing  of  various  books 
intended  to  form  a  portable  library.  I  have  told  your  brother  the 
form  in  which  the  account  should  be  rendered  in  order  to  be  charge- 
able to  public  funds.  Together  with  this  letter  he  will  hand  you  a 
L.D.N.  —  i 

232  The  Rise  to  Power 

warrant  drawn  on  the  paymaster  of  engineers  to  pay  for  the  books 
you  have  bought  and  the  expenses  of  packing. 

You  know  that  the  cases  should  be  solid  and  convenient,  but  as 
simple  as  possible.* 

CAFFAKELLI 
Aide-de-camp 

289 
Decree 

Paris 

23  Germinal,  Year  VI  (12  Apr,  ijg$) 
The  Executive  Directory, 

Considering  that  the  beys  who  have  seized  the  government  of 
Egypt  have  formed  most  intimate  ties  with  the  English  and  have  made 
themselves  wholly  dependent  on  them;  that  in  consequence  they  have 
committed  open  hostilities  and  the  most  horrible  cruelties  towards 
Frenchmen,  whom  they  daily  molest,  rob  and  murder; 

Considering  that  it  is  its  duty  to  pursue  the  enemies  of  the  Republic 
wherever  they  may  be  found; 

Considering,  furthermore,  that,  the  infamous  treachery  by  which 
England  has  made  itself  master  of  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope  having 
rendered  access  to  India  by  the  normal  route  very  difficult  for  the 
ships  of  the  Republic,  it  is  necessary  to  open  another  route  thither 
for  the  Republican  forces,  to  combat  the  satellites  of  the  English  Govern- 
ment there  and  to  stop  that  source  of  its  corrupting  wealth, 

Decrees: 

ARTICLE  i.  The  Commander-in-Chief  of  the  Army  of  the  East  will 
lead  the  land  and  sea  forces  under  his  command  to  Egypt  and  will  take 
possession  of  that  country. 

ART.  2.  He  will  drive  the  English  from  all  their  oriental  possessions 
which  he  can  reach,  and  notably  he  will  destroy  their  settlements  on 
the  Red  Sea. 

ART.  3.  He  will  cause  the  isthmus  of  Suez  to  be  cut  through  and  he 
will  take  all  necessary  measures  to  ensure  to  the  French  Republic  the 
free  and  exclusive  possession  of  the  Red  Sea. 

*  Over  a  third  of  this  field  library  of  some  300  volumes  consisted  of  history, 
about  equally  divided  between  classical  and  modem  works;  among  the  latter, 
biographies  of  great  military  commanders,  Conde,  Turenne,  Saxe,  Marlborough, 
Frederick,  etc.,  predominated.  Tliere  was  also  a  number  of  scientific  and  military 
text4x>oks  and  some  works  of  geography  and  travel,  including  Cook's  Voyages; 
the  heading  *Politics  and  Morals*  covered  the  Old  and  New  Testaments,  the  Koran, 
the  Vedas  and  Montesquieu's  Spirit  of  the  Laws.  For  lighter  reading  Bonaparte  took 
poetry  and  plays  by  La  Fontaine,  Tasso,  Ariosto,  Homer,  Vergil,  Voltaire  and  his 
beloved  Gssum,  while  forty  volumes  of  unnamed  English  novels  appeared  beside 
PtSvost,  Lesage,  Marmontel  and  Goethe. 

333 

ART.  4.  He  will  improve  the  lot  of  the  inhabitants  of  Egypt  by  all 
means  in  his  power. 

ART.  5.  So  far  as  possible  he  will  maintain  good  relations  with  the 
Caliph  and  his  immediate  subjects. 

ART.  6.  The  present  decree  will  not  be  published. 

290 
Decree 

Paris 

23  Germinal,  Year  VI  (12  Apr,  1798) 
The  Executive  Directory, 

Considering  that  the  Order  of  Malta  has  of  its  own  volition  adopted 
a  hostile  attitude  towards  France  since  the  beginning  of  the  present 
war;  that  it  made  an  express  declaration  to  this  effect  in  the  manifesto 
of  the  Grand  Master  of  10  October,  1794;  .  .  .  that,  even  quite  recently, 
it  has  brought  to  the  highest  pitch  its  attacks  on  the  Republic  by  receiv- 
ing into  its  midst  and  admitting  to  its  highest  dignities  Frenchmen 
universally  known  as  the  most  bitter  enemies  of  their  country  and 
forever  dishonoured  through  having  borne  arms  against  it;  that  every- 
thing indicates  its  intention  immediately  to  hand  over  its  territory  to 
one  of  the  powers  still  at  war  with  France  and,  thereby,  to  paralyse 
French  navigation  in  the  Mediterranean;  .  .  . 

Decrees  as  follows: 

ARTICLE  i.  The  Commander-in-Chief  of  the  Army  of  the  East  is 
instructed  to  occupy  the  island  of  Malta. 

ART.  2.  To  this  end  he  will  at  once  direct  against  the  island  of  Malta 
the  land  and  sea  forces  under  his  command. 

The  present  decree  will  not  be  published, 

291 
To  Vice-  Admiral  Brueys 

C.-m-C.,  Mediterranean  Fleet,  at  Toulon  Paris 

3  Floreal,  Year  VI  (22  Apr,  1798} 

It  is  essential,  Citizen  Admiral,  that  you  organize  the  fleet  at  once. 

Commodore  Ganteaume  will  carry  out  the  functions  of  chief  of 
staff  of  the  fleet.  Citizen  Casabianca  will  be  your  flag  captain.  .  .  . 

Our  thirteen  ships  of  the  line  will  be  divided  into  three  squadrons. 
Those  of  the  right  and  left  will  each  contain  four  ships,  the  centre, 
five.  Each  squadron  will  have  a  frigate  and  a  corvette. 

Rear-Admirals  Blanquet  du  Chayla  and  Villeneuve  will  each 
command  a  squadron. 

[Rear-]  Adioiral  Decres  will  command  the  convoy  and  will  have 
under  his  orders  two  first  rates  .  .  .  three  frigates  and  a  number  of  fast 
brigs  which  you  will  select.  With,  these  ships  he  will  lead  the  movement 

234  The  Rise  to  Power 

and  will  be  ready  to  command  the  light  squadron  which  you  may 
decide  to  form  by  detaching  ships  from  the  fleet. 

But,  once  the  enemy  is  in  sight  and  the  line  of  battle  formed,  all 
Admiral  Decres's  care,  with  his  frigates,  will  be  for  the  convoy,  to 
attend  to  its  safety  and  carry  out  the  orders  you  may  have  given  him. 

Thus,  it  seems  to  me  that  this  officer  has  a  splendid  role.  He  sails  at 
the  head  of  the  column,  verifies  the  reports  of  Ms  patrol  boats  and  sends 
back  exact  messages  to  you.  This  single  function  is  so  important  that 
it  ought  to  be,  as  on  land,  the  commander  himself  who  can  be  the  first 
to  observe  the  enemy;  but  at  sea  the  admiral  can  never  leave  his  fleet 
because  he  is  never  sure  of  being  able  to  rejoin  it  once  he  has  left  it. 

Should  you,  as  soon  as  the  enemy  is  sighted,  judge  it  proper  to 
support  the  frigates  with  two  or  three  ships  of  the  line,  then  the  light 
squadron  will  be  organized  in  accordance  with  established  custom  and 
that  officer  will  command  it.  Finally,  if  you  fight  in  line,  the  responsi- 
bilities of  that  admiral  will  be  not  less  important;  whatever  the  issue 
of  the  battle,  he  will  have  to  shelter  from  every  accident  a  convoy  that 
is  very  precious  to  the  Republic  and,  having  done  that,  he  may  still 
with  his  frigates  be  of  service  to  the  fleet. 

What  I  am  laying  down  is  perhaps  contrary  to  normal  usage,  but 
the  advantages  I  foresee  in  it  are  so  great  that  I  am  certain  we  shall 
profit  by  it  and  shall  give  up  the  naval  custom  of  putting  on  the 
frigates  of  the  advance-guard  only  some  commander  when  in  fact  all 
subsequent  events  depend  on  this  first  observation  and  the  first  reports. 

I  leave  tomorrow  night  and  hope  to  find  the  squadron  prepared  on 
my  arrival. 

BONAPARTE 

292 
To  Major-General  Desaix 

At  Civitar-Vecchia  H.Q.,  Toulon 

29  Floreal,  Year  VI  (18  May,  1798) 

Since  the  22nd,  my  dear  General,  we  have  been  at  anchor  and  ready 
to  sail;  but  a  very  strong  east  wind  has  prevented  us.  Today  it  is  dead 
calm.  So  I  hope  to  be  able  to  leave  tomorrow  morning,  unless  the 
wind  is  again  in  the  east. 

Once  at  sea  the  winds  may  carry  us  very  quickly;  you  must,  therefore, 
still  be  ready  to  set  sail  at  six  hours'  notice. 

Four  Spanish  frigates  have  just  arrived  at  Toulon. 

I  recommend  you  to  send  a  dispatch-boat  to  us  between  Elba  and 
Corsica;  it  will  take  care  to  interrogate  all  ships  coming  from  the 
Levant  or  Spain  so  as  to  learn  of  movements  in  the  Mediterranean. 

A  thousand  regards  to  Monge.  I  salute  you. 

BONAPARTE 

Egypt 235 

293 
To  Citizen  Joseph  Bonaparte 

Member  of  the  Council  of  Five  Hundred  On  board  Orient 

4  Prairial,  Year  VI  (23  May,  1798) 

We  have  joined  the  convoy  from  Genoa;  we  have  had  good,  bad, 
and  calm  weather.  We  are  well  on  our  way,  moving  towards  Elba. 
This  evening  we  shall  be  opposite  Bastia.  I  have  not  been  sea-sick. 

Please  send  me  news.  I  wrote  to  you  from  Toulon  what  I  wish  you 
to  do.  What  concerns  you  in  the  arrangement  I  made  with  you  goes 
well. 

I  salute  you. 

BONAPARTE 

P.S.  My  wife  will  wait  a  few  days  at  Toulon,  until  she  knows  that  we 
have  passed  Sicily;  after  that  she  will  go  to  take  the  waters. 

294 
To  Vice- Admiral  Brueys 

C.-f«-C.,  Mediterranean  Fleet  On  board  Orient 

8  Prairial,  Year  VI  (27  May,  1798) 

[Proposal  by  Admiral  Brueys  to  detach  four  ships  of  the  line  and  three 
frigates  to  meet  the  convoy  from  Civita-Vecchia.] 

If,  twenty-four  hours  after  this  separation,  ten  English  ships  are 
signalled,  I  shall  have  only  nine  instead  of  thirteen. 

BONAPARTE 

295 
To  the  Grand  Master 

Order  of  St.-John-of-Jerusalem  On  board  Orient,  before  Malta 

22  Prairial,  Year  VI  (10  June,  1798} 

Eminence,  having  been  called  upon  to  carry  aboard  the  flagship  the 
reply  of  Your  Eminence  to  the  request  that  the  squadron  be  permitted 
to  take  on  water,  the  Commander-in-Chief  Bonaparte  is  indignant 
that  permission  to  water  should  be  accorded  only  to  two  ships  at  a 
time;  what  length  of  time,  indeed,  would  it  not  take  for  500  or  600 
sail  to  procure  in  this  way  the  water  and  other  things  they  urgently 
need?  This  refusal  has  surprised  General  Bonaparte  the  more,  since  he 
is  aware  of  the  preference  granted  to  the  English  and  of  the  proclama- 
tion issued  by  Your  Eminence's  predecessor. 

General  Bonaparte  is  resolved  to  secure  by  force  what  ought  to  have 
been  accorded  to  him  in  the  name  of  hospitality  which  is  the  basis  of 
your  Order. 

I  have  seen  the  considerable  forces  under  tie  orders  of  General 
Bonaparte  and  I  foresee  the  inability  of  the  Order  to  resist.  In  so 
important  a  matter  it  was  to  be  wished  that  Your  Eminence,  through 

336  The  Rise  to  Power 

love  of  his  Order  and  his  knights  and  the  whole  population  of  Malta, 
could  have  proposed  some  means  of  accommodation. 

The  general  does  not  wish  me  to  return  to  a  town  which  he  feels 
obliged  from  now  on  to  treat  as  hostile  and  whose  only  hope  lies  in 
the  generosity  of  General  Bonaparte.  He  has  given  the  most  precise 
orders  that  the  religion,  customs  and  property  of  the  Maltese  should 
be  scrupulously  respected. 

By  order  of  the  Commander-in-Chief 
The  French  Consul  in  Malta 
CARUSON 

296 
To  the  Grandmaster 

Order  of  St.-John-of-Jerusalem  On  board  Orient,  before  Malta 

23  Prairial,  Year  VI  (njune,  1798} 

In  consequence  of  the  request  Your  Excellency  has  made  for  an 
armistice,  the  Commander-in-Chief  has  ordered  his  aide-de-camp, 
Colonel  [Junot],  to  visit  you  and  has  authorized  him  to  conclude  and 
sign  an  armistice. 

I  beg  Your  Excellency  to  appreciate  my  desire  to  express  the  esteem 
in  which  I  hold  Your  Excellency. 

By  order  of  the  Commander-in-Chief 

297 
To  Major- General  Vaubois 

G.O.C.,  Landing  Force  On  board  Orient,  before  Malta 

23  Prairial,  Year  VI  (njune,  1798) 
The  Commander-in-Chief  understands,  General,  that  the  Grand 

Master  of  the  Order  of  Jerusalem  has  informed  the  French  military 
commander  that  there  is  an  armistice. 

There  are  only  parleys,  in  the  town  and  on  board  Orient. 

If  the  armistice  takes  place,  it  will  be  only  for  the  fortress,  unless  the 
other  positions  of  the  island  are  specifically  mentioned. 

The  Commander-in-Chief  hopes  that  during  the  course  of  the 
day  you  will  become  master  of  the  Old  City  and  of  the  whole  is- 
land in  accordance  with  the  orders  you  received  yesterday  from  the 
Commander-hb-Chief  and  myself. 

By  order  of  the  Commander-in-Chief 

298 
Convention 

On  board  Orient,  before  Malta 

24  Prairial  Year  VI  (12  June,  1798) 
Convention  agreed  between  the  French  Republic,  represented  by 

237 

Citizen  Bonaparte,  Commander-in-Ckief,  of  the  one  part,  and  the 
Order  of  Knights  of  St-John-o£-Jerusalem,  represented  by  ... 

ARTICLE  I.  The  Knights  of  the  Order  of  St.-John-o£jerusalem  will 
deliver  the  forts  of  Malta  to  the  French  army.  They  renounce  in 
favour  of  the  French  Republic  their  rights  of  sovereignty  and  property 
over  this  town  and  the  islands  of  Malta,  Gozo  and  Cumino. 

ART.  2.  The  French  Republic  will  use  its  influence  at  the  Congress 
of  Rastadt  to  secure  to  the  Grand  Master,  during  his  lifetime,  a  prin- 
cipality equivalent  to  that  which  lie  loses  hereby,  and,  meanwhile,  it 
undertakes  to  pay  to  him  an  annual  pension  of  300,000  francs;  in 
addition  he  will  be  given  the  value  of  two  years'  duration  of  this 
pension  as  indemnity  for  his  personal  property.  So  long  as  he  remains 

French,  at  present  at  Malta,  and  of  whom  a  list  will  be  drawn  up  by 
the  Commander-in-Chief,  may  return  to  their  country  and  their 
residence  in  Malta  will  be  counted  to  them  as  residence  in  France. 

The  French  Republic  will  use  its  good  offices  with  the  Cisalpine, 
Roman,  Ligurian  and  Helvetic  Republics  to  have  the  present  Article 
declared  applicable  to  the  Knights  of  these  different  nations. 

ART.  4.  The  French  Republic  will  pay  a  pension  of  700  francs  to  the 
French  Knights  at  present  at  Malta  during  their  lifetime  and  will  use  its 
good  offices  with  the  Cisalpine,  Ligurian,  Roman  and  Helvetic  Republics 
that  they  may  grant  the  same  pension  to  Knights  of  their  nations. 

A&T.  5.  The  French  Republic  will  use  its  good  offices  with  the  other 
powers  of  Europe  to  the  end  that  they  should  preserve  to  the  Knights 
of  their  nations  the  exercise  of  their  rights  over  the  property  of  the 
Order  situated  in  their  States. 

ART.  6.  The  Knights  will  retain  the  personal  property  which  they 
possess  in  the  islands  of  Malta  and  Gozo. 

ART.  7.  AH  the  civil  acts  passed  under  the  government  of  the  Order 
will  remain  valid  and  will  be  executed  .  .  . 

BONAPARTE  BOSREDON-RANSIJAT  . . . 

299 
Order  of  the  Day 

Army  of  the  East  On  board  Orient,  before  Malta 

24  Prairial,  Year  VI  (12  June,  1798) 

The  Army  is  informed  that  the  enemy  has  surrendered;  the  standard 
of  liberty  floats  on  the  forts  of  Malta. 

The  Commander-in-Chief  recalls  the  Army  to  the  strictest  discipline; 
he  wishes  persons  and  property  to  be  respected  and  the  people  of  Malta 
to  be  treated  with  friendship. 

By  order  of  the  Commander-in-Chief 

23  8  The  Rise  to  Power 

300 
Order* 

H.Q.,  Malta 
25  Prairial,  Year  VI  (13  June,  179$) 

Bonaparte,  Commander-in-Chief,  member  of  the  Institute,  orders: 

ARTICLE  i.  The  islands  of  Malta  and  Gozo  will  be  administered  by 
a  governing  committee,  composed  of  nine  persons,  to  be  appointed  by 
the  Commander-in-Chief. 

ART.  3.  A  French  commissioner  will  be  attached  to  the  governing 
committee. 

ART.  6*  The  governing  committee  will  at  once  commence  organising 
civil  and  criminal  courts,  following  as  far  as  possible  the  forms  at  pre- 
sent existing  in  France.  Appointment  of  members  of  the  courts  will 
require  the  approval  of  the  general  officer  commanding  in  Malta. 
Until  these  courts  are  organized,  justice  will  continue  to  be  ad- 
ministered as  in  the  past. 

ART.  n.  All  the  properties  of  the  Order  of  Malta,  of  the  Grand 
Master  and  the  different  monasteries  of  the  knights  belong  to  the 
French  Republic. 

ART.  13.  The  police  will  be  wholly  under  the  orders  of  the  general 
officer  commanding  and  the  officers  under  his  orders. 

ARTICLE  i.  In  consequence  of  today's  order  concerning  the  organiza- 
tion of  the  government,  the  following  citizens  compose  the  governing 
committee:  Bosredon-Ransijat.  . .  . 

ART.  2.  Citizen  Regnaud  de  Saint-Jean  d* Angely  is  the  commissioner 
of  the  Government  attached  to  the  committee. 

ARTICLE  i.  The  officers  and  soldiers  who  composed  the  military 
forces  in  the  service  of  the  Order  of  Malta  .  ,.  .  will  assemble  at  2.0  p.m. 
today  and  will  proceed  to  Bircarcara  at  5.0  a.m.  tomorrow.  They  will 
be  passed  in  review  by  Brigadier-General  Lannes. 

ART.  2.  All  armorial  beanngs  will  be  removed  within  twenty-four 
hours.  It  is  forbidden  to  wear  livery  or  any  mark  or  tide  of  nobility. 

ART.  3.  All  knights  and  inhabitants  who  are  subjects  of  a  power  at 
war  with  France,  such  as  Russia  and  Portugal,  are  required  to  leave 
Malta  within  forty-eight  hours. 

ART.  4.  All  knights  of  less  than  sixty  years  of  age  are  required  to 
leave  Malta  within  three  days. 

ARTICLE  i.  Knights  who  were  not  sworn  and  who  have  married  at 
Malta. 
ART.  2.  Knights  who  have  private  professions  in  Malta. 

*  Between  13  and  18  June  Bonaparte  issued  more  than  twenty  orders  concern- 
ing different  aspects  of  tire  government  of  Malta.  Extracts  from  several  of  these 
are  here  given,  under  a  single  number. 

Egypt 239 

ART.  4.  And  those  included  in  the  attached  list,  known  for  the 
sentiments  they  have  held  towards  the  Republic,  will  be  regarded  as 
citizens  of  Malta  and  may  remain  as  long  as  they  wish.* 

ARTICLE  i.  All  effects  and  merchandise  belonging  to  English,  Russian 
and  Portuguese  merchants  will  be  placed  under  seal. 

28  Prairial,  Year  VI  (16  June,  1798) 

AjmciE  i.  Henceforth  all  inhabitants  of  Malta  have  equal  rights  .  . . 

ART.  2.  Slavery  is  abolished;  the  slaves  known  under  the  name  of 
buonavogli  are  set  at  liberty  and  the  contract  which  they  have  made 
and  which  dishonours  the  human  race  is  annulled. 

ART.  4.  All  inhabitants  of  the  islands  of  Malta  and  Gozo  are  required 
to  wear  the  tricolour  cockade  .  .  . 

ART.  6.  The  Order  of  Malta  being  dissolved,  it  is  expressly  forbidden 
to  all  to  take  the  tides  of  bailly,  commander  or  knight. 

ART.  8.  In  every  church  the  arms  of  the  Grand  Master  will  be 
repkced  by  those  of  the  French  Republic. 

ART.  9.  Since  the  island  of  Malta  belongs  to  the  French  Republic, 
the  missions  of  the  various  minister-plenipotentiaries  have  ceased. 

ART.  12.  All  those  contravening  the  above  articles  will  be  condemned, 
for  the  first  offence,  to  a  fine  of  one  third  of  their  income;  for  the  second 
offence,  to  three  months  imprisonment .... 

ARTICLE  i.  All  inhabitants  of  the  islands  of  Malta  and  Gozo  will  be 
disarmed.  Arms  will  be  allowed  only  by  permission  of  the  commanding 
general  to  men  whose  patriotism  is  known. 

ART.  2.  The  organization  of  volunteer  chasseurs  will  becontinued  .  . . 

ART.  3.  The  signal  stations  between  Gozo  point  and  Malta  will  be 
re-established. 

ART.  4.  The  health  laws  at  Malta  will  be  neither  more  nor  less 
rigorous  than  those  at  Marseilles. 

ART.  8.  The  governing  committee  will  nominate  sixty  youths,  aged 
between  nine  and  fourteen,  belonging  to  the  richest  families,  who  will 
be  sent  to  Paris  to  be  educated  in  the  colleges  of  the  Republic. .  .  . 

ART.  12.  Training  classes  for  sailors  will  be  established  as  in  the  ports 
of  France. .  . . 

ARTICLE  i.  All  French  troops  at  Malta  will  be  dressed  in  cotton. 

ART.  2.  If  blue  cotton  cannot  be  found,  they  may  easily  be  dressed 
in  white,  with  collars  and  facings  of  red  and  blue,  so  that  they  always 
wear  the  three  colours. 

ART.  7.  The  best  hospital,  that  which  was  served  by  the  knights, 
will  be  reserved  exclusively  for  the  French. 

*  The  list  included  the  names  of  fifteen  French  and  two  Tuscan  knights. 
Against  the  French  list  Bonaparte  wrote:  'Almost  all,  six  months  ago,  provided 
me  with  useful  notes  or  have  made  patriotic  gifts  for  the  descent  on  England.* 

240  The  Rise to  P°wer 

ARTICLE  i.  All  priests,  monks  and  nuns,  of  whatever  order,  who  are 
not  natives  of  Malta,  are  required  to  leave  the  island  within  ten  days 
of  the  publication  of  the  present  order.  In  view  of  his  pastoral  qualities, 
the  bisnop  alone  is  excepted. 

ART.  3.  Henceforth  religious  vows  may  not  be  taken  before  the  age 
of  thirty. ... 

ART.  4.  There  may  no  longer  be  in  Malta  more  than  one  monastery 

of  each  order. .  . . 

2p  Prairial  Year  VI  (17  June,  1798) 

ARTICLE  i.  Latin  priests  may  not  officiate  in  the  churches  belonging 
to  the  Greeks. 

ART.  3.  Protection  will  be  accorded  to  the  Jews  wishing  to  establish 
a  synagogue. 

ART.  4.  The  commanding  general  will  thank  the  Greeks  established 
at  Malta  for  their  good  conduct  during  the  siege. 

ART.  6.  All  Greek  ships  sailing  under  the  Russian  flag,  if  captured 
by  French  ships,  will  be  sunk. 

30  Prairial,  Year  VI  (18  June,  1798} 

ARTICLE  2.  The  governing  committee  is  responsible  for  civil,  judicial 
and  administrative  organization. 

ART.  3.  It  can  act  only  on  the  request  of  the  commissioner  or  after 
having  heard  his  report. .  . . 

ART.  4.  No  regulation  may  be  published  or  take  effect  unless 
approved  by  the  commissioner  and  the  commanding  general. 

ARTICLE  i.  The  existing  taxes  will  be  maintained  provisionally. 

ART.  2.  With  the  shortest  delay,  a  new  system  of  taxation  will  be 
introduced,  so  that  the  total  product,  secured  from  customs,  wine, 
registration,  stamps,  tobacco,  salt,  rents  and  servants  amounts  to 
720,000  francs. 

ART.  6.  The  streets  of  the  towns  and  the  maintenance  of  cleanliness 
and  lighting  will  be  paid  for  by  the  inhabitants. 

ART.  8.  Tolls  will  be  imposed  for  the  upkeep  of  the  roads. 

ART.  14.  The  postal  service  will  be  organized  so  that  the  tax  on 
letters  covers  the  cost. 

ARTICLE  i.  There  will  be  established  in  Malta  a  central  school  which 
Witt  replace  the  university  and  other  faculties. 

ART.  2.  It  will  be  composed  of:  a  professor  of  arithmetic  and  stereo- 
metry; a  professor  of  algebra  and  stereotomy;  a  professor  of  geometry 
and  astronomy;  a  professor  of  mechanics  and  physics;  a  professor  of 
navigation;  a  professor  of  chemistry;  a  professor  of  oriental  languages, 
and  a  librarian  responsible  for  the  course  in  geography. 

AST*  3,  There  will  be  attached  to  the  centralschool:  die  library  and 

Egypt 241 

collection  of  antiquities;  a  museum  of  natural  history;  a  botanical 
garden,  and  the  observatory. 

ART.  5.  The  professors  will  together  form  a  council  which  will 
consider  how  to  improve  instruction  and  will  propose  to  the  governing 
committee  the  administrative  measures  which  it  judges  necessary. 

ART.  8.  A  course  of  anatomy,  medicine  and  midwifery  will  be 
established  at  the  hospital  of  the  town  of  Malta. 

ARTICLE  i.  Fifteen  primary  schools  will  be  set  up  in  the  islands  of 
Malta  and  Gozo. 

AST.  2.  Instructors  in  the  schools  will  teach  the  pupils  to  read  and 
write  in  French,  arithmetic  and  pilotage  and  the  principles  of  morality 
and  of  the  French  Constitution. 

ARTICLE  i.  The  bishop  will  hold  no  judicial  powers  except  over 
ecclesiastics.  All  proceedings  relating  to  marriages  fall  within  the 
jurisdiction  of  the  civil  and  criminal  courts. 

ART.  2.  It  is  expressly  forbidden  to  the  bishop,  priests  and  inhabitants 
of  the  island  to  receive  payment  for  the  administration  of  the  sacra- 
ments, the  duty  of  their  office  being  to  administer  them  free  of  charge. 

ARTICLE  i.  Funds  of  the  suppressed  monasteries  and  endowments, 
sufficient  to  yield  interest  of  40,000  francs,  will  be  set  aside  for  the 
hospital. ... 

ART.  2.  300,000  francs  from  public  property  will  be  set  aside  for  the 
creditors  of  the  Grand  Master. 

301 
Order 

H.Q.,  Malta 
25  Prairial,  Year  VI  (13  June,  1798} 

Bonaparte,  Commander-in-Chief,  orders: 

ARTICLE  i.  Citizen  Berthollet,  the  auditor  of  the  Army  and  a  clerk 
of  the  paymaster  will  take  possession  of  the  gold,  silver  and  precious 
stones  which  are  in  the  church  of  St.  John  and  other  dependencies  of 
the  Order  of  Malta,  the  silverware  of  the  hotels  and  that  of  the  Grand 
Master. 

ART.  2.  During  the  course  of  tomorrow  they  will  have  all  the  gold 
cast  into  ingots  to  be  transferred  to  the  chest  of  the  army  paymaster. 

ART.  3.  They  will  make  an  inventory  of  all  the  precious  stones 
which  will  be  placed  under  seal  in  the  army  chest. 

ART.  4.  They  will  sell  silverware  worth  250,000  to  300,000  francs 
to  local  merchants  for  gold  and  silver  money  which  will  also  be  placed 
in  the  army  chest.* 

*  Most  of  this  treasure  went  to  the  bottom  of  the  sea,  for  it  was  still  stowed 
aboard  Orient  when  that  ship  blew  up  during  the  battle  of  the  Nile. 

242.  The  Rise  to  Power 

ART.  5.  The  rest  of  the  silverware  will  be  left  at  the  Maltese  Mint  to 
be  coined,  and  the  money  will  be  transmitted  to  the  divisional  pay- 
master for  the  upkeep  of  this  division;  it  will  be  specified  how  much 
this  will  produce,  so  that  the  paymaster  can  be  accountable  for  it. 

AUT,  6.  They  will  leave  what  is  necessary  for  the  exercise  of  the 
cult  both  at  the  Church  of  St.  John  and  the  other  churches. 

BONAPARTE 

302 
To  Major-General  Berthier 

Chief  of  Staff,  Army  of  the  East  H.Q.,  Malta 

25  Prairial,  Year  VI  (13  June,  1798} 
Please,  Citizen  General,  send  an  officer  to  visit  the  different  State 

prisons  and  set  at  liberty  all  who  are  held  in  them  because  of  opinions. 

BONAPARTE 

303 
To  General  Brune 

C.-m-C.,  Army  of  Italy  H.Q.,  Malta 

26  Prairial,  Year  VI  (14  June,  1798) 
We  are  masters  of  Malta,  my  dear  General;  we  have  found  here 

1,200  guns,  1,000  tons  of  powder,  2  ships  of  the  line,  i  frigate,  4  galleys, 
40,000  muskets, 

Garat,  Minister  to  Naples,  will  give  you  more  precise  details. 

I  trust  you  have  sent  the  rest  of  the  6th  and  ypth  Demi-brigades  to 
Corfu. 

I  salute  you. 

BONAPARTE 

304 
To  Major-General  Chabot 

G.O.C.,  Corfu  H.Q.,  Malta 

27  Prairial,  Year  VI  (15  June,  1798) 
We  altered  Malta  three  days  ago,  Citizen  General.  Thereby  the 

Republic  has  acquired  a  pkce  as  strong  as  it  is  favourably  situated  for 
commerce.  The  inhabitants  of  the  three  departments  forming  your 
command  should  derive  a  very  special  benefit  from  it;  let  them  know 
this  good  news. 

I  am  leaving  General  Vaubois  to  command  here.  You  can  correspond 
witt  him  on  all  matters  you  need  to. 

Your  division  forms  part  of  the  army  I  command.  Please  send  me  by 
tie  brig  an  exact  return  of  your  troops,  your  ships  and  your  stores  of 
ammunition  and  food.  Let  me  know  also  what  is  owed  to  the  troops 
and  whether  it  is  possible  for  you  to  procure  sailors  to  man  the  battle- 

243 

ship  and  the  frigate  which  are  at  Corfu  and  to  send  them  to  me  at  a 
point  I  will  indicate  to  you. 

Please  send  to  our  minister  at  Constantinople  the  news  of  the  occu- 
pation of  Malta  by  the  French  army  and  of  the  destruction  of  the  Order 
of  St.-John-of-Jerusalem.  Announce  this  also  to  All  Pasha  [of  Jannina] 
and  to  the  pashas  of  Scutari  and  the  Morea. 

The  Fortunatus  has  orders  to  rejoin  the  squadron;  have  it  accompanied 
by  one  of  your  best  brigs,  which  I  can  send  back  to  you  with  new 
orders. 

Prepare  yourself  for  attack  by  the  Turks.  .  .  . 

BONAPARTE 

Give  me  news  of  the  countries  adjoining  your  command. 

305 
To  the  French  Consuls 

At  Tunis,  Tripoli  and  Algiers  H.Q.,  Malta 

27  Prairial,  Year  VI  (15  June,  1798} 

I  am  informing  you,  Citizen,  that  for  two  days  the  army  of  the 
Republic  has  been  in  possession  of  the  town  and  the  two  islands  of 
Malta  and  Gozo;  the  Tricolour  flies  on  all  the  forts. 

Please,  Citizen,  make  known  the  destruction  of  the  Order  of  Malta 
and  the  gain  of  this  new  possession  by  the  Republic  to  the  bey  to 
whom  you  are  accredited,  and  let  him  know  that  in  future  he  must 
respect  the  Maltese  as  they  are  now  French  subjects. 

Please  ask  him,  also,  to  set  at  liberty  the  Maltese  slaves  that  he  owns; 
I  have  ordered  the  release  of  over  2,000  Turkish  and  Berber  skves  that 
the  order  of  St.-John-of-Jerusalem  held  in  their  galleys. 

Let  the  bey  understand  that  the  power  which  has  taken  Malta  in 
three  or  four  days  is  well  able  to  punish  him  if  he  departs  for  a  moment 
from  a  correct  attitude  towards  the  Republic. 

BONAPARTE 

306 
To  the  Executive  Directory 

H,Q.,  Malta 

29  Prairial,  Year  VI  (17  June,  1798} 

You  will  find  attached  the  original  of  the  treaty  which  the  Order 
of  Malta  had  just  concluded  with  Russia.  It  had  been  ratified  only  five 
days,  and  the  courier,  who  was  the  man  I  arrested  two  years  ago  at 
Ancona,  had  not  yet  left.  Thus  His  Majesty  the  Emperor  of  Russia 
owes  us  his  thanks,  for  the  occupation  of  Malta  saves  his  treasury 
400,000  roubles.  We  have  understood  the  interests  of  his  nation  better 
tf>ar>  he  himself. 

244 

If  his  aim  was  to  prepare  the  way  to  establish  himself  in  the  port 
of  Malta,  it  seems  to  me  that  His  Majesty  should  have  done  things  a 
little  more  secredy  and  not  made  his  plans  so  easily  discoverable.  But, 
in  any  case,  we  now  have  in  the  centre  of  the  Mediterranean  the 
strongest  fortress  in  Europe  and  it  will  cost  anyone  dear  to  dislodge 
us. 

BONAPARTE 

307 
To  Brigadier-General  Dommartin 

Qfr.,  Artillery,  Army  of  the  East  H.Q.,  Malta 

29  Prairial,  Year  VI  (17 June,  1798) 

It  being  the  intention  of  the  Commander-in-Chief  to  send  to  Paris 
the  Maltese  4-pounder  which  is  worth  preserving  because  of  its  work- 
manship and  which  is  at  the  arsenal,  you  will  have  it  embarked  today 
aboard  the  frigate  Sensible,  which  should  leave  tonight. 

General  Baraguey  d'Hilliers  is  instructed  to  take  it  to  Paris  together 
with  the  flags  of  Malta. 

By  order  of  the  Commander-in-Chief 

308 
To  Major-General  Berthier 

Chief  of  Staff,  Army  of  the  East  H.Q.,  Malta 

29  Prairial,  Year  VI  (17  June,  1798) 

You  will  send  orders  to  Toulon,  Citizen  General,  that  aU  the  wives 
of  the  army  who  have  remained  at  the  depots  should  be  embarked 
on  ships  of  the  second  convoy  as  far  as  Malta,  where  they  will  receive 
orders  for  their  further  destination. 
You  will  insert  this  decision  in  Army  Orders  tomorrow. 

BONAPARTE 

309 
Order  of  the  Day 

Army  of  the  East  H.Q.,  on  board  Orient 

ioMessidor9  Year  VI  (28  June,  1798) 

Soldiers! 

You  are  going  to  undertake  a  conquest  whose  effects  on  civilization 
and  the  commerce  of  the  world  will  be  incalculable. 

You  will  strike  the  surest  and  most  painful  stroke  possible  against 
Engird  until  you  can  deal  her  final  death-blow. 

We  shall  undergo  tiring  marches;  we  shall  fight  several  battles;  we 
shall  succeed  in  all  our  enterprises;  Destiny  is  with  us. 

The  Mameluke  beys,  who  favour  English  trade  exclusively,  who 
have  covered  our  merchants  with  insults  and  tyrannize  over  the 

unfortunate  inhabitants  of  the  Nile,  will  have  ceased  to  exist  a  few 
days  after  our  arrival. 

The  people  amongst  whom  we  are  going  to  live  are  Mohammedans; 
the  first  article  of  their  faith  is:  'There  is  no  other  God  but  God,  and 
Mahomet  is  his  prophet/ 

Do  not  argue  with  them;  behave  towards  them  as  we  behaved 
towards  the  Jews  and  the  Italians;  show  respect  to  their  muftis  and 
imams  as  you  have  to  rabbis  and  bishops. 

Have  for  the  mosques  and  the  ceremonies  prescribed  by  the  Koran 
the  same  tolerance  that  you  showed  for  convents  and  synagogues, 
for  the  religion  of  Moses  and  of  Jesus  Christ. 

The  Roman  legions  protected  all  religions.  You  will  find  here 
customs  different  from  those  of  Europe;  you  must  get  used  to  them. 

The  people  amongst  whom  we  are  going  treat  women  differently 
from  us;  but,  in  every  country,  he  who  commits  rape  is  a  monster. 

Pillage  enriches  but  a  few;  it  dishonours  us,  it  destroys  our  resources, 
it  makes  enemies  of  the  people  it  is  to  our  interest  to  have  as  friends. 

The  first  city  we  are  going  to  meet  was  built  by  Alexander.  At  each 
step  we  shall  find  memories  worthy  to  excite  emulation. 

BONAPARTE 

310 
To  the  Pasha  of  Egypt 

On  board  Orient 
i2Messidor,  Year  VI  (30  June,  1798} 

The  Executive  Directory  of  the  French  Republic  has  several  times 
approached  the  Sublime  Porte  asking  for  the  punishment  of  the  beys 
of  Egypt  who  were  heaping  injuries  on  French  traders. 

But  die  Sublime  Porte  declared  that  the  capricious  and  greedy  beys 
did  not  adhere  to  die  principles  of  justice,  and  that  not  only  did  it  not 
authorize  the  outrages  against  its  good  and  ancient  friends,  the  French, 
but  that  it  was  even  withdrawing  its  protection  from  the  beys. 

The  French  Republic  has  determined  to  send  a  powerful  army  to  put 
an  end  to  the  brigandage  of  the  Egyptian  beys,  just  as  it  has  several 
times  during  this  century  been  obliged  to  do  against  the  beys  of  Tunis 
and  Algiers. 

You,  who  should  be  the  master  of  the  beys,  but  whom  they  hold  in 
Cairo  without  authority  or  power,  should  welcome  my  arrival 

No  doubt  you  are  already  informed  that  I  am  come  to  do  nothing 
against  the  Koran  or  the  Sultan.  You  know  that  the  French  nation  is 
the  sole  ally  of  the  Sultan  in  Europe. 

Come  to  meet  me,  therefore,  and  curse  with  me  the  impious  race 
of  the  beys. 

BONAPARTE 

246  The  Rise  to  Power 

Proclamation  to  the  People  of  Egypt 

H.Q.,  Alexandria 

i4Messidor,  Year  VI;  iSMoharram,  AH.  1213  (2  July  ^  1798) 
The  beys  who  govern  Egypt  have  for  long  insulted  the  French 
nation  ana  injured  its  merchants:  the  hour  of  their  punishment  has 
arrived. 

For  too  long  this  rabble  of  skves  bought  in  Georgia  and  Caucasia 
have  tyrannized  over  the  most  beautiful  part  of  the  world;  but  God, 
from  whom  all  depends,  has  ordered  that  their  empire  shall  cease. 

Peoples  of  Egypt,  you  will  be  told  that  I  have  come  to  destroy  your 
religion;  do  not  believe  it!  Answer  that  I  have  come  to  restore  your 
rights  and  punish  the  usurpers,  and  that,  more  than  the  Mamelukes,  I 
respect  God,  his  Prophet  and  the  Koran.  4 

Say  that  all  men  are  equal  before  God;  wisdom,  talent  and  virtue 
alone  differentiate  between  them.  But  what  wisdom,  what  talents, 
what  virtue  have  the  Mamelukes,  that  they  exclusively  have  all  that 
makes  life  desirable  and  sweet? 

Is  there  a  fine  estate?  It  belongs  to  the  Mamelukes.  Is  there  a  beautiful 
skve,  a  good  horse,  a  pleasant  house?  They  belong  to  the  Mamelukes. 
If  Egypt  is  their  farm,  let  them  show  the  lease  that  God  has  given 
them.  But  God  is  just  and  merciful  to  the  people. 

The  Egyptians  will  be  called  upon  to  hold  all  offices;  the  wisest  and 
most  learned  and  most  virtuous  will  govern,  and  the  people  will  be 
happy. 

Once  there  were  among  you  great  cities,  great  canals,  a  great 
commerce.  What  has  destroyed  all  this  if  not  the  greed,  the  injustice 
and  the  tyranny  of  the  Mamelukes? 

Cadis,  sheiks,  imams,  tell  the  people  that  we  are  friends  of  the  true 
Moslems. 

Is  it  not  we  who  have  destroyed  the  Pope,  who  called  for  war 
against  the  Moslems?  Is  it  not  we  who  have  destroyed  the  knights  of 
Malta,  because  those  madmen  believed  God  wished  them  to  fight  the 
Moslems?  Is  it  not  we  who  have  been  through  the  centuries  the  friends 
of  the  Sultan  (may  God  grant  his  desires!)  and  the  enemies  of  his 
enemies?  But,  as  for  the  Mamelukes,  have  they  not  ever  been  in  revolt 
against  the  Sultan's  authority,  which  even  now  they  disown? 

Tlirice  happy  those  who  shall  be  for  us!  They  will  prosper  both  in 
fortune  and  in  rank.  Happy  those  who  shall  be  neutral!  They  will  have 
time  to  learn  to  know  us>  and  they  will  range  themselves  beside  us. 

But  woe,  threefold  woe  to  those  who  take  up  arms  for  the  Mame- 
lukes and  fight  against  us!  For  them  there  will  be  no  hope:  they  will 
perish. 
ABTICLE  i.  All  villages  situated  within  three  leagues  of  places  where 

Egypt 247 

the  army  passes  will  send  a  deputation  to  inform  the  general  command- 
ing the  troops  that  they  are  obedient  and  have  flown  the  flag  of  the 
army:  blue,  white  and  red. 

ART.  2.  All  villages  which  take  up  arms  against  the  army  will  be 
burnt. 

ART.  3.  AJ1  villages  which  submit  will  fly  the  flag  of  the  army 
together  with  that  of  the  Sultan,  our  friend. 

ART.  4.  The  sheiks  will  have  placed  under  seal  the  goods,  houses 
and  property  belonging  to  the  Mamelukes  and  will  take  care  that 
nothing  be  embezzled. 

ART.  5.  The  sheiks,  cadis  and  imams  will  continue  to  discharge  their 
functions.  All  inhabitants  will  remain  at  home,  and  prayers  will 
continue  as  usual.  All  will  thank  God  for  the  destruction  of  the  Mame- 
lukes and  will  cry:  'Glory  to  the  Sultan!  Glory  to  the  French  army,  his 
friend!  Cursed  be  the  Mamelukes,  and  happiness  to  the  peoples  of 
Egypt!' 

BONAPARTE 

312 
To  Vice-Admiral  Brueys 

C.-m-C,  The  Fleet  H.Q.,  Alexandria 

15  Messidor,  Year  VI  (3  July,  1798} 

I  enclose  the  letter  which  I  have  just  received  from  Admiral 
Ganteaume  and  which  I  have  shown  to  the  Commander-in-Chief.  He 
instructs  me  to  tell  you  that  he  is  annoyed  that  you  did  not  blockade 
the  new  port  during  his  attack  on  Alexandria,  with  the  result  that  all 
the  local  boats  called  djerms  escaped,  together  with  four  large  cargo 
ships. 

The  Commander-in-Chief  wishes  you  to  take  steps,  while  loading, 
to  have  everything  belonging  to  the  army  disembarked.  He  is  sure 
you  will  already  have  taken  soundings.  He  wishes  the  squadron  to 
enter  the  port  and  he  thinks  meanwhile  that  you  should  set  sail  and 
approach  as  your  present  anchorage  is  much  too  far  off  for  our  com- 
munications. 

Needing  an  experienced  naval  officer,  the  Commander-in-Chief 
orders  Citizen  Ganteaume  to  come  here  at  once. 

By  order  of  the  Commander-in-Chief 

313 
To  Brigadier-General  Caffarelli 

Cdr.,  Engineers,  Army  of  the  East  H-Q*>  Alexandria 

15  Messidor,  Year  VI  (3  July,  1798} 

Please,  Citizen  General,  report  to  me  tomorrow  on  the  military 
advantages  which  might  result  and  the  amount  of  accommodation  to 

248  Tfe  &&e  to  Pother 

be  gained  by  the  step  of  having  the  European  consuls  lodged  elsewhere 
and  taking  possession  of  all  these  houses. 
I  salute  you. 

BONAPARTE 

Order 

H.Q.,  Alexandria 

IS  Messidor,  Year  VI  (3  July,  1798} 

ARTICLE  I.  All  inhabitants  of  Alexandria,  of  whatever  nation,  are 
required,  twenty-four  hours  after  publication  of  the  present  order,  to 
take  their  firearms  to  a  spot  to  be  indicated  by  the  commandant  of  the 
fortress.  Only  muftis,  imams  and  sheiks  will  be  permitted  to  retain 
and  carry  their  arms. 

ART.  2.  All  inhabitants  of  Alexandria,  of  whatever  nation,  are 
required  to  wear  the  tricolour  cockade.  The  muftis  alone  will  have  the 
right  to  wear  a  tricolour  shawl.  But  the  Commander-in-Chief  reserves 
the  right  to  grant  the  same  favour  to  sheiks  and  imams  who  are 
distinguished  for  their  enlightenment,  wisdom  and  virtue. 

ART.  3.  In  consequence  of  the  preceding  article,  the  troops  will 
salute  individuals  wearing  a  tricolour  shawl,  as  a  mark  of  military 
honour.  . . . 

ART.  4.  Foreign  agents,  of  whatever  power,  are  expressly  forbidden 
to  fly  flags  on  their  terraces.  Consuls  alone  will  have  the  right  to  inscribe 
on  their  doors  the  tide  of  their  employment:  'Consul  of — 

The  present  order  will  at  once  be  translated  into  arabic  and  com- 
municated without  delay  to  prominent  men  of  the  country.  The 
Sherif  will  have  it  proclaimed  in  the  city,  so  that  it  shall  be  obeyed. 

BONAPARTE 

315 
To  Divisional  Commanders 

Army  of  the  East  H.Q.,  Alexandria 

15  Messidor,  Year  VI  (j /w/y,  i?9s] 

The  Commander-ii-Chief  wishes  die  Turks  to  carry  out  their  acts  of 
worship  in  the  mosques  as  in  the  past;  he  expressly  forbids  all  French- 
men, niilitary  or  otherwise,  to  enter  the  mosques  or  to  collect  at  the 
door  of  a  mosque. 

You  will  order  all  commanders  of  demi-brigades  to  parade  the 
troops  and  read  this  order  to  thenou  They  will  also  read  again  the 
Comina3kler4tjr<3hief  *s  order  concerning  looting  and  rape.  You  will 
have  those  who  disobey  it  shot.  It  is  of  the^first  importance  that  the 
soMiers  pay  for  all  that  they  acquire  in  the  city  and  that  the  Turks  are 

249 

neither  robbed  nor  insulted.  We  must  make  friends  of  them  and  make 
war  only  on  the  Mamelukes. 

Insist  that  our  troops  do  not  straggle  on  the  march  and  that  in  no 
circumstances  do  they  march  singly,  for  otherwise  they  will  be  cut 
down  by  the  Arabs. 

By  order  of  the  Commander-in-Chief 

Order 

H.Q.,  Alexandria 

15  Messidor,  Year  VI  (3  July,  1798) 
Bonaparte,  Commander-in-Chief,  orders: 

ARTICLE  i.  All  the  Turkish  sailors  who  were  skves  in  Malta  and 
have  been  freed  and  who  hail  from  Syria,  the  Archipelago,  Egypt  or 
Tripoli  will  be  set  at  liberty  at  once. 

ART.  2.  The  admiral  will  have  them  disembarked  tomorrow  at 
Alexandria  where  the  staff  will  give  them  passports  to  return  home 
and,  to  each  one,  a  proclamation  in  Arabic. 

BONAPARTE 

317 
To  Major-General  Berthier 

Chief  of  Staff,  Army  of  the  East  H.Q.,  Alexandria 

15  Messidor,  Year  VI  (3  July,  1798) 

Please  give  orders,  Citizen  General,  that  tie  English  vice-consul 
be  set  free.  He  will  be  expressly  forbidden  to  hold  any  kind  of  corre- 
spondence with  any  individual  of  his  own  nation. 

You  will  tell  him  that  he  owes  his  liberty  to  his  position  as  consul 
of  the  Emperor. 

BONAPARTE 

To  Major-General  Menou 

G.O.C.,  Left  Division  H.Q.,  Alexandria 

15  Messidor,  Year  VI  (3  July,  1798} 

Please,  Citizen  General,  give  me  the  names  of  those  who  distin- 
guished themselves  yesterday  and,  among  others,  of  that  sergeant 
whom  I  saw  who  was  wounded.  I  point  him  out  because,  since  you 
were  the  first  to  arrive  and  you  advanced  as  soon  as  you  had  a  few 
men,  you  may  well  not  have  noticed  him. 
I  salute  you. 

BONAPARTE 

250  Tfe  Rise  to  Power 

319 
Decree 

H.Q.,  Alexandria 

16  Messidor,  Year  VI  (4  July,  1798) 

ARTICLE  i.  The  names  of  all  the  men  of  the  French  Army  who  were 
killed  at  the  capture  of  Alexandria  will  be  inscribed  on  Pompey's 
column. 
ART  2.  They  will  be  buried  at  the  foot  of  the  column.  Citizens 

Costaz,  Dutertre  and will  draw  up  proposals  for  the  execution 

of  this  decree,  which  will  be  inserted  in  Army  Orders. 

ART.  3.  The  staff  will  provide  this  commission  with  the  names  of 
men  killed  at  the  capture  of  Alexandria 

BONAPARTE 

320 
To  the  Executive  Directory 

H.Q.,  Alexandria 
iSMessidor,  Year  VI  (6 July,  1798} 

The  Army  left  Malta  on  I  Messidor  and  arrived  before  Alexandria 
at  dawn  on  the  I3th.  An  English  squadron,  said  to  be  very  powerful, 
had  put  in  there  three  days  earlier  and  left  mails  for  India.  .  .  . 

The  wind  was  strong  and  there  was  a  heavy  swell;  however,  I 
thought  it  right  to  disembark  at  once.  The  day  was  passed  in  preparing 
for  the  Igndmg-  General  Menou,  at  the  head  of  his  division,  was  the 
first  ashore,  near  the  Marabout,  a  league  and  a  half  from  Alexandria. 

I  landed  with  General  Kleber  and  another  part  of  the  troops  at 
ii  p.m.  We  at  once  marched  towards  Alexandria.  At  first  light  we 
could  see  Pompey's  column.  A  force  of  Mamelukes  and  Arabs  began 
to  skirmish  with  our  forward  troops;  but  we  moved  rapidly  on  to 
different  parts  of  Alexandria,  General  Bon's  division  being  on  the 
right,  General  Kleber's  in  the  centre,  General  Menou's  on  the  left.  The 
wall  of  the  Arab  city  was  heavily  manned. 

General  Kleber  left  Pompey's  column  to  scale  the  wall,  while 
General  Bon  forced  the  Rosetta  gate  and  General  Menou,  blocking 
the  triangular  castle  with  part  of  his  division,  with  the  rest  stormed 
another  part  of  the  wall;  he  was  the  first  to  enter  the  city.  He  received 
seven  wounds,  but  happily  none  of  them  are  dangerous. 

While  at  the  foot  of  the  wall  showing  his  grenadiers  where  to  mount, 
General  KlSber  received  a  bullet  in  the  face,  which  threw  him  to  the 
ground.  His  wound,  although  extremely  grave,  is  not  mortal.  At  that 
the  grenadiers  of  his  division  redoubled  their  courage  and  broke  into 
the  city  . .  . 

Once  we  were  masters  of  the  Arab  city  the  enemy  retired  into  the 
triangular  fort,  the  lighthouse  and  the  new  city.  Every  house  became 

351 

a  citadel  for  them.  But  before  the  end  of  the  day  the  city  was  quiet, 
the  two  castles  surrendered,  and  we  found  ourselves  completely  masters 
of  the  city,  the  forts  and  die  two  harbours  of  Alexandria. 

Meanwhile  the  Arabs  of  the  desert  had  ridden  up  in  groups  of  thirty 
to  fifty  horsemen,  attacking  our  rear  and  falling  upon  our  stragglers. 
They  did  not  cease  harassing  us  for  two  days;  but  yesterday  I  succeeded 
in  concluding  a  treaty,  not  only  of  friendship,  but  even  of  alliance. 
Thirteen  of  die  principal  chiefs  came  to  my  quarters.  I  sat  in  the  midst 
of  them  and  we  had  a  very  long  conversation.  After  agreeing  upon 
terms  we  assembled  round  a  table  and  consigned  to  hell-fire  whoever 
of  ours  or  theirs  should  break  our  agreements.  These  are:  on  their  side, 
to  cease  harassing  my  rear,  to  give  me  all  help  in  their  power  and  to 
provide  the  men  I  ask  for  to  march  against  the  Mamelukes;  on  mine,  to 
restore  to  them,  once  I  am  master  of  Egypt,  the  lands  which  formerly 
belonged  to  them. 

Prayers  are  held  as  usual  in  the  mosques,  and  my  house  is  always  full 
of  imams,  orcadis,  sherifs,  chiefs,  muftis  or  religious  leaders  .  .  , 

This  country  is  not  at  all  inferior  to  the  picture  painted  by  travellers: 
it  is  calm,  proud  and  brave. 

The  fleet  will  be  at  Aboukir  today  to  finish  landing  our  artillery. 
The  old  port  of  Alexandria  can  contain  a  fleet  of  any  size.  But  there  is 
one  point  in  the  passage  with  only  five  fathoms  of  water,  which  makes 
the  sailors  think  it  impossible  for  74$  to  enter.  This  fact  seriously 
interferes  with  my  plans. 

Venetian-built  sMps  can  enter,  and  Dubois  and  Causse  are  already 
there.  I  shall  need  you  to  send  me  as  soon  as  possible  the  three  Venetian- 
built  ships  which  are  at  Toulon.  I  will  send  for  the  three  at  Ancona. 

General  Desaix's  division  has  reached  Damanhur  after  crossing  four- 
teen leagues  of  arid  desert  which  gready  tired  it;  General  Reynier's 
should  arrive  there  this  evening.  General  Dugua's  is  at  Rosetta.* 

Commodore  Perree  commands  our  light  flotilla  and  will  try  to  send 
part  of  his  ships  up  die  Nile  .  .  . 

I  have  appointed  Citizen  Le  Roy  naval  commissioner  at  Alex- 
andria .  .  . 

At  the  capture  of  Alexandria  we  had  30  to  40  men  killed  and  80  to 
100  wounded.  .  .  , 

BONAPARTE 

321 
To  Major-General  Kteber 

Governor  of  Alexandria  H.Q.,  Alexandria 

ip  Messidor,  Year  VI  (7  July,  1798) 

Citizen  General,  you  will  take  command  of  Alexandria,  Aboukir 
*  Dugiia  had  assumed  temporary  command  of  Kleber's  division. 

252  The  Rise  to  Power 

and  the  mobile  column  commanded  by  General  Dumuy  which  is 
intended  to  remain  in  rear  of  die  army  to  facilitate  its  communica- 
tions. The  staff  will  inform  you  of  the  different  individuals  composing 
the  staff  of  the  district  of  Alexandria  and  of  the  heads  of  services.  . .  . 

One  of  the  most  essential  objects  is  to  provide  at  once  for  the 
establishment  of  a  quarantine  station;  to  follow  the  various  require- 
ments demanded  by  that  with  the  utmost  strictness,  and  to  establish 
two  separate  hospitals  in  Alexandria,  one  for  the  wounded,  the  other 
for  the  sick. 

Keep  on  good  terms  with  the  Arabs  as  far  as  possible.  Show  the 
greatest  regard  for  the  muftis  and  principal  sheiks  of  the  area 

The  fleet  is  going  to  anchor  at  Abouktr.  It  must  try  to  anchor  so  as 
to  be  protected  by  the  batteries  we  shall  establish  there.  If  this  is 
possible  you  will  see  how  important  it  is  to  push  ahead  quickly  with 
these  works. 

It  is  also  essential  that  General  Dumuy  should  take  the  field  with  his 
mobile  column  as  soon  as  possible.  Tne  first  position  I  wish  him  to 
occupy  is  between  Alexandria  and  Damanhur,  at  El-Keryun,  where 
there  is  plenty  of  water. ...  It  is  important  to  tell  him  to  have  the 
wells  at  El-Beydah  cleaned. 

It  is  also  necessary  that  you  see  that  there  are  always  about  thirty 
local  boats  on  the  lake  of  Aboukir  for  the  land  communication  between 
Alexandria  and  Rosetta, 

The  staff  will  send  you  the  order  I  have  given  for  the  organization 
of  the  country.  We  must  accustom  these  people  to  our  ways  and 
manner  of  seeing  things  step  by  step,  and  leave  them  meanwhile  a 
great  latitude  in  their  internal  affairs;  above  all  we  must  not  interfere 
with  their  justice,  which,  being  founded  on  divine  laws,  derives  wholly 
from  the  Koran. 

However,  I  trust  you  will  give  yourself  up  to  these  occupations 
only  so  far  as  will  not  deky  your  return  to  health.  — 

I  salute  you. 

BONAPARTE 

322 
Order 

H.Q.,  Alexandria 

10,  Messidor,  Year  VI  (7  July,  1798} 
The  Ck>mmander-inrChief  orders: 

ARTICLE  i.  The  general  staff  will  leave  an  officer  at  Alexandria  to 
have  tie  French,  Arabic  and  Greek  printing  presses  disembarked. 

ART.  2.  These  presses  will  be  set  up  in  the  house  of  the  Venetian 
consul,  so  that  within  forty-eight  hours  everything  sent  from  head- 
quarters can  be  printed  in  French  or  Arabic. 

253 

ART.  3.  As  soon  as  the  Arabic  press  is  established,  4,000  proclamations 
will  be  printed. 

ART.  4.  Rations  will  be  provided  for  the  overseer  and  workmen  of 
the  printing  office. 

BONAPARTE 

323 
Order  of  the  Day 

Army  of  the  East  H.Q.>  Damanhur 

21  Messidor,  Year  VI  (9  July,  1798) 

The  Commander-in-Chief  has  fixed  the  prices  of  goods  as  follows: 
One  goose  26  sous  or  35  paras 

One  chicken  15  id  20  id 

A  pair  of  pigeons  18  id  24  id 

Mutton  8 i  d  ii  id 

Beef  6  id  10  id 

3  eggs  3  liards        i  id 

A  pound  of  rice  2  sous          3  id 

A  pound  of  lentils  3  liards        i  id 

By  order  of  the  Commander-in-Chief 

324 
Order  of  the  Day 

Amy  of  the  East  H.Q.,  El-Rahmaniya 

24  Messidor,  Year  VI  (12  July,  1798) 

In  his  proclamation  the  Commander-in-Chief  informed  the  army 
that  he  is  making  war  on  the  Mamelukes,  not  on  the  inhabitants  of  the 
country,  whose  friend  he  is.  Since  the  arrival  of  the  unmounted 
cavalrymen,  some  have  broken  into  houses  by  force.  The  Commander- 
in-Chief  holds  the  officers  commanding  these  detachments  responsible 
for  any  disorder.  They  will  use  part  of  the  unmounted  cavalry  on 
frequent  patrols.  General  Dumas  and  General  Zajonchek  will  issue  the 
necessary  orders. 

In  the  Order  for  21  Messidor  the  Commander-in-Chief  expressly 
forbade  soldiers  to  fire  in  the  camp  for  the  purpose  of  emptying  their 
arms,  which  they  must  do  with  discharger  rods.  This  morning,  con- 
trary to  orders,  a  fusilade  took  pkce  on  this  pretext.  The  Commander- 
inr-Chief  recommends  more  supervision  to  generals  and  unit  cont- 
manders. . . . 

Commanders  will  recommend  the  soldiers  to  eat  very  little  of  what 
are  called  gourds  or  water-melons,  unless  they  are  cooked;  then  they 
are  healthy  and  nourishing. 

Generals  wiH  take  the  greatest  care  to  instruct  the  camp  guards  as 

254  The  Rue  to  Power 

to  the  watch  to  be  kept  by  the  sentries.  There  cannot  be  too  much 
security,  but  at  the  same  time  alerts  must  not  be  given  unnecessarily 

The  Commander-in-Chief  is  informed  that  on  the  night  of  the 
23rd  to  24th  several  posts  had  neither  the  password  nor  countersign. 
He  invites  divisional  commanders  to  take  steps  that  a  similar  oversight 
is  not  repeated.  They  will  also  instruct  the  troops  not  to  fire  when  out 
of  range  and  not  uselessly  to  waste  ammunition  which  must  be  saved 
for  a  more  effective  occasion. 

The  general  of  the  rounds  for  the  24th  to  25th  is  Brigadier-General 
Fugiere. 

By  order  of  the  Commander-in-Chief 

325 
To  the  Sheiks  and  Notables  of  Cairo 

H.Q.,  Giza 

4  Thermidor,  Year  VI  (22  July,  1798) 

From  the  attached  proclamation  you  will  see  what  sentiments 
inspire  me. 

Yesterday  die  Mamelukes  were  for  the  most  part  killed  or  taken 
prisoner,  and  I  am  in  pursuit  of  the  few  still  remaining. 

Send  over  to  this  bank  the  boats  on  your  side;  send  me  a  deputation 
to  inform  me  of  your  submission. 

Have  bread,  meat,  straw  and  barley  prepared  for  my  army,  and  be 
without  fear,  for  no  one  desires  more  than  I  to  contribute  to  your 
happiness. 

BONAPARTE 

326 
Proclamation  to  the  People  of  Cairo 

H.Q.,  Giza 
4  Thermidor,  Year  VI  (22  July,  1798} 

People  of  Cairo,  I  am  satisfied  with  your  conduct.  You  have  done 
well  not  to  take  sides  against  me.  I  have  come  to  destroy  the  race  of 
Mamelukes  and  to  protect  trade  and  the  natives  of  the  country. 

Let  those  who  are  afraid  be  calm;  those  who  have  fled  return  to 
their  houses.  Let  prayers  be  held  today  as  usual,  as  I  wish  them  always 
to  be.  Fear  nothing  for  your  families,  your  houses,  your  property,  and, 
above  all,  for  the  religion  of  the  Prophet,  whom  I  love. 

Since  it  is  important  that  the  peace  be  not  disturbed,  there  will  be 
a  divan  of  seven  persons  which  will  meet  at  the  Mosque  of  El-Azhar. 
Here  will  always  be  two  members  attached  to  the  commandant  of  the 
city  and  four  will  be  occupied  in  maintaining  public  order  and  super- 
vising the  polke, 

BONAPARTE 

255 

327 
To  the  Pasha  of  Egypt 

H.Q.,  Giza 

4  Thermidor,  Year  VI  (2  2  July,  1798} 

I  am  most  angry  at  the  violence  which  Ibrahim  has  done  you  in 
forcing  you  to  leave  Cairo  and  follow  him. 

If  you  are  able  to  do  so  return  to  Cairo,  where  you  will  enjoy  the 
consideration  and  rank  due  to  the  representative  of  our  friend  the 
Sultan. 

I  wrote  you  the  attached  letter*  from  Alexandria.  ...  I  am  assured 
that  you  have  not  received  it. 

By  the  grace  of  God,  from  whom  all  depends,  the  Mamelukes  have 
been  destroyed.  Be  assured  and  assure  the  Porte  that  these  same  arms 
that  we  have  made  victorious  will  always  be  at  the  disposal  of  the 
Sultan.  May  Heaven  fulfil  his  desires  against  his  enemies! 

BONAPARTE 

328 
To  the  Executive  Directory 

H.Q.,  Cairo 

6  Thermidor,  Year  VI  (24  July,  1798) 
Citizen  Directors, 

The  Army  left  Alexandria  on  19  Messidor;  it  reached  Damanliur  on 
the  2Oth,  suffering  much  across  this  desert  from  the  excessive  heat  and 
the  lack  of  water. 

On  the  22nd  we  met  the  Nile  at  El-RahmSuiya  and  rejoined  General 
Dugua's  division,  which  had  come  by  Rosetta,  making  several  forced 
marches  .  .  . 

BATTLE  OF  CHOBRAKHYT 

I  learnt  that  Murad-Bey,  at  the  head  of  his  army,  composed  of  a 
great  quantity  of  cavalry,  awaited  us  at  the  village  of  Cnobrakhyt 
with  eight  or  ten  gunboats  and  several  batteries  on  the  Nile.  On  the 
evening  of  the  24th  we  began  to  march  towards  them;  at  dawn  on 
the  25th  we  were  in  presence. 

We  had  only  200  cavalry,  still  lame  and  worn  out  by  the  crossing. 
The  Mamelukes  had  a  magnificent  force  of  horsemen,  covered  in  gold 
and  silver,  armed  with  the  best  carbines  and  pistols  of  London  and  the 
best  sabres  of  the  East  and  mounted  on  perhaps  the  best  horses  of  the 
continent. 

The  army  was  drawn  up,  the  divisions  formed  in  battalion  squares 
with  the  baggage  in  the  midst  and  the  artillery  in  the  intervals  between 
die  squares.  .  .  .  The  five  divisions  of  the  army  were  in  echelon,  cover- 
ing each  other  and  flanked  by  two  villages  which  we  occupied. 

*  No.  310. 

256  The  Rise  to  Power 

Commodore  Perree,  with  three  gunboats,  a  sloop  and  a  galley' 
attacked  the  enemy  flotillas.  The  fighting  was  extremely  stubborn- 
More  than  1,500  rounds  were  fired.  Commodore  Peree  was  wounded 
in  the  arm,  and  by  his  courage  and  good  dispositions  he  succeeded  in 
recapturing  three  gunboats  and  the  galley  that  the  Mamelukes  had 
taken  and  in  setting  fire  to  their  flagship  . .  . 

Soon  the  Mameluke  cavalry  covered  the  whole  plain,  outflanked  our 
wings  and  sought  everywhere,  on  our  flanks  and  rear,  for  a  weak  point 
to  penetrate;  but  it  found  that  the  line  was  always  equally  formidable 
and  met  it  with  a  cross-fire  from  front  and  flank.  Several  times  they 
attempted  to  charge,  but  without  pressing  home.  A  few  braves 
advanced  to  skirmish;  they  were  received  by  the  fire  of  squads  of 
carabiniers  placed  ahead  of  the  battalion  intervals.  Finally,  after  remain- 
ing at  half  cannon  range  for  part  of  the  day,  they  effected  their  retreat 
and  disappeared.  Their  losses  can  be  reckoned  at  300  men  killed  or 
wounded. 

We  marched  for  eight  days,  deprived  of  everything  and  in  one  of  the 
most  burning  climates  in  the  world. 

On  the  morning  of  2  Thermidor  we  saw  the  Pyramids. 

In  the  evening  we  were  six  leagues  from  Cairo,  and  I  learned  that 
the  twenty-three  beys,  with  all  their  forces,  were  entrenched  at 
Embabeh,  and  that  they  had  mounted  more  than  sixty  guns  on  their 
parapets. 

BATTLE  OF  THE  PYRAMIDS 

At  first  light  on  the  3rd  we  encountered  their  advance-guard,  which 
we  pushed  back  from  village  to  village.  At  2  p.m.  we  were  face  to  face 
with  the  enemy  army  and  emplacements. 

I  ordered  the  divisions  of  Generals  Desaix  and  Reynier  to  take  up 
position  on  the  right,  between  Giza  and  Embabeh,  so  as  to  cut  the 
enemy's  communication  with  Upper  Egypt,  which  was  his  natural 
retreat.  The  army  was  drawn  up  in  the  same  manner  as  at  the  battle  of 
Chobrakhyt. 

As  soon  as  Murad-Bey  saw  General  Desaix's  movement,  he  decided 
to  charge  him.  He  sent  one  of  his  bravest  beys  with  a  corps  d'elite 
which  charged  the  two  divisions  with  the  speed  of  lightning.  It  was 
allowed  to  approach  to  within  fifty  paces  and  was  then  welcomed  with 
a  hail  of  case  shot  and  bullets  which  felled  a  great  many  on  the  field  of 
battle.  They  threw  themselves  into  the  space  between  the  two  divisions, 
where  they  were  met  with  a  double  fire  which  completed  their  defeat. 

I  seized  that  moment  and  ordered  General  Bon's  division,  which  was 
on  the  Nile,  to  go  in  to  attack  the  fortifications,  and  General  Vial,  who 
was  commanding  General  Menou's  division,  to  move  between  the 
force  which  had  just  charged  and  the  emplacements,  so  as  to  complete 
the  threefold  aim  of  preventing,  that  force  from  entering,  cutting  off 

257 

the  retreat  of  the  force  within,  and,  if  necessary,  of  attacking  the 
emplacements  from  the  left  .  .  . 

General  Bon's  attacking  columns,  commanded  by  the  brave  General 
Rampon,  despite  heavy  artillery  fire,  threw  themselves  against  the 
fortifications  with  their  usual  impetuosity,  when  the  Mamelukes 
charged.  They  left  their  lines  at  full  gallop;  our  columns  had  time  to 
halt,  form  squares  and  receive  them  with  fixed  bayonets  and  a  hail  of 
bullets.  In  an  instant  the  field  was  strewn  with  them.  Our  troops  were 
soon  carrying  the  trenches.  The  fleeing  Mamelukes  hurled  themselves 
in  a  mass  towards  their  left;  but  General  Vial  was  in  position  there; 
one  battalion  of  carabiniers,  under  whose  fire  they  were  forced  to  pass 
at  a  range  of  five  paces  carried  out  a  fearful  butchery;  a  great  many 
threw  themselves  in  the  Nile  and  were  drowned. 

More  than  400  camels  laden  with  baggage  and  50  guns  have  fallen 
into  our  power.  I  reckon  the  Mameluke  losses  at  2,000  of  their  finest 
cavalry  .  .  .  Ours  amount  to  20  or  30  killed  and  120  wounded.  That 
very  night  Cairo  was  evacuated  .  .  .  and  on  the  4th  our  troops  entered 
the  city.  During  the  night  the  populace  had  burnt  the  houses  of  the 
beys  and  committed  various  excesses.  Cairo,  which  has  more  than 
300,000  inhabitants,  has  the  most  wretched  populace  in  the  world. 

After  the  great  number  of  engagements  and  battles  which  the  troops 
I  command  have  fought  against  superior  forces,  I  would  not  think.'  of 
praising  their  bearing  and  calmness  on  this  occasion  were  it  not  that 
this  quite  new  kind  of  warfare  had  in  truth  demanded  of  them  a 
patience  at  variance  with  French  impetuosity;  had  they  given  way  to 
their  ardour  they  would  not  have  gained  the  victory,  which  could  be 
achieved  only  by  great  sangfroid  and  steadiness. 

The  Mameluke  cavalry  showed  great  bravery;  they  were  defending 
their  fortune,  and  there  is  not  one  of  them  on  whom  our  soldiers  have 
not  found  300,  400  or  500  louis  of  gold. 

All  the  luxury  of  these  people  was  in  their  horses  and  arms;  their 
houses  are  pitiable.  It  is  hard  to  imagine  a  land  more  fertile  and  a 
people  more  wretched,  ignorant  and  brutish.  They  prefer  one  of  our 
soldiers'  buttons  to  a  five-franc  piece.  In  the  villages  they  do  not  even 
know  of  a  pair  of  scissors.  Their  houses  are  just  mud.  For  furniture 
they  have  only  a  straw  mat  and  two  or  three  earthenware  pots.  They 
generally  eat  and  drink  very  little.  They  do  not  use  mills,  so  that  we 
have  constantly  bivouacked  on  great  heaps  of  corn  unable  to  have  flour. 
We  feed  on  vegetables  and  cattle.  The  Etde  grain  that  they  make  into 
flour  they  grind  with  stones,  and  in  a  few  large  villages  there  are  mills 
turned  by  bullocks. 

We  have  been  continuously  harassed  by  clouds  of  Arabs,  who  are  the 
greatest  robbers  and  scoundrels  on  earth,  murdering  Turks  and  French 
alike,  all  who  fall  into  their  hands, 

258  The  Rise  to  Power 

Brigadier-General  Mireur  and  several  other  staff  officers  and  aides- 
de-camp  have  been  assassinated  by  these  wretches.  Ambushed  behind 
dikes  and  in  ditches  on  their  excellent  little  horses,  woe  to  anyone  who 
goes  a  hundred  yards  from  the  columns!  .  . . 

There  is  very  little  coin  in  this  country,  not  enough  to  pay  the  army; 
plenty  of  corn,  rice,  vegetables  and  cattle.  The  Republic  could  not  have 
a  colony  more  within  reach  and  with  a  richer  soil.  The  climate  is 
healthy  since  the  nights  are  cool. 

Despite  fifteen  days'  march,  every  kind  of  labour  and  the  complete 
lack  ot  wine  and  everything  that  can  relieve  fatigue,  we  have  no  sick. 
The  soldier  has  found  great  comfort  in  a  kind  of  water-melon,  which 
is  very  abundant. 

We  are  without  any  news  from  France  since  our  departure. 

I  will  shortly  send  an  officer  with  all  information  on  the  economic, 
moral  and  political  situation  of  this  country.  I  will  also  tell  you  in 
detail  of  those  who  have  distinguished  themselves  and  the  promotions 
I  have  made  . .  . 

I  hear  nothing  of  Talleyrand.  It  is  most  important  that  his  arrival 
at  Constantinople  be  not  delayed.  .  . . 

I  beg  you  to  pay  a  gratuity  of  1,200  francs  to  the  wife  of  Citizen 
Larrey,  Surgeon-General  of  the  army.  His  energy  and  zeal  in  the  midst 
of  the  desert  have  rendered  us  the  greatest  service.  Of  the  medical 
officers  whom  I  know,  he  is  the  most  fitted  to  be  at  the  head  of  the 
ambnlan.ce  service  of  an  army. 

BONAPARTE 

329 
To  Citizen  Joseph  Bonaparte 

Member  of  the  Council  of  Five  Hundred  Cairo 

7  Thermidor,  Year  VI  (25  July,  1798) 

You  will  see  in  the  public  papers  the  result  of  our  battles  and  the 
conquest  of  Egypt,  which  met  enough  resistance  to  add  a  page  to  the 
military  glory  of  this  army.  Egypt  is  the  richest  country  on  earth  in 
corn,  rice,  vegetables,  meat.  It  is  utterly  barbarous.  There  is  no  money, 
not  even  enough  to  pay  the  troops.  In  two  months  I  may  be  back  in 
France.  Please  look  after  my  interests.  I  have  great  private  unhappiness; 
die  veil  has  at  last  quite  fallen  from  my  eyes.  Your  friendship  is  very 
dear  to  me;  to  lose  it  and  see  you  betray  me  is  the  one  thing  needed  to 
make  me  a  misanthrope.  It  is  a  sad  state  to  be  in  to  have  all  one's 
thoughts  centred  in  the  heart  of  one  person. 

Arrange  for  me  to  have  a  country  house  when  I  get  back,  either 
near  Paris  or  in  Burgundy;  I  intend  to  shut  myself  up  there  for  the 
winter:  I  have  had  enough  of  human  nature.  I  need  solitude  and  quiet; 

Egypt 259 

grandeur  bores  me;  my  emotions  are  dried  up.  Glory  is  stale  at  twenty- 
nine;  I  have  used  everything  up;  it  only  remains  to  become  a  real 
egoist.  I  shall  keep  my  town  house;  never  will  I  give  that  up  to  anyone. 
I  have  only  enough  to  live  on.  Good-bye,  my  one  friend.  I  have  never 
wronged  you.  You  owe  me  that  at  least,  whatever  my  heart  may  have 
desired:  you  understand?  Kiss  your  wife,  and  Jerome. 

BONAPARTE 

330 
To  Citizen  Joseph  Bonaparte 

Member  of  the  Council  of  Five  Hundred  Cairo 

Undated 

M.  Calmebet  holds  100,000  francs  on  loan  in  my  name;  tell  him  I 
wish  him  to  reinvest  the  interest  and  that  the  expenses  should  be  as 
low  as  possible. 

Before  deciding  what  to  do,  I  shall  await  news  from  Constantinople 
and  France.  If  thfogs  are  not  settled  at  Rastadt  and  if  the  Irish  have  been 
beaten,  it  would  be  best  to  make  peace  and  to  use  Egypt  to  make  a 
brilliant  and  solid  peace.  Take  care  of  my  wife;  see  her  occasionally. 
I  am  asking  Louis  to  give  her  some  good  advice.  I  have  had  only  one 
letter  from  you:  the  one  brought  by  Lesimple.  I  hope  Desiree  will  be 
happy  if  she  marries  Bernadotte:  she  deserves  it.  A  thousand  kisses  to 
your  wife  and  to  Lucien.  I  am  sending  a  pretty  shawl  to  Julie;  she  is 
a  good  wife:  make  her  happy. 

BONAPARTE 

To  Major-General  Menou 

Governor  ofRosetta*  H.Q.,  Cairo 

9  Thermidor,  Year  VI  (27  July,  1798} 

You  will  find  enclosed,  Citizen  General,  a  copy  of  the  provisional 
organization  for  Egypt. 

You  will  appoint  tne  divan,  the  aga  and  the  company  of  sixty  men 
he  is  to  have  under  him.  The  comptroller  and  the  French  agent  will  be 
proceeding  to  their  posts  immediately. 

You  will  have  an  inventory  made  of  all  the  goods,  possessions  and 
houses  belonging  to  the  Mamelukes. 

You  will  requisition  all  horses  to  remount  the  cavalry. 

Take  all  steps  that  may  be  necessary  to  maintain  peace,  order  and 
security  in  the  province  ofRosetta. 

BONAPAUTE 

*  Identical  instructions  to  Kteber  for  the  province  of  Alexandria,  Belliard  for 
he  province  of  Giza  and  Murat  for  the  province  of  Qalyub. 

2<5o  The  Rise  to  Power 

332 

Order  T  ^ 

H.Q., 

p  Thermidor,  Year  VI  (27  July,  1798} 
Bonaparte,  member  of  the  National  Institute,  Commander-in-Chief, 

ARTICLE  i.  In  each  province  of  Egypt  there  will  be  a  divan  of  seven 
members  charged  with  watching  over  the  interests  of  the  province, 
informing  me  of  all  complaints,  preventing  war  between  the  villages, 
supervising  and  punishing  criminals  with  forces  provided  by  the 
French  governor,  and  instructing  the  people  whenever  necessary. 

ART.  2.  In  each  province  there  will  be  an  aga  of  police,  who  will 
always  remain  with  die  French  governor.  He  will  have  a  guard  of  sixty 
armed  native  men,  with  which  he  will  move  wherever  necessary  to 
maintain  order  and  bring  about  obedience  and  tranquillity. 

ART.  3.  In  each  province  there  will  be  an  comptroller  responsible 
for  the  collection  of  taxes  and  of  the  revenues  formerly  belonging  to 
the  Mamelukes,  which  today  belong  to  the  Republic;  he  will  have  the 
necessary  agents  under  him. 

ART.  4.  Attached  to  each  comptroller  there  will  be  a  French  agent 
who  will  report  to  the  central  financial  administration  and  enforce  all 

orders  he  may  receive. 

BONAPARTE 

333 
To  Major-General  Berthier 

Chief  of  Staff,  Army  of  the  East  H.Q    Cairo 

J  J  10  Thermidor,  Year  VI  (28  July,  1798) 

The  undernamed  Coptic  gentlemen  will  be  recognized  as  comp- 
trollers of  Egypt.  You  should  first  give  them  a  proper  commission, 
which  must  be  signed  by  yourself  and  the  Quartermaster-General,  and 
inform  the  generals  governing  the  provinces,  who  must  aid  them  in 
their  extremely  important  functions. . .  . 

BONAPARTE 

334 
To  Colonel  Merlin 

Aide-de-camp  to  the  C.-m-C.  -FJ.Q-,  Cairo 

10  Thermidor,  Year  VI  (2 8  July,  1798) 

Citizen  Merlin  will  proceed  tomorrow  at  4.0  a.m.  to  the  office  of 
die  Quartermaster-General.  He  will  require  the  Surgeon-General  or 
Physician-General  and  the  chief  administrator  of  hospitals  to  join  him 
and  visit  the  site  fixed  for  the  establishment  of  a  hospital  in  Cairo  to  dis- 
cover the  reasons  which  have  so  far  prevented  its  completion.  Thence 

Egypt  261 

he  will  proceed  with  the  health  officer  and  hospital  agent  to  Giza  to 
inspect  in  the  greatest  detail  the  establishment  which  has  been  set  up 
there. 

He  will  present  me  with  a  report  on  these  two  essential  matters. 

BONAPARTE 

335 
Note 

H.Q.,  Cairo 

Presumed  10  Thermidor,  Year  VI  (28  July,  1798} 
What  should  be  sent: 

[A  long  autograph  list  of  reinforcements  and  military  supplies  of  all  kinds.] 
Various  needs: 

1.  A  company  of  actors; 

2.  A  company  of  dancers; 

3.  At  least  three  or  four  marionettists  for  the  people; 

4.  A  hundred  French  women; 

5.  The  wives  of  all  those  employed  in  the  country; 

6.  Twenty  surgeons,  thirty  dispensers,  ten  physicians; 

7.  Smelters; 

8.  Distillers; 

9.  Fifty  gardeners  with  their  families  and  seeds  of  all  kinds  of 
vegetables. 

10.  Each  convoy  must  carry  200,000  pints  of  brandy,  a  million  pints 
of  wine. 

11.  300,000  ells  of  blue  and  scarlet  cloth. 

12.  Soap,  oil. 

336 
To  Admiral  Brueys 

C.-w-C,  The  Fleet  H.Q.,  Cairo 

12  Thermidor9  Year  VI  (30  July,  1798} 

I  have  just  received,  all  together,  your  letters  from  25  Messidor  to 
8  Thermidor.  What  I  hear  from  Alexandria  on  the  success  of  the 
soundings  leads  me  to  hope  that  by  now  you  have  entered  the  port.  I 
expect,  too,  that  the  Causse  and  Dubois  are  fully  armed  and  capable  of 
forming  part  of  the  line  if  you  are  attacked;  two  additional  snips  are 
not  to  be  despised. 

Rear-Admiral  Perrfe  will  be  needed  for  a  long  time  on  the  Nile, 
which  he  is  beginning  to  know.  I  see  no  harm  in  your  giving  the 
command  of  his  ships  to  Citizen .  Do  what  is  proper  about  it. 

I  have  sent  you  copies  of  all  the  orders  I  have  given  for  the  provision- 
ing of  the  squadron.  I  imagine  that  the  fifty  boats  laden  with  foodstuffs 
have  arrived  by  now.  Here  we  have  an  immense  task;  there  has  never 

262  The  Rise  to  Power 

been  such  chaos  to  be  disentangled  and  organized.  We  have  corn,  rice 
and  vegetables  in  abundance.  We  are  seeking  money  and  beginning  to 
find  it,  but  all  that  involves  work,  trouble  and  difficulties. 

Enclosed  is  an  order  for  Damietta.  Send  it  by  a  picket  boat  which 
must  ensure  that  our  troops  are  there  before  entering;  they  left  three 
days  ago  in  Nile  boats,  so  they  should  have  arrived  when  you  get  this 
letter.  I  am  going  to  send  a  further  thirty  boat-loads  of  wheat  for  your 
squadron. 

The  behaviour  of  the  English  tends  to  show  that  they  are  inferior  in 
numbers  and  are  confining  themselves  to  blockading  Malta. 

However,  you  must  either  at  once  enter  the  port  of  Alexandria  or 
else  provision  yourself  quickly  with  the  rice  and  corn  I  am  sending  you 
and  proceed  to  Corfu;  it  is  essential  that  until  matters  are  decided  you 
should  be  in  a  position  to  threaten  the  Porte.  In  the  second  case,  you 
will  take  care  that  the  Venetian  and  French  frigates  and  all  ships  that 
can  be  of  use  to  us  remain  at  Alexandria. 

BONAPARTE 

337 
Order 

H.Q.,  Cairo 

12  Thermidor,  Year  VI  (30  July,  1798} 

Bonaparte,  Commander-in-Cbief,  being  dissatisfied  with  die  con- 
duct of  the  inhabitants  of  Alexandria,  orders: 

ARTICLE  i.  All  the  inhabitants,  of  whatever  nation,  must  take  their 
arms  to  the  military  commander. 

ART.  2.  Those  who,  forty-eight  hours  after  publication  of  the  present 
order,  have  not  done  so  will  be  beheaded. 

ART.  3 .  The  house  of  the  man  who  murdered  the  French  gunner  will 
be  demolished. 

ART.  4.  Fifty  hostages  from  among  the  most  ill-disposed  will  be 
taken  on  board  the  fleet,  where  they  will  be  held  until  the  inhabitants 
of  Alexandria  behave  better. 

BONAPARTE 

338 
Order 

H.Q.,  Cairo 

12  Thermidor,  Year  VI  (30  July,  1798) 

Bonaparte,  Commander-in-Chief,  orders  that  all  horses  in  the  city 
of  Alexandria  will  be  handed  over  to  the  military  commander  to 
remount  the  cavalry.  Those  who  have  not  obeyed  within  forty-eight 
hoars  of  the  publication  of  the  present  order  will  receive  100  strokes  of 
the  cane  and  will  be  fined  100  talaris. 

BONAPARTE 

_  Egypt  _  263 

339 
Order* 

H.Q.,  Cairo 

12  Thermidor,  Year  VI  (30  July,  1798) 
Bonaparte,  Commander-in-Chief,  considering  it  essential  that  the 

merchants  of  Rosetta,  like  those  of  Cairo,  contribute  to  the  upkeep  of 
the  army  until  this  can  be  ensured  through  the  collection  of  taxes, 
orders  the  merchants  of  Rosetta  to  pay  a  contribution  of  100,000 
francs  into  the  chest  of  the  Paymaster-General. 
This  contribution  must  be  paid  within  forty-eight  hours. 

BONAPARTE 

340 
Order 

H,Q.,  Cairo 

13  Thermidor,  Year  VI  (31  July,  1  798) 
The  Commander-in-Chief  orders: 

1.  All  Egyptian  landowners  are  confirmed  in  their  property. 

2.  Religious  foundations  attached  to  mosques,  especially  those  of 
Medina  and  Mecca,  are  confirmed  as  in  the  past. 

3.  All  civil  transactions  will  continue  to  take  pkce  as  in  the  past. 

4.  Civil  justice  will  be  administered  as  in  the  past. 

BONAPARTE 

Order 

H.Q.,  Cairo 
13  Thermidor,  Year  VI  (31  July,  1  798) 

1.  Navigation  on  the  Nile  and  the  trade  of  Cairo,  especially  with 
Alexandria,  Rosetta  and  Damietta,  will  continue  as  in  the  past. 

2.  Shipping  will  be  liable  only  to  the  ordinary  customs  dues  which 
were  charged  previously. 

3.  The  Commander-in-Chief  orders  the  generals  and  civil  and 
military  administrative  officers  to  protect  shipping  on  the  Nile  and  to 
ensure  that  it  is  neither  interfered  with  nor  delayed. 

BONAPARTE 

342 
To  Major-  General  Menou 

Governor  of  Rosetta  H.Q.,  Cairo 

13  Thermidor,  Year  VI  (31  July,  1798} 

Citizen  General,  your  presence  is  still  needed  at  Rosetta  for  some 
days  for  the  organization  of  that  province. 

*  Similar  orders  for  Alexandria  and  Damietta. 

L.D.N.  —  K 

264  The  Rise  to  Power 

Only  the  greatest  severity  will  make  the  Turks  behave;  every  day 
I  have  five  or  six  heads  cut  off  in  the  streets  of  Cairo.  We  have  had  to 
treat  them  gently  so  far  so  as  to  destroy  the  reputation  for  brutality 
which  preceded  us:  but  today  we  must  adopt  the  tone  necessary  to 
make  these  people  obey,  and,  for  them,  to  obey  is  to  fear. .  , . 

The  commission  charged  with  making  the  inventory  of  Mameluke 
goods  must  send  its  reports  to  the  Quartermaster. 

Send  us  news  of  the  admiral  and  the  fleet  as  soon  as  possible. 

Order  your  artillery  commander  to  send  for  two  or  three  heavy 
guns  from  Alexandria  and  place  them  at  the  mouth  of  the  Nile  to 
prevent  English  sloops  insulting  us. 

BONAPARTE 

343 
Order 

JJ.Q.,  Cairo 
15  Thermidor,  Year  VI  (2  Aug,  1798) 

1.  Citizen  Beauvoisins,  an  engineer  officer,  a  member  of  the  divan, 
the  Physician-  or  Surgeon-General  of  the  army  or  someone  appointed 
by  them  will  form  a  health  committee  charged  with  maintaining  the 
purity  of  the  air  in  the  city  of  Cairo,  Old  Cairo  and  Bouluq. 

2.  They  will  make  regulations  governing  butchers'  shops  and  the 
burial  of  the  dead,  and  to  cleanse  the  city  of  all  impurities  tending  to 
corrupt  the  air. 

BONAPARTE 

344 
To  Citizens  Berthollet,  Monge  and  Caffarelli 

H.Q.,  Cairo 

15  Thermidor,  Year  VI  (2  Aug,  1798) 
Citizens  Berthollet  and  Monge  and  the  Commander  of  engineers 

will  consult  and  choose  a  house  in  which  can  be  established  a  French 
and  arabic  printing  works,  a  chemistry  laboratory,  a  physics  laboratory, 
a  library  and,  if  possible,  an  observatory.  There  will  be  a  hall  for  the 

Institute I  wish  this  house  to  be  on  Ezbekyeh  Square 

BONAPARTE 

345 
To  Major-General  Berthier 

Chief  of  Staff,  Army  of  the  East  H.Q,,  Cairo 

16  Thermldor,  Year  VI  (3  Aug,  1798) 
Please  have  measured,  in  the  presence  of  a  staff-officer,  how  much 

water  a  camd  carries  in  ordinary  goat  skins.* 

BONAPARTE 
*  Answer:  24  gallons. 

Egypt 265 

346 
To  Brigadier- General  Dupuy 

Commandant  of  Cairo  H.Q.,  Cairo 

17  Thermidor,  Year  VI  (4  Aug,  1798) 

I  have  just  written  to  the  divan  to  make  a  distribution  of  corn  to 
the  poor  of  the  great  mosque. .  . . 

For  the  peace  of  the  city  great  vigilance  is  more  important  than  a 
widespread  use  of  troops.  A  few  duty  officers  patrolling  the  town,  a  few 
orderly  sergeants  on  asses  inspecting  the  most  important  points,  a  few 
French  troops  penetrating  into  the  markets  and  the  various  districts, 
and  a  few  reserve  companies  which  can  be  sent  wherever  there  may  be 
trouble  are  more  useful  and  less  tiring  than  fixed  guards  on  the  squares 
and  cross-roads.  Apart  from  the  guards  on  the  houses  of  the  Mame- 
lukes, 400  infantry  and  50  cavalry  should  suffice  for  duty  in  the 
city.  .  .  . 

BONAPARTE 

347 
To  Rear- Admiral  Ganteaume 

Ai  Alexandria  H.Q.,  Cairo 

28  Thermidor9  Year  VI  (15  Aug,  1798) 

The  picture  of  the  situation  in  which  you  found  yourself  is  horrible, 
Citizen  Admiral.  That,  under  the  circumstances,  you  did  not  perish  is 
because  fate  destines  you  one  day  to  avenge  our  navy  and  our  friends; 
accept  my  congratulations  thereon.  That  is  the  sole  pleasant  thought 
I  have  had  since  the  day  before  yesterday,  when  I  received  your  report, 
brought  to  me  by  General  Kleber's  aide-de-camp  to  my  advance-guard 
thirty  leagues  from  Cairo. 

I  salute  and  embrace  you. 

BONAPARTE 

348 

To  Rear- Admiral  Ganteaume 

C.-m-C.  The  Fleet  H.Q.,  Cairo 

28  ThermidoTy  Year  VI  (15  Aug,  1798} 

Citizen  Admiral,  you  will  take  command  of  all  that  remains  of  our 
navy  in  Egypt  and  you  will  act  together  with  Commissioner  Le  Roy 
to  arm  and  provision  the  frigates  Alceste,  Junon,  Carrere  andMwtrow, 
the  ships  Dubois  and  Causse  and  any  other  frigates,  brigs  and  dispatch 
boats  we  still  have.  You  will  appoint  to  all  commands. 

You  will  do  everything  possible  to  salvage  the  wrecks  remaining 
in  the  Abonkir  roadstead. 

You  will  at  once  send  to  Corfu,  and  thence  to  Ancona,  a  dispatch 
boat  with  the  letters  carried  by  the  courier  I  sent  from  Cairo  a  fortnight 

266  The  Rise  to  Power 

ago,  which  I  arn  told  are  still  at  Rosetta.  Send  an  exact  account  of  the 
battle  to  the  Minister  of  Marine. 

I  much  desire  to  confer  with  you;  but  I  shall  wait  a  few  days  before 
ordering  you  to  come  to  Cairo,  since  I  intend  if  possible  to  go  myself 
to  Alexandria. 

Send  me  a  return  of  the  officers,  sailors  and  ships  remaining  to  us. 

You  must  know  it  is  essential  to  warn  Malta  and  Corfu,  which 
Admiral  Villeneuve  will  already  have  done,  but  so  that  they  keep  on 
the  alert  and  avoid  being  surprised. 

I  imagine  that  by  now  the  English  have  drawn  off  with  their 
wreckage. 

I  salute  and  love  you. 

BONAPAKTE 

349 
To  the  Executive  Directory 

H.Q.,  Cairo 
2  Fructidor,  Year  VII  (19  Aug,  ijgg) 

Citizen  Directors,  on  18  Thermidor  ...  we  marched  towards  Syria, 
driving  Ibrahim-Bey  and  his  army  before  us. 

Before  reaching  Bilbeis  we  rescued  part  of  the  Mecca  caravan  which 
. . .  had  been  captured  by  Ibrahim,  released  and  then  pillaged  by  the 
Arabs.  I  had  it  conducted  to  Cairo  under  good  escort.  One  merchant 
assured  me  he  had  lost  goods  worth  a  million  francs.  He  had  all  his 
women  with  him.  I  gave  them  supper  and  had  camels  provided  for 
their  journey  to  Cairo.  Several  appeared  to  have  good  figures,  but  their 
faces  were  covered,  as  is  the  custom  of  the  country,  a  custom  the  army 
finds  it  very  difficult  to  get  used  to. 

We  reached  Salhiya,  which  is  the  last  inhabited  pkce  in  Egypt  and 
where  there  is  good  water;  then  begins  the  desert  separating  Egypt  and 
Syria  .  . .  Ibrahim-Bey  is  now  crossing  it;  he  has  been  wounded. 

I  placed  General  Reynier's  division  and  some  engineer  officers  at 
Salhiya  to  build  a  fortress  and  left  on  26  Thermidor  for  Cairo.  I  had 
not  gone  two  leagues  when  General  Kleber's  aide-de-camp  arrived  with 
news  of  the  battle  our  fleet  had  undergone  on  14  Thermidor,  Com- 
munications are  so  difficult  he  had  taken  eleven  days  to  come 

I  left  Alexandria  on  18  Messidor.  I  wrote  to  the  admiral  to  enter  the 
port  within  twenty-four  hours  or,  if  his  fleet  could  not  enter,  to  unload 
all  tie  artillery  and  stores  of  the  land  army  at  once  and  to  go  to  Corfu. 

The  admiral  did  not  think  he  could  complete  unloading  where  he 
was,  since  he  was  moored  among  rocks  before  the  port  of  Alexandria 
and  several  ships  had  already  lost  their  anchors.  He  moved  to  Aboukir 
which  offered  a  good  anchorage.  I  sent  engineer  and  artillery  officers 
who  agreed  with  the  admiral  that  he  could  be  given  no  protection 

Egypt 267 

from  the  land  and  that,  if  the  English  appeared  during  the  two  or  three 
days  he  would  have  to  remain  there  in  order  to  land  our  artillery  and 
to  sound  and  mark  the  passage  at  Alexandria,  he  could  do  nothing  but 
cut  his  cables  and  that  it  was  important  to  stay  at  Aboukir  as  short  a 
time  as  possible.  I  thus  left  Alexandria  in  the  firm  belief  that  within 
three  days  the  fleet  would  be  in  the  port  or  would  have  set  sail  for 
Corfu.  From  18  Messidor  to  9  Thermidor  I  received  no  news  from 
either  Rosetta  or  Alexandria.  ...  I  then  received  several  letters  from 
the  admiral  from  which  I  saw  with  astonishment  that  he  was  still  at 
Aboukir.  I  wrote  to  him  immediately  to  impress  upon  him  that  he 
must  not  waste  an  hour  in  entering  Alexandria  or  proceeding  to  Corfu. 

In  a  letter  of  2  Thermidor  the  admiral  informed  me  that  several 
English  ships  were  reconnoitring  his  position  and  that  he  was  arming 
at  Aboukir  to  await  the  enemy.  This  strange  resolve  caused  me  the 
greatest  alarmj  but  it  was  already  too  late,  for  the  letter  reached  me  only 
on  the  I2th.  I  sent  my  aide-de-camp,  Citizen  Jullien,  with  orders  not 
to  leave  Aboukir  till  he  had  seen  the  fleet  set  sail.  Leaving  on  the  I2th 
he  could  never  have  arrived  in  time,  but  he  was  killed  on  the  way  by 
a  group  of  Arabs  who  stopped  his  boat  on  the  Nile  and  murdered  him 
and  his  escort. 

On  8  Thermidor  the  admiral  wrote  that  the  English  had  moved  off, 
which  he  attributed  to  shortage  of  food.  .  .  . 

On  the  evening  of  the  I4th  the  English  attacked  him.  As  soon  as 
he  saw  their  fleet  he  sent  an  officer  to  inform  me  of  his  dispositions  and 
plans;  this  officer  perished  on  the  way. 

It  appears  to  me  that  Admiral  Brueys  did  not  wish  to  go  to  Corfu 
until  he  was  certain  he  could  not  enter  the  port  of  Alexandria  and  that 
the  army,  of  which  he  had  for  long  had  no  news,  was  in  a  position  to 
have  no  need  for  a  retreat. 

If  in  the  course  of  these  disastrous  events  he  has  made  mistakes  he 
has  expiated  them  by  a  glorious  death. 

On  this  occasion  as  on  so  many  others  Destiny  has  shown  that,  if 
it  gives  us  great  preponderance  on  the  continent,  it  has  given  the  empire 
of  the  seas  to  our  rivals.  But,  however  great  this  reverse,  it  cannot  be 
attributed  to  the  perversity  of  Fortune,  which  has  not  yet  abandoned 
us;  on  the  contrary,  she  has  helped  us  more  than  ever  before  throughout 
this  operation.  When  I  arrived  off  Alexandria  and  learned  that  the 
English  had  been  there  in  superior  force  a  few  days  before,  I  hurled 
myself  ashore  despite  the  furious  storm  which  threatened  to  wreck  us. 
I  remember  that  while  we  were  preparing  to  land  a  warship  was 
signalled  in  the  distance;  it  was  the  Justice,  coming  from  Malta.  'For- 
tune/ I  cried,  'would  you  desert  me?  Give  me  but  five  days/ 1  marched 
all  night;  at  dawn  I  attacked  Alexandria  . . .  and  in  five  days  I  was 
master  of  Rosetta,  of  Damanhur,  and  established  in  Egypt  During 

268  The  Rise  to  Power 

those  five  days  the  fleet  should  have  found  shelter  from  the  English, 
whatever  their  number;  far  from  that,  it  remained  exposed  throughout 
the  rest  of  Messidor;  at  the  beginning  of  Thermidor  it  received  two 
months'  supply  of  rice  from  Rosetta;  for  ten  days  the  English,  in 
superior  force,  were  sighted;  on  n  Thermidor  it  learned  of  the 
occupation  of  all  Egypt  and  of  our  entry  into  Cairo;  and  it  is  only 
when  she  sees  that  all  her  favours  are  useless  that  Fortune  abandons  our 
fleet  to  its  destiny. 

Is  Talleyrand  at  Constantinople?  . .  . 

I  salute  you. 

BONAPARTE 

350 
To  Rear- Admiral  Villeneuve 

At  Malta  H.Q.,  Cairo 

4  Fructidor,  Year  VII  (21  Aug,  1798} 

Citizen  Admiral,  I  have  received  the  letter  you  wrote  to  me  at  sea 
ten  leagues  from  Cape  Kelidonia.  If  you  are  to  be  reproached  at  all  it 
is  with  not  having  put  to  sail  immediately  after  the  Orient  blew  up, 
since  the  position  the  admiral  had  taken  up  had  already  for  three  hours 
been  forced  and  surrounded  by  the  enemy  on  every  side. 

Under  the  circumstances,  you  have,  as  on  so  many  other  occasions, 
rendered  a  vital  service  to  the  Republic  by  saving  part  of  the  fleet. 

Rear-Admirals  Ganteaume  and  du  Chayla  are  at  Alexandria,  together 
with  all  the  sailors,  gunners  and  soldiers  from  the  fleet,  both  wounded 
and  fit,  all  the  prisoners  having  been  returned. 

The  two  battleships,  Causse  and  Dubois,  are  fitted  out,  as  are  the 
frigates  Akeste>  Junon,  Muiron  and  Carrere  and  the  other  Venetian 
frigates. 

At  Malta  you  will  find  two  battleships  and  one  frigate;  you  will 
await  the  arrival  of  the  three  Venetian  ships  and  two  frigates  which 
should  come  from  Toulon  with  the  convoy.  You  will  make  every 
effort  and  do  all  that  you  think  necessary  to  enable  it  to  reach  us. 

My  plan  is  to  bring  together  the  three  new  battleships  we  have  at 
Ancona,  the  one  at  Corfu  and  the  two  in  the  port  at  Alexandria,  so 
that,  whatever  happens,  we  can  contain  the  Turkish  fleet,  and  later 
on  to  try  to  join  tnese  with  the  seven  ships  you  will  then  have  tinder 
your  command  and  whose  principal  aim  at  the  moment  is  to  help  the 
passage  of  the  convoys  coining  to  us  from  France. 

I  am  ordering  General  Vaubois  to  provide  you  with  a  further  one 
htmdred  Frenchmen  for  each  of  your  ships,  so  that  with  this  reinforce- 
ment you  can  the  better  control  your  crews,  which  you  must  complete 
with  such  Maltese  sailors  as  you  can  find. 

BONAPARTE 

269 

351 
To  Citizen  Najac 

Naval  Commissioner,  at  Toulon  H.Q.,  Cairo 

4  Fructidor,  Year  VI  (21  Aug,  179$) 
Admiral  Ganteaume  has  no  doubt  informed  you,  Citizen  Com- 

missioner, of  the  event  which  has  overtaken  the  fleet.  Admiral  Ville- 
neuve  has  gone  to  Malta  with  all  that  he  has  saved.  Commissioner  Le 
Roy  will  no  doubt  send  you  a  detailed  return  of  the  numbers  of  dead 
and  wounded  and  of  the  crews  which  are  at  Alexandria. 

You  will  find  enclosed  a  letter  for  Mme  Brueys;  please  forward  it 
to  her  with  all  possible  tact. 

The  land  army  is  in  the  most  brilliant  position;  we  are  masters  of 
all  Egypt  and  once  we  receive  the  convoy  you  should  be  sending  us 
we  shall  have  nothing  left  to  desire.  I  am  ordering  Admiral  Villeneuve 
to  assemble  under  his  command  at  Malta  the  two  Maltese  and  three 
Venetian  battleships  and  the  frigates  which  you  have  at  Toulon. 

I  shall  join  the  three  Venetian  ships  of  the  line  which  we  have  at 
Ancona  and  the  one  at  Corfu  to  the  two  battleships  and  six  frigates  at 
Alexandria. 

There  are  only  very  few  dead  and  wounded;  the  latter  are  less  than 
800.  The  crews  captured  by  the  English  have  almost  all  been  returned 
and  are  at  Alexandria.  The  thirty  or  forty  labourers  you  sent  have 
arrived. 

I  beg  you  to  be  so  kind  as  to  inform  my  wife,  wherever  she  may  be, 
and  my  mother,  in  Corsica,  that  I  am  well.  I  am  sure  that  in  Europe 
I  have  been  reported  killed  a  dozen  times. 

BONAPARTE 

352 
To  Citizen  Sucy 

QJW.G.,  Army  of  the  East  H.Q.,  Cairo 

5  Fructidor,  Year  VI  (22  Aug,  1  7$$) 
Please  order  the  medical  officers  and  surgeons  who  were  on  duty 

today  at  No.  I  hospital  to  be  placed  under  arrest.  There  is  one  ward 
which  they  had  not  visited.  Please  also  point  out  that  the  bread  was 
not  properly  baked  and  the  meat  is  bad. 

BONAPARTE 

353 
Decree 

Cairo 

5  Fructidor,  Year  VI  (22  Aug,  1798) 

ARTICLE  i.  An  Egyptian  Institute  of  Arts  and  Sciences  will  be  estab- 
lished at  Cairo. 

270  The  Rise  to  Power 

ART.  2.  The  principal  objects  will  be:  i.  The  progress  of  knowledge 
and  its  propagation  in  Egypt;  2.  Research,  study  and  publication  of  the 
natural,  industrial  and  historical  facts  about  Egypt;  3.  To  give  advice 
on  the  various  questions  upon  which  it  may  be  consulted  by  the 
Government. 

ART.  3.  The  Institute  will  be  divided  into  four  sections  of  mathe- 
matics, physics,  political  economy,  and  literature  and  the  arts.  Each 
section  will  consist  of  twelve  members. 

ART.  7.  There  will  be  two  sessions  each  decade,  on  Primidi  and 
Sextidi.  They  will  open  at  7.0  a.m.  and  last  for  two  hours. 

ART.  8.  All  general  officers  of  the  French  army  may  attend  all 
sessions. 

ART.  23.  The  Proceedings  of  the  Institute  will  be  printed  every  three 
months.  The  volume  will  contain:  i.  Papers  by  members  which  have 
been  selected  by  the  committee.  2.  Papers  by  strangers  whose  inclusion 
has  been  voted  by  the  assembly.  3.  Reports  of  the  various  committees 
on  questions  presented  by  the  Government. 

ART.  24.  Every  two  years  two  prizes  will  be  offered  by  the  Institute: 
one  for  a  question  concerning  the  progress  of  Egyptian  civilization,  the 
other  for  a  question  concerning  the  development  of  industry.* 

BONAPARTE 

354 
Minutes  of  the  Institute  of  Egypt 

First  Session  Cairo 

6  Fructidor,  Year  VI  (23  Aug,  1798) 

The  Institute  of  Egypt  assembled  for  the  first  time  on  6  Fructidor. 
Citizen  Bonaparte  proposed  the  following  questions: 

1.  Can  the  ovens  used  to  bake  bread  for  the  army  be  improved  from 
the  point  of  view  of  fuel  consumption,  and  how? 

2.  Does  there  exist  in  Egypt  anything  to  replace  hops  in  the  brewing 
of  beer? 

3.  What  are  the  customary  methods  of  purifying  and  cooling  the 
water  of  the  Nile? 

4.  In  the  present  circumstances  in  Cairo  is  it  more  suitable  to  con- 
struct wini-  or  watermills? 

5.  Are  there  resources  in  Egypt  for  the  manufacture  of  powder,  and 
what  are  they? 

*  Most  members  of  die  Institute  were  drawn,  understandably,  from  the  com- 
mission of  arts  and  sciences,  but  several  of  the  more  educated  and  interested 
generab  and  administrators  also  joined;  Bonaparte  himself  played  a  prominent 
role.  Hie  omitted  clauses  9  to  22  set  out  detailed  procedural  and  administrative 
regulations. 

Egypt  271 

6.  What  is  the  position  in  Egypt  of  kw  and  education?  What 
improvements  in  these  matters  are  possible  and  desired  by  the  people? 

355 
Order 

H.Q.,  Cairo 

8  Fructidor,  Year  VI  (25  Aug,  1798) 
The  Commander-in-Chief  orders: 

ARTICLE  i.The  inhabitants  of  the  village  of  'Algamhaving  murdered 
the  aide-de-camp  Jullien  and  fifteen  Frenchmen  of  his  escort,  the  village 
will  be  burnt. 

ART.  2.  Brigadier-General  Lanusse  will  leave  tomorrow  evening 
with  500  men  of  his  division  and  one  gun-boat  and  proceed  to  'AlgSm 
to  carry  out  this  order.  All  cattle  and  corn  found  mere  will  be  taken 
on  board  and  confiscated  for  the  benefit  of  the  Republic.  If  he  can 
manage  to  arrest  the  sheiks,  he  will  bring  them  to  Cairo  as  hostages. 
He  will  give  the  village  over  to  pillage  so  that  no  house  is  left  standing. 

He  will  make  it  known  by  a  proclamation  distributed  in  neighbour- 
ing villages  that  'Algam  has  been  burnt  for  having  murdered  French- 
men sailing  on  the  Nile. 

BONAPARTE 

356 

Order 

H.Q.,  Cairo 

9  Fructidor,  Year  VI  (26  Aug,  1798} 
Bonaparte,  Commander-in-Chief,  orders: 

ARTICLE  i.  i  Vendemiaire,  the  anniversary  of  the  foundation  of  the 
Republic,  will  be  celebrated  in  all  posts  of  the  army  by  a  civic  festival 

ART.  2.  The  garrison  of  Alexandria  will  celebrate  the  festival  around 
Pompey's  column.  Advantage  will  be  taken  of  the  occasion  to  carry 
out  the  order  of  16  Messidor.*  The  Tricolour  will  be  flown  from  the 
top  of  the  column.  Cleopatra's  needle  will  be  illuminated. 

ART,  3.  In  Cairo  a  seven-sided  pyramid  will  be  erected  in  Ezbekyeh 
Square,  five  of  the  sides  bearing  the  names  of  the  men  of  the  five 
divisions  who  have  died  in  the  conquest  of  Egypt.  The  sixth  will  be  for 
the  navy;  the  seventh  for  the  staff,  cavalry,  artillery  and  engineers. 

ART.  4.  That  part  of  the  army  which  is  in  Cairo  will  parade  there 
at  7.0  a.m.,  and,  after  various  manoeuvres  and  the  singing  of  patriotic 
songs,  a  deputation  from  each  battalion  will  leave  to  plant  the  Tricolour 
on  the  summit  of  the  Great  Pyramid. 

AUT.  5.  Ezbekyeh  Square  will  be  arranged  so  that  at  4.0  p.m.  there 
can  be  horse  and  foot  races  in  which  those  inhabitants  of  the  country 

*No.  319. 

272  The  Rise  to  Power 

who  wish  may  take  part.  Prizes  will  be  awarded  to  the  victors.  In  the 
evening  the  pyramid  will  be  illuminated  and  there  will  be  fireworks. 

ART.  6.  The  troops  in  Upper  Egypt  will  celebrate  the  festival  at  the 
rums  of  Thebes. 

ART.  7.  The  Chief  of  Staff,  the  Commanders  of  artillery  and 
engineers  and  the  Commandant  of  Cairo  will  confer  to  prepare  a  more 
-detailed  programme  for  the  festival. 

BONAPARTE 

357 
Order 

H.Q.,  Cairo 

p  Fructidor,  Year  VI  (26  Aug,  1798} 
The  Commander-in-Chief  orders: 

1.  Only  one  kind  of  bread  will  be  made  in  the  army:  all  rations, 
whether  for  the  staffer  the  administrative  offices,  will  be  of  regulation 
bread. 

2.  A  better  bread  will  be  made  for  the  hospitals;  but  administrators 
and  store-keepers  are  forbidden,  under  any  pretext  whatsoever,  to  give 
such  bread  either  to  the  Commander-in-CHef,  to  any  general  or  to  the 
Quartermaster-General. 

3.  On  the  daily  visits  of  the  duty  officer  to  the  hospitals,  the  director 
will  state  the  quantity  of  hospital  bread  he  has  received.  He  is  forbidden, 
under  the  severest  penalties,  to  give  this  bread  to  anyone  else. 

BONAPARTE 

358 
To  Major-General  Vaubois* 

G.O.C.,  Malta  H.Q.,  Cairo 

11  Fructidor,  Year  VI  (28  Aug,  1798) 

I  have  received  very  few  letters  from  you;  I  believe  that  of  12 
Mesridor  is  the  second.  I  am  grieved  to  learn  there  is  unrest  in  the 
garrison  of  Malta.  Make  severe  examples  of  the  mutineers,  and  every- 
one "will  remain  quiet. 

The  staff  has  no  doubt  sent  you  the  orders  of  the  day  and  reports 
of  the  military  events  which  have  taken  place  here.  Everything  goes 
very  well.  I  am  writing  to  France  to  have  money  sent  to  you.  This 
cotmtry,  although  very  rich  in  goods,  is  not  at  all  so  in  money. 

BONAPARTE 

*  Inis  ktter,  like  many  others,  was  intercepted  by  die  British  Mediterranean 
fleet.  By  the  same  courier  Bonaparte  wrote  a  fairly  insignificant  letter  to  Briga- 
dkr--General  Qbanez,  Commandant  of  the  fortress  at  Malta;  below  the  signature, 
"Bonaparte/  there  is  a  note:  *Mark  the  end.  Nelson.*  This  is  the  only  document 
bearing  these  two  signatures. 

_  Egypt  _  273 

359 
To  Vice-  Admiral  Th£venard 

In  France  H.Q.,  Cairo 

18  Fructidor,  Year  VI  (4  Sept,  1798} 

Your  son*  was  killed  by  a  cannon  ball  on  his  quarter-deck.  I  carry 
out  a  sad  duty  in  informing  you,  Citizen  Admiral;  but  he  died  with 
honour  and  without  pain;  that  is  the  only  consolation  that  can  ease  the 
sorrow  of  a  father.  We  are  all  vowed  to  death.  Are  a  few  more  days 
of  life  equal  to  the  happiness  of  dying  for  our  country?  Are  they  worth 
the  horror  of  dying  in  bed,  surrounded  by  the  egoism  of  a  new  genera- 
tion? Are  they  worth  the  indignity  and  suffering  of  a  long  illness? 
Happy  those  who  die  on  the  field  of  battle!  They  live  eternally  in  the 
memory  of  posterity.  They  have  never  aroused  the  pity  due  to  frail 
old  age  or  to  the  man  tormented  by  a  painful  disease.  You,  Citizen 
Admiral,  have  grown  grey  in  the  career  of  arms;  you  will  mourn  a 
son  worthy  of  yourself  and  of  the  country.  In  shedding  tears  for  his 
memory,  you  will  say  with  us  that  his  glorious  death  is  to  be  envied. 

Know  that  I  share  your  sorrow,  and  do  not  doubt  my  regard  for 
you. 

I  salute  you. 

BONAPARTE 

360 
To  Major-  General  K16ber 

Governor  of  Alexandria  -£T-Q-»  Cairo 

24.  Fructidor,  Year  VI  (10  Sept,  1798) 

I  have  received  the  suit  of  armour  which  you  sent  me,  Citizen 
General.  It  is  very  fine;  I  suspect  it  is  of  English  workmanship  and 
destined  for  some  Indian  nabob. 

BONAPAHTE 

To  Citizen  Poussielgue 

Financial  Administrator  of  Egypt  H.Q.,  Cairo 

28  Fructidor,  Year  VI  (14  Sept,  1798) 

I  wish  to  have  sketches  of  the  various  local  costumes.  When  drawing 
them,  Citizen  Rigo  can  at  the  same  time  draw  the  principal  men  of 
the  country.  Thus,  to  draw  an  Osmanli,  he  will  draw  the  amir-al-hadj; 
for  a  Copt,  he  will  draw  the  comptroller-general;  for  a  sheik  he  can 
draw  die  sheik  El-Bekry,  and  so  on.  I  have  already  spoken  to  the 
amir-al-hadj  about  this;  speak  to  the  shiek  El-Bekry  and  the  comp- 
troller-general. 

BONAPARTE 
*  TheVenard,  captain  of  Aquiton,  killed  at  the  battle  of  the  Nile. 

274 

to 

To  Citizen  Poussielgue 

Financial  Administrator  of  Egypt  H.Q.,  Cairo 

$th  Complementary  Day,  Year  VI  (21  Sept,  1798) 
The  Damascus  merchants  owe  us  8,300  talari,  which  they  have  not 
paid;  the  coffee  merchants  owe  32,000  talari,  which  they  have  not  paid; 
the  Copts,  1,000;  the  wife  of  Murad  Bey,  8,000;  the  wives  of  the 
Mamelukes,  20,400.  None  of  that  is  being  paid;  but  it  is  essential  that 
they  make  haste,  for  our  needs  are  becoming  urgent. 

BONAPARTE 

363 
Order  of  the  Day 

Army  of  the  East  H.Q.,  Cairo 

9  Vendlmiaire,  Year  VII  (30  Sept,  1 798) 

The  men  Jean-Baptiste  Lenati,  Benedite  and  Francois  Sala,  accused 
and  convicted  of  having  cut  bunches  of  grapes  in  a  Turkish  garden, 
have  been  condemned,  in  accordance  with  Section  VI  of  the  Law 
of  21  Brumaire,  Year  V,  to  be  paraded  under  escort  in  the  camp  twice 
in  one  day  in  the  presence  of  the  guard,  carrying  the  bunches  of  grapes, 
their  uniforms  inside  out  and  with  a  placard  on  the  chest  bearing  the 
word:  'Marauder*. 

By  order  of  the  Commander-in-Chief 

364 
To  Major-General  Berthier 

Chief  of  Staff,  Army  of  the  East  H.Q.,  Cairo 

21  Brumaire,  Year  VII  (11  Nov,  1798} 

The  barbarous  custom  of  whipping  men  suspected  of  having  im- 
portant secrets  to  reveal  must  be  abolished.  It  has  always  been  recog- 
nized that  this  method  of  interrogation,  by  putting  men  to  the  torture, 
is  useless.  The  wretches  say  whatever  comes  into  their  heads  and 
whatever  they  tViink  one  wants  to  believe.  Consequently,  the  Com- 
mander-in-Chief forbids  the  use  of  a  method  wHch  is  contrary  to 
reason  and  humanity.  That  does  not  prevent  the  agas  from  inflicting 
the  bastinado,  but  only  as  a  punishment. 

BONAPARTE 

365 
To  Brigadier-General  Caffarelli 

Cik,  Engineers,  Army  of  the  East  H.Q.,  Cairo 

23  Brumaire,  Year  VII  (13  Nov,  1798} 

Citizen  General,  I  wish  you  to  have  five  or  six  games  of  bowls  made 
and  sent  to  Salhiya,  to  the  troops  at  Bilbeis  and  to  General  Desaix. 

BONAPARTE 

Egypt 275 

366 
To  Major- General  Berthier 

Chief  of  Staff,  Army  of  the  East  H.Q.,  Cairo 

18  Frimaire,  Year  VII  (S  Dec,  1798} 

Citizen  General,  please  inform  the  Physician-  and  Surgeon-General 
that  I  am  displeased  at  their  readiness  to  grant  certificates  to  return 
to  Europe  to  individuals  who,  through  cowardice  and  lack  of  the  sense 
of  duty,  wish  to  leave  the  army  before  the  campaign  is  ended. 

Instruct  them  that  they  should  give  certificates  only  to  men  who 
need  to  go  to  Europe  to  recover;  in  a  country  as  healthy  as  Egypt  that 
should  be  limited  to  a  very  small  number  of  diseases. 

It  is  not  that  it  is  my  intention  to  keep  with  the  army  those  who  do 
not  feel  the  honour  of  being  our  companions  in  arms;  let  them  go,  and 
I  shall  be  the  happier  for  it:  but  I  do  not  wish  them  to  hide  the  real 
reason  for  not  sharing  our  fatigues  and  dangers  under  feigned  illnesses; 
we  risk  their  sharing  in  our  glory. 

BONAPARTE 

367 
To  the  Executive  Directory 

H.Q.,  Cairo 
27  Frimaire,  Year  VII  (17  Dec,  1798} 

I  am  sending  you  an  officer  from  the  army  with  orders  to  stay  only 
seven  or  eight  days  in  Paris  and  then  to  return  to  Cairo  . .  .  Egypt 
begins  to  be  organized. 

A  boat  arriving  at  Suez  brought  an  Indian  who  had  a  letter  for  the 
commander  of  the  French  forces  in  Egypt;  but  this  letter  has  been  lost. 
It  seems  that  our  arrival  in  Egypt  has  given  a  great  impression  of  our 
power  in  India  and  produced  effects  very  unfavourable  to  the  English. 
There  is  fighting  there. 

We  are  still  without  news  from  France;  not  a  single  courier  since 
Messidor.  That  is  unparalleled,  even  in  the  colonies.  My  brother,* 
Quartermaster  Sucy  and  several  couriers  I  have  sent  to  you  should  have 
arrived.  Send  ships  for  us  to  Damietta. 

The  English  have  three  battleships  and  two  frigates  before  Alexandria. 

General  Desaix  is  in  Upper  Egypt  chasing  MuracUBey,  who  is  fleeing 
before  him  with  a  force  of  Mamelukes.  General  Bon  is  at  Suez. 

Work  is  proceeding  with  the  greatest  activity  on  the  fortifications 
of  Alexandria,  Rosetta,  Damietta,  Bilbeis,  SalHya,  Suez  and  Cairo. 
The  army  is  in  the  best  possible  condition  and  has  few  sick.  There  are 
a  few  concentrations  of  Turkish  forces  in  Syria;  I  would  have  been  to 
have  an  argument  with  them  if  seven  days  of  desert  did  not  separate  us. 
*  Jerome  Bonaparte  had  left  Egypt  on  i  November. 

276  The  Rise  to  Power 

We  have  goods  in  abundance;  but  money  is  very  scarce  and  the 
presence  of  the  English  stops  all  trade. 

We  await  news  of  France  and  Europe;  that  is  a  great  need  for  our 
souls,  for  if  the  national  glory  had  need  of  us  we  should  be  inconsolable 
at  not  being  there. 

BONAPARTE 

368 
Order 

H.Q.,  Cairo 
29  Frimaire,  Year  VII  (ig  Dec,  1798} 

Bonaparte,  Commander-in-Chief,  wishing  to  show  favour  towards 
the  monastery  of  Mount  Sinai:  i.  So  that  it  may  transmit  to  future 
generations  the  tradition  of  our  conquest;  2.  Out  of  respect  for  Moses 
and  the  Jewish  nation,  whose  cosmogony  recounts  for  us  the  most 
distant  ages;  3.  Because  the  monastery  of  Mount  Sinai  is  inhabited  by 
learned  and  civilized  men  in  the  midst  of  the  barbarous  deserts  where 
they  live,  orders: 

ARTICLE  i.  The  bedouin  Arabs  making  war  on  each  other,  to  what- 
ever side  they  may  belong,  may  not  occupy  or  seek  refuge,  food  or 
other  objects  in  the  monastery. 

ART.  2.  Wherever  they  may  reside,  the  monks  will  be  allowed  to 
carry  out  their  offices,  and  the  Government  will  protect  them  from 
interference  in  the  exercise  of  their  cult. 

ART.  4,  They  will  be  exempt  from  all  customs  dues  on  the  merchan- 
dise and  other  objects  which  they  import  and  export  for  the  use  of  the 
monastery,  and  in  particular  on  the  silks  and  satins  and  the  products 
of  the  religious  houses,  gardens  and  farms  which  they  own  on  the 
islands  of  Chios  and  Cyprus. 

ART.  8.  The  civil  and  military  authorities  will  ensure  that  the  monks 
of  Sinai  are  not  harmed  in  the  exercise  of  these  privileges. 

BONAPARTE 

369 
To  the  Inhabitants  of  Cairo 

H.Q.,  Cairo 

i  Nivose,  Year  VII  (21  Dec,  1798} 

Perverse  men  had  led  some  of  you  astray;  they  have  perished.* 
God  has  commanded  me  to  be  forgiving  and  merciful  to  the  people: 
I  have  been  forgiving  and  merciful  towards  you. 

*  A  serious  revolt  broke  out  in  Cairo  on  16  October.  It  was  suppressed  with 
comparative  ease  and  considerable  severity.  This  proclamation  continues  with  a 
series  of  entirely  practical  orders  for  the  re-establishment  and  future  procedure 
of  the  divan. 

Egypt 277 

I  was  angry  with  you  because  of  your  revolt.  For  two  months  I 
deprived  you  of  your  divan;  but  today  I  restore  it  to  you;  your  good 
conduct  has  wiped  out  the  stain  of  revolt. 

Sherifs,  Ulemas,  orators  of  the  mosques,  make  it  well  known  to  the 
people  that  those  who  lightheartedly  deckre  themselves  my  enemies 
will  have  no  refuge  either  in  this  world  or  the  rjext.  Is  there  a  man  so 
blind  as  not  to  see  that  Destiny  itself  directs  all  my  actions?  Is  there 
anyone  so  incredulous  as  to  doubt  that  everything  in  this  vast  universe 
is  subject  to  Destiny? 

Make  known  to  the  people  that,  since  the  world  began,  it  was 
written  that  after  destroying  the  enemies  of  Islam  and  casting  down  the 
crosses  I  should  come  out  of  the  west  to  fulfil  the  task  allotted  to  me. 
Let  them  see  that  in  more  than  twenty  passages  in  the  sacred  book  of  the 
Koran  what  is  happening  has  been  foretold  and  what  will  happen  is 
laid  down. 

Let,  then,  those  who  are  restrained  from  cursing  us  only  by  fear  of 
our  arms  reform  themselves;  for  in  praying  to  Heaven  against  us,  they 
seek  their  own  damnation.  Let  true  believers  pray  for  the  success  of 
our  forces. 

I  could  demand  a  reckoning  from  each  one  of  you  for  the  most 
secret  thoughts  of  his  heart,  for  I  know  all,  even  that  which  you  have 
told  to  no  one;  but  a  day  will  come  when  all  will  see  the  evidence  that 
I  am  led  by  higher  powers  and  that  no  human  efforts  can  succeed 

against  me.  Happy  those  who  in  good  faith  are  the  first  to  range 
themselves  beside  me!  ... 

BONAPARTE 

370 
Order  of  the  Day 

Army  of  the  East  H.Q.,  Cairo 

i  NivSse,  Year  VII  (21  Dec,  179$) 

...  At  midday  daily  the  bands  of  the  various  units  will  play  in  the 
squares  outside  the  hospitals  tunes  likely  to  cheer  the  sick  and  recall  to 
them  the  finest  moments  of  the  past  campaigns.  Garrison  commanders 
will  issue  orders  to  this  effect. 

By  order  of  the  Commander-in-Chief 

371 
To  the  Divan  of  Cairo 

Btibeis 

13  Nivose,  Year  VII  (2  Jan,  1799) 

I  have  received  your  letter  and  have  read  it  with  the  pleasure  one 
always  feels  in  tbinlcfng  of  those  one  respects  and  on  whose  attachment 
one  relies.  In  a  few  days  I  shall  be  in  Cairo. 

278  The  Rise  to  Power 

At  the  moment  I  am  occupied  in  planning  the  route  by  which  the 
water  of  the  Nile  may  be  joined  to  the  Red  Sea.  This  communication 
existed  formerly,  for  I  have  found  its  traces  at  several  points. 

I  have  learned  that  several  groups  of  Arabs  have  committed  thefts 
around  the  city.  I  wish  you  to  discover  what  tribe  they  belong  to,  for 
it  is  my  intention  to  punish  them  severely.  It  is  time  for  these  brigands 
at  last  to  stop  worrying  the  poor  people,  whom  they  are  making 
wretched. 

Believe,  I  beg  you,  my  desire  to  do  good  to  you. 

BONAPARTE 

372 
Order  of  the  Day 

Army  of  the  East  H.Q.,  Cairo 

19  Nivose,  Year  VII  (8]an,  1799) 

Any  medical  officer  who,  in  the  presence  of  the  enemy,  leaves  the 
area  assigned  to  the  ambulance  without  orders  or  who,  in  a  case  of 
contagious  illness,  refuses  to  attend  the  sick  will  be  arrested,  brought 
before  a  court-martial  and  treated  in  accordance  with  the  law  relating 
to  soldiers  who  flee  before  the  enemy.  No  Frenchman  should  fear 
death,  whatever  work  he  may  have  undertaken. 

Citizen  Boyer,  a  surgeon  at  Alexandria,  who  has  been  so  cowardly 
as  to  refuse  to  tend  wounded  men  who  had  been  in  contact  with  those 
suffering  from  supposedly  contagious  disease,  is  unworthy  of  the  tide 
of  French  citizen.  He  will  be  dressed  as  a  woman  and  paraded  on  an 
ass  in  the  streets  of  Alexandria  with  a  placard  on  his  back,  reading: 
'Unworthy  to  be  a  French  citizen;  he  is  afraid  to  die/  After  which  he 
will  be  put  in  prison  and  returned  to  France  on  the  first  ship.  The 
commandant  of  Alexandria  will  send  a  copy  of  this  order  to  the 
president  of  his  Department  with  an  invitation  to  erase  him  from  the 
fist  of  citizens.* 

BONAPARTE 

373 
To  Major-General  Berthier 

Chief  of  Staff,  Army  of  the  East  H.Q.,  Cairo 

21  Nivose,  Year  VII  (lojan,  1799} 

I  am  extremely  displeased  that  General  Menou  has  retained  the 
Revenge,  which  had  received  orders  to  proceed  to  Damietta.  Please 

*  Bubonic  plague  had  recently  broken  out  at  Alexandria,  At  the  other  end  of 
tbe  scale  of  medical  courage  an  act  by  Desgenettes,  the  Physician-General  of  the 
army,  is  worthy  of  record.  "When  in  March  the  plague  was  raging  among  the 
troops  at  Jaffa  he  deliberately  cut  himself  with  an  infected  scalpel  to  restore  the 
courage  of  the  terrified  soldiers* 

279 

write  to  him  once  and  for  all  that  he  is  to  carry  out  the  orders  he 
receives.  By  holding  the  Revenge  he  has  upset  important  plans. 

BONAPARTE 

374 
To  Brigadier- General  Caffarelli 

Cdr.,  Engineers,  Army  of  the  East  H.Q.,  Cairo 

24  Nivose,  Year  VII  (13  Jan,  1799) 

You  will  see  by  the  Order  of  the  Day  for  tomorrow,  Citizen  General, 
that  a  committee  is  going  with  a  strong  escort  to  Upper  Egypt.  On  the 
26th  a  convoy  is  leaving  for  Suez.  Four  armed  boats  are  leaving  on 
i  Pluviose  for  Quseir  and  other  ports  on  the  Red  Sea.  On  the  26th 
General  Andreossy  is  going  to  the  Natrun  lakes  to  visit  the  monasteries 
and  the  waterless  river. 

Those  of  the  Commission  of  the  Arts  who  wish  to  go  to  these 
various  places  are  free  to  do  so. 

BONAPARTE 

375 
Order  of  the  Day 

Army  of  the  East  H.Q.,  Cairo 

24  Nivose,  Year  VII  (13  Jan,  1799) 

Corporal  Girardeau  and  Grenadier  Antoine,  of  the  32nd  Demi- 
brigade,  will  be  shot  at  midday  today  for  having  murdered  three 
women.  .  .  . 

BONAPASTE 

376 
To  Brigadier-General  Marmont 

Governor  of  Alexandria*  H.Q.,  Cairo 

25  Nivose,  Year  VII  (14  Jan,  i/pp) 
I  cannot  conceive  Citizen  General,  how  the  foreign  consuls  have 

been  able  to  receive  a  letter  from  the  English  admiral  without  you 
being  aware  of  it,  and  still  less  how,  having  received  it,  they  have 
published  it  without  your  permission. 

Inquire  of  the  consuls  as  to  who  passed  them  this  letter  and  let 
them  know  that,  if  in  future  they  do  not  hand  over  to  you  the  letters 
they  receive,  sealed,  you  will  have  them  shot. . . . 

You  will  place  under  seal  all  the  effects  of  the  man  Jenovitch, 
Imperial  captain,  who  has  reached  Alexandria,  and  send  him  under 
good  escort  to  me  in  Cairo.  Take  care  to  have  him  stripped  naked, 
and  his  clothes  taken  and  unsewn  to  make  sure  there  is  nothing  hidden 

*  KMber  had  recovered  from  his  wound  and  resumed  cx>xnrnand  of  a  field 
division, 

28o  The  Rise  to  Power 

in  them.  Have  him  given  other  clothes.  The  sending  of  this  man  to 
Alexandria  seems  to  me  suspicious.  Apart  from  that,  I  am  glad  that 
he  is  there,  for  he  will  give  you  hews  of  the  continent;  but  let  nun  speak 
to  no  one  else. 

BONAPARTE 

377 
To  the  Sultan  of  Mecca* 

H.Q.,  Cairo 

6  Pluviose,  Year  VII  (25  Jan,  1799) 

I  have  received  and  understood  your  letter.  I  am  sending  you  the 
regulations  which  I  have  drawn  up  for  the  customs  at  Suez,  and  I 
intend  to  have  them  carried  out  exactly.  I  do  not  doubt  that  the 
merchants  of  the  Hedjaz  will  see  with  gratitude  that  I  have  lowered 
the  dues  to  the  great  benefit  of  trade,  and  you  can  assure  them  that 
here  they  will  enjoy  complete  protection. 

Whenever  you  need  anything  in  Egypt,  you  have  only  to  let  me 
know,  and  it  will  be  a  pleasure  to  me  to  show  you  signs  of  my  high 
regard. 

BONAPARTE 

378 
To  the  Imam  of  Muscat 

H.Q.,  Cairo 

6  Pluviose,  Year  VII  (2 5  Jan,  1799} 

I  write  you  this  letter  to  inform  you  of  what  you  have  no  doubt 
already  learnt,  the  arrival  of  the  French  army  in  Egypt. 

As  you  have  always  been  our  friend,  you  should  be  convinced  of 
my  desire  to  protect  all  your  nation's  ships,  and  if  you  will  instruct 
them  to  come  to  Suez  they  will  find  protection  for  their  trade. 

Please  also  send  this  letter  to  Tippoo  Sahib  by  the  first  means  you 
have  to  reach  India. 

BONAPARTE 

379 
To  Tippoo  Sahib 

H.Q.,  Cairo 

6  Pluviose,  Year  VII  (25  Jan,  1799} 

You  have  already  been  informed  of  my  arrival  on  the  coasts  of  the 
Red  Sea  witt  an  innumerable  and  invincible  army,  filled  with  the 
desire  to  deliver  you  from  the  iron  yoke  of  England. 

*  Hie  form  of  address  used.  Cp.  No,  406  where  the  'Sherif '  of  Mecca  is, 
correctiy,  referred  to. 

Egypt  281 

I  hasten  to  let  you  know  my  desire  that  you  should  send  me,  by 
way  of  Muscat  and  Mocha,  news  of  the  political  situation  in  which 
you  are  placed.  I  wish,  too,  that  you  would  send  to  Suez  or  to  Cairo 
some  able  man  in  your  confidence  with  whom  I  can  confer. 

BONAPARTE 

380 
To  Brigadier-  General  Marmont 

Governor  of  Alexandria  H.Q.,  Cairo 

p  Pluviose,  Year  VII  (28  Jan,  i/pp) 

...  I  cannot  understand  the  obstinacy  of  war  commissary  Michaux 
in  staying  in  his  house  when  there  is  plague  there;  why  does  he  not  go 
and  camp  on  a  hillock  near  Pompey's  column? 

Keep  all  your  battalions  at  least  half  a  league  apart.  Keep  very  few 
troops  in  the  city  and,  since  it  is  the  most  dangerous  spot,  no  corps 
d'£lite  ...  As  for  the  unfortunate  light  infantry  demi-brigade,  have 
them  strip  and  take  a  good  sea  bath,  scrubbing  themselves  from  head  to 
toe;  have  them  wash  their  clothes  well,  and  see  to  it  that  they  keep 
themselves  dean.  Hold  no  parades  and  mount  no  guards  except  in 
each  camp.  Have  a  big  ditch  dug  and  filled  with  quick-lime  to  throw 
the  dead  into  .  .  .  Order  everyone  to  wash  face,  hands  and  feet  daily 
and  to  keep  clean. 

If  you  cannot  save  the  whole  of  the  units  where  this  disease  has 
broken  out,  at  least  save  the  majority  of  your  garrison.  It  seems  to 
me  you  have  not  yet  taken  steps  commensurate  with  the  circumstances. 
If  I  did  not  have  stores  in  Alexandria  that  I  cannot  do  without  I  would 
already  have  told  you  to  take  your  garrison  and  camp  three  leagues 
away  in  the  desert.  I  know  you  cannot  do  that,  but  approach  as  near  to 
it  as  possible  .  .  . 

BONAPAUTE 

To  Major-General  Desaix 

G.O.C.,  Upper  Egypt  H.Q.,  Cairo 

15  Pluviose,  Year  VII  (3  Feb,  i/pp) 

Your  last  letter,  which  I  received  yesterday,  Citizen  General,  is  dated 
16  Nivose.  I  have  no  news  of  your  subsequent  operations.  General 
Davput  has  written  from  Asyut  on  23  Nivose  announcing  his  successes 
against  various  groups  of  fellahin  who  had  revolted. 

Since  3  Nivose  we  have  been  in  Qatiya  where  we  have  set  up  a  fort 
and  considerable  stores.  General  Reynier  leaves  there  on  the  i6th  for 
El  *  Arish.  A  great  part  of  the  army  is  on  the  march  to  cross  the  desert 
and  approach  the  Syrian  frontier.  Headquarters  is  leaving  immediately. 
My  aim  is  to  chase  Ibrahim-Bey  from  Egypt,  disperse  the  concentration 
at  Gaza  and  punish  Djezzar  for  his  bad  behaviour. 

282  The  Rise  to  Power 

Naval  Lieutenant  Collet  Has  left  Suez  with  four  gunboats  carrying 
a  landing  party  of  eighty.  He  is  ordered  to  cruise  off  Quseir  and  even  to 
capture  it.  As  soon  as  he  has  landed  he  will  send  Arabs  to  inform  you. 
On  your  side,  send  men  from  Isna  to  get  into  touch  with  him  and  send 
him  food  supplies,  which  he  may  need. 

Dispose  of  those  wretched  Mamelukes  by  every  means  and  as  soon  as 
possible. 

BONAPARTE 

382 
To  the  Executive  Directory 

H.Q.,  Cairo 
22  Pluviose,  Year  VII  (10  Feb,  ijgg] 

Citizen  Directors,  a  Ragusan  ship  entered  the  port  of  Alexandria 
on  7  Pluviose;  on  board  were  Citizens  Hamelin  and  Livron,  owners  of 
the  cargo,  which  consisted  of  wine,  vinegar,  doth,  brandy,  etc.  ...  I 
have  myself  questioned  Citizen  Hamelin.  His  information  is  pretty 
contradictory.  I  have  not  had  news  from  Europe  since  6  July.  .  . . 

I  have  sent  you  more  than  sixty  ships  of  all  nationalities  and  by  all 
routes;  thus  you  should  be  well-informed  of  our  position  here. 

We  have  learned  through  Suez  that  six  French  frigates,  which  were 
cruising  off  the  mouth  of  the  Red  Sea,  had  taken  more  than  20  millions 
from  tie  English  in  prizes.  I  am  at  this  moment  having  a  corvette 
built  at  Suez  and  I  have  a  flotilla  of  four  sloops  sailing  in  the  Red  Sea. 

The  English  have  obtained  from  the  Porte  that  Djezzar  Pasha,  in 
addition  to  his  own  pashalic  of  Acre,  should  have  that  of  Damascus. 
Ibrahim,  Abdullah  and  other  pashas  are  at  Gaza  and  threatening  to 
invade  Egypt.  I  am  leaving  at  once  to  find  them.  That  means  nine  days 
of  desert  with  neither  grass  nor  water,  but  I  have  collected  a  consider- 
able number  of  camds  and  hope  that  we  shall  lack  nothing.  When  you 
read  this  letter  it  is  possible  that  I  shall  be  on  the  ruins  of  Solomon's  city. 

Djezzar  Pasha  is  a  fierce  old  man  of  seventy  with  an  unreasoned 
hatred  of  the  French.  He  has  replied  with  scorn  to  the  friendly  over- 
tures I  have  several  times  made  to  him. 

I  have  three  aims  in  the  operation  I  am  undertaking. 

1.  To  assure  the  conquest  of  Egypt  by  the  establishment  of  a  strong 
point  beyond  the  desert  which  will  hold  armies,  of  whatever  nation, 
so  far  from  Egypt  that  they  cannot  combine  with  a  European  army 
landing  on  the  coast. 

2.  To  force  the  Porte  to  take  up  a  position,  thereby  supporting  the 
negotiations  which  you  have  no  doubt  begun. . .  . 

3.  To  prevent  the  English  cruisers  from  drawing  supplies  from 
Syria  by  using  the  two  months  of  winter  left  to  me  in  making  the 
whole  of  that  coast  friendly  through  war  and  negotiation. 

283 

I  am  being  accompanied  by  the  mullah,  who  is  the  most  revered 
man  in  the  moslem  empire  after  the  mufti  of  Constantinople,  by  the 
shieks  of  the  four  principal  sects  and  by  the  amir-al-haj,  or  prince  of 
the  pilgrims. 

Ramadan,  which  began  yesterday,  has  been  celebrated  on  my  part 
with  the  greatest  pomp;  I  undertook  the  functions  formerly  carried 
out  by  the  pasha. 

General  Desaix  is  near  the  cataracts,  more  tfr^n  160  leagues  from 
Cairo.  He  is  searching  the  ruins  of  Thebes.  Each  moment  I  await 
official  details  of  abatdehehas  had  with  theMamelukes  inwhichMurad- 
Bey  was  killed  and  five  or  six  beys  made  prisoner. 

Adjutant-general  Boyer  has  discovered  ruins  never  before  seen  by 
a  European  in  the  desert  near  the  Fayum.  .  .  . 

By  the  next  courier  I  will  send  you  the  levels  of  the  Suez  canal  whose 
remains  are  perfectly  preserved. 

It  is  essential  that  you  have  arms  sent  to  us  and  that  your  military 
and  diplomatic  operations  are  pursued  in  such  a  way  that  we  receive 
help.  Warfare  and  natural  causes  bring  us  losses.  A  contagious  disease 
broke  out  in  Alexandria  two  months  ago;  200  men  have  fallen  victim. 
We  have  taken  steps  to  prevent  it  spreading;  we  shall  conquer  it.  We 
have  had  many  enemies  to  conquer  in  this  expedition:  desert,  local 
inhabitants,  Arabs,  Mamelukes,  Russians,  Turks,  English. 

If  during  March  the  report  of  Citizen  Hamelin  is  confirmed,  and 
France  is  in  arms  against  tie  kings,  I  shall  return  home. 

I  will  not  allow  myself  any  reflections  in  this  letter  on  the  affairs  of 
the  Republic,  since  I  have  been  without  news  for  ten  months.  We  all 
have  complete  confidence  in  the  wisdom  and  vigour  of  the  decisions 
you  will  take. 

BONAPARTE 

383 
To  the  Sheiks  and  Ulemas  of  Gaza 

H.Q.,  Khan  Ytinis 
6  VentSse,  Year  VII  (24  Feb,  179$) 

On  reaching  Khan  Ytinis  with  my  army  I  have  learnt  that  some  of 
the  inhabitants  of  Gaza  have  taken  fright  and  fled  from  the  city.  I  am 
writing  you  this  letter  to  act  as  a  safe  conduct  and  to  inform  you  that 
I  am  a  friend  of  the  people  and  protector  of  the  faithful. 

I  am  coming  to  Gaza  with  my  army  only  to  drive  out  Djezzar 
Pasha  and  punish  bim  for  having  invaded  Egypt. 

Send  representatives  to  meet  me,  and  have  no  fear  for  your  religion 
or  for  your  lives,  property  and  women. 

BONAPAJRTP 

284  ^  Rise  *°  Power 

384 
To  Major-General  Menou 

Governor  ofRosetta  H-Q-,  Gaza 

8  Ventose,  Year  VII  (26  Feb,  1799} 
I  have  learned  with  pleasure  from  your  letter  of  the  27th,  Citizen 

General,  that  you  have  said  prayers  in  the  mosque.* 

The  present  weather,  which  should  continue  throughout  the  month 
of  March,  reassures  me  as  to  the  activities  of  the  English.  If  they  come 
close,  our  bombs  and  red-hot  shot  will  deal  with  diem;  if  they  keep 
far  out,  their  bombardment  will  produce  a  few  accidents  but,  in  the 
final  result,  will  do  little  harm.  As  soon  as  your  presence  is  no  longer 
necessary  at  Rosetta,  go  to  Cairo  and  send  all  available  foodstuffs  and 
money  to  Alexandria.  Be  vigorous  and  punish  any  risings  by  marching 
against  them  promptly  and  secretly.  The  weather  is  very  bad  today, 
which  rather  tries  us. 

I  imagine  you  had  the  two  12-pounders  sent  to  Damietta;  we  have 
great  need  ol  them. 

BONAPARTE 

385 
To  Major-General  Desaix 

G.O.C,  Upper  Egypt,  at  Qfts  H.Q.,  Gaza 

9  Ventdse,  Year  VII  (27  Feb,  1799) 
I  have  had  no  letters  from  you  for  over  a  month,  Citizen  General, 

though  I  have  had  indirect  news  through  the  commandants  of  the 
provinces  of  Cairo  and  Beni-Suef.  We  are  now,  I  suppose,  some  300 
leagues  apart.  The  staff  will  have  informed  you  of  the  military  situation 
here.  We  have  crossed  70  leagues  of  desert,  which  was  extremely  tiring; 
brackish  water,  often  none  at  all.  We  have  eaten  dogs,  asses  and  camels. 
For  three  days  there  has  been  a  horrible  wind  and  pouring  rain;  the  sky 
is  black;  it  is  Parisian  weather.  The  lemon-trees,  the  olive  forests  and 
the  rugged  ground  are  exactly  like  the  countryside  of  Languedoc;  one 
thinks  oneself  at  Beziers.  In  the  fort  of  Gaza  we  found  more  than  fifteen 
tons  of  powder  and  a  great  quantity  of  shot  of  all  calibres.  We  leave 
tomorrow  for  Jaffa.  The  Mamelukes  and  Ibrahim-Bey  have  taken 
refuge  in  the  mountains  of  Nablus.  I  await  your  news  impatiently. 

BONAPARTE 

386 
Order  of  the  Day 

Army  of  the  East  H.Q.,  before  Jaffa 

14  Ventose,  Year  VII  (4  Mar,  1799) 

The  Coinmander-itt-Chief  regrets  to  see  that  on  leaving  camp  the 
*  Menou  Had  become  2 

troops  are  burning  the  straw  and  wood  they  have  procured.  Since  these 
materials  are  very  scarce  and  may  be  useful  to  troops  following  behind 
the  army,  he  urges  unit  commanders  to  prevent  all  unnecessary 
destruction. 

Several  outpost  commanders  have  been  negligent,  thereby  com- 
promising their  own  safety  and  that  of  the  army.  A  soldier  of  the  Bon 
division  was  killed  by  an  Arab  last  night  because  the  picket  was  asleep. 
In  each  division  there  will  be  a  senior  duty  officer  for  each  day 
who  must  go  the  rounds  at  night  to  ensure  that  the  pickets  are  in 
order. 

All  divisions,  detached  battalions,  the  guides  and  engineers  will  camp 
in  squares  with  their  baggage  and  transport  animals  in  the  middle. 

Generals  Bon  and  Lannes  will  order  tie  advanced  posts  blockading 
the  town  to  arrest  any  Turk  trying  to  enter  or  leave  and  to  conduct  him 
to  headquarters. 

By  order  of  the  Commander-in-Chief 

387 
To  Major-General  Berthier 

Chief  of  Staff,  Army  of  the  East  H.Q.,  Jaffa 

19  Ventose,  Year  VII  (g  Mar,  1799} 

You  will  send  for  the  colonel  of  the  [Turkish]  gunners,  Citizen 
General;  you  will  ask  him  the  names  of  the  twenty  principal  officers  of 
the  gunners,  and  you  will  have  these  twenty  officers  conducted  to  the 
village  where  the  battalion  that  is  to  leave  for  Cairo  is  stationed.  There 
they  will  be  confined  in  the  fort  until  further  orders.  When  they  have 
left  for  the  village,  you  will  order  the  duty  adjutant-general  to  take 
all  the  gunners  and  other  Turks  captured  with  arms  in  their  hands  at 
Jaffa  to  the  sea  shore  and  to  have  them  shot,  taking  precautions  that 
none  shall  escape. 

BONAPARTE 

388 
To  Djezzar  Pasha 

At  Acre  H.Q.Jaffa 

1$  Ventose,  Year  VI  (p  Mar,  1799) 

Since  my  entry  into  Egypt  I  have  several  times  informed  you  that 
it  was  not  my  intention  to  make  war  on  you  and  that  my  sole  aim  was 
to  destroy  the  Mamelukes:  you  have  not  replied  to  any  of  the  over- 
tures I  have  made.  I  have  let  you  know  that  I  wished  you  to  remove 
Ibrahim-Bey  from  the  frontier  of  Egypt:  far  from  that,  you  have  sent 
troops  to  Gaza,  you  have  set  up  great  stores,  you  have  spread  it  abroad 
that  you  were  going  to  enter  Egypt  and  you  have  effected  your 

28(5  The  Rise  to  Power 

invasion  by  putting  2,000  of  your  troops  into  the  fort  of  El  'Arish, 
which  is  ten  leagues  inside  the  territory  of  Egypt.  I  have  therefore  had 
to  leave  Cairo  and  bring  to  you  the  war  that  you  seemed  to  be 
provoking. 

The  provinces  of  Gaza,  Ramie  and  Jaffa  are  in  my  power In  a 

few  days  I  shall  march  on  Acre.  But  what  reason  should  I  have  for 
shortening  by  a  few  years  the  life  of  an  old  man  whom  I  do  not  know? 
What  are  a  few  more  leagues  beside  the  country  I  have  already  con- 
quered? And,  since  God  gives  me  victory,  I  wish,  like  him,  to  be 
merciful,  not  only  towards  the  people  but  also  towards  the  great. 

You  have  no  real  reason  to  be  my  enemy,  since  you  were  the  enemy 
of  the  Mamelukes.  Your  pashalic  is  separated  from  Egypt  by  the 
provinces  of  Gaza  and  Ramie  and  by  immense  deserts.  Become  my 
friend  again  and  enemy  of  the  Mamelukes  and  the  English:  I  will  do 
you  as  much  good  as  I  can  otherwise  do  you  harm.  Send  me  your 
answer  by  a  man  entrusted  with  full  powers  who  knows  your  inten- 
tions; he  will  present  himself  at  my  outposts  with  a  white  flag,  and 
I  am  ordering  my  staff  to  send  you  a  safe  conduct,  which  you  will 
find  here  attached. 

On  the  24th  of  this  month  I  shall  be  on  the  march  for  Acre;  I  must, 
therefore,  have  your  reply  before  that  day. 

BONAPARTE 

389 
To  the  Executive  Directory 

H.Q.,  Jaffa 
23  VentSst,  Year  VII  (13  Mar,  1799} 

On  5  Fructidor,  Citizen  Directors,  I  sent  an  officer  to  Djezzar,  Pasha 
of  Acre;  he  received  him  badly  and  did  not  reply  to  me. 

On  29  Brumaire  I  wrote  him  another  letter;  he  had  the  messenger's 
head  cut  off. 

The  French  at  Acre  were  being  arrested  and  cruelly  treated.  The 
provinces  of  Egypt  were  inundated  with  firmans  in  which  Djezzar 
did  not  dissimulate  his  hostile  intentions  and  announced  his  arrival. 

He  did  more;  he  invaded  die  provinces  of  Jaffa,  Ramie  and  Gaza. 
His  advance-guard  took  up  position  at  El  'Arish,  where  there  are 
a  few  good  wells  and  a  fort  in  the  desert,  ten  leagues  inside  Egyptian 
territory. 

I  had  no  choice,  therefore;  I  was  provoked  into  war  and  thought 
that  I  ought  not  to  delay  in  myself  carrying  it  to  him. 

On  16  Pluviose  General  Reynier  rejoined  his  advance-guard  which 
was  undo:  the  orders  of  the  indefatigable  General  Lagrange  at  Qatia, 
tbcee  days*  journey  in  die  desert,  where  I  had  assembled  considerable 

Egypt 287 

stores.  General  Kleber  arrived  on  18  Pluviose  from  Damietta  by  way 
of  Lake  Manzala  on  which  several  gunboats  had  been  built;  he  dis- 
embarked at  Pelusium  and  proceeded  to  Qatia. 

On  18  Pluviose  General  Reynier  left  Qatia  for  El  'Arish  with  his 
division.  It  meant  marching  across  the  desert  for  several  days  without 
finding  water.  Difficulties  of  every  kind  were  surmounted.  The  enemy 
was  attacked  and  driven  back,  the  village  of  El  'Arish  was  carried  and 
the  whole  enemy  advance-guard  was  blockaded  in  the  fort. 

But  Djezzar's  cavalry,  supported  by  a  force  of  infantry,  had  taken 
up  position  a  league  in  our  rear,  cutting  the  besieging  army.  General 
Kleber  ordered  General  Reynier  to  move.  At  midnight  die  enemy 
camp  was  surrounded,  attacked  and  carried;  one  of  the  beys  was  killed; 
equipment,  arms,  baggage,  all  was  captured,  but  most  of  the  men  had 
time  to  escape  .  .  . 

The  trench  was  opened  around  the  fort.  One  of  our  mines  caved  in 
and  the  miners  were  dislodged.  On  28  Pluviose  a  breaching  bat- 
tery was  set  up  and  two  approach  batteries.  We  fired  throughout  the 
29th.  At  midday  on  the  soth  the  breach  was  passable;  I  summoned  the 
commander  to  surrender,  and  he  did  so  ... 

We  left  El  'Arish  on  4  Ventose.  The  advance-guard  lost  itself  in  the 
desert  and  suffered  badly  from  lack  of  water.  We  were  short  of  pro- 
visions and  were  forced  to  eat  horses,  mules  and  camels. 

On  the  5th  we  were  at  the  columns  placed  on  the  border  of  Asia 
and  Africa.  On  the  6th  we  camped  in  Asia;  the  following  day  we  were 
on  the  march  for  Gaza;  at  10.0  a.m.  we  found  3,000  to  4,000  cavalry 
marching  against  us. 

General  Murat,  commanding  the  cavalry,  crossed  several  streams  in 
face  of  the  enemy  by  well-executed  movements . .  .  General  Lannes 
with  his  light  infantry  supported  the  cavalry  movements  .  .  .  We 
charged  the  enemy  near  the  heights  opposite  Hebron,  where  Samson 
carried  the  gates  of  Gaza,  The  enemy  withdrew  and  did  not  accept  the 
charge .  . .  The  22nd  light  Infantry  did  very  well;  it  followed  the 
horses  at  the  double,  although  for  several  days  it  had  had  little  to  eat  or 
drink. 

We  entered  Gaza  and  found  there  eight  tons  of  powder,  much 
ammunition,  bombs,  tools,  more  than  200,000  rations  of  biscuit  and 
six  guns. 

The  weather  became  terrible,  with  thunder  and  heavy  rain;  it  was 
the  first  storm  we  had  had  since  leaving  France  .  .  . 

On  the  nth  we  camped  at  Ramie;  the  enemy  had  evacuated  it  so 
suddenly  that  he  left  us  100,000  rations  of  biscuit,  much  more  barley 
and  1,500  waterskins  which  Djezzar  had  prepared  for  his  crossing  of 
the  desert. 

The  Kleber  division  first  invested  Jaffa  and  then  advanced  to  the  El 

288  The  Rise  to  Power 

Auja  river  to  cover  the  siege.  The  Bon  division  invested  the  right  front 
of  the  town,  the  Lannes  division  the  left  front .  .  . 

On  the  i6th  two  approach  batteries,  the  breaching  battery  and  a 
mortar  battery  were  ready  to  fire.  The  garrison  made  a  sortie,  and  then 
one  saw  a  great  crowd  of  men  of  all  colours  and  a  variety  of  dress 
rush  against  the  breaching  battery  .  .  .  They  were  vigorously  repulsed 
and  returned  quicker  than  they  wished .  . . 

At  dawn  on  the  lyth  I  summoned  the  governor  to  surrender.  He  did 
not  reply  and  beheaded  my  emissary.  At  7.0  a.m.  we  opened  fire;  at 
i.o  p.m.  I  judged  the  breach  practicable.  General  Lannes  planned  the 
assault;  staff  officer  Netherwood  was  the  first  in  with  ten  carabiniers 
and  was  followed  by  three  companies  of  grenadiers  of  the  isth  and  by 
the  6pth  Demi-brigade,  commanded  by  Adjutant-general  Rambeaud, 
for  whom  I  request  the  rank  of  brigadier-general. 

At  5.0  p.m.  we  were  masters  of  the  town  and  for  twenty-four  hours 
it  was  given  up  to  pillage  and  all  the  horrors  of  war,  which  have  never 
seemed  to  me  so  hideous  . . . 

During  the  following  days  several  ships  arrived  from  Acre  with 
munitions  and  stores,  which  were  captured  in  the  port.  They  were 
astonished  to  see  the  town  in  our  power,  for  their  opinion  was  that 
it  would  stop  us  for  six  months. 

Djezzar's  general,  Abdullah,  had  the  good  sense  to  hide  himself 
among  the  men  from  Egypt  and  to  come  and  throw  himself  at  my 
feet .  . . 

At  Jaffa  we  found  fifty  guns,  thirty  of  them  being  European  models 
and  forming  the  field  train,  more  than  400,000  rations  of  biscuit,  2,000 
quintals  of  rice  and  several  stores  of  soap. 

The  engineer  and  artillery  corps  have  distinguished  themselves. 
General  Caffarelli,  who  directed  the  siege  and  fortified  the  Egyptian 
fortresses,  is  recommended  for  his  rare  energy,  courage  and  ability  . .  . 

Colonel  Songis,  director  of  the  artillery  park  had  great  difficulty  in 
transporting  the  guns;  he  commanded  the  main  attack  on  Jaffa  .  .  . 

The  army  of  the  Republic  is  master  of  the  whole  of  Palestine. 

BONAPARTE 

390 
To  the  Sheiks  and  Inhabitants  of  Acre 

H.Q.,  Mount  Carmel 
28  Ventdse,  Year  VU  (i&Mar,  1799) 
God  is  merciful  and  compassionate! 

God  gives  victory  to  whom  he  will;  he  renders  account  to  no  one. 
The  peoples  must  submit  to  his  will! 

In  coming  with  my  army  into  the  pashalic  of  Acre,  my  intention  is 
to  punish  Djezzar  for  daring  to  provoke  me  into  war  and  to  deliver 

Egypt  289 

you  from  the  vexations  he  places  on  the  people.  God,  who  sooner 
or  later  punishes  tyrants,  has  decided  that  the  end  of  the  reign  of 
Djezzar  has  arrived. 

You,  good  Moslems  and  inhabitants,  must  have  no  fear,  for  I  am  a 
friend  to  all  those  who  do  no  ill  and  live  peacefully. 

Let  each  commune  therefore  send  deputies  to  my  camp,  so  that  I 
can  record  them  and  give  them  safe-conducts,  for  I  cannot  otherwise 
be  answerable  for  what  may  befall  them, 

I  am  terrible  against  my  enemies,  but  good,  just  and  merciful  towards 
those  who  deckre  themselves  my  friends. 

BONAPARTE 

39i 
To  the  Emir  Beshir 

Emir  of  the  Druses  H.Q.,  before  Acre, 

30  VentSse,  Year  VII  (20  Mar,  i  jggf) 

After  conquering  the  whole  of  Egypt,  I  have  crossed  the  desert  and 
entered  Syria.  I  have  captured  the  forts  of  El '  Arish,  Gaza  and  Jaffa 
which  the  troops  of  Djezzar  Pasha  had  occupied.  I  have  beaten  and 
destroyed  his  whole  army  and  have  now  shut  him  up  in  the  fortress  of 
Acre,  which  I  have  been  besieging  for  two  days. 

I  hasten  to  inform  you  of  all  this  news  because  I  know  it  must 
please  you,  since  all  these  victories  are  destroying  the  power  of  a 
savage  man  who  has  done  as  much  harm  to  the  brave  Druse  nation 
as  to  mankind. 

It  is  my  intention  to  make  the  Druse  nation  independent,  to  lower 
the  tribute  it  pays,  and  to  give  it  the  port  of  Beirut  and  other  towns 
which  it  needs  as  outlets  for  its  commerce.  I  wish  you  to  come  yourself 
as  soon  as  possible  or  send  someone  to  see  me  here,  before  Acre,  to 
make  the  necessary  arrangements  to  free  you  from  our  common 
enemies. 

You  can  proclaim  in  all  the  Druse  villages  that  those  who  wish  to 
bring  food  and,  above  all,  wine  and  brandy  to  the  camp  will  be  paid 
in  full. 

BONAPARTE 

392 
To  Commodore  Sidney  Smith 

H.Q.,  before  Acre 

3  Germinal,  Year  VII  (23  Mar,  i/pp) 

General  Bonaparte,  commanding  one  of  the  armies  of  the  French, 
Republic,  instructs  me  to  inform  you,  Sir,  that,  in  conformity  with 
die  exchange  agreement  existing  between  the  two  nations,  he  is  sending 
back  to  you  the  English  prisoners  captured  at  Haifa. 

The  Rise  to  Power 

He  has  also  issued  orders  in  the  cities  of  Egypt  and  in  the  island  of 
Mauritius  that  all  English  prisoners  who  may  have  been  taken  shall 
be  returned  to  Alexandria,  or  to  Acre,  or  to  die  Indian  possessions  of 
the  King  of  England  as  you  may  wish. 

The  Commander-in-Chief  of  the  French  army  requests  you  to  return 
the  French  prisoners,  especially  those  captured  on  the  last  ships,  to  the 
camp  before  Acre,  upon  the  condition  mat  they  will  not  serve  against 
the  forces  of  His  Britannic  Majesty  until  the  complete  exchange. 

The  Commander-in-Chief  requires  me  to  thank  you  on  his  behalf 
for  the  return  of  one  of  his  messengers.  Do  not  doubt,  Sir,  my  desire  to 
please  you,  or  my  eagerness  to  be  of  service  to  the  men  of  your  nation 
who  may  suffer  from  the  misfortunes  of  war. 

I  have  the  honour  to  be,  with  the  highest  consideration, 

By  order  of  the  Cornmander-in-ChieJ 

393 
To  the  Sheik  of  Nablus 

HQ.,  before  Acre. 
28  Germinal,  Year  VII  (17  Apr,.  17$$) 

Commander-in-Chief  Bonaparte  requires  me  to  inform  yon  ttat 
after  the  letter  he  wrote  you  from  Jaffa  he  believed  you  would  be  wise 
enough  to  remain  quiet  and  not  expose  your  country  to  the  horrors  of 
war.  But  you  have  not  done  so,  preferring  to  place  yourself  in  the 
service  of  Djezzar,  a  tyrant  who  is  the  enemy  of  God  aad  of  men. 
However,  since  General  Bonaparte  is  merciful  and  knows  that  hitherto 
you  have  been  enemies  of  Djezzar,  he  wishes  to  be  satisfied  with  the 
lesson  he  gave  you  yesterday  and  not  to  carry  iron  and  fire  into  your 
villages. 

If  therefore  you  behave  well  and  entertain  no  correspondence  with. 
Djezzar,  he  will  grant  safety  and  protection  to  your  country.  Other- 
wise you  will  run  the  risk  of  perishing. 

By  order  of  the  Commander-in-Chief 

394 
Order  of  the  Day 

Army  of  the  East  H.Q.,  Before  Acre 

29  Germinal,  Year  VII  (18  Apr,  1799) 

The  janissaries  of  Damascus,  united  with  Djezzar' s  cavalry,  the  militia 
of  Nablus,  the  Mamelukes  of  Ibrahim-Bey  and  some  Arabs,  crossed  the 
Jordan  with  the  intention  of  raising  the  siege  of  Acre.  Tkey  have  beeo. 
completely  defeated  in  the  actions  of  Nazareth,  Safed  and  Cam  and  the 
battle  of  Mount  Tabor.  A  great  many  fell  on  the  field  of  battle;  most 
of  their  baggage  was  captured,  including  that  of  Ibrahim-Bey  and  the 

291 

Mamelukes,  which  was  carried  on  400  camels,  and  several  flags  and 
guns  were  taken.  Part  of  the  fleeing  crowd,  pursued  at  the  point  of  the 
sword,  were  drowned  in  the  Jordan;  the  rest  were  chased  onto  the 
Damascus  road. 

According  to  the  ktest  news  from  France  received  by  the  Com- 
mander-in-Chief,  on  i  Ventose  the  Republic  was  master  of  the  whole 
of  the  Kingdom  of  Naples  and  the  whole  of  Piedmont,  and  the  great 
powers  of  the  continent,  indignant  at  the  arrogant  and  ridiculous 
conduct  of  the  court  of  Naples,  had  abandoned  that  kitig  to  his  unhappy 
fate. 

The  bases  of  peace  appear  to  have  been  agreed  at  Rastadt  and  the 
treaty  was  on  the  point  of  being  signed. 

By  order  of  the  Commander-in-Chief 

395 
To  Major-  General  Berthier 

Chief  of  Staff,  Army  of  the  East  H.Q.,  before  Acre 

29  Germinal,  Year  VII  (18  Apr,  1799} 

The  commander  of  the  English  squadron  cruising  off  Acre  having 
had  the  barbarity  to  embark  die  French  prisoners  on  a  plague-ridden 
ship  from  Constantinople,  under  pretence  of  sending  them  back  to 
Toulon  but  in  fact  to  get  rid  of  them  on  the  way,  and  this  man  being, 
besides,  a  kind  of  madman,  you  will  inform  the  coastal  commanders 
of  my  intention  that  there  should  be  no  communication  with  him. 
Intermediaries  will  be  turned  back  before  they  are  within  musket 
range  of  the  coast 

This  order  will  apply  only  to  the  present  commander  of  the 
squadron. 

BONAPARTE 

39<$ 
To  Citizen  D'Aure 

Q.M.G.,  Army  of  the  East*  H.Q.,  before  Acre 

8  Floreal,  Year  VII  (27  Apr,  1799} 

Citizen  Quartermaster,  you  will  inform  Physician-General  Des- 
genettes  and  Surgeon-General  Larrey  that,  wishing  to  give  them  a 
mark  of  my  satisfaction  for  the  services  they  have  rendered  and  are 
rendering  daily  to  the  army,  I  award  each  of  them  a  gratuity  of  2,000 
francs,  which  they  can  draw  in  Paris  or  Cairo.  You  will  inform  me 
of  their  intentions. 

BONAPARTE 

*  D'Aure  had  succeeded  Sucy  in  December  when  the  latter  left  for  France 
owing  to  ill-health. 

292  The  Rise  to  Power 

397 
To  Colonel  Sanson 

Cdr.,  Engineers,  Army  of  the  East*  H.Q.,  before  Acre 

13  Floreal,  Year  VII  (2  May,  j/pp) 

I  request  you,  Citizen  Commander,  to  send  the  engineer  carto- 
graphers, Citizens  Jacotin  and  Favier,  to  map  the  course  of  the  Jordan 
and  the  various  gorges  running  into  it  as  well  as  the  positions  of 
General  Kleber.  They  will  proceed  to  that  General's  camp  today. 

BONAPARTE 

398 
To  the  Executive  Directory 

H.Q.,  before  Acre 
21  Florlal,  Year  VII  (loMay,  i7pp) 

Citizen  Directors,  . .  .  you  have  seen  from  my  last  dispatch  the  speed 
with  which  the  army  crossed  the  desert,  the  capture  of  El  'Arish,  Gaza, 
Jaffa,  and  the  dispersal  of  the  enemy  army,  which  has  lost  its  magazines 
and  part  of  its  camels,  waterskins  and  field  equipment. 

There  were  still  two  months  before  the  right  season  for  landings; 
I  resolved  to  pursue  the  remnants  of  the  enemy  army  and  to  maintain 
the  war  for  two  months  in  the  heart  of  Syria. 

We  marched  on  Acre  .  . . 

At  8.0  p.m.  on  the  2yth  we  captured  Haifa;  an  English  squadron  was 
anchored  in  the  harbour. 

Four  siege  guns  that  I  had  had  embarked  at  Alexandria  were  cap- 
tured by  the  English.  But  several  boats  laden  with  bombs  and  pro- 
visions escaped  and  came  into  Haifa  .  .  . 

We  had  nothing  but  our  field  guns  to  mount  against  Acre  .  . .  You 
will  see  from  the  journal  of  the  siege  that  on  6, 10, 18  and  26  Germinal 
the  enemy  made  strong  sorties  which  General  Vial  repulsed  with  heavy 
loss;  that  on  the  I2th  our  miners  blew  up  the  counterscarp  but  that 
the  breach  was  not  practicable. 

On  the  I2th  General  Murat  occupied  Safed,  the  old  Bethulia;  the 
inhabitants  show  the  spot  where  Judith  killed  Holophernes.  On  the 
same  day  General  Junot  took  Nazareth  . .  .  [Accounts  of  various  actions 
culminating  in  the  battle  of  Mount  Tabor,  27  Germinal,  and  the  destruction 
of  the  Turkish  army  from  Damascus^ 

You  will  see  in  the  journal  of  the  siege  of  Acre  the  works  put  in  hand 
at  various  points  in  order  to  cross  the  moat  and  secure  a  lodgement  in 
the  tower,  which  was  mined  and  countermined;  that  when  several 
24-pounders  arrived  we  set  seriously  about  breaching  the  town;  that 
on  7, 10  and  13  Floreal  the  enemy  made  sorties  which  were  vigorously 
repulsed;  that  on  19  Floreal  the  enemy  received  reinforcements  carried 
*  CaflEkreBi  had  died  of  wounds  a  few  days  earlier. 

_____ Egypt 293 

on  thirty  Turkish  warships;  that  on  the  same  day  he  made  four  sorties 
which  filled  our  saps  with  corpses;  that  after  a  most  murderous  assault 
we  established  ourselves  in  one  of  the  most  important  points  of  the 
fortress, 

Today  we  occupy  the  principal  points  of  the  rampart.  The  enemy  has 
built  a  second  defence  lined  based  on  Djezzar's  castle. 

It  would  remain  for  us  to  advance  into  the  town.  That  would  mean 
besieging  every  house  and  losing  more  men  than  I  wish  to.  Besides,  it 
is  too  late  in  the  season;  what  I  intended  has  been  done;  Egypt  calls  me. 

I  am  going  to  set  up  a  battery  of  24-pounders  to  destroy  Djezzar's 
palace  and  the  principal  buildings  of  the  town.  I  shall  send  in  1,000 
bombs,  and  that  should  do  a  lot  of  damage  in  so  restricted  a  space. 
When  I  have  reduced  Acre  to  a  heap  of  rubble,  I  shall  recross  the  desert 
and  be  ready  to  receive  the  European  or  Turkish  army  which  will 
land  in  Egypt  in  Messidor  or  Thermidor. 

I  will  send  you  from  Cairo  an  account  of  the  victories  of  General 
Desaix  in  Upper  Egypt;  he  has  already  several  times  destroyed  groups 
arriving  from  Arabia  and  almost  entirely  dispersed  the  Mamelukes. 

In  all  these  encounters  a  number  of  brave  men  have  died,  and  at  the 
head  of  them  Generals  Caffarelli  and  Rambeaud;  many  are  wounded, 
Generals  Bon  and  Lannes  among  them. 

Since  I  crossed  the  desert  I  have  had  500  men  killed  and  double  that 
number  of  wounded.  The  enemy  has  lost  more  than  15,000  men. 

I  ask  the  rank  of  major-general  for  General  Lannes  and  the  rank  of 
brigadier-general  for  Colonel  Songis  of  the  artillery  , . . 

I  have  been  completely  satisfied  with  the  army  in  all  events  and  in 
a  type  of  warfare  so  new  to  Europeans.  It  has  shown  that  true  courage 
and  warlike  talents  are  surprised  at  nothing  and  accept  privation  of 
every  kind.  The  result,  we  hope,  will  be  an  advantageous  peace  and 
an  accession  of  glory  and  prosperity  for  the  Republic. 

BONAPARTE 

399 
To  Ahmed  Pasha 

Turkish  Commander  in  Acre  H.Q.,  before  Acre 

24  Florid,  Year  VIL  (13  May,  1799) 

The  Commander-in-chief  requires  me  to  propose  a  cease-fire  in 
order  to  bury  the  dead  who  are  beyond  the  trenches. 

He  also  wishes  to  arrange  an  exchange  of  prisoners;  he  has  in  his 
power  part  of  the  garrison  of  Jaffa,  General  Abdullah,  and,  in  parti- 
cular, tie  gunners  and  bombardiers  belonging  to  the  convoy  which 
reached  Acre  from  Constantinople  three  days  ago;  he  also  holds  a 
large  number  of  soldiers  from  the  army  which  came  from  Damascus, 
He  knows  that  there  are  French  prisoners  at  Constantinople  and 

294  The  Rise  to  Power 

Rhodes.  He  hopes  that  you  will  appoint  someone  to  discuss  these 
matters  with  one  of  his  officers. 

By  order  of  the  Commander-in-Chief 

400 
To  Brigadier-General  Dommartin 

Cdr.9  Artillery p,  Army  of  the  East  H-Q-,  before  Acre 

26  Floreal,  Year  VII  (15  May,  ijpp) 

It  is  essential,  Citizen  General,  that  you  employ  all  your  available 
workmen  in  making  stretchers  to  complete  the  evacuation;  this  is  of 
the  greatest  urgency  and  I  require  you  to  have  this  work  carried  out  at 
once  and  without  respite. 

If  possible  please  place  a  certain  number  of  muskets  taken  from  the 
dead  at  the  disposal  of  the  Quartermaster-General  to  arm  the  bakers, 
butchers  and  other  administrative  employees. 

By  order  of  the  Commander-in-Chief 

401 
Order  of  the  Day 

Army  of  the  East  H.Q.,  before  Acre 

28  Flortal,  Year  VII  (17  May,  1799} 

Soldiers,  you  have  crossed  the  desert  dividing  Africa  from  Asia  faster 
than  an  Arab  army. 

The  army  that  was  marching  to  invade  Egypt  has  been  destroyed; 
you  have  captured  its  general,  its  field  equipment,  its  waterskins,  its 
camels.  You  have  taken  all  the  forts  defending  the  desert  wells. 

On  the  field  of  Mount  Tabor  you  dispersed  that  horde  of  men  who 
had  run  from  every  corner  of  Asia  in  the  hopes  of  looting  Egypt. 

The  thirty  ships  you  saw  arrive  before  Acre  twelve  days  ago  carried 
the  army  which  was  intended  to  besiege  Alexandria;  but  it  was  forced 
to  come  to  the  help  of  Acre  and  there  met  its  fate.  Some  of  its  flags  will 
decorate  your  entry  into  Egypt. 

Thus,  having  made  war  in  the  heart  of  Syria  for  three  months, 
having  taken  forty  field  guns,  fifty  flags  and  6,000  prisoners,  having 
razed  to  the  ground  the  fortifications  of  Gaza,  Jaffa,  Haifa,  Acre,  and 
all  with  a  handful  of  men,  we  are  going  back  to  Egypt.  The  season  for 
landings  calls  me  there. 

In  a  few  days  you  might  have  hoped  to  capture  the  Pasha  himself 
in  his  palace;  but  at  this  time  of  year  the  capture  of  the  castle  of  Acre 
is  not  worth  the  loss  of  a  few  days,  and,  besides,  the  brave  men  I 
should  lose  there  are  now  needed  for  more  essential  operations. 

Soldiers,  we  have  a  hard  and  dangerous  road  to  cross;  we  have 
stopped  die  East  from  doing  anything  against  us  this  campaign,  but 
we  may  have  to  repel  efforts  from  the  West. 

295 

That  will  give  you  new  opportunities  for  glory;  and  if  in  the  midst 
of  so  many  struggles  each  day  brings  the  death  of  a  brave  man,  new 
men  must  step  forward  to  take  their  place  in  the  front  rank  among 
those  few  who  take  the  lead  in  danger  and  command  victory. 

BONAPARTE 

402 
To  the  Executive  Directory 

H.Q.,  Jaffa 

8  Prairial,  Year  VII  (27  May,  1799) 

I  informed  you,  Citizen  Directors,  in  my  despatch  of  21  Floreal  of 
the  glorious  events  of  the  last  three  months  in  Syria  and  of  my  resolu- 
tion to  recross  the  desert  quickly  and  return  to  Egypt  before  June. 

As  I  said,  the  batteries  of  mortars  and  24-pounders  were  set  up  during 
23  Floreal  so  as  to  destroy  the  palace  of  Djezzar  and  the  principal 
buildings  of  Acre;  they  fired  for  twenty-four  hours  and  produced  the 
effect  I  intended.  The  town  was  on  fire  throughout. 

On  27  Floreal  the  desperate  garrison  made  a  general  sortie.  The  fight 
lasted  three  hours;  Brigadier-General  Verdier  was  commanding  the 
trench.  The  rest  of  the  troops  which  had  arrived  from  Constantinople 
on  the  ipth  and  were  European  trained  fell  upon  our  trenches  in  close 
column.  We  withdrew  the  posts  we  were  holding  on  the  ramparts, 
and  thereby  our  field  batteries  were  able  to  pour  case  shot  on  them 
at  150  yards.  Nearly  half  of  them  fell  on  the  field. 

It  seemed  a  favourable  moment  to  carry  the  town.  But  deserters  and 
prisoners  and  our  spies  all  agreed  in  their  reports  that  the  plague  was 
raging  horribly  in  Acre,  more  than  sixty  people  dying  daily,  and  that 
the  symptoms  were  terrible  and  within  thirty-six  hours  caused  the 
victims  to  fall  into  convulsions  like  those  of  rabies.  It  would  have 
been  impossible  to  prevent  the  soldiers  from  looting  once  they  were 
scattered  in  the  town,  and  at  night  they  would  have  brought  into  the 
camp  the  germs  of  that  terrible  scourge,  more  to  be  feared  than  all  the 
armies  of  the  world.  ™"  ~ 

The  army  left  Acre  on  2  Prairial  and  reached  Tantura  in  the  evening. 

On  the  3rd  it  camped  on  the  ruins  of  Caesarea  in  the  midst  of  the 
broken  marble  and  granite  columns  which  prove  what  Josephus  said 
of  this  city. 

We  reached  Jaffa  on  the  5th  and  for  two  days  detachments  have  been 
marching  off  for  Egypt  I  shall  stay  here  for  two  more  days  to  blow 
up  the  fortifications.  I  shall  go  and  punish  a  few  places  that  have 
behaved  badly  and  in  a  few  days  I  shall  cross  the  desert,  leaving  a 
strong  garrison  at  El  'Arish. 

My  next  dispatch  will  be  dated  from  Cairo. 

BONAPARTE 
L.D.N.— L 

296  The  Rise  to  Power 

403 
Order  of  the  Day 

Army  of  the  East  H.Q.,  Cairo 

27  Prairial,  Year  VII  (15  June,  1799) 

The  Commander-in-Chief  expresses  his  satisfaction  to  General 
Dugua  at  his  conduct;  it  is  largely  due  to  the  wise  measures  he  took  that 
we  owe  the  peace  enjoyed  by  Egypt  during  the  invasion  of  Syria. 

It  was  with  great  pleasure  that  in  the  course  of  his  review  the 
Commander-in-Chief  saw  the  battalions  of  the  6ist  and  88th  and  the 
brave  I5th  Dragoons;  owing  to  their  fatigues  and  constant  victories 
in  Upper  Egypt,  these  units  deserve  this  particular  mark  of  satisfaction. 

The  Commander-in-Chief  is  extremely  displeased  with  the  war 
commissaries  and  store-keepers  in  charge  of  the  services  at  Jaffa  and 
Gaza,  and  he  orders  the  staff  to  have  them  placed  under  arrest  and  their 
papers  sealed  at  once,  and  to  have  them  dealt  with  according  to  the  full 
rigour  of  military  law;  it  was  not  owing  to  them  that  the  army  did  not 
die  of  hunger. 

The  Commander-in-Chief  expresses  his  satisfaction  to  the  Quarter- 
master-General at  the  measures  taken  to  feed  the  army  in  the  desert. 
War  Commissary  Sartelon  showed  energy  and  zeal  in  overcoming  all 
the  difficulties  which  presented  themselves. 

The  Commander-in-Chief  is  displeased  with  the  commandant  of 
Qatia  for  taking  upon  himself  to  send  to  Damietta  an  English  officer 
and  five  men  who  had  been  wrecked  when  escorting  a  boatload  of 
wounded  Frenchmen.  He  should  have  kept  them  at  Qatia  pending  the 
Commander-in-Chief 's  orders,  treating  them  with  all  the  considera- 
tion due  between  civilized  nations  although  their  country  debases 
itself  by  its  alliance  with  savages.  In  unforeseen  circumstances  of  this 
kind  the  Commander-in-Chief  orders  all  commanders  to  take  nothing 
into  their  own  hands  but  to  await  his  orders. 

By  order  of  the  Commander-in-Chief 

404 
To  the  Executive  Directory 

H.Q.,  Cairo 

i  Messidor,  Year  VII  (ipjune,  i/pp) 

...  At  the  beginning  of  Flor6al  the  province  of  Bahyreh  was  led 
to  revolt  by  a  drama  the  like  of  which  we  had  not  yet  seen.  A  man 
from  the  depths  of  Africa  who  had  landed  at  Derna  assembled  the 
Arabs  and  announced  himself  as  the  Mahdi  angel,  foretold  in  the 
Koran  by  the  Prophet.  A  few  days  later  200  men  of  the  Moghreb 
arrived,  as  if  by  chance,  and  placed  themselves  under  his  orders.  The 
Mahdi  should  descend  from  heaven;  this  impostor  claimed  to  have 
descended  from  heaven  in  the  midst  of  the  desert.  Although  naked,  he 

297 

lavished  gold,  which  he  was  clever  enough  to  keep  hidden.  Every  day 
he  dipped  his  fingers  in  a  bowl  of  milk,  passing  them  over  his  lips;  that 
was  his  only  nourishment.  Going  to  Damanhur  he  surprised  and 
slaughtered  60  men  of  the  naval  legion,  who  had  foolishly  been  left 
there  instead  of  being  pkced  in  the  redoubt  at  El-Rahmaniya.  Encour- 
aged by  this  success,  he  fired  the  imagination  of  his  disciples,  claiming 
to  be  able  to  stop  our  powder  firing  and  make  our  bullets  fall  down 
before  true  believers  by  throwing  a  litde  sand  at  our  guns;  a  great 
many  attest  a  hundred  such  miracles  by  him  daily. 

Colonel  Lefebvre  left  Rahmaniya  with  400  men  to  march  against 
the  angel.  But,  seeing  the  numbers  of  the  enemy  increase  at  every 
moment,  he  saw  it  was  impossible  to  bring  so  great  a  number  of 
fanatical  men  to  reason.  He  formed  battalion  square  and  throughout 
the  day  killed  those  madmen  who  rushed  against  our  guns  in  their 
delusion.  Only  at  nightfall,  when  they  counted  their  dead  (there  were 
more  than  1,000)  and  wounded,  did  the  fanatics  realize  that  God  does 
not  work  miracles. 

On  19  Floreal  General  Lanusse,  who  was  always  to  be  found 
wherever  there  were  enemies  to  fight,  reached  Damanhur  and  put 
1,500  men  to  the  sword;  a  pile  of  ashes  shows  where  Damanhur  stood. 
Wounded  several  times,  the  Mahdi  angel  felt  his  own  enthusiasm 
cooling;  he  is  hiding  in  the  deep  desert  still  surrounded  by  his  partisans. 
In  fanatic  heads  there  are  no  organs  through  which  reason  can  enter. 

The  nature  of  this  revolt  helped  to  hasten  my  return  to  Egypt  .  .  . 

I  reached  El  'Arish  from  Syria  on  15  Prairial.  The  heat  of  the  desert 
sand  sent  the  thermometer  up  to  44  degrees;  the  air  temperature  was 
34  degrees.*  We  had  to  cover  eleven  leagues  a  day  to  reach  the  wells 
where  there  was  a  little  warm,  brackish  water,  but  we  drank  it  more 
avidly  than  a  good  bottle  of  Champagne. 

I  entered  Cairo  on  26  Prairial,  surrounded  by  an  immense  crowd, 
with  all  the  muftis  mounted  on  mules,  because  the  Prophet  preferred 
to  ride  on  those  animals.  .  .  . 

BONAPARTE 

405 
To  Citizen  D'Aure 

Q.M.G.,  Army  of  the  East  H.Q.,  Cairo 

i  Messidor,  Year  VII  (19  June,  1799} 

There  are  too  many  office  workers,  Citizen  Quartermaster;  please 
prepare  me  a  plan  to  reduce  them. 

A  great  many  officers  and  N,C.O.s  who  have  wounds  which  prevent 
them  from  active  service  could  be  employed  in  the  administrative 

*  On  the  R6aumur  scale;  equivalent  readings  are,  approximately,  130°  and 
110°  Fahrenheit. 

298  The  Rise  to  Power 

offices  and  a  great  many  young  men  able  to  carry  muskets  could  leave 
them  to  join  the  units. 
Send  me  proposals  on  each  of  these  matters. 

BONAPARTE 

406 
To  the  Executive  Directory 

H.Q.,  Cairo 
10  Messidor,  Year  VII  (28 June,  ijgg] 

. .  .  Six  months  ago  plague  broke  out  in  Alexandria  with  very  pro- 
nounced symptoms.  At  Damietta  it  was  milder,  at  Gaza  and  Jaffa, 
worse.  It  has  not  appeared  at  Cairo  or  Suez,  nor  in  Upper  Egypt. 

It  is  clear  from  the  attached  strength  return  that  from  its  arrival  in 
Egypt  until  today  the  French  army  has  lost  5,344  men. 

The  Syrian  campaign  had  great  results:  we  are  masters  of  the  whole 
desert  and  we  have  upset  our  enemies'  plans  for  this  year.  We  have 
lost  distinguished  men.  General  Bon  has  died  of  wounds;  Caffarelli  is 
dead;  my  aide-de-camp,  Croizier,  is  dead;  many  have  been  wounded. 

Our  situation  is  very  reassuring.  Alexandria,  Rosetta,  Damietta, 
El  '  Arish,  Qatia,  El  SSlhiya  are  being  fortified  apace;  but,  if  you 
wish  us  to  hold  out,  we  need  6,000  reinforcements  before  Pluviose. 
If  you  send  15,000  in  addition,  we  can  go  anywhere,  even  to 
Constantinople. 

In  that  case  we  should  need  2,000  cavalrymen,  500  labourers,  masons, 
armourers,  carpenters,  miners,  sappers;  five  demi-brigades  of  2,000 
men  each;  20,000  muskets;  40,000  bayonets;  3,000  sabres;  6,000  pairs  of 
pistols;  10,000  pioneer  tools. 

If  it  is  impossible  for  you  to  send  us  this  help,  we  must  make  peace, 
for  it  must  be  reckoned  that  we  shall  lose  a  further  6,000  men  within 
a  year.  Next  season  we  shall  be  reduced  to  15,000  effectives;  taking 
from  that  2,000  men  in  hospital,  500  too  old,  500  non-combatant 
workmen,  we  shall  be  left  with  12,000  including  cavalry,  artillery, 
sagmeers-aad  staff,  and  we  shall  be  unable  to  withstand  a  landing 
combined  with  an  attack  across  the  desert.  . .  . 

We  shall  need  18  to  20  physicians  and  60  to  80  surgeons;  many  are 
dead.  The  diseases  of  this  country  need  to  be  studied.  They  can  dl  be 
regarded  as  unknown;  but  every  year  they  will  become  better  known 
and  less  dangerous  .  . . 

All  our  thoughts  are  for  France.  If  the  kings  attack  her,  you  will  find 
in  our  good  frontiers,  in  the  warlike  spirit  of  the  nation  and  in  your 
generals  the  means  to  punish  their  audacity.  The  finest  day  for  us  will 
be  when  we  learn  of  the  formation  of  the  first  republic  in  Germany. 

I  will  send  you  shortly  the  levels  of  the  Suez  canal,  maps  of  all  Egypt, 
of  the  canals  and  of  Syria. 

299 

We  have  frequent  contact  with  Mecca  and  Mocha.  I  have  written 
several  times  to  India  and  Mauritius  and  expect  replies  soon.  It  is  the 
Sherif  of  Mecca  who  forwards  our  correspondence. 

BONAPARTE 

407 
To  Major-  General  Berthier 

Chief  of  Staff,  Army  of  the  East  H.Q.,  Cairo 

13  Messidor,  Year  VII  (i  July,  1  799} 

General  CafFarelli  having  left  extremely  interesting  papers  on  Egypt, 
on  political  economy  and  military  science,  the  Commander-in-Chief 
wishes  a  committee  to  go  through  these  papers  and  to  retain  those 
which  deserve  to  be  published.  The  committee  will  consist  of  Citizens 
Monge,  Fourier  and  Andreossy. 

BONAPARTE 

408 
To  the  Sultan  of  Morocco 

Cairo 

28  Thermidor,  Year  VII  (15  Aug,  1799) 

There  is  no  other  god  but  God,  and  Mohammed  is  his  Prophet! 
In  the  name  of  forgiving  and  merciful  God  I 

To  the  Sultan  of  Morocco,  servant  of  the  Holy  Kasbah,  mighty 
among  kings,  and  faithful  observer  of  the  true  Prophet's  kw. 

We  take  advantage  of  the  return  of  the  Moroccan  pilgrims  to  write 
this  letter  to  you  and  to  inform  you  that  we  have  given  them  every 
assistance  in  our  power,  since  it  is  our  intention  to  do  what  we  may, 
on  all  occasions,  to  convince  you  of  our  regard  for  you.  We  ask  you 
in  return  to  treat  the  French  who  are  in  your  dominions  well  and  to 
allow  trade  to  enter. 

BONAPARTE 

409  "  '  — - — - 

Order  of  the  Day 

Army  of  the  East  H.Q.,  Cairo 

29  Thermidor,  Year  VII  (16  Aug,  1799} 

Governors  of  provinces  will  make  known  by  means  of  a  circular  in 
Arabic,  which  will  be  sent  to  all  villages,  the  pomp  with  which  the 
feast  of  the  Prophet  has  been  celebrated,  in  Cairo.  In  living  memory 
there  has  been  none  more  brilliant. 

All  troops  in  Cairo  marched  by  torchlight  to  visit  the  Sheik 
El-Bekry.  The  Commander-in-Chief  dined  there,  together  with 
Mustafa  Pasha  and  all  the  principal  officers  taken  prisoner  at  the  battle 
of  Aboukir.  The  Commander-in-Chief  was  present  at  the  reading  of 

300  'The  Rise  to  Power 

Arabic  poems  in  honour  of  the  Prophet,  after  which,  in  the  midst  of  the 
great  sheiks,  he  had  prayers  said  and  the  genealogy  of  the  Prophet 
recited.  The  Pasha  and  all  the  Turkish  prisoners  could  not  get  over 
their  surprise  at  seeing  the  respect  of  the  French  for  Islam  and  the  law 
of  the  holiest  of  prophets. 

Wishing  to  give  a  proof  of  his  satisfaction  to  the  sheiks  Gariany, 
governor  of  Alexandria,  and  El-Messiry,  president  of  the  divan  of 
Alexandria,  men  honourable  for  their  wisdom  and  piety,  the 
Commander-in-Chief  had  them  each  clothed  in  a  cloak  of  great  value. 

This  order  of  the  day  will  be  translated  into  Arabic  and  printed,  and 
thirty  copies  will  be  sent  to  the  governor  of  each  province. 

BONAPARTE 

410 
To  the  Grand  Vizir* 

H.Q.,  Cairo 
30  Thermidor,  Year  VII  (17  Aug,  1799) 

To  the  Grand  Vizir,  wise  among  the  wisest,  only  repository  of  the 
confidence  of  the  greatest  of  sultans. 

I  have  the  honour  to  write  to  Your  Excellency  to  inform  Your 
Excellency  of  the  true  situation  in  Egypt  and  to  open  negotiations 
between  die  Sublime  Porte  and  the  French  Republic  to  put  an  end  to 
the  present  war  which  brings  harm  to  both  states. 

By  what  fate  are  France  and  the  Porte  at  war,  though  friends  by 
habit,  friends  by  the  separation  of  their  frontiers,  enemies  alike  of 
Russia  and  the  Emperor?  How  can  Your  Excellency  not  feel  that  no 
Frenchman  is  killed  but  there  is  one  less  defender  of  the  Porte?  How 
can  Your  Excellency,  so  informed  as  to  the  politics  and  interests  of 
states,  not  know  that  Russia  and  the  Emperor  have  plotted  the  partition 
of  Turkey? 

The  true  enemy  of  Islam  is  Russia.  Paul  made  himself  Grand  Master 
of  Malta;  that  is  to  swear  war  against  the  Moslems.  Is  he  not  head  of 
church,  the  most  numerous  enemies  of  Islam? 

But  France  has  destroyed  the  knights  of  Malta,  broken  the  chains 
of  the  Turks  held  in  slavery,  and  believes,  as  Islam  commands,  that 
there  is  but  one  God. 

Thus  the  Sublime  Porte  has  declared  war  on  its  true  friends  and 
allied  itself  with  its  real  enemies. 

The  Sublime  Porte  declared  war  in  January  without  waiting  for  the 
arrival  of  ambassador  Descorches,  who  had  already  left  Paris  for 
Constantinople,  and  without  asking  me  for  any  explanation  or  replying 
to  my  approaches.  Yet  I  hoped  to  have  the  declaration  withdrawn  and 
to  that  end  I  sent  Citizen  Beauchamp,  In  reply,  he  was  imprisoned:  in 
*  This  letter  has  been  abridged, 

Egypt 301 

reply,  armies  were  assembled  at  Gaza  and  ordered  to  invade  Egypt. 
At  that  I  found  myself  obliged  to  cross  the  desert,  preferring  to  wage 
war  in  Syria  rather  than  have  it  waged  against  me  in  Egypt. 

My  army  is  powerful,  perfectly  disciplined  and  equipped  with  every- 
thing to  make  it  victorious  over  armies  as  numerous  as  the  sands  of  the 
sea.  Citadels  and  fortresses  bristling  with  cannon  have  arisen  on  the 
coast  and  the  desert  frontiers.  Here  I  am  invincible  and  fear  nothing; 
but  I  owe  it  to  humanity,  to  wise  policy,  to  the  oldest  and  truest  of 
allies,  the  sultan  Selim,  to  make  this  approach. 

What  the  Sublime  Porte  will  never  obtain  by  force  of  arms  it  can 
obtain  by  negotiation.  I  shall  answer  any  proposal  with  conciliation, 
and,  as  soon  as  the  Sublime  Porte  ceases  to  make  common  cause  with 
our  enemies,  the  French  Republic  will  do  all  in  its  power  to  restore 
good  relations  and  remove  all  causes  of  disunity  between  the  two  states. 

You  wish  for  Egypt,  they  say;  but  it  has  never  been  the  intention 
of  France  to  take  it  from  you. 

Give  your  Minister  in  Paris  full  powers  or  send  someone  with  full 
powers  to  Egypt.  Two  hours*  discussion  can  arrange  everything.  It  is 
not  against  Moslems  that  the  French  armies  wish  to  deploy  their  tactics 
and  courage,  but  in  union  with  the  Moslems  against  their  common 
enemy. 

As  for  myself,  I  shall  think  the  happiest  day  of  my  life  to  be  that 
in  which  I  can  help  to  end  a  war  at  once  pointless  and  unwise. 

BONAPARTE 

411 
To  Major-General  K16ber 

C.-m-C.,  Army  of  the  East  H.Q.,  Alexandria 

5  Fructidor,  Year  VII  (22  Aug,  1799} 

You  will  find  enclosed,  Citizen  General,  an  order  to  assume  com- 
mand of  the  army.  Fear  that  the  English  squadron  may  reappear  at 
any  moment  causes  me  to  hasten  my  departure  by  two  or  three  days. 

I  am  taking  with  me  Generals  Berthier,  Lannes,  Murat,  Andreossy 
and  Marmont,  and  citizens  Monge  and  Berthollet. 

Enclosed  are  English  and  Frankfurt  newspapers  up  to  10  June.  You 
will  see  from  them  that  we  have  lost  Italy;  that  Mantua,  Turin  and 
Tortona  are  besieged.  I  have  reason  to  hope  that  the  first  of  these 
fortresses  will  hold  out  till  the  end  of  November.  If  fortune  smiles  on 
me,  I  expect  to  reach  Europe  by  the  beginning  of  October.  You  will 
find  attached  a  cipher  for  correspondence  with  the  Government  and 
another  for  correspondence  with  me. 

During  October,  please  send  off  Junot  and  the  belongings  which  I 
have  left  at  Cairo  and  my  servants.  But  I  shall  not  mind  if  you  take 
any  you  wish  into  your  own  service. 

302  The  Rise  to  Power 

The  Government  wishes  General  Desaix  to  leave  for  Europe  during 
November,  unless  serious  events  occur. 

The  Commission  of  the  Arts  will  return  to  France  in  November  as 
soon  as  they  have  completed  their  mission,  under  a  safe  conduct  that 
you  must  request  under  the  exchange  agreement.  At  the  moment  they 
are  finishing  their  work  in  visiting  Upper  Egypt.  But  you  will  have  no 
difficulty  in  retaining  any  you  think  may  be  useful .  .  . 

The  arrival  of  our  Brest  squadron  at  Toulon  and  of  the  Spanish 
squadron  at  Carthagena  leaves  no  doubt  as  to  the  possibility  of  trans- 
porting to  Egypt  the  muskets,  sabres,  pistols  and  shot  which  you  need 
and  of  which  I  have  an  exact  list,  together  with  enough  recruits  to 
make  good  the  losses  of  two  campaigns.  The  Government  will  then 
itself  let  you  know  its  intentions,  and  I  myself,  both  as  public  man  and 
as  a  private  individual,  will  take  steps  to  send  you  frequent  news. 

Should  unforeseen  events  render  all  our  efforts  fruitless,  and  you 
have  not  received  help  or  news  from  France  by  May,  and  if  despite  all 
precaution  :there  is  plague  in  Egypt  this  year  which  kills  off  1,500 
of  your  men,  a  serious  loss  since  it  would  be  in  addition  to  what  the 
circumstances  of  war  cause  you  daily,  then  I  think  that  in  that  case  you 
should  not  risk  undertaking  the  next  campaign,  and  you  are  authorized 
to  conclude  peace  with  the  Ottoman  Porte,  even  if  the  evacuation  of 
Egypt  has  to  be  the  principal  condition.  You  must  simply,  if  possible, 
delay  the  execution  of  that  condition  until  the  general  peace. 

You  can  appreciate  as  well  as  any  one,  Citizen  General,  how  im- 
portant the  possession  of  Egypt  is  for  France.  This  Turkish  Empire, 
which  threatens  to  collapse  on  every  side,  is  today  breaking  up,  and 
the  evacuation  of  Egypt  by  France  would  be  the  more  unfortunate 
since  in  our  own  time  we  should  see  this  fine  province  in  other  Euro- 
pean hands.  What  you  hear  of  the  success  or  reverses  of  the  Republic 
in  Europe  must  enter  strongly  into  your  calculations. 

If,  before  you  have  received  my  news  from  France,  the  Porte  replies 
to  the  proposals  I  made  to  it  for  peace,  you  must  state  that  you  have 
all  the  powers  which  I  had  and  begin  negotiations,  repeating  my 
assertion  that  it  has  never  been  the  intention  of  France  to  seize  Egypt 
and  demanding  that  the  Porte  leave  the  coalition  and  allow  us  access  to 
the  Black  Sea  trade  and  an  armistice  for  six  months  so  that  the  exchange 
of  ratifications  can  take  place  . .  . 

You  know  my  views  on  the  internal  politics  of  Egypt.  Whatever 
you  do,  the  Christians  will  always  be  our  friends.  You  must  prevent 
them  from  becoming  too  insolent,  so  that  the  Turks  do  not  have  the 
same  fanaticism  against  us  as  against  the  Christians,  which  would  make 
them  irreconcilable.  Fanaticism  must  be  lulled  to  sleep  until  it  can  be 
rooted  out.  By  captivating  the  opinion  of  the  great  sheiks  of  Cairo 
you  gain  the  support  pf  allEgypt  and  of  aU  the  leaders  of  the  people. 

303 

As  to  fortifications,  Alexandria  and  El  'Arish  are  the  two  keys  of 
Egypt. 

If  nothing  prevented  it  I  had  the  intention  of  trying  this  winter  to 
introduce  a  new  system  of  taxation,  which  would  enable  us  pretty  well 
to  do  without  the  Copts.  However,  I  recommend  you  to  reflect  care- 
fully before  undertaking  it;  it  is  better  to  carry  out  that  operation  a 
little  too  late  than  a  little  too  soon.  .  .  . 

When  the  French  ships  arrive,  try  to  collect  500  or  600  Mamelukes 
whom  you  will  have  arrested  in  one  day  in  Cairo  or  the  other  pro- 
vinces and  have  them  embarked  for  France  ____  They  will  be  kept 
there  for  one  or  two  years,  will  see  the  greatness  of  the  nation,  take 
on  our  customs  and  language  and,  once  back  in  Egypt,  will  be  so  many 
supporters  for  us. 

I  have  already  asked  several  times  for  a  company  of  actors  and  will 
make  a  particular  point  of  sending  you  one.  This  is  of  great  importance 
for  the  army  and  in  order  to  begin  changing  the  manners  of  the 
country. 

The  important  place  that  you  are  going  to  occupy  will  enable  you 
to  use  the  talents  that  nature  has  given  you.  Interest  in  what  happens 
here  is  great,  and  the  effects  on  trade  and  civilization  will  be  immense. 
This  is  a  time  from  which  great  revolutions  will  stem. 

Accustomed  to  see  the  rewards  for  the  work  and  hardships  of  life  in 
the  opinion  of  posterity,  I  am  leaving  Egypt  with  the  greatest  regret. 
It  is  only  obedience,  the  interest  and  glory  of  our  country  and  the 
extraordinary  events  that  have  occurred  there  that  have  determined  me 
to  go  into  the  midst  of  the  enemy  squadrons  to  return  to  Europe. 
In  heart  and  mind  I  shall  be  with  you;  your  successes  will  be  as  dear 
to  me  as  if  they  were  my  own,  and  I  shall  regard  as  wasted  all  the  days 
of  my  life  in  which  I  do  not  do  something  for  the  army  I  am  leaving 
to  your  command  aiid  to  consolidate  the  magnificent  edifice  whose 
foundations  have  just  been  kid. 

All  the  soldiers  of  the  army  I  confide  to  you  are  as  my  own  children; 
at  all  times,  even  in  the  midst  of  their  greatest  hardships,  I  have  had 
signs  of  their  affection.  Treat  them  with  the  same  feeling;  you  owe  it 
to  the  very  special  regard  and  friendship  that  I  have  for  you  and  to 
the  true  affection  that  I  feel  for  them. 

BONAPARTE 

412 
To  the  Army  of  the  East 

H.Q.,  Alexandria 

$  Fructidor,  Year  VII  (22  Aug9  1799) 

In  view  of  the  news  from  Europe  I  have  decided  to  leave  for  France. 
I  leave  General  Kl£ber  in  command  of  the  army. 

304  The  Rise 

The  army  will  soon  have  news  of  me;  I  can  say  no  more.  It  is  hard 
for  me  to  leave  the  soldiers  to  whom  I  am  most  attached;  but  it  will 
be  only  for  a  time,  and  the  new  Commander-in-Chief  has  the  con- 
fidence of  the  Government  and  of  myself. 

BONAPARTE 

413 
To  the  Executive  Directory 

Aix-en-Provence 
18  Venddmiaire,  Year  VIII  (10  Oct,  1799) 

Citizen  Directors,  since  my  departure  from  France  I  have  only  once 
received  dispatches  from  you;  they  reached  me  on  5  Germinal,  before 
Acre,  and  were  dated  14  Brumaire  and  5  Nivose.  They  gave  me  news 
of  our  success  against  Naples,  which  made  me  suspect  that  there  would 
soon  be  war  on  the  Continent,and  from  then  on  I  felt  that  I  ought  not 
to  remain  long  away  from  France.  But,  although  in  my  Syrian  cam- 
paign I  had  destroyed  the  armies  that  had  threatened  to  invade  Egypt 
across  the  desert,  it  still  remained  to  see  the  outcome  of  the  sea-borne 
expedition  which  was  being  actively  prepared  in  the  Black  Sea.  The 
landing  could  take  place  only  at  Alexandria  or  Damietta.  I  confided 
the  defence  of  the  coast  at  Damietta  to  General  Kleber  and  held  myself 
ready  to  march  on  Alexandria.  You  will  have  seen  in  my  last  dispatches 
the  result  of  the  battle  of  Aboukir.  Egypt,  safe  from  any  invasion,  is 
entirely  ours. 

At  the  end  of  several  diplomatic  conferences  I  obtained  the  English 
newspapers  up  to  6  June  wherein  I  learned  of  the  defeats  of  Jourdan  in 
Germany  and  Scherer  in  Italy.  I  left  at  once  with  the  frigates  Muiron 
and  Carrere,  although  they  are  slow  sailers.  I  thought  it  right  to  ignore 
the  dangers,  for  I  had  to  place  myself  where  my  presence  could  be 
useful.  In  this  belief  I  would  have  wrapped  myself  in  my  cloak  and  left 
in  an  open  boat  if  I  had  not  had  the  frigates. 

I  have  left  Egypt  well  organized  and  under  the  orders  of  General 
Kleber.  It  was  already  under  water,  and  the  Nile  was  more  beautiful 
than  it  had  been  for  fifty  years. 

I  have  passed  several  English  squadrons,  and  I  owe  my  safe  arrival 
at  Frejus  to  the  energy  and  sound  manoeuvres  of  Rear- Admiral 
Ganteaume.  I  should  be  in  Paris  almost  as  soon  as  this  letter;  but  the  dry 
and  cold  air  here  affects  and  tires  me,  and  that  will  delay  me  for  thirty 
or  forty  hours. 

BONAPARTE 

Brumaire 

au       -v    a 

fa 

x>v-7.^,  > 
C.  £/      / 

fa   <°Le 

Letter-heads  of  the  Consulate 

Above:  in  use  during  1800;  below:  in  use  thereafter. 
Slightly  reduced. 

THE  FOLLOWING  DOCUMENTS  COYER  THE  SEVEN  MONTHS  FROM 
the  coup  d'etat  of  Brumaire  to  the  batde  of  Marengo.  This 
period  has  a  character  of  its  own.  For  all  the  authority  given  to 
the  First  Consul  by  the  new  Constitution  and  overwhelming  popular 
vote  and  for  all  the  energy  and  apparent  confidence  with  which  he  set 
about  using  it,  for  some  time  after  Brumaire  the  condition  of  France 
was  chaotic  and  the  tenure  of  the  government  insecure.  When  he 
returned  with  the  triumph  of  Marengo  behind  him  his  position  was 
impregnable. 

He  reached  Paris  from  Frejus  on  16  October.  Only  two  or  three 
unimportant  papers  have  survived  from  the  next  three  weeks,  and  it 
is  probable  that  very  few  were  written.  He  had  a  terrible  quarrel 
with  Josephine,  though  they  were,  soon  reconciled.  There  was  a  con- 
stant stream  of  visits  and  invitations  from  those  who  wished  to  honour 
the  hero,  to  learn  about  Egypt,  to  tell  him  of  the  ills  afflicting  France, 
to  persuade  him  to  their  side.  He  heard  the  suggestions  of  all  parties 
and  gradually  reached  agreement  with  Sieyes  and  Talleyrand,  and  with 
them  and  a  few  supporters  prepared  plans.  He  was  too  busy  to  write, 
and  wise  conspirators  do  not  put  things  on  paper. 

The  essence  of  the  plot  was  that  Bonaparte  was  to  win  over  the 
senior  generals,  in  which,  with  a  few  notable  exceptions,  he  succeeded, 
and  that  at  least  three  of  the  Directors  were  to  be  persuaded  to  resign, 
leaving  France  without  a  government  (the  quorum  was  three).  The 
Ancients  were  then  to  appoint  Bonaparte  to  command  the  ijth 
District  and  to  remove  tie  legislature  to  Saint-Cloud,  where  the 
recalcitrant  majority  in  the  Five  Hundred  could  be  overawed  and  the 
necessary  decisions  taken  before  their  Jacobin  supporters  in  Paris  got 
wind  of  them.  The  Councils  were  then  to  decree  the  formation  of  a 
provisional  government  of  three  Consuls  and  of  a  committee,  drawn 
from  the  ranks  of  the  conspirators,  to  draft  a  new  Constitution.  On 
9  November  the  plot  was  put  into  effect,  and  the  flood  of  documents 
begins  again. 

Almost  all  Bonaparte's  papers  concerning  the  coup  d'etat  are 
included;  a  few  call  for  comment.  He  made  the  speech  to  the  Ancients 
(No.  414)  in  lieu  of  taking  the  oath  of  fidelity  to  the  Constitution  on 
appointment  to  a  District  command.  The  longer  speech  to  the  same 
body  at  Saint-Cloud  (No.  416)  is  far  from  being  what  the  Council 
heard,  though  the  first  part  of  it  may  have  been  prepared  beforehand; 
eye-witness  accounts  agree  that  the  chamber  was  in  uproar  and  the 
general  shaken  and  almost  speechless,  though  such  few  coherent  phrases 
as  were  audible  were  not  incompatible  with  the  published  version.  His 
report  to  the  nation  (No.  417)  is  packed  with  falsehoods:  the  Council 
of  the  Ancients  was  a  good  deal  less  enthusiastic  than  he  makes  out; 

308  The  Rise  to  Power 

it  is  doubtful  whether  there  were  any  weapons  in  the  Five  Hundred, 
certain  that  none  were  used  against  him;  it  is  certain  too  that,  faced 
with  the  noisy  opposition  of  the  majority,  Bonaparte  lost  his  nerve  and 
was  carried  out  in  a  state  of  collapse;  it  was  Lucien  who  saved  him, 
rather  than  vice  versa,  for  Lucien  rallied  both  his  brother  and  the  troops 
and  caused  them  to  clear  the  chamber;  finally,  the  'majority'  that  later 
reassembled  was  in  fact  a  rump  of  barely  fifty  members. 

"Whether  Bonaparte  was  responsible  for  the  actual  wording  of  any 
part  of  the  new  Constitution  (No.  427)  is  doubtful,  but  much  of  it 
bears  the  clear  imprint  of  his  thought.  It  was  drafted  by  a  small  com- 
mittee meeting  in  Josephine's  drawing-room,  but  the  outcome  was  the 
result  of  a  conflict  of  view  between  Bonaparte  and  Sieyes  and  was 
almost  wholly  the  work  of  these  two.  The  starting-point  was  a  draft 
which  Sieyes  had  long  been  preparing,  and  the  firial  electoral  system 
and  much  of  the  legislative  and  legal  structures  closely  followed  his 
proposals.  But  Sieyes's  ideal  was  a  total  separation  of  powers,  a  careful 
system  of  checks  and  balances  within  each  sector  of  public  life  and  a 
head  of  state  with  very  limited  authority.  This  did  not  suit  the  general, 
who  insisted  that  the  executive  should  be  the  dominant  factor  in  the 
State,  that  the  ministers  and  Council  of  State  should  be  wholly  respon- 
sible to  the  Consuls  and  that,  as  between  the  three  Consuls,  effective 
power  should  unmistakably  rest  with  the  First.  Despite  many  later 
changes,  this  Constitution  underlay  the  whole  subsequent  period  of 
Napoleonic  rule. 

The  remaining  papers,  apart  from  two  or  three  of  personal  rather 
than  public  interest,  show  Bonaparte  taking  his  first  steps  as  ruler  of 
France.  Much  of  his  work  was  done  verbally  in  the  Council  of  State 
and  conferences  with  ministers,  but  there  are  more  than  enough 
documents  to  show  how  he  imposed  his  will  on  every  aspect  of  French 
life.  He  went  through  the  whole  army  establishment  with  a  tooth- 
comb,  calling  for  innumerable  reports  and  ordering  many  changes — 
the  few  examples  given  (Nos.  454,  456,  459,  460)  are  typical  of 
hundreds  of  similar  papers — and  his  interventions  in  other  areas  of 
government  were  scarcely  less  thorough. 

Important  as  all  these  matters  were,  there  were  three  related  pro- 
blems of  special  urgency  facing  the  French  government  at  the  close 
of  1799:  the  royalist  insurrection  in  the  west,  the  diplomatic  position 
and,  if  this  did  not  issue  in  peace,  the  military  campaign  of  1800. 
Nos.  446,  457,  464,  480,  491  and  507  are  a  selection  from  many  docu- 
ments dealing  directly  with  the  tragic,  complex  poHtico-military 
situation  in  the  Vendee,  though  others  which  show  a  more  liberal 
attitude  towards  the  Church  and  the  emigrants  also  have  a  bearing  on 
it:  previous  policy  had  been  to  destroy  the  royalists;  Bonaparte's  was 
to  win  them  over. 

Brumalre  309 

It  is  often  alleged  that  the  first  Consul  was  determined  to  continue 
the  war,  but  in  Fact  it  is  probable  that  the  bid  for  peace  begun  in  his 
letters  to  George  III  and  die  Emperor  (Nos.  435  and  436)  was  sincere. 
He  wrote  of  the  possibility  of  peace  to  associates  with  whom  he  had 
no  need  to  dissemble  (e.g.  No.  491),  though  he  probably  thought 
successful  negotiations  unlikely.  He  certainly  began  operational  plan- 
ning for  the  Marengo  campaign  at  an.  early  date,  but  the  papers  dealing 
with  the  whole  of  this  are  grouped  together  in  the  next  section. 

THE  LAST  DIRECTORS 
Gohier  (President)    Barras    Sieyes    Moulin    Roger  Ducos* 

LAST  MINISTERS  OF  THE  DIRECTORY 

Interior:  Quinette;  Foreign  Affairs:  Reinhard;  War:  Dubois-Crance; 

Finance:  Lindet;  Police:  Fouche;  justice:  Cambaceres 

Marine  and  Colonies:  Bourdon  de  Vatry 

THE  PROVISIONAL  CONSULS 
(n  November-25  December,  1799) 

Sieyes    Bonaparte    Roger  Ducos 

THE  CONSULATE 
First  Consul:  Bonaparte 
Second  Consul:  Cambaceres 
Third  Consul:  Lebrun 

Secretary  of  State:  Maret 

MINISTERS  UNDER  THE  CONSULATE 

Interior:  Laplace  (12  Nov-25  Dec,  1799);  Lucien  Bonaparte  (25  Dec, 

1799-6  Nov,  1800);  Chaptal  (from  6  Nov,  1800) 
Foreign  Affairs:  Reinhard  (11-22  Nov,   1799);  Talleyrand   (from 

22  Nov,  1799) 
War:  Berthier  (11  Nov,  1799-2  Apr,  1800);  Carnot  (2  Apr-8  Oct, 

1800);  Berthier  (from  8  Oct,  1800) 
Finance:  Gaudin 
Marine  and  Colonies:  Bourdon  (12-22  Nov,  1799);  Forfait  (22  Nov, 

1799-2  Oct,  1801);  Decr£s  (from  2  Oct,  1801) 
Justice:  Cambacerfes  (n  Nov-25  Dec,  1799);  Abrial  (25  Dec,  1799- 

4  Sept,  1802);  Regnier  (from  4  Sept,  1802) 
Police:  Fouche 

Treasury  (created  27  Nov,  1801):  Barbe-Marbois 
War  Administration  (created  21  Mar,  1802}:  Dejean 

*  Sieyes  and  Roger  Ducos  were  privy  to  the  Brumaire  plot. 

3io  The  Rise  to  Power 

414 
Speech  to  the  Council  of  the  Ancients 

Paris 
18  Brumaire,  Year  VIII  (9  Nov,  1799} 

Citizen  Representatives,  the  Republic  was  dying.  You  knew  it,  and 
your  decree  has  saved  it.  Woe  to  those  who  sought  to  make  trouble 
and  disorder.  I  will  arrest  them  with  the  aid  of  General  Lefebvre, 
General  Berthier  and  all  my  comrades  in  arms. 

Let  no  one  search  the  past  for  precedents  to  impede  your  progress! 
Nothing  in  history  resembles  die  end  of  the  eighteenth  century; 
nothing  at  the  end  of  the  eighteenth  century  resembles  the  present 
moment. 

Your  wisdom  has  handed  down  this  decree;*  our  arms  will  ensure 
its  execution. 

We  want  a  republic  founded  on  true  liberty,  on  civil  liberty,  on 
national  representation,  and  we  will  have  it.  I  swear  it!  I  swear  it  in 
my  own  name  and  in  the  names  of  my  comrades  in  arms. 

415 
Order  of  the  Day 

17th  Military  District  H.Q.,  Paris 

18  Brumaire,  Year  VIII  (g  Nov,  1799} 
Soldiers,  the  Extraordinary  Decree  of  the  Council  of  the  Ancients 

is  in  conformity  with  Articles  102  and  103  of  the  Constitutional  Act. 
It  has  given  me  the  command  of  the  city  and  the  army.  I  have  accepted 
this  so  as  to  support  the  measures  to  be  taken  by  the  Council  which 
are  entirely  in  favour  of  the  people. 

For  two  years  the  Republic  has  been  mis-governed.  You  have  hoped 
that  my  return  would  put  an  end  to  such  ills;  you  have  celebrated  it 
with  a  unity  which  imposes  obligations  upon  me  and  these  I  am 
fulfilling;  you  will  fulfil  yours  and  will  support  your  general  with  the 
energy,  steadfastness  and  confidence  that  I  have  always  found  in  you. 

Liberty,  victory  and  peace  will  once  more  place  the  French  Republic 
in  the  rank  it  used  to  occupy  in  Europe  and  which  only  ineptitude  or 
treason  has  enabled  it  to  lose.  Long  Kve  the  Republic! 

BONAPARTE 

416 
Speech  to  the  Council  of  the  Ancients 

Saint-Cloud 

19  Brumaire,  Year  VIII  (10  Not>,  1799) 

Citizen  Representatives,  you  find  yourselves  in  no  ordinary  circum- 
stances; you  are  on  a  volcano. 

^Transferring  the  sessions  of  the  legislature  to  Saint-Cloud. 

Brumaire 

Permit  me  to  speak  to  you  with  the  frankness  of  a  soldier  and,  to 
escape  the  trap  which  is  held  ready  for  you,  suspend  your  judgment 
until  I  have  finished. 

Yesterday  I  was  quietly  in  Paris  when  you  sent  for  me  to  notify 
me  of  the  decree  of  transfer  and  to  entrust  me  with  its  execution.  I  at 
once  assembled  my  comrades  and  we  ran  to  your  help.  Well!  Today 
I  am  overwhelmed  with  calumnies.  They  are  talking  of  Caesar,  they 
are  talking  of  Cromwell,  they  are  talking  of  military  government. 
Had  I  sought  military  government,  would  I  have  hastened  to  lend  my 
support  to  the  national  representatives? 

Citizen  Representatives,  time  presses;  it  is  essential  that  you  take 
prompt  measures.  The  Republic  has  no  government.  Four  of  the 
Directors  have  resigned;  I  have  felt  it  necessary  to  place  the  fifth  under 
surveillance,  by  virtue  of  the  power  you  have  invested  me  with.  The 
Council  of  Hve  Hundred  is  divided;  there  remains  only  the  Council  of 
the  Ancients.  It  is  from  that  body  that  I  hold  my  powers;  let  it  speak, 
let  it  take  steps;  here  am  I  to  execute  them.  Let  us  save  liberty!  Let  us 
save  equality! 

(A  voice:  And  the  Constitution?) 

The  Constitution!  You  have  yourselves  destroyed  it.  You  violated 
it  on  18  Fructidor;  you  violated  it  on  22  Floreal;  you  violated  it  on 
30  Prairial.  It  no  longer  has  the  respect  of  anyone.  I  will  say  all.  Since 
my  return  I  have  been  surrounded  by  intrigue.  Every  faction  has 
pressed  around  me  to  win  me  over.  And  these  men  who  insolently 
style  themselves  'the  only  patriots*  have  come  to  me  and  said  the 
Constitution  must  be  set  aside;  and  to  purify  the  Councils  they  pro- 
posed to  me  to  exclude  men  who  are  sincere  friends  of  the  country. 
So  much  for  their  attachment  to  the  Constitution!  Then  I  was  afraid 
for  the  Republic.  I  joined  with  my  brothers  in  arms  and  we  have 
come  to  post  ourselves  around  you.  There  is  no  time  to  lose;  let  the 
Council  of  the  Ancients  pronounce.  I  am  no  intriguer;  you  know  me; 
I  believe  I  have  given  enough  proofs  of  my  devotion  to  my  country. 
Those  who  speak  to  you  of  the  Constitution  know  full  well  that, 
violated  every  instant,  torn  on  every  page,  the  Constitution  no  longer 
exists.  The  sovereignty  of  the  people,  liberty,  equality,  these  sacred 
roots  of  the  Constitution  still  remain:  they  must  be  saved.  If  by  Con- 
stitution is  meant  these  sacred  principles,  all  the  rights  belonging 
to  the  people,  all  those  belonging  to  each  citizen,  my  comrades 
and  I  are  ready  to  shed  our  blood  defending  them.  But  I  will  not 
prostitute  the  name  of  constitutional  act  by  applying  it  to  purely 
administrative  regulations  which  offer  no  guarantees  to  die  citizen. 
For  the  rest,  I  declare  that  once  this  is  settled  I  will  be  nothing 
in  the  Republic  but  the  right  arm  supporting  what  you  have  set 
up. 

3 12  The  Rise  to  Power 

Citizen  Representatives,  the  Council  of  Five  Hundred  is  divided  and 
the  leaders  of  faction  are  the  cause.  The  men  of  Prairial,  who  wish  to 
bring  back  to  the  soil  of  liberty  the  scaffolds  and  the  horrible  regime 
of  the  Terror,  are  gathering  their  accomplices  and  preparing  to  carry 
out  their  vile  projects.  Already  they  are  attacking  the  Council  of  the 
Ancients  for  the  measures  it  has  taken  and  for  investing  me  with  its 
confidence.  For  my  part,  I  am  not  disturbed.  Should  I,  whom  the 
coalition  could  not  destroy,  tremble  before  traitors?  If  I  am  faithless, 
may  you  all  play  Brutus.  And  you,  my  comrades  who  accompany  me, 
you,  brave  grenadiers  whom  I  see  around  this  building,  may  you  turn 
against  my  heart  those  bayonets  with  which  we  have  triumphed 
together.  But  also,  should  any  orator  in  foreign  pay  dare  pronounce 
against  your  general  the  word  'outlaw',  let  the  thunder  of  war  crush 
him  on  the  instant.  Remember  that  fortune  and  the  god  of  war  march 
beside  me.* 

I  withdraw.  You  will  deliberate.  Decide,  and  I  will  execute. 

(Several  voices:  Names!  Names!) 

Each  one  had  his  opinions;  each  had  his  plans;  each  had  his  clique. 
Citizen  Barras,  Citizen  Moulin  had  theirs.  They  have  made  proposals 
to  me. 

(Several  voices:  The  General  Committee!) 

There  is  no  longer  need  for  the  General  Committee;  the  whole  of 
France  should  know  what  we  wish  to  tell;  we  would  be  the  most 
unworthy  of  men  if  we  did  not  at  once  take  those  steps  that  can  save 
liberty  and  equality. 

Since  my  arrival  all  the  magistrates  and  all  the  officials  with  whom 
I  have  spoken  have  shown  me  their  conviction  that  the  Constitution, 
so  often  violated,  continually  disregarded,  is  slipping  towards  disaster; 
that  it  offers  no  protection  to  the  people  of  France.  All  the  factions  are 
agreed  on  this;  all  are  ready  to  profit  from  the  fall  of  the  present 
government;  all  have  come  to  me;  all  have  wished  me  to  join  them.  I 
have  felt  it  my  duty  to  join  only  the  Council  of  the  Ancients,  the  first 
assembly  of  the  Republic.  I  repeat  that  it  cannot  act  too  promptly,  if  it 
wishes  to  arrest  the  movement  which  at  any  moment  may  destroy 
liberty. 

Consider,  Citizen  Representatives;  I  have  just  told  you  truths  that 
each  has  hitherto  told  himself,  but  that  someone  had  at  length  to  have 
the  courage  to  say  out  loud.  The  means  of  saving  our  country  are  in 
your  hands;  if  you  hesitate  to  use  them,  if  liberty  perishes,  you  will 
be  accountable  for  it  before  the  universe,  before  posterity,  before 
France  and  your  families. 

^Referring  to  this  sentence  next  day  Bonaparte  said  to  some  friends:  CI  got 
heated  and  ended  with  a  silly  sentence.  The  French  do  not  like  bad  taste;  no  sooner 
had  I  said  the  words  than  a  murmur  made  me  aware  of  it.* 

Brumaire  313 

417 
Proclamation  to  the  French  Nation 

Paris* 
ig  Brumaire,  Year  VIII  (10  Nov>  ijgg)  n  p.m. 

On  my  return  to  Paris  I  found  all  authority  in  chaos  and  agreement 
only  on  the  one  truth  that  the  Constitution  was  half  destroyed  and 
incapable  of  preserving  liberty. 

Men  of  every  party  came  to  me,  confided  their  plans,  disclosed  their 
secrets  and  asked  for  my  support:  I  refused  to  be  a  man  of  party. 

The  Council  of  the  Ancients  called  upon  me  and  I  responded  to  its 
appeal.  A  plan  for  general  reform  has  been  drawn  up  by  men  upon 
whom  the  nation  is  accustomed  to  look  as  the  defenders  of  liberty, 
equality  and  property.  That  plan  needed  calm  examination,  free  from 
all  fear  and  partisan  influence.  Therefore,  the  Council  of  the  Ancients 
resolved  to  transfer  the  legislative  body  to  Saint-Cloud  and  charged 
me  to  deploy  the  force  necessary  to  ensure  its  independence.  I  believed 
it  my  duty  to  my  fellow-citizens,  to  the  soldiers  laying  down  their  lives 
in  our  armies,  to  the  national  glory  gained  at  the  price  of  their  blood 
to  accept  this  command. 

The  Councils  reassembled  at  Saint-Cloud.  The  troops  of  the 
Republic  guaranteed  their  security  from  without  But  assassins  created 
terrorwithm.  Several  Deputies  of  the  Council  of  Five  Hundred,  bearing 
daggers  and  fire-arms,  uttered  threats  of  death  all  around  them.  Dis- 
cussion of  the  plans  was  halted,  the  majority  became  disorganized,  the 
most  intrepid  orators  hesitated  and  the  hopelessness  of  any  wise 
proposal  was  evident. 

I  carried  my  indignation  and  sorrow  to  the  Council  of  the  Ancients. 
I  urged  it  to  ensure  the  execution  of  its  liberal  designs.  I  recalled  to  it 
the  ills  of  the  nation  which  had  led  it  to  conceive  them.  The  Council 
joined  with  me  in  renewed  assurance  of  its  steadfast  resolve. 

I  then  appeared  before  the  Council  of  Eve  Hundred,  alone,  unarmed, 
bareheaded,  just  as  the  Ancients  had  received  and  applauded  me.  I 
came  to  recall  the  majority  to  its  purpose  and  assure  it  of  its  power. 

The  daggers  which  threatened  the  deputies  were  immediately  raised 
against  their  liberator:  a  score  of  assassins  threw  themselves  upon  me, 
seeking  my  breast.  The  grenadiers  of  the  legislative  guard,  whom  I 
had  left  at  the  door  of  the  chamber,  ran  up,  came  between  us  and  bore 
me  out.  One  of  the  grenadiers  had  his  coat  pierced  by  a  dagger. 

*  At  the  time  of  his  marriage  in  1796  Buonaparte  acquired  a  house  at  No.  6 
Rue  Chantereine  and  this  was  his  and  Josephine's  Paris  home  until  the  time  of 
Brumaire,  though  after  the  Italian  campaign  the  street  was  renamed  Rue  de  la 
Victoire  in  his  honour.  On  returning  to  Paris  after  Brumaire  he  at  once  moved 
into  the  Luxembourg,  the  residence  and  seat  of  government  of  the  Directory. 
On  17  February,  1800,  he  moved  into  the  former  royal  palace  of  the  Tuileries 
which  remained  his  residence  in  Paris  thereafter, 

314  The  Rise  to  Power 

At  that  moment  cries  of  'outlaw*  were  heard  against  the  defender 
of  the  kw,  the  savage  cry  of  the  assassins  against  the  force  destined  to 
crush  them.  They  pressed  round  the  president,*  threatening,  arms  in 
their  hands,  ordering  him  to  declare  my  outlawry.  Told  of  this,  I 
ordered  him  to  be  saved  from  their  fury  and  six  grenadiers  rescued  him. 
Immediately  afterwards  the  legislative  guard  entered  at  the  charge 
and  cleared  the  chamber. 

Intimidated,  the  seditious  dispersed  and  disappeared.  The  majority, 
safe  from  their  threats,  returned  freely  and  peacefully  to  the 
chamber,  heard  the  proposals  made  to  them  for  the  public  good, 
debated  and  prepared  the  salutary  resolution  which  must  become  the 
new,  provisional  kw  of  the  Republic. 

Frenchmen,  you  will  no  doubt  recognize  in  my  conduct  the  zeal  of 
a  soldier  of  liberty  and  of  a  devoted  citizen  of  the  Republic.  Liberal, 
beneficent  and  traditional  ideas  have  returned  to  their  rightful  place 
through  the  dispersal  of  the  odious  and  despicable  factions  which 
sought  to  overawe  the  Councils. 

BONAPARTE 

418 
Order  of  the  Day 

1 7th  Military  District  H.Q.,  Paris 

20  Brumaire,  Year  VIII  (11  Nov9  1799) 
General  Bonaparte  is  very  satisfied  with  the  conduct  of  the  regular 

troops,  of  those  of  the  InvaUdes  and  of  the  local  national  guards,  who 
showed  themselves  to  be  true  friends  of  the  people  during  yesterday, 
a  day  so  happy  for  the  Republic.  He  expresses  his  particular  satisfaction 
to  the  brave  grenadiers  attached  to  the  national  Legislature,  who 
covered  themselves  with  glory  in  saving  the  life  of  their  general  when 
he  was  about  to  fall  beneath  the  blows  of  Representatives  armed  with 
daggers. 

BONAPARTE 

419 
Proclamation  to  the  French  Nation 

Paris 

21  Brumaire,  Year  VIII  (12  Nov,  1799) 
The  Constitution  of  the  Year  III  was  dying.  It  was  incapable  of 

protecting  your  rights,  even  of  protecting  itself.  Through  repeated 
assaults  it  was  losing  beyond  recall  the  respect  of  nations.  Malignant  and 
selfish  factions  were  despoiling  tie  Republic.  France,  indeed,  was 
entering  the  kst  stage  of  general  disorganization. 
But  patriots  have  made  themselves  heard.  All  who  could  harm  you 
*  Lucien  Bonaparte. 

Brumaire  3*5 

liave  been  cast  aside.  All  who  can  serve  you,  all  those  representatives 
who  have  remained  pure  have  come  together  under  the  banner  of 
liberty. 

Frenchmen,  the  Republic,  strengthened  and  restored  to  that  rank 
in  Europe  which  should  never  have  been  lost,  will  realize  all  the  hopes 
of  her  citizens  and  will  accomplish  her  glorious  destiny. 

Swear  with  us  the  oath  we  have  taken  to  be  faithful  to  the  Republic, 
one  and  indivisible,  founded  on  equality,  liberty  and  the  representative 
system. 

The  Consuls  of  the  Republic 
BONAPARTE.  ROGER  Ducos.  SIEVES 

420 
To  the  Legislative  Committee 

The  Council  of  Five  Hundred  Paris 

24  Brumaire,  Year  VIII  (15  Nov,  1799) 

Citizen  Representatives,  each  day  should  be  marked  by  a  step 
towards  the  creation  of  a  general  financial  system.  Certain  initial 
measures  are  essential,  among  which  appear  to  be: 

1.  Undertakings  by  the  departmental  tax  collectors  to  pay  the 
annual  direct  contributions,  as  from  i  Germinal  next,  in  twelve  instal- 
ments, for  each  of  which  they  will  underwrite  bills  payable  on  the  first 
of  each  month. 

2.  An  advance  in  cash  to  be  made  by  the  same  collectors  amounting 
to  one  tenth  of  the  land  tax  for  the  year  VII  for  each  department. 

3.  A  sinking  and  guarantee  fund,  outside  the  national  Treasury, 
into  which  will  be  paid  the  amount  of  these  advances,  ...  to  reduce 
the  public  debt. 

In  presenting  to  you  a  report  by  the  Minister  of  Finance  setting  out 
these  various  measures,  the  Consuls  of  the  Republic  formally  propose 
them  to  you  in  accordance  with  Article  9  of  the  Law  of  19  Brumaire, 
YearVHI. 

The  Consuls  of  the  Republic 
BONAPARTE.  SIBYLS.  ROGER  Ducos 

421 
To  Citizen  Laplace 

Minister  of  the  Interior  Paris 

24  Brumaire,  Year  VIII  (15  Nov,  iypp) 

The  Consuls  of  the  Republic  require  me,  Citizen  Minister,  to  ask 
that  you  will  at  once  take  steps  to  assemble  a  troupe  of  actors  for  Egypt. 
It  would  be  desirable  to  include  a  few  dancing  girls.  The  Minister  of 
Marine  will  provide  means  of  transport, 

By  order  of  the  Consuls 

3i6 

The  Rise  to  Power 

422 

Decree 

Paris 
29  Brumaire,  Year  VIII  (20  Nov,  1799) 

The  Consuls  of  the  French  Republic,  considering  that  it  is  essential 
to  enlighten  the  citizens  in  all  parts  of  the  Republic  as  to  the  causes  and 
true  objects  of  the  events  of  die  i8th  and  ipth  of  this  month,  decree, 
in  accordance  with  Articles  4  and  7  of  the  Law  of  the  I9th  of  this 
month: 

ARTICLE  i.  Delegates  of  the  Consuls  will  be  sent  into  each  military 
district.  They  are  required  to  inform  the  people,  by  proclamations 
if  they  think  necessary,  of  the  causes  of  the  events  of  the  i8th  and  ipth 
and  of  the  happy  results  that  should  follow  them.  They  will  ascertain 
the  principles  and  morality  of  the  public  officials  and  they  can  suspend 
and  temporarily  replace  those  against  whom  public  opinion  complains. 

ART.  2.  For  the  execution  of  the  preceding  article  the  delegates  will 
co-operate  with  the  generals  commanding  military  districts  and  those 
officials  who  are  attached  to  republican  principles  and  to  the  Govern- 
ment. They  will  correspond  with  the  Minister  of  the  Interior  on  the 
important  mission  confided  to  them. .  .  . 

The  Consuls  of  the  Republic 
BONAPARTE.  ROGER  Ducos.  SIBYLS 

423 

To  General  Jourdan 

Paris 

3  Frimaire,  Year  VIII  (24  Nov,  1799} 

Citizen  General,  I  have  received  your  letter  of  29  Brumaire.  You 
were  affronted  by  the  events  of  the  ipth. 

Now  that  the  first  moments  are  over  I  wish  for  nothing  so  much  as 
to  see  the  victor  of  Fleurus  take  the  road  that  leads  to  order,  true  liberty 
and  happiness. 

But,  however  you  may  be  placed,  I  beg  you  not  to  doubt  my  friend- 
ship for  you. 

BONAPARTE 

424 
To  Major- General  Berthier 

Minister  of  War  P^is 

8  Frimaire,  Year  VIII  (29  Nov,  1799) 

Bonaparte,  Consul  of  the  Republic,  sends  to  the  Minister  of  War 
a  letter  from  the  Government  Commissioner  attached  to  the  central 
administration  of  the  commune  of  Cherbourg  and  invites  him  to 
assemble  without  delay  seven  engineer,  artillery  and  general  officers, 
to  whom  this  question  will  be  submitted: 

Brumaire  3*7 

If  the  English  were  to  land  11,000  to  12,000  men  on  our  coasts 
situated  in  the  1 3th,  I4th  and  I5th  Military  Districts,  what  could  they 
do  that  is  to  be  feared? 

BONAPARTE 

425 
To  Major-General  Berthier 

Minister  of  War 

11  Frimaire,  Year  VIII  (2  Dec, 

I  beg  the  Minister  to  let  me  know  whether  he  has  had  made  the 
arms  I  requested  for  the  generals  who  distinguished  themselves  during 
the  affair  at  Saint-Cloud  and  particularly  for  General  Macdonald  and 
Colonel  Dumoulin. 

The  Consuls  approve  that  Major-General  Murat  should  command 
their  Guard  and  that  Colonel  Bessieres  should  command  the  Guard 
cavalry. 

The  Minister  of  War  will  have  a  fine  carbine  made  at  Versailles  for 
General  Kleber  and  will  have  inscribed  on  it:  Capture  of  Alexandria 

— Battle  of  Mount  Tabor. 

BONAPARTE 

426 

Decree 

Paris 

18  Frimaire,  Year  VIII  (g  Dec,  1799} 

The  Consuls  of  the  Republic,  being  specially  charged  with  the 
establishment  of  internal  order,  having  heard  the  report  of  the  Minister 
of  Police,  and  considering: 

1.  That  the  emigrants  detained  in  the  castle  of  Ham  were  wrecked 
on  the  coast  at  Calais; 

2.  That  they  are  in  no  way  covered  by  the  laws  concerning 
emigrants; 

3.  That  it  is  contrary  to  the  kw  of  civilised  nations  to  profit  by  the 
accident  of  wreck  to  deliver  even  to  the  just  rigour  of  the  kws  the 
unfortunates  who  have  escaped  the  waves,  decree: 

ARTICLE  I.  The  French  emigrants  wrecked  at  Calais  on  23  Brumaire, 
Year  IV,  and  named  in  die  judgment  of  the  court  martial  at  Calais 
on  9  Nivose,  Year  IV,  will  be  deported  beyond  the  territory  of  the 
Republic. 

ART.  2.  The  Ministers  of  Police  and  of  War  are  charged,  each  in  so 
far  as  he  is  concerned,  with  the  execution  of  the  present  decree,  which 
will  be  printed  in  the  Bulletin  of  the  Laws. 

The  Consuls  of  the  Republic 
BONAPARTE.  SIBYLS.  ROGER  Ducos 

3i8  The  Rise  to  Power 

427 
Constitution  of  the  French  Republic* 

Paris 
22  Frimaire,  Year  VIII  (13  Dec,  ijgg] 

OF  THE  RIGHTS   OF  CITIZENSHIP 

ARTICLE  i.  The  French  Republic  is  one  and  indivisible.  Its  European 
territory  is  divided  into  departments  and  communes. 

2.  Every  man  born  and  residing  in  France,  who,  being  twenty-one 
years  of  age,  has  caused  his  name  to  be  inscribed  on  the  civic  register 
of  his  commune  and  who  has  remained  for  a  period  of  one  year  upon 
the  territory  of  the  Republic  is  a  French  citizen. 

7.  The  citizens  of  each  commune  choose  by  vote  those  amongst 
them  whom  they  believe  most  suitable  to  conduct  public  affairs.  There 
results  a  list  containing  a  number  of  names  equal  to  one-tenth  of  the 
number  of  citizens  having  the  right  to  participate.  The  public  officials 
of  the  commune  must  be  selected  from  this  first  communal  list. 

8.  The  citizens  included  in  the  communal  lists  of  a  department  select 
one-tenth  of  their  own  number.  There  results  a  second  list,  called 
departmental,  from  which  must  be  chosen  the  public  officials  of  the 
department. 

9.  The  citizens  carried  on  the  departmental  list  also  select  one  tenth 
of  their  number;  there  results  a  third  list  which  includes  citizens  of  the 
department  eligible  for  national  office. 

14. ...  the  lists  of  those  eligible  will  be  drawn  up  for  the  first  time 
in  the  course  of  the  year  IX.  Citizens  appointed  to  the  first  constituted 
authorities  will  belong  as  of  right  to  the  first  lists. 

OF  THE  SENATE 

15.  The  Senate  is  composed  of  eighty  members  of  at  least  forty  years 
of  age  who  hold  office  for  life  and  are  immovable.  . .  . 

16.  Senators  are  appointed  by  the  Senate,  which  chooses  from 
among  three  candidates  proposed,  as  to  the  first  by  the  Legislature;  as  to 
the  second,  by  the  Tribunate;  as  to  the  third  by  the  First  Consul.  . . . 

*  The  Constitution  was  submitted  to  and  approved  by  the  surviving  Legislative 
Committees  of  the  former  Councils  on  13  December  (22  Frimaire).  On  the  I4tha 
law  was  passed  regulating  the  method  by  which  it  was  to  be  submitted  to  the 
popular  vote.  This  process  was  completed  on  7  February,  1800,  the  result  being: 
Ayes,  3,009,445;  Noes,  1,562.  Meanwhile,  Bonaparte's  impatience  had  already 
succeeded  in  bringing  the  Constitution  into  force  (see  No.  431).  On  24  December 
the  new  Consuls  nominated  ministers  and  members  of  the  Council  of  State,  and 
forty-one  Senators  were  chosen  in  accordance  with  Article  24.  On  the  following 
day  the  Senate  completed  itself  and  nominated  the  Tribunes  and  Legislators,  while 
the  Legislative  Committees  passed  a  kw  stipulating  that  the  new  governing  bodies 
should  assume  office  forthwith.  On  the  26th,  on  being  notified  that  these  bodies 
had  been  constituted,  the  Committees  declared  themselves  dissolved. 

Brumaire  319 

1 8.  A  Senator  is  always  ineligible  for  any  other  public  office. 

19.  The  lists  drawn  up  in  the  departments  under  Article  9  are  pre- 
sented to  the  Senate;  they  compose  the  national  list. 

20.  From  this  list  it  elects  the  Legislators,  the  Tribunes,  the  Consuls, 
the  Judges  of  Appeal  and  the  Commissioners  of  Accounts. 

21.  It  upholds  or  annuls  all  acts  referred  to  it  as  unconstitutional  by 
the  Tribunate  or  the  Government.  . . . 

22.  The  revenues  from  specified  national  domains  are  set  aside  for 
the  expenses  of  the  Senate.  The  annual  stipend  of  each  of  its  members 
is  drawn  from  these  revenues  and  amounts  to  one  twentieth  of  that 
of  the  First  Consul. 

23.  The  sessions  of  the  Senate  are  not  open  to  the  public. 

24.  Citizens    Sieves    and    Roger   Ducos,   retiring   Consuls,   are 
appointed  to  the  Senate;  they  will  join  with  the  Second  and  Third 
Consuls  named  in  this  Constitution.  These  four  citizens  will  nominate 
the  majority  of  the  Senate,  which  will  then  complete  itself  and  proceed 
to  the  elections  conferred  upon  it. 

OF  THE  LEGISLATIVE  POWER 

25.  New  laws  will  be  promulgated  only  when  a  bill  has  been  pro- 
posed by  the  Government,  communicated  to  the  Senate  and  assented 
to  by  the  Legislature. 

27.  The  Tribunate  is  composed  of  one  hundred  members  of  at  least 
twenty-five  years  of  age.  One  fifth  of  them  are  renewed  annually  and 
they  remain  indefinitely  re-eligible  so  long  as  their  names  remain  upon 
the  national  list. 

28.  The  Tribunate  discusses  draft  laws;  it  votes  their  adoption  or 
rejection.  It  sends  three  orators  from  among  its  members  to  explain  and 
defend  the  motives  for  the  views  it  has  expressed  on  each  of  these  bills. 
It  refers  to  the  Senate,  on  grounds  of  unconstitutionality  only,  the  lists 
of  eligible  citizens,  the  acts  of  the  Legislative  Corps  and  those  of  the 
Government. 

29.  It  expresses  its  views  on  kws  passed  and  to  be  passed,  on  abuses 
to  be  remedied,  on  improvements  to  be  undertaken  in  every  part  of  the 
public  administration,  but  never  on  civil  or  criminal  matters  before 
the  courts. . . . 

31.  The  Legislative  Corps  is  composed  of  three  hundred  members 
of  at  least  thirty  years  of  age;  one-fifth  of  them  are  renewed  annually. 
There  must  always  be  at  least  one  citizen  from  each  department  of  the 
Republic. 

34.  The  Legislative  Corps  makes  the  kw  by  voting,  in  secret  ballot 
and  without  previous  discussion  by  its  members,  on  the  bills  debated 
before  it  by  the  orators  of  the  Tribunate  and  the  Government. 

35.  Sessions   of  the  Tribunate   and  the  Legislative   Corps   are 
public. . . . 

320  The  Rise  to  Power 

36.  The  annual  salary  of  a  Tribune  is  15,000  francs;  that  of  a  Legis- 
lator, 10,000  francs. 

37.  Every  enactment  of  the  Legislative  Corps  is  promulgated  by  the 
First  Consul  on  the  tenth  day  after  being  voted,  unless  during  this 
period  there  has  been  recourse  to  the  Senate  on  grounds  of  unconstitu- 
tionality. .  . . 

OF  THE  GOVERNMENT 

39.  The  Government  is  entrusted  to  three  Consuls,  appointed  for 
ten  years  and  indefinitely  re-eligible.  . .  .  The  Constitution  appoints 
Citizen  Bonaparte,  formerly  provisional  Consul,  to  be  First  Consul; 
Citizen  Cambaceres,  formerly  Minister  of  Justice,  to  be  Second 
Consul;  Citizen  Lebrun,  formerly  member  of  the  Council  of  the 
Ancients,  to  be  third  Consul.  .  .  . 

40.  The  First  Consul  has  special  functions  and  attributions,  in  which, 
when  necessary,  he  is  temporarily  replaced  by  one  of  his  colleagues. 

41.  The  First  Consul  promulgates  the  kws;  he  appoints  and  dis- 
misses at  will  the  members  of  the  Council  of  State,  the  ministers, 
ambassadors,  .  . .  the  officers  of  the  armed  forces,  the  members  of  local 
administrations,  and  the  Government's  attorneys  before  the  courts. 
He  appoints,  but  cannot  dismiss,  the  criminal  and  civil  judges,  except 
justices  of  the  peace  and  Judges  of  Appeal. 

42.  In  the  other  acts  of  die  Government  the  Second  and  Third 
Consuls  have  a  consultative  role:  they  sign  the  register  of  these  acts  to 
confirm  their  presence;  if  they  wish,  they  may  record  their  opinions; 
after  which  the  decision  of  the  First  Consul  suffices. 

43.  The  salary  of  the  First  Consul  will  be  500,000  francs  during  the 
Year  VEIL  The  salary  of  each  of  the  other  Consuls  equals  three-tenths 
of  that  of  the  First. 

44.  The  Government  proposes  the  laws  and  makes  the  regulations 
necessary  to  ensure  their  execution. 

45.  The  Government  controls  the  revenue  and  expenditure  of  the 
State  in  conformity  with  the  annual  law  determining  the  amount  of 
each.  „ . . 

46.  If  the  Government  is  informed  of  a  conspiracy  against  the  State, 
it  may  issue  warrants  of  arrest  against  the  persons  who  are  the  pre- 
sumed authors  or  accomplices;  but,  if,  ten  days  after  their  arrest,  they 
have  not  been  either  set  at  liberty  or  prosecuted  according  to  kw,  the 
minister  signing  the  warrant  is  guilty  of  arbitrary  detention. 

47.  The  Government  provides  for  the  internal  security  and  external 
defence  of  the  State.  . . , 

49.  The  Government  carries  on  external  political  rektions,  conducts 
negotiations,  . . .  signs  and  concludes  all  treaties.  .  . . 

50.  Declarations  of  war,  treaties  of  peace,  alliance  and  trade  are 
proposed,  discussed,  decreed  and  promulgated  as  kws.  .  . . 

Brumaire  321 

51.  The  secret  articles  of  a  treaty  may  not  be  destructive  of  the  open 
articles. 

52.  Under  the  direction  of  the  Consuls,  a  Council  of  State  is 
entrusted  with  the  drafting  of  bills  and  regulations  for  public  adminis- 
tration and  with  resolving  the  difficulties  arising  in  administrative 
matters. 

54.  The  ministers  procure  the  execution  of  the  laws  and  regulations 
for  public  administration. 

55.  No  action  of  the  Government  is  effective  unless  signed  by  a 
minister. 

57.  Detailed  accounts  of  the  expenditure  of  each  minister,  signed  and 
certified  by  him,  are  made  public. 

58.  The  Government  may  select  and  retain  as  Councillors  of  State 
and  ministers  only  citizens  whose  names  are  inscribed  on  the  national 
list. 

OF  THE  COURTS 

60.  Each  commune  has  one  or  more  justices  of  the  peace  directly 
elected  by  the  citizens  for  three  years.  Their  principal  function  consists 
in  conciliating  the  parties,  whom,  conciliation  failing,  they  invite  to 
submit  to  arbitration. 

61.  In  civil  cases  there  are  courts  of  first  instance  and  courts  of 
appeal.  .  .  . 

62.  In  criminal  cases  carrying  degrading  or  corporal  punishment,  a 
first  jury  admits  or  rejects  the  accusation:  if  admitted,  a  second  jury 
determines  the  facts;  the  judges  impose  the  sentence. . . . 

63.  The  function  of  public  prosecutor  in  a  criminal,  court  is  carried 
out  by  the  Government  attorney. 

64.  Crimes  not  carrying  degrading  or  corporal  punishment  are 
judged  by  police  courts,  subject  to  appeal  to  the  criminal  courts. 

65.  There  is,  for  the  whole  Republic,  a  Court  of  Appeal,  which 
pronounces  in  the  last  instance  on  the  judgments  delivered  by  the 
courts.  .  . . 

66.  The  Court  of  Appeal  does  not  take  into  account  the  facts  of 
cases;  but  it  overthrows  judgments  where  the  correct  form  of  pro- 
cedure has  been  violated  or  where  there  is  an  express  contravention 
of  the  law;  it  refers  the  facts  of  the  case  back  to  the  competent  court. 

68.  Judges,  other  than  justices  of  the  peace,  retain  their  functions 

f       i*r 

for  life. . .  . 

OF  THE  RESPONSIBILITY  OF  PUBLIC  OFFICIALS 

69.  The  functions  of  members  of  the  Senate,  the  Legislative  Corps, 
the  Tribunate,  those  of  the  Consuls  and  Councillors  of  State  give  rise 
to  no  responsibility. 

322  The  Rise  to  Power 

70.  Private  crimes  committed  by  members  of  the  Senate,  the 
Tribunate,  the  Legislative  Corps  or  the  Council  of  State  are  pursued 
before  the  ordinary  courts,  after  the  body  to  which  the  accused  belongs 
has  deliberated  and  authorized  this  course. 

71.  Ministers  accused  of  private  crimes  are  considered  to  be  members 
of  the  Council  of  State. 

72.  Ministers  are  responsible:  i.  for  every  act  of  government  signed 
by  them  and  declared  unconstitutional  by  the  Senate;  2.  for  failure  to 
carry  out  the  laws  and  public  administrative  regulations;  3.  for  orders 
personally  given  by  them,  if  these  are  contrary  to  the  Constitution,  the 
laws  or  the  regulations. 

73.  When  the  preceding  article  applies,  the  Tribunate  denounces  the 
minister  in  a  bill  which  the  Legislative  Corps  discusses  under  the  usual 
procedure,  after  having  heard  the  accused.  A  minister  placed  on  trial 
by  a  decree  of  the  Legislative  Corps  is  judged  by  a  high  court  without 
appeal.  The  high  court  is  composed  of  judges  and  jury.  The  judges  are 
chosen  by  the  Court  of  Appeal  from  among  its  members;  the  jury  are 
taken  from  the  national  list.  .  .  . 

GENERAL  DISPOSITIONS. 

76.  The  house  of  every  person  living  on  French  territory  is  an 
inviolable  refuge.  During  the  night  none  may  enter  except  in  case  of 
fire  or  flood,  or  at  the  request  of  those  within.  During  the  day  it 
may  be  entered  for  a  special  purpose  determined  either  by  a  law  or 
by  the  order  of  a  public  authority. 

77.  Before  the  warrant  ordering  the  arrest  of  any  person  may  be 
executed,  it  must:  i.  expressly  state  the  reason  for  die  arrest  and  the 
kw  under  which  it  has  been  issued;  2.  be  signed  by  an  official  to  whom 
the  law  expressly  gives  this  power;  3.  be  read  to  the  person  arrested, 
who  must  receive  a  copy. 

80.  Access  to  a  detained  person  may  not  be  refused  to  his  relatives  or 
friends  bearing  an  order  from  the  civil  officer,  who  will  always  be 
required  to  grant  it,  unless  the  guardian  or  jailer  holds  the  order  of  a 
judge  to  hold  the  person  in  secret. 

82.  All  violence  employed  in  effecting  arrest,  detention  or  the 
execution  of  punishments,  other  than  such  as  is  authorized  by  the  law, 
is  a  crime. 

83.  Every  person  has  the  right  to  address  individual  petitions  to  any 
constituted  authority,  and  especially  to  the  Tribunate. 

86.  The  French  nation  declares  that  pensions  will  be  accorded  to  all 
soldiers  wounded  in  the  defence  of  the  nation  and  to  the  widows  and 
children  of  soldiers  dying  on  the  field  of  battle  or  as  a  result  of  their 
wounds. 

88.  A  National  Institute  is  charged  with  the  recording  of  discoveries 
and  the  perfecting  of  science  and  art, 

Brutnaire  323 

89.  A  Committee  of  National  Accounts  regulates  and  verifies  the 
receipts  and  expenditure  of  the  Republic.  This  Committee  is  composed 
of  seven  members  chosen  by  the  Senate  from  the  National  list. 

91.  The  government  of  the  French  colonies  is  determined  by  special 
laws. 

92.  In  the  case  of  armed  revolt  or  of  disturbances  which  threaten  the 
security  of  the  State,  the  rule  of  the  Constitution  may  be  suspended  by 
kw  in  specified  areas  and  for  a  specified  period.  If  the  Legislative  Corps 
is  in  recess,  such  suspension  may  in  like  circumstances  be  declared 
provisionally  by  a  decree  of  the  Government,  provided  that  by  an 
article  of  the  same  decree  the  Corps  is  recalled  at  the  earliest  moment. 

93.  The  French  nation  deckres  that  in  no  case  will  it  permit  the 
return  of  those  Frenchmen  who,  having  abandoned  their  country  since 
14  July,  1789,  are  not  included  among  the  exceptions  carried  in  the  laws 
delivered  against  the  emigrants;  it  forbids  any  further  exception  on  this 
point.  The  property  of  the  emigrants  is  irrevocably  vested  in  the 
Republic. 

95.  The  present  Constitution  will  be  submitted  at  once  to  the 
approval  of  the  French  people. 

428 
Proclamation  to  the  French  Nation 

Pans 

24  Frimaire,  Year  VIII  (15  Dec,  1799) 

A  Constitution  is  laid  before  you. 

It  ends  the  uncertainty  which  the  provisional  nature  of  the  govern- 
ment was  bringing  to  foreign  affairs  and  to  the  internal  and  military 
situation  of  the  Republic.  It  appoints  to  the  offices  it  establishes  chief 
magistrates  whose  devotion  will  make  it  effective. 

The  Constitution  is  based  on  the  true  principles  of  representative 
government  and  on  the  sacred  rights  of  property,  equality  and  liberty. 
The  powers  which  it  sets  up  will  be  strong  and  stable,  as  they  must 
be  in  order  to  guarantee  the  rights  of  the  citizens  and  the  interests  of 
the  State. 

Citizens,  the  revolution  is  established  on  the  principles  with  which 
it  began.  It  is  complete. 

The  Consuls  of  the  Republic 
BONAPARTE.  ROGER  Ducos.  SiEvis 

429 
To  General  K16ber 

C-iH-C,  Army  of  the  East  Paris 

27  Frimaire,  Year  VIII  (18  Dec,  1799} 
I  have  sent  you  several  ships,  Citizen  General,  and  I  hope  they  will 

324  The  Rise  to  Power 

have  Had  the  skill  to  reach  you  and  bring  you  news  of  France,  for  which 
you  must  be  very  avid. 

I  am  sending  you  a  staff  officer  from  Paris,  who  knows  the  events 
that  have  taken  place.  You  will  see  it  was  high  time  I  arrived  in  France. 
What  has  happened  here  should  give  new  encouragement  to  your 
soldiers.  Let  them  know  that  not  a  day  passes  but  I  am  occupied  with 
everything  that  may  influence  their  fate,  and  that  it  will  be  a  happy 
day  for  me  when,  as  first  magistrate  of  the  Republic,  I  can  bestow 
rewards  on  men  who  have  so  many  claims  to  my  affection. 

I  dare  write  you  nothing,  even  in  cipher,  for  there  are  men  in  Paris 
and  London  who  can  decipher  everything;  but  be  sure  I  do  not  lose 
sight  of  you. 

You  will  see  from  the  dispatches  of  the  Minister  of  War  that  the 
harm  done  to  the  depots  of  the  demi-brigades  in  your  army  has  been 
made  good. 

I  have  had  a  pension  of  one-third  of  the  pay  of  their  husbands  given 
to  the  wives  of  men  who  are  in  Egypt. 

The  next  campaign  will,  I  hope,  bring  more  honour  to  French  arms 
than  the  last.  Why  cannot  men  like  you  be  in  several  places  at  once? 

BONAPARTE 

430 
To  the  Legislative  Committee 

The  Council  of  Five  Hundred  Paris 

28  Frimaire,  Year  VIII  (19  Dec,  1799) 

Citizen  Representatives,  by  the  Law  of  19  Frimaire,  Year  VIII,  the 
Legislature  has  settled  the  form  of  the  new  metric  system.  Several 
provisions  seem  now  to  be  necessary  to  hasten  the  introduction  of  the 
new  measures  and  assure  the  execution  of  the  laws  already  passed  on 
this  subject. 

The  Consuls  of  the  Republic  lay  before  you  a  report  made  to  them 
by  the  Minister  of  the  Interior  and,  in  accordance  with  the  Law  of 
19  Brumaire,  Year  VIII,  they  submit  to  you  the  formal  and  necessary 
proposal  to  make  regulations  to  this  effect. 

The  Consuls  of  the  Republic 
BONAPARTE.  ROGER  Ducos.  SIBYLS 

To  the  Legislative  Committee 

The  Council  of  Five  Hundred  Paris 

1  NivSse,  Year  VIII  (22  Dec,  1799) 

Citizen  Representatives,  important  considerations  appear  to  demand 
the  immediate  cessation  of  the  present  provisional  nature  of  all  govern- 
mental powers.  The  welcome  accorded  to  the  new  Constitution  in 

Brumaire  325 

Paris  and  in  the  departments  leaves  no  doubt  that  this  new  pact  of  the 
French  is  almost  unanimously  accepted  by  the  citizens.  In  these  circum- 
stances the  Consuls  of  the  Republic  believe  that  it  would  be  contrary 
to  the  best  interests  of  the  country  to  delay  bringing  the  Constitution 
into  force. 

Consequently,  the  Consuls  of  the  Republic  submit  to  you  the  formal 
and  necessary  proposal  to  fix  the  day  when  the  Constitution  of  the 
French  people  will  be  brought  into  force; 

To  determine  the  places  where  die  Conservative  Senate,  the  Tribu- 
nate, the  Legislative  Corps  and  the  Government  shall  be  established; 

To  place  die  present  guard  of  the  Legislative  Corps  at  the  disposal 
of  the  Government; 

And  to  make  regulations  concerning  various  credits  to  be  opened  or 
modified  as  a  result  of  the  new  order  of  things,  for  the  service  of  the 
Year  VIE.  A  report  of  the  Minister  of  Finance  on  this  last  matter  is 
attached  to  the  present  message. 

BONAPARTE 

432 
To  the  Legislative  Committee 

The  Council  of  Five  Hundred  Paris 

2  Nivose,  Year  VIII  (23  Dec,  1799} 
Citizen  Representatives,  different  laws  passed  at  various  rimes  have 

condemned  a  number  of  individuals,  without  previous  trial,  to  deporta- 
tion or  other  penalties. 

The  Consuls  ky  before  you  the  report  on  this  subject  presented  to 
them  by  the  Minister  of  Police;  they  submit  to  you  the  formal  and 
necessary  proposal  to  pass  a  law  authorizing  the  Government  to  pro- 
nounce definitively  on  thepetitions  made  to  it  by  individuals  condemned 
to  deportation  or  other  penalty  by  laws,  decrees  or  acts  of  the  legislative 
body. 

You  will  no  doubt  also  think  it  necessary  to  accord  to  the  Govern- 
ment the  power  to  restore  to  them  the  rights  of  citizenship  when  it 
judges  that  this  can  be  done  without  danger  to  the  public  peace. 

BONAPARTE.  ROGER  Ducos 

433 
To  the  Legislative  Committee 

The  Council  of  Five  Hundred  Paris 

3  Nivose,  Yea*  VIII  (24  Dec,  1799) 
Citizen  Representatives,  two  great  moments  have  occurred  during 

the  Revolution:  the  triumph  of  liberty  on  14  July,  and  the  foundation  of 
the  Republic  on  i  Vendemiaire;  this  last  day  preserves  the  memory  of 
10  August. 

326  The  Rise  to  Power 

The  citizens'  memory  of  these  days  is  imperishable;  they  were 
greeted  with  unanimous  joy  by  all  Frenchmen,  and  they  raise  no 
memory  tending  to  divide  die  friends  of  the  Republic. 

Consequently,  the  Consuls  of  the  Republic  make  to  you  the  formal 
and  necessary  proposal  that  you  declare  that  in  future  14  July  and  i 
Vendemiaire  shall  be  the  only  festivals  celebrated  in  the  name  of  the 
Republic.* 

The  Consuls  of  the  Republic 
BONAPARTE.  Srarfs.  ROGER  Ducos 

434 
To  Citizen  Sieyfcs 

President  of  the  Conservative  Senate  Paris 

3  Nivose,  Year  VIII  (24  Dec,  1799} 

Citizens  Abrial,  Cretet,  Roederer  and  Regnier  do  not  accept  the 
position  of  Senator.  I  wish  you  to  appoint  in  their  place: 

Admiral  Morard  de  Galles,  distinguished  sailor  and  respected  old 
man; 

General  Fregeville,  at  present  commanding  at  Toulouse; 

Citizen  Jacqueminot,  member  of  the  committee  of  Five  Hundred; 

General  Sauret,  distinguished  soldier  and  respected  old  man. 

I  think  it  wise  and  strictly  just  that  there  should  be  eight  or  ten 
soldiers  in  the  Senate. 

BONAPARTE 

435 
To  H.M.  the  King  of  Great  Britain  and  Ireland 

Paris 
4  Nivose,  Year  VIII  (25  Dec,  1799} 

Called  by  the  wish  of  the  French  nation  to  occupy  the  first  magis- 
tracy of  the  Republic,  I  deem  it  proper,  on  entering  office,  personally 
to  inform  Your  Majesty. 

Must  the  war  which  for  eight  years  has  ravaged  the  four  corners  of 
the  world  be  eternal?  Is  there  no  way  to  understanding? 

How  can  the  two  most  enlightened  nations  of  Europe,  strong  and 
powerful  beyond  the  needs  of  their  security  and  independence,  sacrifice 
to  vain  notions  of  grandeur  alike  commercial  well-being,  internal 
prosperity  and  family  happiness?  Why  do  they  not  recognize  that 
peace  is  at  once  the  highest  necessity  and  the  highest  glory? 

*  This  proposal  was  made  in  a  report  by  Laplace,  in,  which  he  said  that  'for 
festivals  to  be  of  real  value  some  great  political  or  moral  idea  must  have  presided 
over  their  creation  and  they  must  be  able  to  be  celebrated  with  the  same  enthu- 
siasm at  all  times  and  in  all  places9. 

Brumaire  327 

These  sentiments  cannot  be  foreign  to  the  heart  of  Your  Majesty, 
who  rules  over  a  free  nation  with  the  sole  aim  of  promoting  its 
happiness. 

Your  Majesty  will  see  in  this  approach  only  my  sincere  desire  for  the 
second  time  to  contribute  effectively  towards  general  pacification  by  a 
prompt  and  confidential  intervention,  free  of  those  formalities  which 
may  be  necessary  to  disguise  the  dependence  of  weak  states  but  which 
in  die  strong  reveal  only  the  mutual  desire  to  deceive. 

In  abusing  their  powers,  to  the  misery  of  all,  France  and  England 
can  still  for  long  avoid  exhaustion;  but  I  dare  to  say  that  the  fate  of 
all  civilized  nations  depends  upon  an  end  to  a  war  which  is  setting  fire 
to  the  whole  world. 

BONAPARTE 

436 
To  H.M.  the  Emperor,  King  of  Hungary  and  Bohemia 

Paris 
4  Nivose,  Year  VIII  (25  Dec,  1799) 

On  returning  to  Europe  after  an  absence  of  eighteen  months  I  find 
war  renewed  between  the  French  Republic  and  Your  Majesty. 

The  French  nation  has  called  upon  me  to  occupy  the  first  magistracy. 

Being  foreign  to  every  sentiment  of  vain  glory,  the  first  of  my 
desires  is  to  prevent  the  shedding  of  blood.  All  goes  to  show  that  in 
the  forthcoming  campaign  powerful  and  ably  led  armies  will  treble 
the  number  of  victims  already  caused  by  the  renewal  of  hostilities. 

The  known  character  of  Your  Majesty  leaves  me  in  no  doubt  as  to 
the  wish  of  Your  Majesty's  heart.  If  that  alone  is  hearkened  to  I  foresee 
the  possibility  of  harmonizing  the  interests  of  our  two  nations. 

In  all  previous  correspondence  Your  Majesty  has  accorded  me  some 
marks  of  esteem,  I  pray  that  in  this  present  approach  will  be  seen  both 
the  desire  to  respond  and  further  evidence  of  the  most  particular 
regard  in  which  I  hold  Your  Majesty. 

BONAPARTE 

437 
Proclamation  to  the  French  Nation 

Paris 

4  NivSse,  Year  VIU  (25  Dec,  i/pp) 

To  make  the  Republic  beloved  by  its  citizens,  respected  by 
foreigners,  formidable  to  its  enemies,  such  are  the  obligations  which 
we  undertook  in  accepting  the  first  magistracy. 

It  will  be  dear  to  its  citizens  if  the  kws  and  die  acts  of  the  authorities 

are  always  imbued  with  the  spirit  of  order,  justice  and  moderation. 

Without  order  administration  is  but  chaos:  finance  and  public  credit 

328  The  Rise  to  Power 

are  wanting,  and  personal  fortunes  colkpse  with  the  fortune  of  the 
State.  Without  justice  there  are  only  parties,  oppressors  and  victims. 
Moderation  imprints  an  august  quality  upon  governments  as  upon 
nations;  it  is  always  the  counterpart  of  force  and  the  guarantee  of  the 
survival  of  social  institutions. 

The  Republic  will  be  impressive  to  foreigners  if  it  knows  how  to 
respect  in  their  independence  the  tide  to  its  own;  if  its  undertakings, 
wisely  prepared  and  accepted  with  sincerity,  are  faithfully  kept. 

It  wiE  be  formidable  to  its  enemies  if  its  forces  by  land  and  sea  are 
strongly  built;  if  each  of  its  defenders  finds  a  family  in  the  unit  to  which 
he  belongs  and,  within  this  family,  a  heritage  of  valour  and  glory;  if 
the  officer,  trained  by  long  study,  finds  through  regular  advancement 
the  rewards  due  to  his  talents  and  labours. 

Upon  these  principles  depend  the  stability  of  government,  the 
success  of  commerce  and  agriculture,  the  greatness  and  prosperity  of 
nations.  In  setting  them  out  we  have  set  out  the  rule  by  which  we  must 
be  judged.  Frenchmen,  we  have  told  you  our  duties;  it  will  be  you 
who  will  tell  us  whether  we  have  fulfilled  them. 

BONAPARTE 

438 
Order  of  the  Day 

Army  of  Italy  Paris 

4  Nivose,  Year  VIII  (25  Dec,  1799} 

Soldiers!  The  circumstances  which  keep  me  at  the  head  of  the 
Government  prevent  me  from  being  in  your  midst. 

Your  needs  are  great.  All  steps  have  been  taken  to  meet  them. 

The  first  qualities  of  the  soldier  are  constancy  and  discipline;  valour 
is  only  the  second. 

Soldiers  1  Several  units  have  left  their  positions;  they  have  been  deaf 
to  the  voice  of  their  officers.  The  iyth  Light  is  of  this  number. 

Axe  they  all  dead,  then,  the  brave  men  of  Castiglione,  of  Rivoli,  of 
Neumarkt?  They  would  have  perished  sooner  than  desert  their  flags, 
and  they  would  have  led  their  young  comrades  in  the  path  of  honour 
and  duty. 

Soldiers!  Your  rations  are  not  issued  regularly,  you  say.  What  would 
you  have  done  had  you,  like  the  4th  and  22nd  Light,  the  i8th  and  32nd 
of  the  Line,  found  yourselves  in  the  middle  of  the  desert,  without 
bread  or  water,  eating  horse  and  mule?  'Victory  will  give  us  bread', 
they  said;  and  you,  you  desert  the  Colours! 

I  shall  have  rendered  to  me  a  daily  report  on  the  conduct  of  all  units 
and  especially  of  the  lyth  Light  and  the  6srd  of  the  Line.  They  shall 
remember  again  the  confidence  I  once  had  in  them. 

BONAPARTE 

Brumaire  329 

439 
Proclamation  to  the  Citizens  of  Santo  Domingo 

Paris 

4  Nivose,  Year  VIII  (2$  Dec,  1799} 
Citizens,  a  Constitution  which  could  not  be  maintained  in  the  face  of 

repeated  violations  has  been  repkced  by  a  new  pact  designed  to 
strengthen  freedom. 

Article  91  lays  down  that  the  French  colonies  will  be  governed  by 
special  kws. 

This  disposition  derives  from  the  nature  of  things  and  the  differences 
of  climate.  The  inhabitants  of  French  colonies  situated  in  America, 
Asia  and  Africa  cannot  be  ruled  by  the  same  law.  Distinctions  of 
tradition,  of  custom,  of  interest,  the  diversity  of  soil,  of  culture,  of 
production  demand  various  modifications. 

One  of  the  first  acts  of  the  new  legislature  will  be  to  prepare  the 
laws  destined  to  govern  you.  Far  from  these  being  a  cause  for  alarm 
among  you,  you  will  recognize  in  them  the  wisdom  and  depth  of  view 
which  inspires  the  legislators  of  France. 

In  announcing  the  new  social  pact  to  you,  the  Consuls  of  the 
Republic  declare  that  the  sacred  principles  of  the  liberty  and  equality 
of  the  black  peoples  will  never  undergo  any  threat  or  modification 
among  you. 

If  there  are  any  who  maintain  relations  with  the  enemy  powers, 
remember,  brave  blacks,  that  the  French  people  alone  recognize  your 
freedom  and  the  equality  of  your  rights. 

BONAPARTE 

440 
To  Citizen  Boulay  de  la  Meurthe 

President,  Legal  Section,  Council  of  State  Paris 

5  Nivose,  Year  VIII  (26  Dec,  1799) 
I  wish  your  section  to  consider,  as  soon  as  possible,  the  important 

question  of  the  emigrants. 

1.  To  close  the  list  of  emigrants  and  to  substitute  for  it  a  kw  on 
passports.  As  to  individuals  who  have  emigrated  but  have  not  yet  been 
inscribed  on  the  list,  to  establish  a  formality  that  preserves  civil  liberty, 
and,  above  all,  to  propose  a  law  repealing  those  dispositions  of  earlier 
laws  which  are  contrary  to  the  true  purpose  for  which  the  law  on 
emigrants  was  made. 

2,  To  propose  a  regulation  to  enable  those  who  have  been 
visionally  struck  off  the  list  but  not  definitively  confirmed  to  be  jucl 
as  soon  as  possible. . . . 

BONAPARTE 
You  will  find  attached  different  notes  furnished  by  the  Ministers: 

330  The  Rise  to  Power 

i.  on  emigration  and  its  effects;  2.  a  numerical  report  of  inscriptions 
on  the  list;  3.  a  report  on  surveillance;  4.  notes  on  the  laws onemigrants 
with  observations;  5.  accounts  of  the  work  of  the  emigrant  section 
in  the  Ministry  of  Police. 

441 
To  the  Conservative  Senate 

Paris 

6Nivose,  Year  VIII  (27  Dec,  1799} 

Senators,  the  Consuls  of  the  Republic  hasten  to  inform  you  that  the 
Government  is  installed.  In  all  circumstances  they  will  employ  every 
means  to  decrease  faction,  to  bring  about  unity  and  to  maintain  the 
Constitution,  which  represents  the  hopes  of  the  French  people.  The 
Conservative  Senate  will  be  animated  by  the  same  desires,  and  through 
its  union  with  the  Consuls  the  ill-disposed,  if  such  can  exist  in  the  first 
bodies  of  the  State,  will  be  frustrated. 

BONAPARTE 

442 
To  the  Conservative  Senate 

Paris 

6Nivose,  Year  VIII  (27  Dec,  1799) 

Citizen  Senators,  the  Consuls  of  the  Republic  have  received  the 
report  containing  the  nominations  which  you  have  made  for  the 
Tribunate  and  the  Legislative  Corps. 

They  desire  that  all  members  composing  them  should  come  together, 
remote  from  all  spirit  of  faction,  to  work  towards  the  prosperity  of  the 
Republic;  that  they  should  forget  the  different  hatreds  resulting  from 
revolutionary  dissensions;  and  that  the  declamations  made  by  some 
of  them  against  the  Constitution,  which  has  been  accepted  with  so 
much  acclamation  by  the  French  people,  should  be  the  last. 

BONAPARTE 

443 
To  Citizen  FouchS 

Minister  of  Police  Paris 

6  NivSse,  Year  VIII  (27  Dec,  179$) 

In  conformity  with  the  orders  I  have  received  from  the  First  Consul, 
I  have  the  honour  to  inform  you,  Citizen  Minister,  that  as  from  today 
The  Monitor  is  the  sole  official  journal.  Please,  in  consequence,  give  the 
necessary  orders  so  that  such  correspondence  and  acts  of  your  adminis- 
tration as  should  be  made  public  are  communicated  to  it  exactly. 

By  order  of  the  First  Consul 

Brumaire  331 

To  Rear-  Admiral  Ganteaume 

President,  Naval  and  Colonial  Section,  Council  of  State  Paris 

6  Nivose,  Year  VIII  (27  Dec,  i/pp) 
I  request  you,  Citizen,  to  prepare  for  me  a  draft  regulation  for  the 

provisional  government  of  Santo  Domingo,  Guadaloupe,  Mauritius 
and  Reunion.  Let  me  also  know  the  ideas  of  the  section  on  measures 
to  be  taken  to  bring  the  last  two  to  the  obedience  they  owe  to  the 
mother  country. 

BONAPARTE 

445 
Decree 

Paris 

7  Nivose,  Year  VIII  (2$  Dec,  i/pp) 
The  Consuls  of  the  Republic,  having  seen  the  recommendation  of 

the  Council  of  State,  being  instructed  that  certain  local  authorities 
have  strained  the  kws  setting  up  the  Republican  calendar  by  ordering 
that  religious  buildings  shall  be  open  only  on  Decadi,  and  considering 
that  no  law  has  empowered  these  authorities  to  take  such  steps,  decree: 

ARTICLE  i.  The  said  orders  are  annulled. 

ART.  2.  The  kws  concerning  the  freedom  of  worship  will  be 
executed  in  the  letter  and  the  spirit. 

ART.  3.  The  Ministers  of  Justice  and  of  Police  are  charged,  each  in 
so  far  as  he  is  concerned,  with  the  execution  of  the  present  decree, 
which  will  be  inserted  in  the  Bulletin  of  the  Laws. 

BONAPARTE 

446 
Proclamation 

Inhabitants  of  the  Western  Departments  Paris 

7  Nivose,  Year  VIII  (28  Dec,  ijgg) 

For  the  second  time  a  hateful  war  threatens  to  set  aflame  the  western 
departments.  It  is  the  duty  of  the  first  magistrates  of  the  Republic  to 
halt  its  progress  and  extinguish  it  at  the  source;  but  they  do  not  wish  to 
employ  force  until  they  have  exhausted  the  resources  of  persuasion  and 
justice. 

The  instigators  of  this  trouble  are  insensate  partisans  of  two  men 
who  have  honoured  neither  their  rank  by  virtue  nor  their  misfortunes 
by  deeds,  men  despised  by  the  foreigner  whose  hatred  they  have  used 
without  inspiring  nis  sympathy. 

There  are  still  traitors  sold  to  the  English,  took  of  their  enmity, 
and  brigands  who  seek  only  to  continue  their  crimes  and  hide  them 
under  civil  strife.  To  such  the  Government  owes  neither  concessions 
nor  the  explanation  of  its  principles. 

332  The  Rise  to  Power 

But  there  are  also  citizens  beloved  by  the  nation  who  have  been 
seduced  by  their  wiles;  to  these  citizens  enlightenment  and  truth  are 
due. 

Unjust  kws  have  been  passed  and  executed;  arbitrary  acts  have 
undermined  the  security  of  the  citizen  and  the  liberty  of  conscience; 
haphazard  additions  to  the  lists  of  emigrants  have  everywhere  struck 
down  citizens  who  had  never  abandoned  either  their  country  or  even 
their  homes;  in  fact,  great  principles  of  social  order  have  been  violated. 

To  repair  these  errors  and  injustices  a  government  founded  on  the 
sacred  principles  of  liberty,  equality,  and  the  representative  system 
has  been  proclaimed  and  recognized  by  the  nation.  It  will  be  the 
constant  desire  of  the  first  magistrates  it  has  appointed,  as  it  will  be 
to  their  interest  and  glory,  to  heal  all  the  wounds  of  France.  Already 
this  desire  is  witnessed  by  all  their  acts. 

Thus  the  disastrous  law  of  the  forced  loan  and  the  yet  more  dis- 
astrous law  of  hostages  have  been  repealed;  individuals  deported 
without  prior  trial  have  been  restored  to  their  country  and  their 
families.  Each  day  is  and  will  be  marked  by  acts  of  justice,  and  the 
Council  of  State  is  working  without  pause  to  prepare  the  reform  of 
bad  laws  and  a  happier  distribution  of  public  contributions. 

The  Consuls  of  the  Republic  declare  once  again  that  freedom  of 
worship  is  guaranteed  by  the  Constitution;  that  no  magistrate  can 
attack  it;  that  no  man  can  say  to  another:  'You  will  follow  this  creed; 
you  will  worship  only  on  such  a  day.'  The  law  of  n  Prairial,  Year  HI, 
granting  to  citizens  the  use  of  religious  buildings,  will  be  executed. . .  . 

The  Government  will  pardon;  it  will  show  mercy  to  repentance; 
indulgence  will  be  complete  and  absolute.  But  it  will  strike  down 
whoever  may  still  dare,  after  this  declaration,  to  resist  the  national 
sovereignty. 

Frenchmen  living  in  the  departments  of  the  west,  rally  to  a  con- 
stitution which  gives  to  the  magistrates  the  power  and  the  duty  of 
protecting  the  citizens  and  which  guarantees  them  all  equally  against 
unjust  and  oppressive  kws. 

Let  those  who  seek  the  glory  of  France  shun  those  who  would  still 
lead  them  astray  to  hand  them  over  to  the  fetters  of  tyranny  or  the 
domination  of  the  foreigner.  Let  the  good  inhabitants  of  the  country- 
side return  to  their  homes  and  take  up  again  their  useful  labour;  let 
them  spurn  the  insinuations  of  those  who  would  lead  them  back  into 
feudal  slavery. 

If,  despite  all  the  measures  taken  by  the  Government,  there  are  still 
men  who  dare  to  provoke  civil  war,  the  first  magistrates  will  have 
only  one  sad  but  necessary  duty  to  perform,  that  of  subjugating  them 
by  force. . .  . 

BONAPARTE 

Brumaire  333 

447 
To  General  Augereau 

£.-w-C.,  French  Army  in  Holland  Paris 

7  Nivose,  Year  VIII  (28  Dec,  1799) 

I  have  appointed  you,  Citizen  General,  to  the  important  post  of 
3ommander-in-Chief  of  the  French  army  in  Holland. 

In  all  your  actions  in  the  exercise  of  this  command  show  yourself 
:o  be  above  these  miserable  political  divisions  whose  unhappy  effect  has 
}een  to  tear  France  asunder  for  ten  years. 

The  glory  of  the  Republic  is  the  fruit  of  our  comrades*  blood;  we 
Belong  to  no  group  other  than  that  of  the  whole  nation. 

Be  sure  that,  if  circumstances  force  me  to  go  to  war  myself,  I  will 
lot  leave  you  in  Holland,  and  that  I  will  never  forget  the  great  day  of 
3astiglione. 

BONAPARTE 

448 
Note  in  'The  Monitor' 

Paris 

g  Nivose,  Year  VIII  (30  Dec,  1799) 

The  Friend  of  the  Laws  (No.  1585)  says  the  First  Consul  Bonaparte 
las  just  ordered  a  fete  which  will  cost  200,000  francs;  this  is  false. 
First  Consul  Bonaparte  knows  that  200,000  francs  is  the  pay  of  a 
Drigade  for  six  months. 

449 
To  the  Burgomaster  and  Senate 

Free  and  Imperial  City  of  Hamburg  Paris 

g  NivSse,  Year  VIII  (30  Dec,  1799) 

We  have  received  your  letter,  Gentlemen;  it  does  not  justify  you. 

States  are  preserved  by  courage  and  virtue;  cowardice  and  vice  ruin 
:hem.  You  have  violated  hospitality.  The  most  barbarous  hordes  of  the 
desert  have  not  done  the  like.  Our  fellow  citizens  will  hold  it  against 
you  for  ever. 

The  two  unfortunates  you  have  surrendered  will  die  illustrious;* 
3Ut  their  blood  will  do  their  persecutors  more  harm  than  an  army. 

BONAPARTE 

450 
To  Citizen  Boulay  de  la  Meurthe 

President,  Legal  Section,  Council  of  State  Paris 

g  Nivose,  Year  VIII  (30  Dec,  1799} 

The  First  Consul  refers  to  the  legal  section  of  the  Council  of  State 
*  Napper  Tandy  and  BkckwelL 

334  The  Rise  to  Power 

the  question  whether  there  exists  in  the  law  any  penalty  to  punish  an 
individual  who  has  undertaken,  on  certain  conditions,  to  maintain  a 
depot  of  flour  sufficient  to  provision  a  certain  town  and  who  has  left 
this  depot  empty  although  all  conditions  of  the  agreement  with  him 
have  been  fulfilled. 

By  order  of  the  First  Consul 

451 
To  Citizen  Fouch6 

Minister  of  Police  Paris 

9  Nivose,  Year  VIII  (30  Dec,  1799) 

I  have  the  honour  to  send  you,  Citizen  Minister,  a  decision  setting 

at  liberty  several  priests  who  were  deported  to  the  lie  de  R.e  but  at 

the  same  time  requiring  of  them  the  oath  of  fidelity  to  the  Constitution. 

The  First  Consul  instructs  me  to  inform  you  confidentially  that 

their  release  should  not  take  place  until  the  oath  has  been  signed. 

By  order  of  the  First  Consul 

452 
To  Major- General  Murat 

G.O.C.,  Consular  Guard  Paris 

p  Nivose,  Year  VIII  (30  Dec,  j/pp) 

It  will  be  published  tomorrow  in  the  daily  orders  of  the  Consular 
Guard  that  die  Consuls  intend  that  there  should  be  in  their  Guard 
only  men  distinguished  by  their  military  services  or  by  outstanding 
actions. 

Consequently,  the  commander  of  the  Guard  will  order  his  colonels 
and  majors  to  submit  to  him  a  return  of  the  men  in  the  units  they 
command;  they  will  take  care  to  add  notes  of  the  armies  in  which  they 
have  served,  the  principal  battles  in  which  they  have  taken  part  and 
the  special  acts  of  bravery  which  they  have  performed. 

No  man  who  has  not  served  in  several  campaigns  may,  for  that 
reason  alone,  belong  to  the  Consular  Guard. 

BONAPARTE 

453 
To  Major- General  Berthier 

Minister  of  War  Paris 

10  NivSse,  Year  VIII  (31  Dec,  i/pp) 

The  Minister  of  War  will  have  a  commission  as  brigadier-general 
forwarded  to  General  Boudet  and  he  will  be  sent  to  the  Army  of  Italy 
to  be  employed  in  that  rank. 

Citizen  Dubois-Cranc6,  having  been  on  active  service  neither  as 
brigadier-  nor  as  major-general,  will  revert  to  the  rank  of  adjutant- 

Brumaire  335 

general  which  he  held  before  being  appointed  a  Deputy  to  the  National 
Convention;  he  will  be  employed  in  this  rank  in  the  Army  of  the 
Rhine. 

Major-General  Anselme  will  be  placed  on  half-pay  until  his  pension 
is  fixed. 

BONAPARTE 

454 
To  Major-General  Berthier 

Minister  of  War  Paris 

13  Nivise,  Year  VIII  (3  Jan,  1800} 
Please  send  me  a  report,  Citizen  Minister:  i.  On  the  present  state  of 

our  artillery  teams;  would  it  be  possible  and  useful  to  have  horses 
belonging  to  the  Republic?  2.  A  report  on  the  laws,  regulations  and 
customs  in  force  as  to  the  financial  accounts  of  different  parts  of  the 
service;  what  changes  are  desirable?  3.  On  the  laws  regulating  the  pay 
of  the  troops,  and  the  systems  in  force  before  and  at  different  periods 
of  the  Revolution;  what  action  ought  to  be  taken? 

BONAPARTE 

455 
To  Major- General  Sainte-Hilaire* 

G.O.C,  8th  Military  District  Paris 

14  Nivose,  Year  VIII  (4  Jan,  1800} 
I  am  satisfied,  Citizen  General,  with  your  conduct  in  the  8th  District 

since  I  appointed  you  to  the  command. 

Instruct  the  people  and  let  every  citizen  know  that  the  time  of 
factions  and  discords  is  ended.  Use  the  troops  at  your  disposal 
and  strong  pickets  from  the  communal  national  guards  to  restore  the 
safety  of  the  roads  and  to  exterminate  the  brigands  who  are  disturbing 
the  public  peace.  Heads  are  hot  in  the  country  where  you  are;  let  this 
warmth  turn  towards  the  re-establishment  of  commerce,  the  glory  of 
our  armies  and  navy,  everything  that  can  make  the  French  name 
respected  in  the  eyes  of  the  universe,  and  our  generation  will  be  dear 
to  the  future.  All  factious  meetings  should  be  forbidden  even  more  in 
the  south  of  France  than  elsewhere,  because  there  more  than  anywhere 
else  men  tend  to  exaggeration.  Tell  the  national  guards  and  the  citizens 
that  the  revolution  is  over,  that  the  reins  of  the  State  are  in  strong 
hands.  Repeat  to  them  often  that  moderation  is  man's  greatest  virtue. 

I  have  promoted  you  to  the  rank  of  major-general.  Let  the  Govern- 
ment know  soon  that  the  bands  of  rrj.tninfl.ls  infesting  the  main  roads 
have  been  dispersed. 

BONAPARTE 

*  This  letter  has  been  abridged. 

336  The  Rise  to  Power 

456 

To  Major-General  Berthier 

Minister  of  War  Paris 

14  Nivose,  Year  VIII  (4  Jan,  1800) 

1.  The  Minister  of  War  will  inform  General  D'Urtubie  that,  since 
it  is  my  unalterable  intention  not  to  keep  on  the  active  list  any  officer 
who  has  not  seen  active  service  during  the  war  of  liberty,  I  think  it 
essential  that  he  should  proceed  to  an  army  in  order  to  undertake  the 
next  campaign;  failing  that  I  shall,  with  regret,  be  obliged  to  have  him 
excluded  from  the  active  list  of  generals  of  artillery. 

2.  Major-General  Dupuch  will  be  appointed  to  a  garrison  command 
(which  he  may  choose)  or  retire,  in  which  case  he  will  receive  the  half- 
pay  of  his  rank  until  his  pension  is  settled. 

3 .  Brigadier-General  Ravel  will  be  appointed  to  command  Brian^on. 
The  Minister  of  War  will  inform  him  that  this  command  is  being 
given  him  as  a  special  mark  of  confidence. 

4.  Brigadier-Generals  La  Salette,  Campagnol,*  Valcin  and  Senne- 
ville  will  be  retired  and  will  draw  the  half-pay  of  their  rank  until  their 
pensions  are  fixed. 

5.  Major-General  Debelle  will  be  employed  on  active  service  in  his 
rank. 

6.  Brigadier-Generals  Sorbier,  Andreossy  and  Songis  will  be  pro- 
moted to  the  rank  of  major-general. 

7.  Major-General  Gueriot  Saint-Martin  will  receive  orders  to  report 
to  a  field  army  to  be  employed  in  his  rank. 

BONAPARTE 

457 
Order  of  the  Day 

Army  of  England  Paris 

15  NivSse,  Year  VIII  (5  Jan,  1800} 
Soldiers,  the  Government  has  taken  all  possible  steps  to  bring  to 

their  senses  the  misguided  inhabitants  of  the  western  departments.  It 
has  heard  them  before  judging.  It  has  done  justice  to  their  complaints, 
for  these  were  reasonable.  The  great  mass  of  sound  inhabitants  have 
laid  down  their  arms.  There  remain  only  brigands,  emigrants  and 
English  hirelings. 

Frenchmen  in  the  pay  of  England!  Such  can  be  but  vagabonds, 
without  loyalty,  without  honour.  March  against  them;  you  will  not 
be  called  upon  to  show  great  valour. 

The  army  contains  more  than  60,000  brave  men;  let  me  know  soon 
that  the  reoel  chiefs  have  ceased  to  live.  Glory  is  to  be  gained  only 
through  hardship;  if  it  could  be  found  by  keeping  headquarters  in 
*  Bonaparte's  former  colonel  in  the  4th  Artillery  Regiment. 

Bntmdre  337 

comfortable  towns  or  by  staying  in  good  barracks,  who  would  not 
possess  it? 

Soldiers,  whatever  your  rank,  the  thanks  of  the  nation  await  you. 
To  be  worthy  of  it  you  must  brave  the  rigours  of  the  season,  the  ice  and 
snow,  the  cold  nights;  you  must  surprise  your  enemies  at  dawn  and 
exterminate  these  wretches,  who  dishonour  the  French  name. 

Make  a  short  and  good  campaign.  Be  inexorable  towards  the 
rebels,  but  maintain  the  strictest  discipline. 

BONAPARTE 

458 
To  Citizen  Gaudin 

Minister  of  Finance  Paris 

18  Nivose,  Year  VIII  (8  Jan,  1800) 

The  2,500,000  francs  accruing  from  the  lottery  and  the  6,000,000 

coming  from  Holland  will  be  distributed  as  follows: 

To  the  Ministry  of  War,  destined  for  a  secret  expedition,  400,000 

To  the  Army  of  Italy  1,000,000 
For  the  pay  of  the  Army  of  Italy  (independently  of  the 

preceding  million);  the  Minister  will  inform  me  when 

these  2  millions  can  leave  Paris  2,000,000 

For  the  pay  of  the  Army  of  the  Rhine  2,000,000 

To  the  Ministry  of  Marine,  for  the  expedition  ordered  500,000 

For  the  pay  of  the  Atlantic  fleet  1,000,000 

For  the  pay  of  the  Mediterranean  fleet  500,000 

To  the  Ministry  of  Foreign  Affairs  300,000 

To  the  Ministry  of  War  for  arms  manufacture  300,000 

For  expenses  paid  in  France  for  the  Army  of  Egypt  100,000 
To  the  Ministry  of  the  Interior,  for  the  expenses  of  the 

public  workshops  of  Paris  100,000 

To  the  Ministry  of  War,  for  cavalry  remounts  300,000 

8,500,000 
BONAPARTE 

459 
To  Major- General  Berthier 

Minister  of  War 

19  Nivose,  Year  VIII  ($Jan,  1800) 

The  First  Consul  wishes  to  have,  if  possible  by  the  2ist,  a  service 
return  of  all  the  brigadier-generals  on  the  active  list  with  a  note  on 
the  abilities  and  morality  of  each  of  them. 

By  order  of  the  First  Consul 

338  The  Rise  to  Power 

460 

To  Major- General  Berthier 

Minister  of  War  Paris 

20  Nivose,  Year  VIII  (lojan,  1800} 
I  wish  to  know  at  once,  Citizen  Minister: 

1.  What  steps  you  have  taken  to  remount  the  cavalry. 

2.  If  General  Gardanne  and  the  other  officers  employed  in  the  Army 
of  England  have  had  orders  to  return  to  their  posts  by  the  24th  of  this 
month. 

3.  When  shall  I  receive  the  report  on  our  present  legislation  relating 
to  the  manner  of  promotion  in  the  different  corps? 

4.  When  shall  I  receive  the  report  on  the  present  situation  of  the 
artillery  and  engineer  schools? 

5.  When  shaft  I  receive  the  report  on  the  present  situation  as  to 

military  law? 

6.  The  report  on  the  present  organization  of  our  artillery  trains? 
Would  it  be  possible  and  useful  to  have  horses  owned  by  the  Republic? 

7.  The  report  on  the  laws,  regulations  and  customs  governing  the 
accounts  of  the  different  parts  of  the  public  service? 

8.  The  report  on  the  laws  governing  the  manner  in  which  the 
troops  are  paid;  what  was  the  custom  formerly  and  during  the  various 
periods  of  the  Revolution?  What  position  ought  we  to  adopt  in  this 
matter? 

9.  The  report  on  conscription?  . .  . 

BONAPARTE 

461 
To  Major- General  Berthier 

Minister  of  War  Paris 

21  Nivose,  Year  VIII  (11  Jan,  1800) 

I  wish  to  know,  Citizen  Minister,  whether  it  is  true  about  the  letter 
from  General  Baraguey  d'Hilliers  to  Prince  Charles.  .  .  .  Divisional 
generals  must  not  correspond  with  enemy  generals  without  the 
authorization  of  the  commander-in-chief.  General  Moreau  will  take 
measures  and  issue  the  strictest  orders  that  no  correspondence  with  the 
enemy  takes  place  except  on  his  instructions. 

BONAPARTE 

462 
Minute 

Paris 

21  NivSse,  Year  VIII  (11  Jan,  1800) 

[Proposal  by  the  Minister  of  War  to  promote  Citizen  Marchant  to  the 
rank  of  major.] 

Brumaire  339 

If  this  is  the  man  who  was  consul  at  Tripoli  and  who  refused  in 
Egypt  to  march  against  the  enemy,  refused. 

BONAPARTE 

463 
Decree 

Paris 
22  Nivose,  Year  VIII  (12  Jan,  1800) 

ARTICLE  i.  On  the  first  day  of  each  decade  there  will  be  held  a 
general  council  of  finance;  on  the  fourth  day,  an  administrative  council 
of  war;  on  the  sixth  day,  an  administrative  council  of  the  navy. 

ART.  2.  On  the  eighth  day  of  each  month  there  will  be  an  administra- 
tive council  of  justice;  on  the  eighteenth,  an  administrative  council  of 
foreign  affairs,  and  on  the  twenty-eighth  an  administrative  council  of 
the  interior  and  of  police. 

ART.  3.  The  Director  of  the  Public  Treasury  will  attend  each 
administrative  council  of  finance;  the  Minister  of  Finance  will  neces- 
sarily be  present  at  the  financial  council:  he  will  attend  the 
administrative  councils  of  the  other  departments  when  he  considers 
it  desirable. 

ART.  4.  Ministers  will  be  accompanied  at  the  administrative  councils 
by  the  chief  clerks  in  charge  of  their  accounts  and  by  the  heads  of 
divisions  in  their  departments  if  they  so  instruct  them. 

ART.  5.  The  Secretary  of  State  will  keep  the  minutes  of  the  general 
council  of  finance  and  the  administrative  councils  on  separate  registers. 

On  the  day  preceding  each  administrative  council  he  will  receive  the 
orders  of  the  Consuls  for  the  summoning  of  those  Councillors  of  State 
whom  it  may  be  judged  necessary  to  call. 

ART.  6.  These  different  councils  will  be  held  at  the  residence  of  the 
First  Consul  at  9.30  p.m. 

BONAPARTE 

464 
To  General  Brune 

C.-m-C,  Army  of  the  West*  Paris 

24  Nivose,  Year  VIII  (14  Jan,  1800} 

.  .  .  The  Army  of  the  West  contains  more  than  60,000  men  under 
arms.  By  pursuing  the  brigands  energetically  you  will  be  able  to  end 
this  war  promptly;  from  now  on  the  peace  of  Europe  depends  on  its 
conclusion. 

*  Formerly  the  Army  of  England.  With  Brune's  appointment  as  C.-in-C.  on  this 
date  it  was  renamed  the  Army  of  the  West.  Hedoimlle,  the  previous  commander, 
agreed  to  serve  under  Brune  and  became  Chief  of  Star! 

340  The  Rise  to  Power 

The  man  d'Andigne,  who  has  arrived  in  Paris  today,  will  remain 
here  during  the  whole  of  tomorrow.  He  will  not  be  allowed  to  leave 
until  twelve  hours  after  yourself. 

The  Armistice  concluded  between  General  Hedouville  and  the 
chouans  must  last  only  until  i  Pluviose.  Georges,*  who  commands  the 
rebels  in  the  Morbihan,  is  not  included  in  it.  ... 

Break  up  Georges's  bands.  Seize  his  guns  and  his  corn  stocks  (he  has 
a  great  deal  on  the  coast  which  he  is  selling  to  the  English).  In  fact 
make  the  insurgents  of  the  Morbihan  feel  the  weight  and  horror  of 
war.  By  the  beginning  of  Pluviose  you  should  ensure:  i.  that  the 
English  ships  anchored  off  the  coasts  of  the  Morbihan  are  no  longer 
in  communication  with  Georges;  2.  that  from  the  tops  of  their  masts 
they  can  see  the  flags  of  the  Republic  dispersing  the  brigands  and 
dashing  their  hopes. 

Diplomatic  reasons  of  the  greatest  importance  demand  that  within 
the  first  five  days  of  Pluviose  the  English  should  know  that  consider- 
able forces  are  in  pursuit  of  Georges  so  that  they  send  the  news  to 
England. 

After  this  first  operation  move  to  Nantes,  Angers  or  Rennes  as 
circumstances  dictate. 

Tomorrow  the  regulation  for  the  organization  of  territory  where  the 
Constitution  is  suspended  will  be  signed  and  sent  to  you  by  special 
messenger,  j*  It  will  apply  to  the  Departments  of  Ille-et-Vilaine,  Loire- 
Inferieure,  C6tes-du-Nord  and  Morbihan. 

Welcome  every  individual  who  submits,  but  allow  no  further  meet- 
ing of  leaders;  hold  no  kind  of  diplomatic  parley. 

Great  tolerance  for  the  priests:  severe  action  against  the  larger 
communes  to  force  them  to  guard  themselves  and  protect  the  smaller. 
Do  not  spare  communes  which  misbehave.  Burn  a  few  farmsteads 
and  large  villages  in  the  Morbihan  and  begin  to  make  examples.  .  . . 
Only  if  the  war  is  made  terrible  for  them  will  the  inhabitants  realize 
that  their  apathy  is  fatal  to  them  and  join  against  the  brigands.  .  .  . 

General  Hedouville  will  do  very  well  as  your  chief  of  staff  or  your 
first  lieutenant.  He  knows  the  area  and  the  people  well  but  he  has 
neither  enough  energy  nor  enough  experience  in  directing  military 
operations  to  be  able  to  command  in  chief. 

You  will  have  the  leaders  Chitillon,  d'Autichamp,  Bourmont, 
d*  Andign6,  Frotte  informed  that  if  they  accede  to  the  proclamations 
issued  by  the  Government  they  must  let  you  know  together  with  the 
pkce  they  are  retiring  to  so  that  their  persons  and  property  may  be 
respected.  They  are  required  only  to  submit  and  to  use  their  influence, 
even  without  a  public  proclamation,  to  disperse  the  bands. 

As  to  disarmament,  after  you  have  destroyed  Georges,  dispersed  a 

*  Cadoudal.  t  See  Article  92  of  the  Constitution  (No.  427  above). 

Brumalre  341 

few  bands  and  made  some  examples,  proceed  with  it  I  know  well 
that  this  operation,  though  essential,  can  only  be  carried  out  pro- 
gressively over  a  period  of  rime. . . . 

Above  all  you  must  stir  up  the  generals,  who  are  unaccustomed  to 
being  commanded  and  not  active  enough.  Do  not  let  them  stay  in 
their  towns;  the  place  of  honour  is  the  bivouac  and  the  barns.  Those 
you  think  too  old  or  unfit  for  command  you  can  send  to  Paris;  give 
command  of  the  divisions  to  active  men. .  . . 

Send  me  frequent  dispatches. 

BONAPARTE 

465 
To  Sergeant  L£on  Aune 

32nd  Demi-brigade  of  the  Line  Paris 

25  Nivfa,  Year  VHI  (15  Jan,  1800} 
To  brave  Leon, 

I  have  received  your  letter,*  my  brave  comrade;  you  had  no  need 
to  tell  me  of  your  deeds.  Since  the  death  of  the  brave  Benezette  you 
are  the  bravest  grenadier  in  the  army.  You  hold  one  of  the  hundred 
swords  which  I  distributed.  All  the  soldiers  agreed  that  you  were  a 
model  for  the  regiment.  I  should  much  like  to  see  you;  the  Minister 
of  War  will  send  you  an  order. 
I  love  you  as  my  son. 

BONAPABTE 

General  Murat  will  give  him  a  commission  as  2nd  lieutenant  in  the 
Consular  Guard  and  will  write  to  him. 

BONAPARTE 

*  Aune's  letter  read:  'Citizen  Consul,  your  arrival  on  the  territory  of  the 
Republic  has  encouraged  all  pure  spirits,  and  especially  my  own,  for  I  no  longer 
have  any  hope  but  in  you.  I  approach  you  as  my  tutelary  god  and  beg  you  to  give 
a  place  in  your  memory  to  Leon,  whom  you  so  often  honoured  on  the  field  of 
battle.  Since  I  could  not  embark  for  Egypt  to  gather  new  laurels  under  your 
command,  I  am  a  sergeant  at  our  demi-brigade  depot.  Learning  from  my  com- 
rades that  you  often  spoke  of  me  in  Egypt,  I  ask  you  not  to  desert  me,  but  to  let 
me  know  that  you  remember  me.  It  would  be  pointless  to  remind  you  of  the 
actions  where  I  showed  myself  to  be  a  republican  and  earned  the  approval  of  my 
superiors;  however,  at  the  battle  of  Montenotte  I  saved  the  life  of  General  Rampon 
and  Colonel  Masse,  as  they  themselves  informed  you;  at  the  battle  of  Dego  I  took 
a  flag  from  the  engineer  commander  of  the  enemy  army;  at  the  battle  of  Lodi  I 
was  the  first  in  the  assault  and  opened  the  gates  to  our  brothers  in  arms;  at  the 
battle  of  Borghetto  I  was  the  first  to  cross  by  pontoon,  the  bridge  being  blown;  I 
fell  upon  the  enemy  and  captured  the  commander  of  the  position;  in  hospital, 
when  I  was  taken  prisoner,  I  killed  the  enemy  commander,  and  by  that  act  of 
bravery  400  men,  prisoners  like  myself,  were  able  to  rejoin  their  units.  Moreover, 
I  have  the  scars  of  five  wounds  on  my  body.  I  dare  to  place  all  my  hope  in  you 
and  am  quite  sure  that  you  will  always  have  a  care  for  the  brave  men  who  have 
served  their  country  so  well.  I  salute  you  with  respect:  L£ON  AUNE.* 

342  The  Rise  to  Power 

466 
To  Citizen  Talleyrand 

Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs  Paris 

26Nivose,  Year  VIII  (16  Jan,  1800} 

The  note  dated  14  Nivose  from  the  Minister  of  His  Britannic 
Majesty  having  been  laid  before  the  First  Consul,  he  has  noted  with 
surprise  that  it  relies  on  an  opinion  as  to  the  origin  and  consequences 
of  the  present  war  which  is  not  at  all  correct.  Far  from  France  having 
provoked  it,  in  accordance  with  the  principles  of  the  revolution  she 
had  solemnly  declared  her  love  of  peace  and  her  respect  for  the  in- 
dependence of  all  governments;  wholly  occupied  with  her  internal 
affairs,  it  is  not  to  be  doubted  that  she  would  liave  remained  faithful 
to  her  declarations. 

But  no  sooner  had  the  French  Revolution  broken  out  than  almost 
the  whole  of  Europe  banded  together  to  destroy  it.  Internal  resistance 
was  encouraged,  opponents  were  welcomed,  plots  were  assisted,  the 
French  nation  was  outraged  in  the  person  of  its  agents;  and  in  particular 
England  set  the  example  by  dismissing  the  minister  accredited  to  her. 
French  independence,  honour  and  security  were  attacked  in  deed  long 
before  war  was  declared. 

Assailed  on  every  side,  the  Republic  had  to  strike  everywhere  in 
her  defence.  So  long  as  she  saw  her  enemies  determined  to  deny  her 
rights,  she  relied  only  on  her  powers  of  resistance;  but  as  soon  as  they 
were  forced  to  renounce  their  hopes  of  invading  her,  she  sought  for 
ways  to  agreement  and  showed  her  wish  for  peace.  If  these  have  not 
been  effective,  the  blame  must  be  laid  above  all  on  the  terrible  obstinacy 
with  which  English  resources  have  been  poured  out  to  complete  the 
ruin  of  France. 

But  if,  as  is  affirmed,  the  wishes  of  His  Britannic  Majesty  are  for 
the  re-establishment  of  peace,  why  this  attempt  to  justify  the  war  instead 
of  an  effort  to  end  it?  What  obstacle  can  prevent  an  agreement  whose 
advantage  is  mutual,  especially  when  the  First  Consul  has  personally 
given  so  many  proofs  of  his  readiness  to  put  an  end  to  the  calamities 
of  war  and  to  uphold  the  strict  observance  of  treaties? 

The  First  Consul  cannot  doubt  that  His  Britannic  Majesty  recognizes 
the  right  of  nations  to  choose  their  form  of  government,  since  it  is 
through  the  exercise  of  this  right  that  he  holds  his  crown;  but  he 
cannot  understand  how,  in  face  of  this  fundamental  principle,  the 
minister  can  make  insinuations  tending  to  meddle  in  the  internal  affairs 
of  the  Republic;  such  are  not  less  injurious  to  the  French  nation  than 
would  be  for  England  and  for  His  Majesty  an  encouragement  towards 
the  repubKcan  regime  whose  forms  England  adopted  in  the  middle  of 
the  last  century  or  an  exhortation  to  recall  to  the  throne  that  family 
which  was  placed  upon  it  by  birth  and  deposed  by  revolution. 

Erummre  343 

verywhere  the  voice  of  the  people  and  of  humanity  pleads  for  the 
of  a  war  that  has  already  brought  great  disasters.  To  arrest  the 

Eve: 
end 

course  of  these  cakmities  the  First  ^Consul  of  the  French  Republic 
proposes  to  bring  hostilities  to  an  end  forthwith  by  the  signature  of 
an  armistice  and  the  immediate  nomination  by  either  side  of  pleni- 
potentiaries who  will  proceed  to  Dunkirk  or  some  no  less  convenient 
town  and  will  work  without  deky  for  the  re-estabHshment  of  peace 
and  friendship  between  the  French  Republic  and  England. 

To  this  end  the  First  Consul  offers  to  issue  the  necessary  passports. 

BONAPARTE 

467 
To  Citizen  Lucien  Bonaparte 

Minister  of  the  Interior  Paris 

28Niv6se,  Year  VIII  (18  Jan,  1800} 

I  -wish  you  to  send  me  at  10  p.m.  each  day,  Citizen  Minister,  a  bulletin 
containing  an  analysis  of  your  correspondence  with  the  central  adminis- 
trations [of  departments],  commissioners  and  other  agents  of  the 
Government. 

For  this  purpose  you  will  have  returns  printed  in  three  columns. 
In  the  first  will  appear  the  names  of  all  the  departments  and  of  the 
central  commissioners;  in  the  second,  observations  resulting  from  the 
correspondence  relating  to  supplies  and  the  collection  of  taxes;  in  the 
third,  observations  rekting  to  the  police  and  to  disputes  that  have 
arisen  between  different  authorities. 

You  will  send  to  me  on  Primidi,  Citizen  Minister,  a  draft  of  the 
return  for  which  I  ask. 

BONAPARTE 

468 
To  Citizen  Forf ait 

Minister  of  Marine  and  Colonies  Paris 

28Nivfoe,  Year  VIII  (18  Jan,  1800} 

Please,  Citizen  Minister,  authorize  Rear-Admiral  Latouche,  com- 
manding the  squadron  at  Brest,  to  leave  with  a  light  squadron  of  three 
or  four  vessels  and  fall  upon  the  74-gun  ship  and  the  three  frigates 
which  have  long  been  anchored  in  the  roads  of  Quiberon  to  support 
the  chouans. 

You  will  also  authorize  Commodore  Bedout  to  leave  Lorient  with 
his  division  to  attack  the  enemy  force  in  the  roads  of  Quiberon  when- 
ever he  can  do  so  effectively.  These  two  orders  will  be  sent  tomorrow 
by  telegraph.* 

BONAPABTE 

*  Chappe's  semaphore  system  which  achieved  very  high  speeds  of  trans- 
mission. 

344  The  Rise  to  Power 

469 
To  the  Seven  Ministers 

Paris 

29  Nivose,  Year  VIII  (ipjan,  1800) 

The  First  Consul  requires  me,  Citizen  Minister,  to  invite  you  to 
attend  in  his  office  on  3  Pluviose  next  at  9.0  p.m.  Your  colleagues  are 
receiving  the  same  invitation.  The  object  of  this  conference  is  to  draft 
a  regulation  fixing  definitively  the  functions  of  each  ministry. 

By  order  of  the  First  Consul 
The  Secretary  of  State 
HUGUES  B.  MARET 

470 
To  Citizen  Talleyrand 

Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs  Paris 

i  Pluviose,  Year  VIII  (21  Jan,  1800) 
Please  send  me  a  report  on  the  following  questions,  Citizen  Minister. 

1.  What  advantage  can  we  gain  from  Prussia  in  order  to  hasten  a 
general  continental  peace  or  a  partial  peace  with  one  of  the  belligerent 
powers? 

2.  What  attention  could  we  pay  her  so  as  to  engage  her  more  and 
more  on  our  side;  and 

3.  To  decide  her  to  put  herself  at  the  head  of  the  Northern  League, 
which  would  put  a  curb  on  the  unreasonable  ambition  of  Russia. 

BONAPARTE 

47i 
To  Citizen  Gaudin 

Minister  of  Finance  Paris 

17  Pluviose,  Year  VIII  (6  Feb,  1800} 

Citizen  Minister,  the  First  Consul  having  received  a  letter  written 
in  the  name  of  the  traders  of  Paris,  he  invites  you  to  introduce  to 
him  this  evening  at  ten  o'clock  twelve  merchants  belonging  to  the 
twelve  principal  firms  and  who  can  be  considered  truly  to  represent 
the  commerce  of  the  capital. 

By  order  of  the  First  Consul 

472. 
To  General  Brune 

C.-m-C,  Army  of  the  West  Paris 

17  Pluviose,  Year  VIII  (6  Feb,  1800} 

The  merchants  of  Nantes,  Citizen  General,  must  imitate  those  of 
Paris,  Lyons  and  Marseilles.  They  can  advance  you  400,000  or  500,000 
francs,  which  will  enable  you  to  pay  the  troops  under  your  command 
and  provide  for  your  most  pressing  needs.  I  am  writing  to  the  Minister 

Brumaire  345 

of  Finance  to  authorize  someone  at  Nantes  to  represent  him  and  make 
the  necessary  arrangements  for  the  repayment  of  this  sum.  In  the 
meantime  whatever  you  agree  to,  provided  it  is  in  no  way  onerous, 
will  be  exactly  fulfilled. 

BONAPARTE 

473 
Order  of  the  Day 

Consular  Guard  and  all  Armies  of  the  Republic  Paris 

18  Pluviose,  Year  VIII  (7  Feb,  1800) 

Washington  is  dead.  This  great  man  fought  against  tyranny.  He 
established  the  freedom  of  his  country.  His  memory  will  ever  be  dear 
to  the  French  people,  as  to  all  free  men  of  the  two  worlds,  and  especially 
to  the  soldiers  of  France  who,  like  him  and  like  the  soldiers  of  America, 
fight  for  equality  and  liberty. 

The  First  Consul  orders  that  for  a  period  of  ten  days  all  flags  and 
colours  of  the  Republic  will  be  draped  in  bkck. 

BONAPARTE 

474 
Decree 

Paris 

ip  PluviSse,  Year  VIII  (8  Feb,  1800} 
The  Consuls  of  the  Republic  decree: 

1.  A  library  of  20,000  volumes  will  be  formed  at  the  Hotel  des 
Invalides  for  die  use  of  soldiers  residing  there. 

2.  These  books  will  be  drawn  from  stocks  of  books  belonging  to  the 
Republic. 

3.  The  Minister  of  War  and  of  the  Interior  will  consult  and  arrange 
for  the  execution  of  this  decree. 

BONAPARTE 

475 
To  Citizen  Abrial 

Minister  of  Justice  Paris 

22  Pluviose,  Year  VIII  (n  Feb,  1800) 

I  am  informed,  Citizen  Minister,  that,  despite  the  orders  that  should 
have  been  issued  by  the  Minister  of  Police  and  the  supervision  of  the 
army,  corn  from  the  Department  of  the  Ruhr  and  those  adjoining  it  is 
reaching  the  right  bank  of  the  Rhine.  The  customs  administration  and 
even  the  constituted  authorities  of  these  departments  appear  to  be 
involved  in  the  offence  and  a  number  of  the  latter,  though  accused  and 
convicted  of  having  committed  it,  have  not  yet  been  dismissed  by  the 
Department.  Remedy  this  state  of  affairs  promptly. 

BONAPARTE 

346  The  Rise  to  Power 

476 
To  Major- General  Berthier 

Minister  of  War  Paris 

22  Pluviose,  Year  VIII  (n  Feb,  1800} 

I  am  reliably  informed,  Citizen  Minister,  that  the  chests  sent  to  the 
various  armies  by  the  general  hospital  administration  in  Paris  contain 
defective  instruments  and  saws  which  lacerate  soldiers  who  have  to 
have  operations.  I  invite  you  to  put  an  end  to  this  abuse  without  delay 
and  to  punish  those  responsible. 

BONAPARTE 

477 
Minute 

Paris 

22  Pluviose,  Year  VIII  (11  Feb,  1800} 

[Request  for  employment  in  the  military  arsenals  by  Citizen  Robert, 
ex-gunner  in  the  4th  Artillery  Regiment*] 
Referred  to  General  Aboville,  who  will  place  this  brave  man. 

BONAPARTE 

478 
Minute 

Paris 

22  Pluviose,  Year  VIII  (11  Feb,  1800} 

[Report  from  the  Minister  of  War  on  the  arrest  of  General  Don.] 
The  decision  of  General  Brune  is  in  conformity  with  the  laws  of  war. 

General  Don  cannot  be  considered  either  a  prisoner  of  war  or  an 
intermediary.  Repeat  the  order  that  he  is  not  to  be  allowed  to  escape. 

BONAPARTE 

479 
Minute 

Paris 

23  Pluviose,  Year  VIII  (12  Feb,  1800) 
[Proposal  by  the  Minister  of  War  to  exempt  the  department  of  the  Lltnan 

from  the  requisition  of  horses,  as  it  was  but  recently  reunited  with  France.] 
Refused.  There  cannot  be  two  kinds  of  French  citizen. 

BONAPARTE 

480 
To  General  Etedouville 

Chief  of  Staff,  Army  of  the  West  Paris 

24  PluviSse,  Year  VIII  (13  Feb,  1800} 
Since  you  are  nearer  to  Paris  than  the  commander-in-chief,  Citizen 

*  la  which  Bonaparte  had  once  served. 

Brumaire  347 

General,  I  am  taking  the  step  of  sending  my  orders  directly  to  you. 

Bourmont  is  fooling  us;  he  has  surrendered  neither  his  guns  nor  his 
arms.  Give  orders  to  die  generals  commanding  at  Le  Mans  and  Laval 
to  combine  their  forces  and  proceed  against  this  rebel.  General  Brune 
will  be  sending  you  2,000  men  from  Nantes.  General  Gardanne  has 
orders  to  send  a  column  of  1,500  men  to  Laval;  it  will  be  under  your 
orders.  Let  Bourmont  know  that  he  must  surrender  his  guns  within 
twenty-four  hours  of  receiving  your  summons  to  do  so,  and  3,000 
muskets  three  days  later.  If  the  response  is  negative,  put  yourself  at 
the  head  of  your  troops  and  do  not  rest  until  you  have  destroyed  him. 

Frotte  has  asked  to  submit;  my  sole  reply  has  been  that  it  must  be 
unconditionally.  Brune  will  pursue  Georges  vigorously.  Thus  the  war 
will  be  pressed  ahead  in  the  Morbihan,  against  Bourmont  and  against 
Frotte.  It  is  essential  that  these  three  theatres  of  civil  war  should  be 
suppressed  simultaneously  during  the  first  decade  of  Ventose;  that  is 
the  only  way  to  consolidate  the  pacification  of  these  departments.  The 
English  are  counting  on  Bourmont,  Frotte  and  Georges,  and  our 
enemies  are  looking  to  this  chouan  war  as  a  diversion  at  the  opening  of 
the  coming  campaign. 

BONAPARTE 

481 
To  Admiral  M azarredo 

Spanish  Ambassador  to  France  Paris 

27Pluvi6se,  Year  VIII  (16  Feb,  iSoo) 

The  First  Consul  has  read  the  letter  you  transmitted  to  him  with  the 
greatest  attention  and  interest.  Citizen  Alquier*  has  been  instructed 
to  express  to  His  Catholic  Majesty  and  to  M.  d'Urquijo  the  sentiments 
of  esteem  which  the  First  Consul  has  towards  His  Majesty  and  the 
Cabinet  of  Madrid. 

On  reaching  the  first  magistracy  the  First  Consul  saw  with  some 
displeasure  the  relationships  which  the  Spanish  Minister  entertained 
with  certain  individuals  in  Paris. 

If  the  First  Consul  has  not  informed  His  Catholic  Majesty  of  the 
request  made  to  the  King  of  England,  that  is  because  this  was  only  a 
first  approach  with  no  conditions  suggested  and  because  His  Catholic 
Majesty  had  several  times  expressed  a  desire  for  the  opening  of 
negotiations. 

But  as  soon  as  there  might  be  any  question  of  conditions,  even  as  to 
preliminaries,  the  First  Consul  would  make  it  his  duty  to  do  nothing 
except  in  concert  with  His  Catholic  Majesty  and  for  the  common 
interest  of  the  two  nations. 

*  French  Ambassador  to  Spain. 

348  The  Rise  to  Power 

The  First  Consul  instructs  me  to  let  you  know,  Admiral,  how 
grateful  he  is  for  the  special  care  you  have  taken  to  procure  two  brigs 
for  Egypt,  to  which  he  still  attaches  great  importance. 

The  submission  of  the  West,  the  departure  of  the  Russians,  the  return 
of  the  Ottoman  Porte  to  its  true  interests  and  the  improvement  in  the 
finances  of  the  Republic  will  place  the  First  Consul  in  a  position  to 
propose  to  His  Majesty  a  plan  worthy  of  the  two  great  nations  which 
must  contribute  to  its  success. 

By  order  of  the  First  Consul 

482 
To  Citizen  Talleyrand 

Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs  Paris 

27  Pluviose,  Year  VIII  (16  Feb,  1800) 

Please,  Citizen  Minister,  collect  the  various  Irish  in  Paris  who  claim 
to  represent  the  interests  of  the  insurgents,  ask  them  for  notes  on  the 
present  situation  in  Ireland  and  hint  to  them  that  now  that  the  western 
departments  are  pacified,  the  Government  might  decide  to  liberate 
Ireland, 

BONAPARTE 

483 
To  General  Moreau 

C.-w-C,  Army  of  the  Rhine  Paris 

27Pluviose,  Year  VIII  (16  Feb,  1800) 

A  great  many  people  tell  me  that  some  of  the  individuals  composing 
the  Swiss  Government  favour  the  Austrians.  In  fact  I  am  informed  that 
for  a  fortnight  they  have  been  considering  projects  for  a  separate  peace 
dignified  with  the  name  neutrality.  This  idea  is  absurd,  if  not  criminal; 
today  there  can  be  no  middle  way  between  a  free  and  independent 
Switzerland  aiding  us  in  the  war  so  as  to  achieve  peace  and  a  Switzer- 
land slave  to  the  Austrian  princes,  its  former  masters. 

Impress  on  the  Government,  in  daily  conversations,  the  irresponsi- 
bility and  danger  to  them  of  allowing  such  fancies  to  circulate. 

BONAPARTE 

484 
Minute 

Paris 

2$  PluviSse,  Year  VIII  (18  Feb9  1800) 
{Citizen  Char  Berthier*  requests  the  rank  of  brigadier-general] 
At  the  first  battle. 

BONAPARTE 
*  Younger  brother  of  the  Minister  of  War. 

Brumaire  349 

485 
To  Citizen  Gaudin 

Minister  of  Finance  Paris 

i  Ventose,  Year  VIII  (20  Feb,  1800) 

The  Consular  Guard  has  been  without  pay  for  a  month,  Citizen 
Minister.  You  will  appreciate  that  this  is  unsatisfactory. 

BONAPARTE 

486 
To  Admiral  Bruix 

C.-w-C,  the  Fleet,  at  Brest  Paris 

3  Ventose,  Year  VIII  (22  Feb,  1800} 

Admiral  Bruix  will  put  to  sea  as  soon  as  possible  with  seventeen  or 
eighteen  French  ships  of  the  line,  six  frigates  and  the  Spanish  squadron. 

He  will  pursue  the  English  squadron  blockading  Brest,  which  is 
believed  to  be  inferior  in  numbers. 

He  will  then  proceed  straight  to  Malta,  where  he  will  break  the 
blockade.  He  will  have  Gtnereux,  Guillaume-Tell,  Athenien  and  the 
frigates  Carthaginoise,  Diane  and  Justice  join  him  together  with  any 
other  ships  in  that  port  which  are  of  no  use  for  the  defence  of  Malta. 
He  will  land  in  Malta  all  kinds  of  provisions  which  his  squadron  can  do 
without  and  the  6,000  quintals  of  flour  and  100,000  pints  of  brandy 
which  Commissioner  Najac  is  under  orders  to  embark  at  Brest. 

After  that  he  will  return  with  the  two  squadrons  to  Toulon.  The 
ships  which  are  at  Ferrol  and  Cadiz  will  also  go  there,  and  the  fleet, 
which  will  then  contain  forty-two  or  forty-three  ships  of  the  line, 
will  undertake  the  expedition  against  Mahon. 

On  leaving  Malta  Admiral  Bruix  will  send  a  light  squadron  of  the 
fastest  ships  to  Egypt  carrying  troops  and  the  munitions  of  all  kinds 
which  the  squadron  has  on  board  for  that  magnificent  army.  He  will 
send  a  more  or  less  powerful  squadron  in  accordance  with  the  course 
of  events  and  his  information  about  the  enemy. 

If,  when  the  level  of  Cadiz  is  reached,  the  Spanish  squadron 
absolutely  insists  on  entering  port,  Admiral  Bruix  will  not  delay  his 
voyage  but  will  proceed  to  Malta  with  the  French  squadron  alone, 
after  having  made  all  possible  requests,  promises  and  protests  to 
persuade  the  Spanish  admiral  to  follow  him. 

Orders  have  been  given  for  all  preparations  to  be  made  at  Toulon 
to  re-provision  the  squadron. 

BONAPARTE 

The  First  Consul  does  not  enter  into  details  as  to  the  steps  Admiral 
Bruix  should  take  to  surprise  the  English  forces  blockading  Cadiz  and 
Malta  and  the  ships  cruising  in  the  seas  off  Leghorn  and  Naples.  He 
relies  on  his  talents  and  his  zeal  for  the  glory  of  the  Navy. .  .  . 

350  The  Rise  to  Power 

487 
To  Admiral  de  Gravina 

C.-w-C,  Spanish  Squadron,  at  Brest  Paris 

3  Ventose,  Year  VIII  (22  Feb,  1800) 

Sir,  it  is  my  strong  desire  that  the  two  squadrons,  commanded  by 
distinguished  officers  and  composed  of  the  finest  ships,  should  cease 
to  be  blockaded  by  a  numerically  far  inferior  force. 

I  am  giving  orders  to  Admiral  Bruix  to  put  to  sea  with  the  united 
squadrons.  I  count  on  the  known  talents,  the  love  of  glory  and  the 
courage  so  natural  to  the  Spanish  nation  and  I  am  giving  instructions 
to  Admiral  Bruix  in  accordance  with  events  and  circumstances.  I 
greatly  hope  they  may  be  such  as  to  enable  you  to  fulfil  the  intentions 
of  His  Catholic  Majesty  and  my  own  and  to  realize  the  desire  His 
Majesty  has  often  shown  to  see  Malta  and  Mahon  seized  from  our 
mortal  enemies. 

Know,  Sir,  the  most  particular  esteem  in  which  I  hold  you. 

BONAPARTE 

488 
To  Citizen  Talleyrand 

Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs  Paris 

4  Ventose,  Year  VIII  (23  M  1800) 

The  First  Consul  requires  me  to  ask  you  for  a  note  setting  out  the 
principal  facts  which  prove  the  violation  of  international  law  by  the 
English,  the  occasions  when  these  have  occurred,  and  their  immoral 
conduct  towards  other  Powers,  notably  during  the  course  of  the 
present  war. 
He  invites  you  to  have  this  note  prepared  as  soon  as  possible. 

By  order  of  the  First  Consul 

489 
To  General  Brune 

C.-w-C.,  Army  of  the  West  Paris 

6  VentSse,  Year  VIII  (25  Feb,  1800) 

I  learn  by  way  of  London,  Citizen  General,  that  the  English  are 
embarking  their  troops  at  Jersey  and  Guernsey.  Is  it  for  Ireland?  Is  it 
to  land  their  forces  in  Hnisterre?  Is  it  to  seize  Cherbourg  and  the 
former  Cotentin  peninsula?  That  cannot  be  foreseen,  for  prudence  and 
good  sense  would  not  suggest  any  of  these  operations  to  them. 

If  General  Dulauloy  is  at  your  headquarters,  order  him  at  once  to 
visit  the  fort  of  Pentbievre;  the  Minister  of  War  should  have  given 
orders  for  it  to  be  put  into  an  immediate  state  of  defence.  He  should 
also  have  issued  the  necessary  funds  for  this  purpose. 

Brumaire  351 

I  saw  with  satisfaction  that  you  were  undertaking  the  provisioning 
of  Belle-fle.  You  should  now  be  thinking  of  hastening  disarmament; 
make  sure  of  the  leaders,  and  see  that  as  many  conscripts  and  deserters 
as  possible  rejoin. 

I  am  not  yet  intending  to  go  to  the  Army  of  the  Rhine;  when  I 
do,  you  can  rest  assured  I  shall  keep  a  place  for  you  there. 

It  is  now  quite  certain  that  the  Russians,  as  well  as  Suvurov,  are  on 
the  road  for  their  own  country  and  have  already  reached  Poland. 

BONAPARTE 

490 
To  Baron  Thugut 

Chancellor  of  the  Holy  Roman  Empire  Paris 

8  Ventose,  Year  VIII  (27  Feb,  1800} 

I  have  laid  before  the  First  Consul  Your  Excellency's  letter  dated 
5  Pluviose.  The  position  which  it  adopts  has  determined  the  First 
Consul  to  enter  into  a  further  explanation  of  his  views. 

The  First  Consul  has  always  regarded  the  Treaty  of  Campo  Formio 
as  capable  of  reconciling  the  interests  of  the  two  powers;  for,  at  the 
time  when  it  was  concluded,  the  First  Consul,  who  exercised  a  direct 
influence  on  his  Government  as  to  the  terms  of  the  treaty,  attached 
more  importance  to  reaching  a  just  peace  than  to  profiting  from  the 
larger  gains  offered  by  the  military  events  which  had  placed  Italy  and 
part  of  Germany  in  his  power.  Today,  having  received  from  the  French 
nation  the  right  and  the  means  to  use  all  its  forces,  he  remains  guided 
by  the  same  principles;  he  still  wishes  to  work  only  for  an  honourable 
peace  which  will  not  undermine  the  balance  of  Europe. 

I  am  therefore  instructed  by  the  First  Consul  to  propose:  i.  that  the 
Treaty  of  Campo  Formio  be  taken  as  the  basis  of  negotiation  between 
the  French  Republic  and  Austria;  2.  that  H.M.  the  Emperor  and  King 
should  obtain  in  Italy  the  equivalent  of  the  indemnity  in  Germany 
promised  to  him  by  the  Treaty  of  Campo  Formio  and  that  the  sub- 
sequent compensations  that  may  be  sought  by  H.M.  the  Emperor 
should  also  be  found  in  Italy  but  in  such  manner  as  not  to  damage  the 
stability  of  the  peace  or  the  political  equilibrium  of  Europe;  3.  that 
there  should  be  set  up  for  the  small  States  of  Europe  a  system  of 
guarantee  capable  of  maintaining  the  full  power  of  international  law 
an  which  the  security  and  happiness  of  nations  essentially  rests. 

If  these  principles  are  agreeable  to  His  Imperial  Majesty,  it  will 
remain  for  him  to  make  known  in  what  manner  he  wishes  the  negotia- 
tions to  be  conducted,  and  no  doubt  he  will  be  inclined  to  choose  the 
means  most  apt  to  lead  to  a  speedy  conclusion.  Perhaps  the  best  way 
:>f  ending  all  conflict  between  the  two  states  would  be  simply  to  put 
the  Treaty  of  Campo  Formio  into  force  again,  while  determining 

352  The  Rise  to  Power 

by  an  additional  treaty  the  modifications  to  be  made  to  it.  In  any 
case,  Your  Excellency  will  judge  whether  it  will  not  be  necessary  first 
to  agree  an  armistice  between  the  respective  armies,  for  it  is  only  by 
arresting  the  course  of  hostilities  that  the  hazards  of  a  new  campaign, 
which  may  further  complicate  the  question  of  peace,  can  be  avoided. 
In  informing  you  of  these  proposals  of  the  First  Consul,  Baron,  and 
requesting  you  to  bring  them  to  the  knowledge  of  His  Imperial 
Majesty,  it  remains  for  me  to  tell  you  that  the  First  Consul  has  seen 
with  pleasure  the  assurance  of  your  personal  eagerness  for  the  re- 
establishment  of  peace,  and  that  I  shall  consider  myself  happy  to  be 
able  to  work  with  you  to  that  end. 

By  order  of  the  First  Consul 
The  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs 
CH.  M.  TALLEYRAND 

491 

To  General  Brune 

C.-m-C,  Army  of  the  West  Paris 

14  VentSse,  Year  VIII  (5  Mar,  1800) 

I  have  your  letter  of  n  Ventose,  Citizen  General.  .  .  . 

I  saw  Georges  this  morning;  he  struck  me  as  a  big  Breton  whom 
we  can  perhaps  turn  to  account  in  the  interest  of  the  country.  . .  . 

I  have  also  seen  Chatillon,  who  dined  with  me  today;  I  was  very 
pleased  with  him,  but  I  think  it  is  still  the  best  course  to  disarm  as 
many  as  possible.  I  will  attend  to  your  request  for  General  Houdetot; 
he  will  be  placed  as  he  wishes. 

Here  everything  goes  from  good  to  better.  The  Prefects  are  going 
to  their  posts,  and  I  hope  that  in  a  month  France  will  at  last  be  an 
organized  State. 

Shall  we  have  peace  or  war?  That  is  still  very  uncertain.  However, 
the  Emperor  is  treating  with  us  with  the  greatest  politeness;  forms  are 
as  much  in  his  favour  as  they  were  against  our  friend  Georges.  .  .  . 

BONAPARTE 

492 
Proclamation  to  the  French  Nation 

Paris 

17  Ventose,  Year  VIII  (8  Mar,  1800) 

Frenchmen,  you  long  for  peace.  Your  Government  desires  it  yet 
more  ardently.  Its  first  wishes,  its  constant  efforts  have  been  to  secure 
it.  The  English  Ministry  has  betrayed  the  secret  of  its  horrible  policy. 
To  rend  France,  to  destroy  its  navy  and  its  ports;  to  wipe  it  from  the 
map  of  Europe  or  reduce  it  to  the  rank  of  the  secondary  powers;  to 
hold  all  the  nations  of  the  continent  divided  so  as  to  seize  their 

Erumaire  353 

commerce  and  enrich  itself  by  plundering  them:  it  is  to  achieve  this 
frightful  success  that  England  is  pouring  out  gold,  proliferating 
promises  and  multiplying  intrigues. 

But  neither  the  gold,  nor  the  promises  nor  the  intrigues  of  England 
will  sway  the  continental  powers  to  her  view.  They  have  heard  the 
word  of  France;  they  know  the  moderate  principles  which  guide  it; 
they  will  listen  to  the  voice  of  humanity  and  the  powerful  voice  of 
their  own  interest.  If  they  waver,  the  Government,  which  has  not  been 
afraid  to  offer  and  to  ask  for  peace,  will  remember  that  it  is  for  you 
to  command  it. 

In  order  to  command  it  there  must  be  money,  iron  and  soldiers. 
Let  all  make  haste  to  pay  the  tribute  they  owe  to  the  common  defence. 
Let  the  young  citizens  arise.  It  is  no  longer  for  the  sake  of  factions  or 
to  choose  between  tyrants  that  they  will  be  arming;  it  is  to  guarantee 
what  they  hold  most  dear,  it  is  for  the  honour  of  France,  for  the  sacred 
interests  of  humanity. 

Already  the  armies  have  regained  the  spirit  that  spells  victory;  do  not 
doubt,  Frenchmen,  that  at  the  sight  of  them,  at  the  sight  of  the  whole 
nation  reunited  in  the  same  interests  and  purposes,  you  will  have  no 
further  enemies  on  the  continent.  And  if  some  power  still  wishes  to 
try  the  hazard  of  war,  the  First  Consul  will  conquer  it  at  the  head  of 
the  warriors  he  has  more  than  once  led  to  victory.  With  them  he  will 
again  seek  those  fields  full  of  the  memory  of  their  exploits.  But  in  the 
midst  of  battles  he  will  call  for  peace,  and  he  swears  to  fight  only  for 
the  happiness  of  France  and  the  peace  of  the  world. 

BONAPARTE 

493 
To  Citizen  Joseph  Bonaparte 

Paris 

17  Ventose,  Year  VIII  (8  Mar,  1800} 

M.  de  Stael  is  in  the  greatest  poverty  and  his  wife  is  giving  dinners 
and  balls.  If  you  are  still  seeing  her,  would  it  not  be  a  good  idea  to 
persuade  this  woman  to  make  her  husband  an  allowance  of  1,000  or 
2,000  francs  a  month?  Or  have  we  already  reached  the  stage  where 
not  only  morals  but  even  more  sacred  duties  than  those  between 
fathers  and  children  can  be  trodden  under  foot  without  honourable 
people  thinking  it  wrong?  By  all  means  let  us  judge  Mme  de  Stael's 
morals  as  though  she  were  a  man;  but  a  man  who  inherited  the 
fortune  of  M.  de  Necker,  who  had  long  enjoyed  the  privileges  of 
a  distinguished  name,  and  yet  who  left  his  wife  in  misery  while  he 
lived  in  abundance,  would  that  be  a  man  with  whom  one  could  keep 
company? 

BONAPARTE 

354  The  Rise  to  Power 

494 
To  Citizen  Talleyrand 

Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs  Paris 

19  Ventose,  Year  VIII  (10  Mar,  1800} 

Citizen  Minister,  you  will  inform  citizen  Otto,  commissioner  of  the 
Government  at  London,  that  the  Government  will  agree  to  the 
exchange  of  General  Don  for  Napper  Tandy  and  his  companions  and 
that,  if  this  does  not  suit  the  English  Government,  the  French  Govern- 
ment will  agree  to  exchange  Generals  Hermann,  Don  and  Mack  against 
Generals  Colli,  Perignon  and  Grouchy.  In  a  separate  note,  five  days 
after  the  first,  Citizen  Otto  will  point  out  how  unworthy  of  the 
English  nation  is  the  threat  to  treat  the  French  prisoners  in  England 
more  harshly.  Is  it  possible  that  the  nation  of  Newton  and  Locke  can 
so  far  forget  itself?  Prisoners,  indeed,  neither  can  nor  should  be  held 
responsible  for  the  conduct  of  their  government.  They  depend  entirely 
on  the  generosity  of  the  capturing  power.  These  being  the  principles 
of  the  French  Government,  it  will  never  copy  the  hateful  practice  of 
reprisals. 

BONAPARTE 

495 
To  Citizen  Lacu6e 

Councillor  of  State  Paris 

21  Ventose,  Year  VIII  (i2Mar>  1800) 

I  beg  Citizen  Lacuee  to  consider  carefully  the  law  on  the  gendarmerie 

of  28  Germinal,  Year  VI,  and  the  regulation  of  the  Directory  which 

followed  that  law  and  to  propose  to  me  a  draft  regulation  to  replace  it. 

Citizen  Lacuee  will  find  attached  a  few  observations  which  struck 

me  in  perusing  the  law  of  28  Germinal. 

BONAPARTE 

1.  Article  149  forbids  the  civil  and  military  authorities  to  use  the 
gendarmerie  to  carry  their  dispatches;  but  it  is  to  the  non-observance 
of  this  law  that  the  inactivity  of  the  gendarmerie  is  largely  due. 

2.  See  Chapter  HI;  it  seems  to  me  that  a  commandant  ot  gendarmerie 
has  no  right  to  combine  several  sections  without  authorization.  This 
clause  must  be  revised.  Gendarmerie  officers  must  have  the  power  to 
combine  sections  to  escort  mail  coaches  and  patrol  roads  and  woods .  .  . 

3.  Under  the  Minister  of  Police  there  will  be  a  departmental  chief 
of  gendarmerie  who,  if  necessary,  can  have  the  rank  of  adjutant-general 
or  brigadier-general  and  who  will  be  responsible  for  corresponding 
with  all  heads  of  divisions  and  for  drawing  up  every  five  days  a 
summary  of  this  correspondence  and  of  the  bulletins  and  reports.  .  .  . 

6.  Establish  foot  instead  of  mounted  gendarmerie  in  mountainous 
country. .  .  . 

Brumaire  355 

496 
To  Citizen  Forfait 

Minister  of  Marine  and  Colonies  Paris 

22  Ventose,  Year  VIII  (13  Mar,  1800) 
Why,  Citizen  Minister,  are  the  English  prisoners  being  given  a 

pound  of  beef,  while  the  soldiers'  ration  is  only  half  a  pound? 

BONAPARTE 

497 
Decree 

Paris 

23  Ventose,  Year  VIII  (14  Mar,  1800} 
The  Consuls  of  the  Republic,  considering  that  prisoners  of  war  are 

entrusted  to  the  care  and  humanity  of  the  nations  into  whose  power 
the  fortune  of  battle  has  pkced  them,  decree: 

ARTICLE  i.  The  Ministers  of  War  and  of  Marine  will  use  all  means 
in  their  power  to  provide  food  and  clothing  for  the  Russian,  Austrian 
and  English  prisoners.  They  will  ensure  that  they  are  treated  with 
every  consideration  compatible  with  public  safety. 

ART.  2.  They  will  also  take  all  necessary  measures  to  speed  up  the 
exchange  of  prisoners. 

BONAPARTE 

498 
To  Colonel  Louis  Bonaparte 

O.C.,  sth  Dragoons  Paris 

29  Ventose,  Year  VIII  (20  Mar,  1800) 

You  will  hand  over  command  of  your  regiment  to  the  senior  major 
and  will  leave  during  the  night  for  Brest  by  way  of  Rennes.  You  will 
hand  the  attached  letter  to  General  Brune,  and,  at  Brest,  the  attached 
letters  to  Admirals  Bruix  and  Gauteaume  and  to  Commissioner  Najac. 

You  will  visit  all  the  ships  still  in  the  dockyards  of  Brest  and  all  the 
forts. 

From  there  you  will  proceed  to  Lorient  where  you  will  visit  all  the 
ships  in  the  dockyard  and  port  and  you  will  return  through  Nantes. 

BONAP   RTE 

499 
To  Admiral  Bruix 

C.-m-C,  the  Fleet,  at  Brest  Paris 

29  Ventose,  Year  VIII  (20  Mar,  1800) 

Citizen  Admiral,  the  Minister  of  Marine  has  just  told  me  that  he  has 
received  the  telegraphed  news  that  forty-five  English  ships  are 
blockading  you. 

356  The  Rise  to  Power 

The  bad  weather  which  will  necessarily  appear  at  the  equinox  will 
force  this  squadron  to  relax  and  may  disperse  part  of  it;  taking  advant- 
age of  these  circumstances  to  set  sail,  you  will  then  be  die  more  certain 
that  a  superior  fleet  cannot  follow  you . . . 

Try  to  bring  your  squadron  up  to  twenty  and  more  ships. 

I  imagine  that  on  I  Germinal  I  shall  receive  by  special  dispatch  the 
details  of  your  position  and  that  of  the  English  squadron.  I  will  reply 
within  the  hour. 

A  short  time  ago  I  wrote  to  Commissioner  Najac  to  fit  out  ten  or 
twelve  of  the  ships  still  in  the  basin  at  Brest.  It  appears  that  biscuit  in 
particular  is  lacking.  Would  it  not  be  possible  to  equip  a  division  of 
five,  six  or  as  many  ships  as  possible  with  provisions  for  only  four  or 
six  decades?  This  division  could  accompany  you  when  you  leave  on  a 
favourable  wind  and  afterwards  put  into  Rochefort  or  Lorient. 

BONAPARTE 

500 
To  General  Brune 

C.-m-C.,  Army  of  the  West  Paris 

29  Ventose,  Year  VIII  (20  Mar,  1800) 

I  have  just  learnt,  Citizen  General,  that  forty-five  warships  are 
blockading  Brest. 

I  wrote  to  you  this  morning  to  send  to  Brest  the  1,800  naval  ratings 
who  are  at  Nantes. 

Countermand  the  order  to  the  800  ratings  who  have  left  Saint-Malo 
for  Cherbourg  and  direct  them  to  Brest. 

Try  to  procure  500,000  francs  from  tax  receipts  for  Commissioner 
Najac. 

Have  sent  to  Brest  all  the  corn  and  flour  that  is  at  Nantes  or  that  you 
can  procure  there,  so  as  to  hasten  the  fitting  out  of  the  twelve  ships 
in  the  port. 

BONAPARTE 

501 
To  the  Conservative  Senate 

Paris 
3  Germinal,  Year  VIII  (24  Mar,  1800) 

Senators,  the  national  budget,  as  established  by  the  new  constitution, 
covers  the  same  operations  as  that  organized  in  1791. 

If  changes  are  necessary,  it  is  above  all  in  the  regulation  of  receipts, 
in  the  distribution  of  expenditure  and  in  the  strict  rules  which  ought 
to  control  them  and  ensure  economy  and  sound  finance. 

The  Government  is  fully  occupied  with  these  important  matters; 
but  the  work  covers  a  multitude  of  interests  and  if  it  is  to  have  successful 
results  it  must  be  prepared  with  prolonged  care. 

Brumaire  357 

The  Consuls  therefore  invite  you  to  proceed  to  the  nomination  of 
seven  members  to  form  the  Committee  of  National  Accounts. 

BONAPARTE 

502 
To  the  Conservative  Senate 

Paris 

7  Germinal  Year  VIII  (28  Mar,  1800) 

Senators,  in  conformity  with  Article  16  of  the  Constitution,  the 
First  Consul  proposes  Major-General  Lefebvre  as  candidate  for  the 
vacant  place  in  the  Senate. 

Major-General  Lefebvre  was  ever  in  the  front  line  during  the  war  of 
liberty.  He  commanded  in  Paris  on  18  Brumaire.  He  has  shown  as 
much  wisdom  and  attachment  to  the  sacred  principles  of  liberty, 
equality  and  the  representative  system  as  he  showed  courage  and 
military  ability  at  Fleurus,  at  the  crossing  of  the  Rhine,  at  Wetzlar. 
Several  times  wounded  in  former  campaigns,  he  was  so  gravely  so 
in  the  last  campaign  that  he  -can  no  longer  take  the  field  in  a  manner 
worthy  of  himself. 

BONAPARTE 

503 
To  General  Brune 

C.-m-C.,  Army  of  the  West  paris 

7  Germinal,  Year  VIII  (28  Mar,  1800} 

I  have  received  your  letters  of  4  Germinal,  Citizen  General.  You 
have  taken  sound  steps  to  procure  the  500,000  francs  at  Brest;  but  you 
have  included  the  departments  of  the  I4th  Military  District  which  are 
not  within  your  command. 

Please  send  me  a  detailed  return  of  the  different  demi-brigades  and 
the  general  and  senior  officers  remaining  in  the  Army  of  the  West, 
so  that  necessary  changes  can  be  made.  You  know  that  before  18 
Brumaire  the  chouans  boasted  of  having  agents  in  the  army.  It  will 
be  as  well  to  take  steps  to  remove  from  the  West  all  units  and  indivi- 
duals who  have  been  there  more  than  three  years.  But  exceptions  can 
be  made  for  individuals  whose  patriotism  and  morality  are  well 
known.  .  . . 

BONAPARTE 

504 
To  Admiral  Bruix 

C.-m-C.,  the  Fleet,  at  Brest  Paris 

7  Germinal  Year  VIII  (28  Mar,  1800} 

I  have  received  your  letters  of  2  Germinal,  Citizen  Admiral.  Here 
is  my  opinion  of  the  present  position  of  our  fleet. 

358  The  Rise  to  Power 

If  several  days  of  bad  weather  disperse  the  English  squadron  and 
you  think  it  possible  to  leave  with  the  thirty-two  or  thirty-three  ships, 
put  to  sea  and  carry  out  your  mission. 

If  the  equinoctial  season  passes  without  the  English  squadron  dispers- 
ing, then,  however  great  our  interest  in  breaking  the  blockade  of 
Malta  and  carrying  help  to  Egypt,  this  must  be  given  up. 

I  do  not  approve  the  proposal  of  Rear-Admiral  Gauteaume  to  relieve 
Malta  with,  six  or  seven  ships.  It  is  not  that  I  fear  that  he  would  not  be 
able  to  pass  the  straits;  but  I  do  fear  his  arrival  before  Malta  where, 
according  to  reports,  there  are  constantly  from  eight  to  eleven  ships. 

If  the  whole  of  April  passes  without  occasion  arising  for  you  to 
leave  with  the  whole  squadron,  it  is  my  intention  to  arm  the  twelve 
ships  remaining  in  the  port,  as  the  Minister  of  Marine  has  already 
informed  the  Commissioner,  which  will  bring  your  squadron  to  thirty 
ships  of  the  line,  to  act,  according  to  the  course  of  the  continental  war, 
against  Ireland  or  even  to  enter  the  Mediterranean  if  that  should 
become  possible.  But  in  that  case  I  wish  to  follow  up  the  expedition 
by  having  Rear-Admiral  Lacrosse  leave  for  the  Antilles. 

Embark  your  3,000  men  on  board  six  74-gun  ships  and  six  frigates, 
which  will  form  Rear-Admiral  Lacrosse's  squadron.  Rear-Admiral 
Lacrosse  will  receive  orders  as  to  his  destination.  .  .  . 

BONAPARTE 

505 
To  Citizen  Lucien  Bonaparte 

Minister  of  the  Interior  Paris 

15  Germinal,  Year  VIII  (5  Apr,  1800) 

Citizen  Minister,  the  Consuls  of  the  Republic  desire  you  to  make 
known  to  the  managers  of  the  various  theatres  in  Paris  that  no  play 
must  be  presented  without  being  licensed  by  you.  The  head  of  the 
division  of  public  instruction  in  your  ministry  is  to  be  personally  re- 
sponsible for  anything  contrary  to  good  morals  and  to  the  principles 
of  the  social  pact  appearing  on  the  stage.  As  a  result  of  this  ruling  the 
Prefect  of  Police  will  allow  no  play  to  be  announced  except  on  produc- 
tion of  the  licence  granted  by  you. 

Please  inform  the  Prefects  of  Departments  that  this  rule  applies  to 
them  also  and  that  they  must  allow  no  dramatic  work  to  be  announced 
or  shown  until  they  are  assured  of  your  permission.  The  circular  which 
you  will  send  out  to  this  effect  wfll  not  be  published. 

The  Consuls  also  request  you,  Citizen  Minister,  to  report  to  them 
during  this  week  on  suitable  measures  to  restrict  the  number  of 
theatres  and  on  the  rules  to  be  issued  to  ensure  supervision  by  the 
public  authorities.  You  may  consider  it  proper  at  the  same  time  to 

Brumaire  359 

suggest  ways  of  honouring  the  drama  and  encouraging  those  writers 
who  practise  it  with  success. 

By  order  of  the  First  Consul 

The  First  Consul  would  be  glad  to  see  suppressed  the  couplet  refer- 
ring to  him  in  the  vaudeville,  Portrait  of  the  Sabines. 

506 
To  Citizen  Fouch6 

Minister  of  Police  Paris 

15  Germinal,  Year  VIII  (5  Apr,  1800} 

Citizen  Minister,  it  is  the  intention  of  the  Consuls  of  the  Republic 
that  the  journals,  The  Well-informed,  Free  Men  and  Defenders  of  the 
Country  should  no  longer  appear,  unless  the  proprietors  appoint  editors 
whose  morality  and  patriotism  is  beyond  all  corruption.  You  will  insist 
that  each  number  of  these  journals  be  signed  by  the  responsible  editor. 

You  will  order  the  Prefect  of  Police  to  take  the  necessary  measures: 

1.  That  no  bills  are  stuck  on  the  walls  of  Paris,  and  that  the  news- 
vendors  cry  the  names  of  no  journals  or  pamphlets  without  a  permit 
from  the  police; 

2.  That  the  bookstalls  expose  for  sale  nothing  contrary  to  good 
morals  or  to  the  principles  of  the  government. 

The  Prefect  of  Police  will  allow  no  stage  performance  to  be  an- 
nounced unless  the  director  of  the  theatre  has  the  permission  of  the 
Minister  of  the  Interior. 

The  Consuls  desire  you  to  let  them  have,  during  this  decade,  a 
report: 

1.  On  the  steps  to  be  taken  to  remove  from  Paris  the  large  number 
of  Italian  refugees  and  foreigners  who  are  there  without  means  of 
subsistence. 

2.  On  those  you  think  desirable  to  remove  from  the  territory  of  the 
Republic  the  emigrants  who  have  returned  to  the  Department  of  the 
Seine,  whether  or  not  they  are  under  surveillance,  unless  they  had 
applied  to  be  removed  from  the  list  before  4  Nivose  last. 

3.  On  the  names  and  residence  of  some  fifty  individuals  who, 
accustomed  to  living  in  revolutionary  movements,  are  continually 
stirring  up  opinion,  and  on  the  means  of  eliminating  these  men  from 
Paris,  several  of  them  being  employed  by  the  foreigner  and  at  the 
bidding  of  whoever  may  be  willing  to  pay  them  to  disturb  the  public 
peace. 

Finally,  you  will  have  Mr.  Payne*  informed  that  the  police  are  aware 
of  his  misconduct  and  that  at  the  first  complaint  against  him  he  will  be 
returned  to  America,  his  homeland. 

BONAPARTE 
*  Tom  Paine. 

3<5o  The  Rise  to  Power 

507 
Proclamation 

To  Departments  Placed  Outside  the  Constitution  Paris 

1  Flortal,  Year  VIII  (21  Apr,  1800} 
Citizens,  it  was  with  regret  that  the  Consuls  of  the  Republic  saw 

themselves  forced  to  invoke  and  execute  a  law  which  circumstances 
had  rendered  necessary.  Those  circumstances  exist  no  longer.  The 
foreign  agents  have  fled  from  your  territory;  those  they  led  astray 
have  renounced  their  errors.  Henceforward  the  Government  sees 
among  you  only  Frenchmen  subject  to  the  same  laws,  bound  by 
common  interests,  united  by  the  same  sentiments. 

If,  to  bring  about  this  return,  the  Government  has  been  obliged  to 
deploy  great  force,  it  has  confided  control  to  General  Brune,  who 
knows  how  to  combine  with  the  necessary  rigour  that  fraternal  bene- 
volence which  looks  only  for  innocent  men  and  finds  only  men  worthy 
of  pardon  or  pity. 

The  Constitution  resumes  its  sway.  Henceforth  you  will  live  under 
magistrates  who  are  almost  all  known  to  you  for  their  talents  and 
virtues  and  who,  being  foreign  to  civil  strife,  have  neither  hatred  nor 
vengeance  to  exact.  Entrust  yourselves  to  their  care:  they  will  bring 
back  harmony  amongst  you;  they  will  enable  you  to  enjoy  the  benefits 
of  liberty. .  . . 

BONAPARTE 

508 
To  Citizen  Forfait 

Minister  of  Marine  and  Colonies  Paris 

2  Flortal,  Year  VIII  (22  Apr,  1800) 

1.  On  15  Floreal,  weather  permitting,  the  Minister  of  Marine  will 
cause  seven  74-gun  warships  and  five  frigates  under  the  orders  of  Rear- 
Admiral  Lacrosse  to  set  sail  from  Brest  for  Santo  Domingo. 

2.  They  will  carry  4,600  landing  troops,  an  artillery  company  and 
six  field  guns.  This  force  will  be  commanded  by  a  major-general,  who 
will  be  appointed  commander-in-chief  of  Santo  Domingo.* 

3 .  Councillor  of  State  Lescallier  will  leave  Paris  on  the  6th  to  embark 
with  this  squadron. 

4.  The  Minister  of  Marine  will  issue  instructions  to  Rear- Admiral 
Lacrosse,  to  the  commander-in-chief  and  to  Councillor  of  State 
Lescallier, 

5.  General  Toussaint-L'Ouverture,  General  Rigaud  and  General 
Michel  will  be  employed  in  the  army  of  Santo  Domingo  according  to 
their  rank. 

BONAPAJtTE 
*  Mathieu  was  appointed  to  this  command  by  an  order  of  the  same  date. 

Brumaire  361 

509 
To  General  Augereau 

C.-m-C,  French  Army  in  Holland  Paris 

7  Flortal,  Year  VIII  (27  Apr,  1800) 

I  am  informed,  Citizen  General,  that  several  members  of  the  Dutch 
Government  are  behaving  with  as  much  insolence  as  we  show  of 
moderation  in  our  conduct.  Demand  imperiously  all  that  this  govern- 
ment owes  to  us.  I  have  told  the  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs  to  write  to 
Citizen  Semonville*  to  be  more  energetic.  I  have  also  shown  Schimmel- 
penninckf  that  I  am  far  from  pleased  with  his  Government. 

The  campaign  is  about  to  begin;  we  shall  have  successes;  that  will 
confound  ill-wishers  of  every  kind  and  particularly  the  partisans  of 
England  who  have  got  into  the  Dutch  Government. 

BONAPARTE 

510 
To  the  Presidents  of  Tribunals 

Department  of  the  Seine  '  Paris 

13  Florid,  Year  VIII  (3  May,  1800} 

When  France  was  divided  by  factions,  justice  was  badly  adminis- 
stered;  that  was  inevitable.  That  condition  has  lasted  for  ten  years; 
you  will  end  it.  You  will  never  inquire  as  to  what  party  belongs  any 
man  who  asks  you  for  justice,  but  the  rights  of  each  will  be  weighed 
with  the  severest  impartiality.  It  is  for  the  armies  to  ensure  peace  with 
foreign  powers:  justice  is  the  means  of  ensuring  peace  between  citizens. 

You  are  appointed  for  life;  no  one  has  the  power  to  dismiss  you; 
you  are  responsible  for  your  judgements  only  to  your  own  consciences. 

The  choice  of  magistrates  for  the  tribunals  in  die  Department  of  the 
Seine  has  been  generally  applauded;  I  hope  that  in  responding  to  public 
confidence  you  will  give  the  Government  ever  more  reason  to  con- 
gratulate itself  on  having  confided  to  you  the  administration  of  justice. 

BONAPARTE 

To  the  Consuls  of  the  Republic 

Geneva 

20  Flortal,  Year  VIII  (10  May,  1800) 

From  information  I  have  gained  in  Geneva,  Citizen  Consuls,  it  seems 
to  me  that  judges  have  been  appointed  rather  too  much  from  a  single 
party.  Citizen  Carelli,  President  of  the  former  criminal  court  of 
Leman,  who  is  accepted  as  a  man  of  great  intelligence  and  probity  has 
not  been  included.  I  wish  him  to  be  placed  in  the  appeal  court  at 
Lyons  in  place  of  Citizen  Gavard,  who  has  resigned  .  .  . 

BONAPARTE 
*  French  Minister  to  Holland.  t  Dutch  Minister  to  France. 

L.D.N.  —  N 

362  The  Rise  to  Power 

512 
To  Citizen  Berlin 

Naval  Commissioner,  Toulon  Geneva 

21  Flortal,  Year  VIII  (11  May,  1800) 

Please,  Citizen,  have  my  messenger  for  Corsica  leave  at  once. 

The  Minister  of  Marine  will  no  doubt  have  written  to  you  to  hasten 
as  much  as  possible  the  dispatch  of  ten  separate  boats  to  Malta. 

Write  to  General  Vaubois  by  each  vessel.  Let  him  know  that  France 
and  the  whole  of  Europe  are  expecting  Malta  to  hold  out  to  the  last 
ounce  of  bread.  Send  him  a  collection  of  newspapers;  tell  him  of  the 
brilliant  victories  of  the  armies  of  the  Republic,  which  are  masters  of 
Suabia. 

BONAPARTE 

513 
To  Citizen  Talleyrand 

Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs  Lausanne 

25  Flortal,  Year  VIII  (15  May,  1800} 

Citizen  Minister,  I  have  received  from  Toulon  a  number  of  letters 
from  generals  and,  among  others,  from  General  Menou.  It  appears  that 
the  capitulation  is  disapproved  by  all  intelligent  people  and  by  many 
brave  men  in  the  army.  Since  the  Quartermaster-General  has  sent  an 
exact  return  of  the  troops  composing  it,  I  am  sending  this  to  the  Consuls 
to  be  published  in  the  Monitor.  When  it  appears  I  wish  you  to  have 
several  articles  written  with  the  aim  of  suggesting  that  had  I  remained 
in  Egypt  that  magnificent  colony  would  still  be  ours,  just  as,  if  I  had 
stayed  in  France,  we  would  not  have  lost  Italy. 

In  this  connexion  it  will  be  as  well  to  recall  that  at  Abukir  4,000 
Frenchmen  beat  20,000  Turks  and  captured  the  pasha;  that  at  Damietta 
General  Verdier,  with  800  men,  beat  4,000  janissaries;  that  the  Grand 
Vizir  certainly  had  no  more  than  30,000  men,  a  rabble  of  all  races,  that 
8,000  French  would  have  routed;  that  it  is  the  more  unfortunate  to 
evacuate  Egypt  now  when,  as  a  result  of  the  precautions  taken,  the 
plague  has  done  no  damage  this  year,  and  when,  with  the  end  of  the 
Vendee  war,  the  Brest  squadron,  carrying  6,000  men  and  plenty  of 
munitions  would  have  brought  aid  to  Egypt  within  a  month  or  two; 
that  the  court  of  London  gave  the  safe  conduct  to  the  army  only  on  the 
recommendation  of  Mr.  Smith  who  has  seen  the  strength  of  the  French 
army  and  the  weakness  of  the  Turks:  it  is  such  that  the  Grand  Vizir 
dare  not  advance  from  his  camp  at  Bilbeis  to  Cairo  and  has  gone  so  far 
in  appeasement  as  to  pay  three  millions  to  the  French  army;  and  that  if 
the  Army  of  Egypt  had  known  that  England  would  oppose  its  return 
to  France  there  is  no  doubt  that  it  would  have  beaten  the  Grand  Vizir, 
forced  him  to  cross  the  desert  and  reconquered  Egypt. 

Brumaire  363 

You  will  realize  that  all  that  must  be  said,  especially  to  remove  any 
shadow  of  suspicion  that  the  enemies  of  the  Government  might  make 
use  of. 

BONAPARTE 

514 
To  Citizen  Talleyrand 

Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs  Lausanne 

25  Floreal,  Year  VIII  (15  May,  1800} 

I  have  received  your  letter  of  21  Floreal,  Citizen  Minister.  Advise 
Citizen  Beurnonville*  to  be  very  circumspect.  To  any  question  as  to 
which  he  has  no  instructions  he  should  always  reply:  *I  will  consult 
my  Government/ 

As  to  Malta,  we  now  have  high  hopes  of  retaining  it.  In  the  mean- 
time we  can  use  the  restoration  of  the  Order  as  a  point  upon  which 
England  and  Russia  will  never  agree.  However,  he  must  not  commit 
himself  too  far. 

BONAPARTE 

To  Citizen  Talleyrand 

Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs  Lausanne 

26  Floreal,  Year  VIII  (16  May,  1800) 

I  am  sending  you,  citizen  Minister,  a  letter  addressed  to  you  which 
I  have  opened;  you  will  probably  find  it  as  stupid  as  I  do.  But,  while 
the  letter  is  in  truth  insignificant,  they  have  learnt  their  lesson  and 
replied  in  great  haste.  The  chancellery,  which  is  influenced  by  England, 
has  felt  it  could  not  at  this  moment  reply  too  soon,  so  as  not  to  have  to 
write  an  answer  as  to  which  the  Emperor  might  be  influenced  by  the 
course  of  the  war.  However  that  may  be,  I  hope  that  the  events  about 
to  take  place  in  Suabia  and  in  Italy  will  make  them  change  their  tone. 

BONAPARTE 

5i6 
To  Citizen  Talleyrand 

Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs  Lausanne 

26  Floreal,  Year  VIII  (16  May,  1800} 

I  believe,  Citizen  Minister,  that  in  order  to  bring  nearer  the  moment 
of  peace  we  must  press  forward  war  and  negotiation  side  by  side.  This 
is  what  I  wish  you  to  do: 

Begin  your  reply  to  M.'de  Thugut  by  deploring  the  inability  of 
governments  to  show  moderation  in  success;  dwell  a  little  on  the 
miseries  this  campaign  will  cause  without  any  real  advantage  to  either 
side.  If  anyone  can  profit  from  it,  it  will  be  solely  the  English. 
*  French  Minister  at  Berlin. 

364  The  Rise  to  Power 

But  since  one  day  the  Court  of  Vienna  will  have  to  return  to  its 
ideas  of  moderation  and  peace,  inform  M.  de  Thugut  that  Citizen 
Lavallette,  charge  d'affaires  of  the  Republic  at  Dresden,  has  the  con- 
fidence of  the  Government;  that  when  he  wishes  to  proceed  with  the 
negotiations  he  can  send  secretly  some  agent  to  Dresden  bearing  a 
letter  to  Citizen  Lavallette  from  M.  de  Thugut  with  the  information 
that  he  is  in  the  confidence  of  that  minister.  You  will  inform  Citizen 
Lavallette  of  what  you  have  done  and  what  he  must  do.  His  principal 
role  should  be  to  express  a  great  desire  for  peace,  to  listen  carefully,  to 
let  it  be  known  that  we  shall  have  no  difficulty  in  making  arrange- 
ments for  Rome,  Sardinia  and  Switzerland,  and  to  demand  the  execu- 
tion of  the  Treaty  of  Campo  Formio,  saying  at  the  same  time  that,  to 
make  this  easier,  some  modifications  may  be  necessary  and  will  be 
made.  Citizen  Lavallette  must  put  nothing  on  paper,  agree  to  little, 
appear  extremely  conciliatory  and,  when  he  has  heard  the  proposals 
of  the  Austrian  agent,  say  that  he  will  forward  them  to  his  Government. 
These  methods  are  only  to  settle  the  preliminaries. 

BONAPARTE 

517 
To  the  Consuls  of  the  Republic 

Aosta 

4  Prairial,  Year  VIII  (24  May,  1800) 

You  inform  me,  Citizen  Consuls,  that  die  Minister  of  the  Interior 
has  allowed  two  ships  to  import  colonial  goods  into  France  from 
England.  That  seems  to  me  inconceivable.  Please  call  for  a  full  report 
on  the  matter.  Such  a  decision  could  be  taken  only  after  long  discussion 
and  by  a  decree  of  the  Government.  I  even  think  it  necessary  that  you 
should  give  instructions  that  no  new  steps  are  to  be  taken  in  this  respect 
until  further  orders.  This  matter  has  diplomatic  implications. 

BONAPARTE 

To  Citizen  Fouch6 

Minister  of  Police  Aosta 

4  Prairial,  Year  VIII  (24  May,  1800) 

I  have  your  undated  letter,  Citizen  Minister,  brought  by  the  courier 
of  the  29th.  The  answer  to  all  intrigues,  all  cabals,  all  denunciations, 
will  always  be  this:  it  is  that  during  the  month  I  have  been  away  Paris 
has  been  perfectly  quiet.  After  such  services  one  is  above  calumny, 
but  so  far  as  I  am  concerned  there  was  no  need  for  this  proof,  which 
can  add  nothing  to  my  complete  confidence  in  you.  I  might  say  to  you 
today  what  I  have  said  several  times:  study  the  people  as  they  are  now 
and  the  means  of  setting  up  a  good  police  system  in  the  Republic;  it  is 

Brumaire  365 

a  problem  that  needs  time.  It  is  with  pleasure  that  I  see  you  ever  making 
giant  strides  towards  it.  Two  or  three  discoveries  like  the  English 
committee  and  you  will  have  a  fine  and  honourable  place  in  the  history 
of  the  times. 

BONAPARTE 

519 
To  Citizen  Talleyrand 

Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs  Novara 

12  Prairial,  Year  VIII  (ljune,  1800) 

You  will  find  attached,  Citizen  Minister,  your  letter  to  M.  de 
Thugut,  with  a  few  changes.  Since  it  closes  the  negotiations  which 
opened  with  my  letter  to  the  Emperor,  I  thought  it  as  well  that  it 
should  be  rather  in  the  style  of  a  peroration. 

If  the  news  from  Egypt  is  confirmed,  it  will  be  very  important  to 
have  someone  in  Russia.  The  Ottoman  Empire  cannot  exist  longer, 
and  if  Paul  I  turns  his  eye  in  that  direction  our  interests  will  be  the  same. 
Beurnonville  is  right  in  saying  that  we  shall  never  do  anything  through 
Prussia. 

BONAPARTE 

I  am  very  pleased  to  learn  that  you  have  been  able  to  go  out. 

520 
To  Citizen  FouchS 

Minister  of  Police  Milan 

15  Prairial,  Year  VIII  (4  June,  1800) 

Georges,  I  am  assured,  is  back  from  England.  It  is  essential  to  have 
him  arrested,  and  also  the  father  of  Frotte,  who  is  in  the  Orne.  Spare 
no  means  to  take  these  two  men  dead  or  alive. 

BONAPARTE 

521 
To  Citizen  Talleyrand 

Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs  Milan 

15  Prairial  Year  VIII  (4  June,  1800) 

Citizen  Minister,  I  wish  you  to  have  printed  a  pamphlet  bearing  the 
tide:  Letter  from  a  patriotic  German  on  the  Policy  of  the  House  of  Austria, 
The  aim  would  be  to  suggest  that  the  House  of  Austria  has  always 
aggrandized  itself  at  the  expence  and  to  the  detriment  of  the  Empire. 

It  needs  someone  well  acquainted  with  the  events  of  the  last  fifty 
years,  those  relating  to  Mainz,  etc.  It  will  be  well  to  have  this  letter 
printed  in  German  and  distributed  profusely  in  Germany. 

BONAPARTE 

$66  The  Rise  to  Power 

522 
To  Citizen  Talleyrand 

Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs  Milan 

15  Prairial,  Year  VIII  (4  June,  1800) 
Inform  the  prize  court,  Citizen  Minister,  that  it  appears  to  me 

essential  that  no  decision  be  reached  concerning  Danish  ships  until 
M.  Dreyer  or  some  other  minister  of  the  same  rank  returns  to  Paris. 
The  prize  council  should  reply  only:  'We  will  see,  we  are  attending  to 
it.3  You  will  arrange  for  it  to  he  known  that  the  cause  of  these  delays 
is  the  present  conduct  of  the  Danish  Government. 

As  to  the  Dutch  ships,  I  think  it  would  be  as  well  to  gain  time;  for, 
if  the  Dutch  continue  to  behave  badly,  especially  in  raising  difficulties 
over  the  troops  we  are  asking  them  for,  there  will  no  longer  be  any 
reason  to  act  favourably  towards  them. 

I  see  no  reason  why  you  should  not  send  some  dresses  to  the  queen 
of  Spain,  and  you  can  spend  1,000  louis  for  this  purpose.  But  this 
must  be  carried  out  with  the  decorum  necessary  to  prevent  it  from 
appearing  ridiculous. 

BONAPARTE 

523 
Address  to  the  Clergy  of  Milan* 

Milan  Cathedral 

16  Prairial,  Year  VIII  (5  June,  1800) 

I  have  wished  to  see  you  all  assembled  here  so  as  to  have  the  satisfac- 
tion of  myself  informing  you  of  the  opinions  I  hold  on  the  subject  of 
the  Catholic,  Apostolic  and  Roman  religion.  Convinced  that  this  is  the 
only  religion  which  can  bring  true  happiness  to  a  well-ordered  society 
and  strengthen  the  foundations  of  a  good  government,  I  assure  you 
that  I  shall  devote  myself  to  defending  it  at  all  times  and  by  every 
means.  I  regard  you,  the  ministers  of  that  religion,  which  is  indeed 
also  my  own,  as  my  most  dear  friends.  I  declare  that  I  shall  regard  as 
a  disturber  of  the  peace  and  enemy  of  the  common  good  whoever 
commits  the  least  outrage  against  our  common  religion  or  dares  offer 
the  slightest  insult  towards  your  sacred  persons,  and  that  I  shall  punish 
such  an  one  in  the  most  signal  and  rigorous  manner,  even,  if  need  be, 
with  death. 

It  is  my  firm  intention  that  the  Christian,  Catholic  and  Roman 
religion  shall  be  preserved  in  its  entirety,  that  it  shall  be  publicly  per- 
formed and  that  it  shall  enjoy  this  public  exercise  with  as  full,  extensive 
and  inviolable  freedom  as  at  the  time  when  I  came  for  the  first  time 
into  these  happy  lands.  All  the  changes  which  then  occurred,  parti- 
cularly as  to  discipline,  took  place  against  my  wishes  and  my  way  of 
*  Delivered  in  Italian. 

Brumaire  367 

thought.  Being  simply  the  agent  of  a  government  which  cared  not 
at  all  for  the  Catholic  religion,  I  was  unable  at  that  time  to  prevent 
the  disorders  deliberately  fomented  with  the  aim  of  overthrowing  it. 
Now  that  I  am  furnished  with  full  power  I  am  resolved  to  put  into 
effect  all  appropriate  means  to  ensure  and  protect  this  religion. 

Modern  philosophers  have  striven  to  persuade  the  French  nation 
that  the  Catholic  religion  is  the  implacable  enemy  of  every  democratic 
system  and  republican  form  of  government:  hence  this  cruel  persecu- 
tion launched  by  the  French  Republic  against  the  religion  and  its 
ministers;  hence  all  the  horrors  to  which  this  unfortunate  people  has 
been  delivered.  The  diversity  of  opinion  on  the  subject  of  religion 
which  reigned  in  France  at  the  time  of  the  Revolution  has  not  been 
one  of  the  least  sources  of  these  disorders.  But  experience  has  dis- 
illusioned the  French  and  has  convinced  them  that  of  all  religions  there 
is  none  which  adapts  itself  as  does  the  Catholic  to  different  forms  of 
government  and  which  favours  republican  democratic  government  in 
particular,  affirming  its  tightness  and  illuminating  its  principles.  I,  too, 
am  a  philosopher,  and  I  know  that  no  man  can  pass  as  virtuous  and 
just  in  any  society  unless  he  knows  whence  he  comes  and  whither  he 
goes.  Reason  alone  cannot  help  us  there;  without  religion  we  move 
always  among  shadows;  and  the  Catholic  religion  is  the  only  one 
which  throws  certain  and  infallible  light  on  the  origin  and  end  of  man. 
No  society  can  exist  without  morality:  there  is  no  good  morality 
without  religion;  it  is  religion  alone,  therefore,  that  gives  to  the  State 
a  firm  and  durable  support.  A  society  without  religion  is  as  a  ship 
without  a  compass;  a  ship  in  that  state  can  neither  find  its  route  nor 
hope  to  enter  port.  A  society  without  religion,  always  disturbed,  per- 
petually shaken  by  the  clash  of  violent  passions,  experiences  all  the  fury 
of  internecine  warfare  which  casts  it  into  an  abyss  of  evils  and  sooner 
or  later  brings  about  its  inevitable  ruin. 

France,  instructed  by  misfortune,  has  at  length  opened  her  eyes. 
She  has  recognized  that  the  Catholic  religion  was  like  an  anchor  which 
could  hold  her  fast  in  the  midst  of  disturbance  and  save  her  from  the 
tempest.  She  has  therefore  recalled  it  to  her  bosom.  I  cannot  deny  that 
I  have  contributed  much  to  this  happy  achievement.  I  assure  you  that 
the  churches  have  been  reopened  in  France,  that  the  Catholic  religion 
is  resuming  its  ancient  glory  there,  and  that  the  people  observe  with 
respect  the  holy  pastors  who  are  returning,  full  of  zeal,  into  the  midst 
of  their  abandoned  flocks. 

Do  not  let  the  manner  in  which  the  late  Pope  was  treated  inspire  any 
fear  in  you;  Pius  VI  owed  his  misfortunes  in  part  to  the  intrigues  of 
those  in  whom  he  had  placed  his  confidence,  in  part  to  the  cruel  policy 
of  the  Directory.  As  soon  as  I  am  able  to  confer  with  the  new  Pope, 
I  hope  to  have  the  happiness  of  removing  every  obstacle  which  still 

368  The  Rise  to  Power 

hinders  complete  reconciliation  between  France  and  the  head  of  the 
Church.  I  am  not  unaware  of  what  you  have  suffered,  both  in  your 
persons  and  your  property.  As  to  your  persons,  they  will  in  future  once 
more  be  inviolable  and  respected  by  all;  as  to  your  property,  I  shall 
give  orders  that  it  be  restored  to  you  at  least  in  part,  and  I  shall  take 
the  necessary  action  to  assure  to  you  forever  an  honourable  livelihood. 
That  is  the  communication  I  wished  to  make  to  you  on  the  subject 
of  the  Christian,  Catholic  and  Roman  religion.  I  desire  these  worcfs  to 
remain  engraved  on  your  minds  and  I  shall  approve  their  printed 
publication,  so  that  my  intentions  may  be  known  not  only  in  France 
and  Italy  but  throughout  the  whole  of  Europe. 

524 
To  the  Consuls  of  the  Republic 

Milan 
18  Prairial,  Year  VIII  (7  June,  1800} 

I  have  received  your  dispatches  of  10,  n  and  12  Prairial,  Citizen 
Consuls.  You  will  see  the  situation  of  the  army  from  the  attached 
bulletin:  all  continues  to  go  well. 

I  think  it  would  be  most  desirable  to  dismiss  the  municipality  of 
Calais  for  its  lack  of  surveillance  and  for  having  allowed  the  man 
Dupeyron,  head  of  the  English  espionage  service,  to  escape.  We  must 
put  into  Calais  men  whose  patriotism  is  certain  and  who  are  immune 
to  corruption  by  the  English. 

The  report  of  the  Minister  of  the  Interior  on  the  suppression  of  The 
Friend  of  the  Laws  does  not  seem  to  me  at  all  reasonable.  I  feel  it  only 
makes  the  Institute  hateful  to  suppress  a  journal  because  it  has  loosed 
off  a  few  gibes  against  this  society,  which  is  so  respected  throughout 
Europe  as  to  be  above  such  trifles.  I  assure  you  that,  as  President  of 
the  Institute,  I  do  not  protest  lightly.  If  they  want  to,  let  them  say  that 
the  sun  goes  round  the  earth,  that  the  tides  are  caused  by  melting 
snow  and  that  we  are  charlatans;  there  must  be  the  greatest  possible 
liberty. 

I  see  from  a  return  you  send  me  of  those  detained  during  the  month 
of  Floreal  that  there  are  281  because  of  desertion.  It  is  perhaps  desirable 
that  you  appoint  a  court  martial  to  judge  those  men  and  not  let  them 
rot  in  prison. 

I  have  received  letters  from  Corsica  from  which  I  learn  that  many 
ships  have  left  for  Malta;  I  am  sending  them  to  you.  It  would  perhaps 
be  well  to  publish  a  small  official  article  to  belie  the  rumours  spread 
about  as  to  the  revolt  of  the  departments  of  Golo  and  Liamone. 

BONAPARTE 

Marengo 

Medals  of  the  Marengo  Campaign 

Above:  Marengo  medal;  below:  Desaix  memorial  medal. 

Actual  size. 

THE  WAR  OF  THE  SECOND  COALITION,  WHICH  BROKE  OUT  EARLY  IN 
1799,  was  initially  disastrous  for  the  French.  Defeated  at  Stock- 
ach  in  March,  Jourdan  was  driven  back  to  the  Rhine.  In  Italy 
Scherer,  Moreau,  Championnet  and  Macdonald  were  routed  in  turn  by 
Austrian  and  Russian  armies  and  when  in  August  Joubert  was  crushed 
at  Novi  all  Bonaparte's  conquests  were  wrested  away.  The  Ionian 
Islands  were  lost,  Malta  blockaded.  An  Anglo-Russian  force  under  the 
Duke  of  York  landed  in  Holland,  while  the  English  aided  the  royalists 
of  Vendee  in  renewed  revolt.  Yet,  despite  administrative  chaos  and 
financial  bankruptcy,  this  tide  had  been  stemmed  when  Bonaparte 
landed  at  Frejus.  As  Minister  of  War,  Bernadotte  worked  ably  to  equip 
and  reinforce  the  armies;  Massena's  heroic  defence  of  Switzerland 
saved  France  from  invasion,  and  in  September  he  overwhelmingly 
defeated  Korsakov  at  Zurich;  in  November  Brune  forced  York  to  the 
surrender  of  Alkmaar,  and  an  uneasy  ascendency  and  partial  truce  were 
achieved  in  Vendee.  The  Coalition,  too,  began  to  break  up  when  Russia 
withdrew  from  active  participation,  so  that  by  the  time  of  Brumaire 
the  military  position  or  France,  though  precarious,  was  no  longer  des- 
perate. Only  in  the  south-east,  where  small,  battered  forces  held  the 
Genoese  coast  and  the  passes  of  Savoy  against  Melas's  well-found  army 
of  70,000  was  there  a  real  danger  of  collapse  and  invasion. 

Bonaparte's  plan  for  the  spring  campaign  of  1800  was  for  the  Army 
of  Italy,  now  under  Massena,  to  hold  on  as  best  it  could  and  for  Moreau, 
with  the  Army  of  the  Rhine,  to  attack  and  hold  Kray,  while  he  him- 
self, with  a  newly  formed  Reserve  Army,  crossed  the  high  Alps  into 
Italy  and  fell  upon  Melas  from  the  rear.  All  his  life  Napoleon  held  up 
the  Marengo  campaign  as  one  of  the  finest  of  his  career.  Fraught  with 
many  risks,  it  was  certainly  a  bold  strategic  conception  and,  despite  the 
unforeseen  handicap  met  at  Bard,  it  was  carried  through  with  complete 
success,  though  not  quite  in  time  to  save  Massena  from  an  honourable 
surrender.  Yet  the  vaunted  crossing  of  the  Saint-Bernard,  though  very- 
difficult,  was  not  more  remarkable  than  Suvurov's  opposed  passage  of 
the  Saint-Gotthard  a  year  earlier  or  than  Macdonald's  crossing  of  the 
Spliigen  in  the  depth  of  winter  six  months  later.  The  battle  of  Marengo 
itself  was  very  nearly  a  disaster  and  the  fault  lay  entirely  with  the  First 
Consul.  There  seems  no  doubt  that  throughout  the  battle  he  remained 
calm  and  confident;  but  the  day  was  saved  by  others  and  there  is  also 
no  doubt  that  he  subsequently  took  to  himself  much  of  the  credit  that 
properly  belonged  to  them. 

Secrecy  and  surprise  were  fully  achieved.  The  enemy  were  entirely 
misled  as  to  the  strength  and  purpose  of  the  Reserve  Army,  considering 
it  no  more  than  a  modest  reinforcement  for  Moreau  or  Massena;  even 
when  it  appeared  in  Italy,  Melas  seems  for  some  time  to  have  thought 
that  he  had  to  do  only  with  a  diversionary  force  of  7,000  or  8,000  men. 

372  The  Rise  to  Power 

In  fact  it  was  nearly  60,000  strong  and  more  than  half  its  effectives  were 
seasoned  troops  drawn  from  Brune's  Army  of  the  "West  and  Augereau's 
forces  in  Holland,  which  marched  to  the  Lake  of  Geneva  without  pass- 
ing through  the  spy-infested  official  assembly  area  round  Dijon.  In 
addition,  Moncey's  corps  of  12,000,  detached  from  the  Army  of  the 
Rhine,  moved  straight  across  the  Saint-Gotthard  to  Milan.  Even  so,  the 
Reserve  Army  was  weak.  It  was  outnumbered;  it  was  short  of  cavalry, 
seriously  short  of  artillery,  while  the  difficult  line  of  march  imposed 
almost  intolerable  strains  on  a  barely  efficient  supply  system.  But 
Bonaparte  inspired  it  with  his  own  confidence,  and  it  was  superbly 
led:  seven  of  die  future  marshals  were  among  the  higher  officers. 

Three  weeks  after  his  foremost  troops  crossed  the  pass,  Bonaparte 
was  astride  the  Austrian  communications,  had  swept  up  their  reserves, 
stores  and  hospitals  and  stormed  or  blockaded  their  fortresses.  He  then 
moved  west  to  meet  Melas's  field  force;- but,  whether  from  over-confi- 
dence or  fear  of  a  relieving  army  from  the  east,  he  did  so,  most  untypi- 
cally,  with  little  more  than  half  his  available  strength.  On  1 3th  June  he 
further  weakened  himself  by  sending  Desaix  with  Boudet's  division  to 
the  south-west  and  Lapoype' s  division  to  the  north-west  to  find  and 
hold  the  enemy,  whom  he  believed  to  be  retreating  from  Alessandria 
towards  either  Genoa  or  Turin.  He  had  some  reason  for  this  in  the 
enemy's  recent  behaviour  and  in  faulty  reconnaissance  reports  showing 
the  Bormida  bridges  opposite  Alessandria  to  be  blown.  In  fact  they 
were  intact,  and  when  on  the  next  morning  the  Austrians  crossed  them 
in  force  to  the  attack,  Bonaparte  with  22,000  men  was  faced  with  an 
unexpected  battle  against  a  far  larger  army  possessing  overwhelming 
superiority  in  cavalry  and  artillery  on  an  open  plain  where  that  superi- 
ority could  be  fully  exploited.  By  n.o  a.m.  the  extent  of  the  danger 
was  clear  and  orders  of  recall  were  sent  to  Desaix  and  Lapoype.  Lapoype 
had  gone  too  far  and  received  the  message  only  at  6.30  p.m.;  Desaix 
received  it  about  i.o  p.m.*  Meanwhile  the  French  were  inexorably 
driven  back;  their  formations  disintegrated,  their  guns  were  overrun; 
by  4.0  p.m.,  when  Desaix  reached  the  field,  they  were  streaming  away 
in  disorder  and  the  battle  seemed  lost.  The  sequel  is  famous.  Marmont's 
skilful  use  of  Desaix's  few  guns  and  the  fire  of  Boudet's  intact  division 
shattered  the  foremost  Austrian  columns,  while  the  charge  of  Keller- 
mairn's  heavy  cavalry  brigade  threw  their  centre  into  confusion. 
The  French  quickly  rallied,  and  by  nightfall  the  Austrians  were 
being  driven  back  over  the  Bormida  in  hopeless  rout.  A  few  hours 
later  Melas  sued  for  an  armistice,  Desaix  had  been  killed  at  the  first 
impact, 

*  It  has  been  widely  held  that  on  hearing  the  gunfire  Desaix  at  once  turned  back 
on  his  own  responsibility — a  view  that  has  been  much  used  to  belabour  Grouchy's 
conduct  at  "Waterloo.  There  is  strong  evidence  that  this  was  not  in  fact  so. 

Marengo  373 

DEPLOYMENT  OF  FRENCH  ARMIES 
During  the  Marengo  Campaign 

ARMY  OF  THE  EAST 

C.-m-C.;  K16ber  (assassinated  I4th  June,  1800,  succeeded  by  Menou).  Strength 
about  30,000.  Cooped  up  in  Egypt  (with  Vaubois's  detachment  equally  blockaded 
in  Malta)  this  army  pkyed  no  part  in  continental  operations.  But  the  absence  of 
Communication  with  Egypt  had  caused  reinforcements  in  officers,  men  and  equip- 
ment to  pile  up  at  the  base  depots,  so  that  the  depots  of  each  of  the  fourteen  demi- 
brigades  of  the  army  stood  at  approximately  battalion  strength  and  those  of  the 
seven  cavalry  regiments  at  squadron  strength.  These  troops  were  brigaded  to  form 
five  ad  hoc  demi-brigades  and  two  regiments  and  were  incorporated  in  the  Reserve 
Army. 

ARMY  OF  THE  WEST 

C.-m-C:  Brune  (Bernadotte  from  i  May,  1800,  when  Brune  was  transferred  to 
Dijon  to  command  what  kter  became  the  2nd  Line,  Reserve  Army);  C.  of  S.: 
Hedouville.  Strength  about  60,000.  Situated  in  west  and  north-west  France,  the 
army  was  engaged  in  suppressing  the  continued,  sporadic  outbreaks  of  royalist 
revolt  and  in  forming  a  covering  force  against  a  possible  English  landing.  It 
played  no  direct  part  in  the  campaign,  but  two  infantry  divisions  and  two  cavalry 
brigades  were  transferred  from  it  to  form  the  core  of  the  Reserve  Army. 

ARMY  IN  HOLLAND 

C.-m-C.;  Augereau.  Strength  about  25,000  French  plus  15,000  Dutch  troops.  The 
main  functions  of  the  army  were  to  provide  a  covering  force  against  an  English 
invasion  and  to  maintain  die  reality  of  French  control  over  Dutch  policy.  One 
infantry  division  and  one  cavalry  brigade  were  contributed  to  the  Reserve  Army. 
In  May  strong  detachments  were  moved  to  the  south-eastern  sector  of  the  army 
area,  and  provisional  orders  were  issued  for  the  bulk  of  the  army  to  move  into 
Germany  on  the  left  flank  of  the  Army  of  the  Rhine.  In  the  event,  this  movement 
was  neither  needed  nor  ordered. 

ARMY  OF  ITALY 

C.-m-C.;  Mass6na;  Deputy  C.-w-C.;  Suchet;  C.  o/S.;  Oudinot.  Strength  about 
30,000,  holding  the  Genoese  riviera  and  the  south-east  frontier  of  France,  with 
small  forces  guarding  the  passes  up  to  the  Swiss  frontier.  Its  r61e  was  to  receive  and 
hold  the  Austrian  attack,  while  the  Reserve  Army  came  down  upon  their  rear. 
This  attack  developed  early  in  April  and  cut  the  army  in  two.  Massena,  with  about 
half  his  strength,  became  closely  blockaded  in  Genoa,  but  kept  a  large  Austrian 
corps  at  bay  until  the  total  eschaustion  of  his  supplies  forced  him  to  surrender  on 
4  June,  at  the  very  moment  when  Hohenzollern  was  ordered  to  raise  the  siege.  In 
the  centre  Suchet  was  driven  back  to  the  Var,  where  he  withstood  heavy  attacks 
until  the  end  of  May,  when  Melas  had  to  withdraw  to  meet  Bonaparte.  Turreau's 
northern  division  in  Savoy  came  under  command  of  the  Reserve  Army  and 
attacked  the  Austrian  right  flank  through  Susa. 

ARMY  OF  THE  RJEONE 

C.-m-C.;  Moreau;  Depwty  C.-m-C.;  Macdonald;  C.  ofS.:  Dessolle.  Strength  about 
120,000,  deployed  from  Mainz  to  the  Swiss  frontier.  Moreau  had  the  dual  role  of 
providing  a  corps  of  20,000  to  25,000  under  Moncey  to  cross  the  Saint-Gotthard 
and  join  the  Reserve  Army  and  of  attacking  and,  if  possible,  defeating,  but  at 
least  holding  the  opposed  Austrians,  so  that  troops  could  not  be  withdrawn  to 
support  Melas  in  Italy.  These  tasks  were  fulfilled,  but,  Moreau  being  a  slow  and 
cautious,  if  able  commander,  neither  so  quickly  nor  completely  as  the  First  Consul 
intended. 

374  .  The  Rise  to  Power 

ORDER  OF  BATTLE  OF  THE  RESERVE  ARMY 
as  at  14  June,  1800 

C.-w-C.:  Berthier 

C.  ofS.:  Dupont  de  1'Etang  Deputy  C.  ofS.:  Vignolle 

Cdr.,  Cavalry:  Murat  C.  ofS.,  Cavalry:  Berthier  (Cesar) 

Cdr.,  Artillery:  Marmont  C.  ofS.,  Artillery:  S&iarmont 

O.C.,  Park:  Gassendi  O.C.,  Siege  Train:  Saint  Michel 

Cdr.,  Engineers:  Marescot  C.  ofS.,  Engineers:  Mutel 

Q.M.G.:  Dubreton  Asst.  Q.M.Gs.;  Lambert,  Boinod 

Paymaster-Gen.:  Jehannot 
Adjts.-gen.,  G.S.:  Dampierre,  Lacroix,  Pannetier,  Stabenrath 

THE  CONSULAR  GUARD:  Bessieres 
Strength:  infantry,  800;  cavalry,  360;  artillery,  72 

ADVANCE  GUARD:  Larmes 

Adjt.-gen.:  Izard    Strength:  5083 

5th  Dragoons  (Dommanget) 

Brigade:  Mainoni 
28th  Line  (Valhubert) 

Division:  Watrin 

Brig.-Gens.:  Gency,  Malher    C.  ofS.:  Nogues 
6th  Light  (Macon),  22nd  Line  (Schreiber),  40th  Line  (Legendre) 

CORPS:  Desaix 
ist  Hussars  (Juniac) 

Division:  Boudet 

Brig.-Gens.:  Gu&iand,  Musnier    C.  ofS.:  Dalton    Strength:  5316 
9th  Light  (Labasse),  soth  Line  (Lajeunesse),  59th  Line  (Bourdois) 

Division:  Monnier 

Brig.-Gens.;  Carra  St.-Cyr,  Schilt    C.  ofS.:  Girard    Strength:  3614 
I9th  Light  (Bourgeois),  7Oth  Line  (RjDuyer),  72nd  Line  (Mercier) 

CORPS:  Victor 
3rd  Cavalry  (Romagny) 

Division:  Gardanne 

Brig.-Gen.:  Dumoulin    C.  ofS.:  Dampierre    Strength:  3691 
44th  Line  (Saudeur),  loist  Line  (Cardenau) 

Division:  Chambarlhac 

Brig.-Gens.:  Herbin,  Rivaud    C.  ofS.:  Delort    Strength:  5287 
24th  Light  (Ferry),  43rd  Line  (Bisson),  96th  Line  (Lepreux) 

CORPS:  Duhesme 
7th  Chasseurs  (Michelon) 

Division:  Loison 

Brig.-Gens.:  Broussier,  Gobert    C.  of  S.:  M6riage    Strength:  5304 
I3th  Light  (Castillon),  58th  Line  (Colomb),  6oth  Line  (Peyre") 

Division:  Chabran 

Brig.-Gen.:  S6risiat    C.  ofS.:  Brenier    Strength:  3373 

I2th  Light  (i  btn,),  ist  ad  hoc  Demi-brigade  ex-Army  of  the  East  (Taupin), 
2nd  ditto  (Gaspard),  3rd  ditto  (Chavardes) 

Marengo  375 

CORPS:  Moncey  (ex-Army  of  the  Rhine) 

Division:  Lapoype 

Brig.-Gens.:  Digonnet,  Chabert    Strength:  3462 
ist  Light  (Gaulois),  29th  Line  (Paticier),  pist  Line  (Goury) 

Division:  Lorge 

Brig.-Gen.:  Bonamy    C.  of  S.:  Foy    Strength:  4400 
I2th  Light  (i  btn.),  67th  Line  (Chossat),  Italic  Legion  (Lechi) 

Brigade:  Gilly 

Adjt.-Gen.:  Hulin    Strength:  3300 
I2th  Light  (i  btn.),  1st  Line  (Berthelot) 

Brigade:  B6thencourt 
I02nd  Line  (GoifFon)    Strength:  1695 

Division:  Turreau  (ex-Army  of  Italy) 

Brig.-Gens.:  Davin,  Lavalette    C.  ofS.:  Li6bault    Strength:  5130 
28th  Light  (Praef  ke),  26th  Line  (Mairesse),  elements  of  I4th  &  I5th  Light  and 
2ist  &  loyth  Line;  9th  Chasseurs  (Thullier),  I4th  Chasseurs  (Boudet) 

CAVALRY 

1st  Division:  Murat 
Adjt.-Gen.:  Berthier    Strength:  3688 

Brigade:  Kellermann 
2nd  Cavalry  (YvendorfT),  20th  Cav.  (G6rard),  2ist  Cav.  (Rouff) 

Brigade:  Champeaux 
ist  Dragoons  (Viallannes),  8th  Drag.  (Millet),  9th  Drag.  (Levreault) 

Brigade:  Rivaud 
I2th  Chasseurs  (Defrance),  2ist  Chas.  Pupres),  nth  Hussars  (Ismert) 

Brigade:  Duvignau* 
6th  Dragoons  (Romagny),  ist  Hussars  (Juniac),  I2th  Hus.  (Fournier) 

2nd  Division:  Harville 

Brig.-Gens.:  Kister,  Dumoulin    Adjt.-Gen.:  Requin    Strength:  2612 
(Unbrigaded)  5th  Cavalry  Qacquemin),  I5th  Cav.  (Poinsot),  22nd  Cav.  (Avice), 
5th  Dragoons  (Dommanget),  2nd  Chasseurs  (Croutelle),  7  Chas.  (Michelon), 
9th  Chas.  (ThulKer),  I4th  Chas.  (Boudet),  I5th  Chas.  (Teinturier) 

ARTILIERY  AND  ENGINEERS 

Artillery  in  action  at  Marengo 618 

Artillery  on  siege  duties,  etc.        .         .         .         .         .  1131 

Engineers 269 

Total  troops  in  action  at  Marengo        .         .         .         .28,169 
Total  troops  in  garrison,  1.  of  c.,  etc 29,676 

Total  strength,  Reserve  Army 57, 845 f 

PERSONAL  STAFF  OF  THE  FIRST  CONSUL 

Councillors-of-State:  Dejean,  Petiet;  Aides-de-camp:  Duroc,  Lauriston,  Merlin, 
Lefebvre;  Secretary:  Bourrienne 

*  Duvignau  was  not  present  in  person  at  the  battle. 

t  Several  contemporary  strength  returns  exist  and  there  are  minor  discrepancies 
between  them  as  to  the  numbers  engaged  and  the  exact  order  of  battle. 

The  Rise  to  Power 

ROUTE  OF  THE  RESERVE  ARMY 

Marengo 

377 

THE  BATTLE  OF  MARENGO 

Above:  about  n.o  a.m.       Below:  about  4.30  p.m. 
, .  route  of  Kellennann's  charge 

378  The  Rise  to  Power 

525 
To  Major- General  Berthier 

Minister  of  War  Paris 

5  Pluviose,  Year  VIII  (25  Jan,  1800} 

Citizen  Minister,  my  intention  is  to  organize  a  Reserve  Army, 
command  of  which  will  be  reserved  to  the  First  Consul.  It  will  be  divided 
into  right,  centre  and  left  and  each  of  these  big  corps  will  be  commanded 
by  a  lieutenant-general.  There  will,  besides,  be  a  cavalry  division,  also 
commanded  by  a  lieutenant-general. 

Each  corps  will  contain  two  divisions,  each  commanded  by  a  major- 
general  and  two  brigadiers;  each  corps  will  also  have  a  senior  artillery 
officer. 

Each  lieutenant-general  will  have  a  brigadier  as  his  chief-of-staff;  each 
major-general  an  adjutant-general. 

Each  corps  will  comprise  from  18,000  to  20,000  men,  including  two 
regiments  of  hussars  or  chasseurs,  and  sixteen  guns,  four  mounted, 
twelve  served  by  foot  companies. 

The  fourteen  battalions  forming  the  depots  of  the  Army  of  the 
East,  the  I4th,  30th,  43rd  and  96th  Demi-brigades  in  the  iyth  District, 
the  pth  and  24th  Light  Infantry  in  the  Army  of  the  West,  the  22nd, 
40th,  58th,  and  52nd,  also  in  that  Army,  the  nth  Light  and  the  66th 
will  all  form  part  of  the  Reserve  Army. 

The  I5th,  I9th,  2ist  and  24th  Chasseurs,  the  5th,  8th,  9th,  and 
I9th  Dragoons,  the  nth,  I2th,  and  2nd  Hussars,  the  ist,  2nd,  3rd,  5th 
and  1 8th  Cavalry  and  the  seven  depot  squadrons  of  the  cavalry  units 
of  the  Army  of  the  East  will  be  the  nucleus  of  the  Reserve  Army* 

The  right  will  be  formed  at  Lyons,  the  centre  at  Dijon  and  the  left  at 
ChSlons-sur-Marne. 

Major-General  Saint-Remy  will  serve  as  commander  of  artillery.* 
Colonel  Gassendi  will  be  director-general  of  the  park.  Chief  Inspector 
of  Engineers  Marescot  will  command  that  arm.  There  will  be  a  quarter- 
master and  four  war  commissaries  in  each  corps  and  a  quartermaster- 
general  of  the  Army,  who  will  remain  with  the  Minister  of  War  and 
carry  out  the  functions  of  chief  of  staff. 

A  staff  officer  from  each  corps  of  the  Army  must  be  called  to  Paris  to 
report  on  armament,  equipment  and  clothing.  They  will  assemble  in 
Paris  on  15  February. 

You  will  issue  orders  to  bring  the  strength  of  each  battalion  up  to 
1,000  men  as  quickly  as  possible. 

You  will  suggest  to  me  officers  to  form  the  staff  of  the  Reserve  Army. 

You  will  keep  the  formation  of  this  army  extremely  secret,  even  in 
your  own  offices. 

BONAPARTE 

*  Owing  to  the  illness  of  this  officer  Marmont  later  replaced  him. 

Marengo  379 

526 

To  General  Moreau 

C.-m-C.,  Army  of  the  Rhine  Paris 

11  Pluviose,  Year  VIII  (31  Jan,  1800) 

Citizen  General,!  am  sending  you  my  aide-de-camp,  Colonel  Duroc, 
so  that  you  can  let  me  know  the  situation  of  the  army  under  your 
command  and  inform  me  as  to  your  position. 

The  following  are  the  sums  of  money  sent  to  the  Army  of  the  Rhine 
during  the  month  of  Nivose.  .  .  .  Please  let  me  know  at  once  if  these 
sums  have  reached  you;  reply  item  by  item.  I  hope  that  the  worst 
moments  are  past,  and  that  from  now  on  we  shall  see  the  condition  of 
our  finances  improving  daily. 

I  wish  Colonel  Duroc  to  visit  the  various  positions  in  Switzerland 
which  were  attacked  and  defended  during  the  last  campaign,  so  that  I 
may  always  have  with  me  someone  who  knows  the  nature  of  that 
country. 

Send  me  by  Citizen  Duroc  an  exact  return  of  the  troops  composing 
your  army  and  of  their  present  organization.  Give  him  also  for  me  a 
detailed  note  setting  out  your  ideas  for  the  coming  campaign. 

BONAPARTE 

527 
To  Major- General  Berthier 

Minister  of  War  Paris 

25  Pluviose,  Year  VIII  (14  Feb,  1800} 

Citizen  Minister,  I  have  not  received  the  report  of  Major-General 
Gauthier  on  the  depots  of  the  Army  of  the  East,  for  which  I  asked  you. 
I  wish  to  receive  it  without  delay.  You  will  order  Major-General 
Chabran  to  proceed  at  once  to  Chalon-sur-Saone  to  take  command  of 
the  fourteen  depot  battalions  of  the  Army  of  the  East.  General  Chabran 
will  inspect  them  and  attend  to  their  equipment,  armament,  clothing 
and  recruitment.  These  battalions  will  remain  in  cantonments  at- 
Micon,  Ch&lon,  Leurre  and  Saint-Jean-de-Losne.  They  will  be  exer- 
cised in  manoeuvres  twice  daily. 

The  division  commanded  by  General  Chabran  will  be  known  as  the 
ist  Division  of  the  Reserve  Army.  There  will  be  attached  to  it  three 
8-pounders  and  one  6-inch  howitzer,  manned  by  the  light  artillery,  two 
12-pounders,  four  8-pounders  and  two  howitzers  manned  by  the  foot 
artillery.  General  Chabran  will  have  two  brigadiers  and  an  adjutant- 
general  under  his  command.  His  headquarters  will  be  at  ChSlon-sur- 
Saone.  He  will  take  orders  only  from  the  Minister  of  War  .  .  . 

Colonel  Taupin,  who  is  at  Toulon,  will  receive  your  order  to  proceed 
to  Chalon  to  take  command  of  the  battalions  of  the  i8th,  32nd  and 
75th  Demi-brigades.  Colonel  Gaspard  will  take  the  battalions  of  the 

380  The  Rise  to  Power 

13th,  25th  and  85th  Demi-brigades.  The  battalions  of  the  4th,  2ist  and 
22nd  Light  Infantry  will  be  commanded  by  a  colonel  formerly  of  the 
Army  of  Italy  who  commanded  troops  through  the  Italian  campaign. 
The  battalions  of  the  6ist,  6pth  and  88th  will  be  commanded  by  a 
colonel  promoted  from  one  of  these  units. 

BONAPARTE 

528 
Decree 

Paris 

26  PluviSse,  Year  VIII  (15  Feb,  1800} 
The  Consuls  of  the  Republic  decree: 

The  Minister  of  Police  will  notify  all  journalists  that  they  must 
refrain  from  printing  anything  concerning  the  movements  of  the 
armed  forces. 

BONAPARTE 

529 
To  Major- General  Berthier 

Minister  of  War  Paris 

10  Ventose,  Year  VIII  (i  Mar,  1800} 

Citizen  Minister,  .  .  .  You  will  issue  orders  to  have  1,500,000 
biscuit  rations,  100,000  pints  of  brandy  and  100,000  bushels  of  oats 
collected  at  Geneva  as  soon  as  possible.  A  herd  of  1,000  bullocks  will  be 
assembled  at  Bourg  by  i  Germinal .  .  . 

You  will  take  steps:  i,  to  purchase  1,000  pack  mules  in  Dauphine 
and  the  other  mountainous  regions  of  France  ...  2,  to  assemble  at 
Geneva  as  soon  as  possible  20  sledges  for  8-  and  10  for  4-pounders. 

You  will  inform  General  Moreau  that  I  wish  his  chief  of  staff  to  come 
with  all  speed  to  Paris  with  the  order  of  battle  of  his  army.  On  his 
return  this  chief  of  staff  will  take  the  plan  for  the  first  operations  of  the 
campaign,  combined  with  that  of  the  other  armies .  .  . 

You  will  hasten  the  organization  of  the  Italian  legions,  so  that  they 
can  take  the  field  in  Germinal.  .  .  . 

You  will  give  orders  so  that  by  Germinal  there  are  at  Geneva  two 
million  cartridges  and  5,000  rounds  of  4  and  8  pound  round  and  case  shot 
and  howitzer  shells.  .  .  . 

You  will  send  Citizen  Gueriot  to  command  the  artillery  at  Geneva, 
to  organize  a  powder  factory  and  stores  for  the  depots. 

You  will  send  General  Sauret  to  command  at  Geneva.  You  will 
order  Generals  Bernadotte,  Macdonald,  Chambarlhac,  Lannes,  Brous- 
sier,  Marescot  and  Saint-Remy  to  prepare  themselves  for  immediate 
active  service;  also  Adjutants-general  Hulin,  Herbin  and  Nogues. 

BONAPARTE 

Marengo  3$i 

530 
To  General  Moreau 

C.-m-C.,  Army  of  the  Rhine  Paris 

10  Vent$se,  Year  VIII  (i  Mar,  1800} 

The  Minister  of  War  will  have  informed  you,  Citizen  General,  of  the 
organization  I  wish  you  to  give  to  your  army  so  that  it  will  be  in  a 
position  to  fulfil  all  the  objects  I  wish  to  obtain  in  the  next  campaign.  .  . 
It  is  not  impossible  that,  if  things  continue  to  go  well  here,  I  may  join 
you  for  a  few  days. 

The  English  are  still  making  preparations  on  the  islands,  which  force 
us  to  have  strong  forces  on  that  side.  .  .  It  is  not  possible  for  me  to  take 
more  than  12,000  or  15,000  men. 

I  am  preparing  a  good  division  of  demi-brigades  which  saw  no 
action  last  year  and  will  be  able  to  hit  hard. 

I  wish  Lemarois  to  go  to  those  places  where  Duroc  did  not  go, 
especially  to  the  Saint-Gotthard. 

BONAPARTE 

53i 
To  Major- General  Lefebvre 

G.O.C.,  14th  15th,  lyth  Military  Districts  Paris 

10  VentSse,  Year  VIII  (i  Mar,  1800) 

Please,  Citizen  General,  issue  the  necessary  orders  to  assemble  at 
Paris  as  quickly  as  possible  all  the  detachments  of  the  43rd  and  96th 
Demi-brigades,  the  8th  and  pth  Dragoons  and  the  I2th  Hussars.  Let  me 
know  what  these  various  units  lack  for  the  purpose  of  immediate  active 
service,  it  being  my  intention  to  form  them  into  the  ist  Division  of  the 
Reserve  Army  and  to  have  them  move  offas  soon  as  possible.  Embody 
conscripts  in  the  two  infantry  demi-brigades  so  as  to  bring  each  to  a 
strength  of  3,000. 

BONAPARTE 

532 
To  Major- General  Berthier 

Minister  of  War  Paris 

12  Ventose,  Year  VIII  (3  Mar,  1800} 

You  will  find  attached,  Citizen  Minister,  a  decree  for  die  formation 
of  the  Reserve  Army.  You  will  keep  the  whole  of  this  decree  secret,  but 
you  will  warn  all  those  mentioned  therein  to  prepare  to  leave  and  will 
take  all  necessary  steps  to  collect  at  Dijon  the  essential  supplies  for  the 
provisioning  of  this  army.  Headquarters  will  be  at  Dijon  and  the 
artillery  park  at  Auxonne. 

You  mil  no  doubt  think  it  necessary  to  dispatch  to  Dijon  as  soon  as 
possible  10,000  pairs  of  boots,  40,000  uniforms  and  other  clothing. 

382  The  Rise  to  Power 

Assemble  the  quartermaster-general  and  the  commanders  of  the 
different  arms,  so  that  each  can  report  to  you  on  the  organization  of  his 
service.  The  sledges  that  I  asked  should  be  made  at  Grenoble  can  be 
made  at  Auxonne. 

BONAPARTE 

533 
To  General  Mass&ia 

C.-m-C,  Army  of  Italy  Paris 

14  VentSse,  Year  VIII  (5  Mar,  1800) 

I  have  your  letters  of  the  5th,  Citizen  General.  800,000  francs  are  be- 
ing sent  off  weekly  for  your  army. 

I  am  assembling  a  Reserve  Army  at  Dijon,  to  be  commanded  by 
myself.  In  eight  or  ten  days  I  will  send  you  one  of  my  aides-de-camp 
with  the  plan  of  all  the  operations  for  the  coming  campaign,  by  which 
you  will  see  that  you  are  to  have  a  fine  role  and  one  not  beyond  the 
means  at  your  disposal. 

However,  if  you  fear  the  enemy  may  open  the  campaign  before  we 
do,  I  see  no  harm  in  your  recalling  2,000  of  the  6,000  men  on  the  Alps. 
Dauphine  is  under  snow  and,  besides,  the  army  I  am  going  to  collect  at 
Dijon  will  be  in  a  position  to  go  there. 

If  the  enemy  masses  his  forces  near  La  Spezia,  so  as  to  attack  you  from 
there  through  Novi  and  Montenotte,  leave  only  very  light  forces  at  the 
Tenda  Pass  . . . 

In  your  place  I  would  have  four-fifths  of  my  forces  at  Genoa  during 
Ventose  and  Germinal ...  As  to  Flor^al  and  Prairial,  it  will  be  a  different 
matter;  we  shall  have  taken  the  initiative  and  the  instructions  I  shall 
send  you  in  ten  days'  time  will  show  you  what  to  do. 

The  fort  of  Savona  must  be  well  provisioned,  and  all  your  depots 
should  be  able  to  retire  there  .  .  . 

If  the  enemy  is  so  stupid  as  to  collect  12,000  men  on  the  Riviera  be- 
tween La  Spezia  and  Genoa,  fall  upon  him  with  all  your  forces  and 
massacre  him. 

I  repeat,  it  seems  to  me  that  you  are  in  a  good  position;  make  the 
most  of  it.  Do  not  be  afraid  if  tne  enemy  appears  on  your  rear.  Aban- 
don at  once  all  positions  he  attacks  so  as  to  be  on  one  of  his  flanks  with 
all  your  forces  . .  . 

In  the  positions  we  occupy,  one  is  never  beaten  if  one  has  the  will  to 
conquer.  Rembember  our  great  days! 

In  the  usual  Austrian  manner,  the  enemy  will  make  three  attacks,  by 
Levante,  Novi  and  Montenotte;  refuse  two  of  these  and  meet  the  third 
with  all  your  forces. 

I  imagine  the  forts  of  Vintirniglia  and  San  Remo  are  provisioned  and 
armed  so  as  to  be  able  to  hold  out  against  field  artillery  and  light  troops. 

Marengo  383 

In  any  case,  I  do  not  think  it  would  be  a  serious  matter  if  you  were  to 
blow  up  the  fort  at  Vintimiglia. 

BONAPARTE 

534 
To  Major- General  Berthier 

Minister  of  War  Paris 

1$  Ventose,  Year  VIII  (6  March,  1800} 

The  soth  Demi-brigade  has  twelve  Piedmontese  officers.  I  have  no 
intention  of  wronging  these  brave  men  who  have  shown  themselves 
well-disposed  towards  France;  but  I  wish  you  to  place  part  of  them  in 
the  Italic  Legion  and  to  distribute  the  rest,  one  by  one,  in  the  demi- 
brigades  of  the  Republic. 

BONAPARTE 

535 
Decree 

Paris 

17  VentSse,  Year  VIII  (8  Mar,  1800) 
The  Consuls  of  the  Republic  decree: 

ARTICLE  i.  A  Reserve  Army,  60,000  strong,  will  be  formed. 

ART.  2.  It  will  be  commanded  by  the  First  Consul  in  person. 

ART.  3.  The  artillery  will  be  commanded  by  General  Saint- 
Remy;  the  park  by  Colonel  Gassendi;  the  engineers  by  Chief  In- 
spector of  Engineers  Marescot. 

ART.  4.  Quartermaster  Dubreton  will  be  Quartermaster-General. 

ART.  5.  The  various  units  and  the  conscripts  which  are  to  compose 
this  Army  will  proceed  at  once  to  Dijon;  they  will  be  cantoned  in  the 
towns  within  a  radius  of  twenty  leagues. 

ART.  6.  The  Minister  of  War  is  charged  with  the  execution  of  the 
present  decree.  He  will  take  all  measures  to  assemble  at  Dijon  every- 
thing necessary  for  the  armament,  clothing  and  equipment  of  the 
Reserve  Army. 

BONAPARTE 

536 
To  General  Brune 

C.-m-C.,  Army  of  the  West  Paris 

21  Ventose,  Year  VIII  (12  Mar,  iBoo) 

I  have  your  letters  of  the  igth,  Citizen  General.  Do  your  best  to  stop 
the  battalion  of  the  5 8th  from  embarking  and  have  it  sent  to  Dijon. 

You  know  how  much  words  mean  to  die-soldiers;  so  let  the  various 
demi-brigades  know  that  they  form  the  2nd  and  3rd  Divisions  of  the 
Reserve  Army  ... 

384  The  Rise  to  Power 

Send  me  the  route  orders  of  your  different  troops  so  that  I  know 
where  they  are  camped  each  day  .  .  . 

On  the  25th  I  am  inspecting  the  24th,  43rd  and  96th  which  form  the 
ist  Division  of  the  Reserve  Army,  with  3,000  cavalry  and  eighteen 
guns.  That  is  13,000  men,  who  leave  the  next  day  .  .  . 

By  10  Germinal  I  hope  to  have  50,000  men  at  Dijon  .  .  ,  The  Mini- 
ster of  War  is  issuing  an  order  that  General  Bethencourt  should  replace 
General  d'Arnaud,  who  appears  to  me  much  too  slow  .  .  . 

If  we  have  war,  I  hope  that  we  shall  come  out  of  it  brilliantly;  if  we 
have  peace,  the  foreign  powers  will  be  convinced  that  we  were  in  a 
position  to  force  it  on  them  .  .  . 

BONAPARTE 

537 
To  General  Moreau 

C.-m.C,  Army  of  the  Rhine  Paris 

21  Ventose,  Year  VIII  (12  Mar,  1800} 

The  Minister  of  War,  Citizen  Minister,  will  have  sent  you  the  decree 
for  the  creation  of  the  Reserve  Army.  It  will  not  be  only  on  paper.  The 
ist  Division  leaves  Paris  on  the  26th.  It  is  composed  of  the  24th,  59 th, 
96th  and  43rd,  with  twelve  guns  and  four  regiments  of  Hussars  and 
Dragoons,  making  15,000  men. 

The  2nd  Division,  composed  of  the  6th  Light  and  the  22nd  and  40th 
of  the  Line  and  six  guns,  should  by  now  have  left  Nantes.  The  3rd 
Division  also  leaves  Nantes  within  a  weeek;  it  contains  the  I9th  Light, 
the  5  8th  and  6oth  of  the  Line  and  six  guns.  All  these  units  are  at  a  strength 
of  2,500  men  and  will  be  at  3,000  on  arrival  at  Dijon  .  .  .  The  4th 
Division  is  forming  in  Paris  and  will  not  be  ready  before  the  first  week 
of  Germinal. 

I  imagine  that  Dessolle*  will  arrive  tomorrow.  Massena  should  have 
concentrated  at  Genoa  all  the  forces  which  were  on  the  Alps.  He  has 
40,000  men  and,  if  he  plays  his  part  well  and  does  not  give  way  to 
groundless  fears,  he  should  be  able  to  deal  with  60,000.  For  the  enemy 
to  have  60,000  infantry  in  action  against  him  he  must  have  at  least 
90,000  in  his  army,  counting  the  garrisons  in  his  fortresses  and  the 
observation  corps  at  Bellinzona  and  Milan;  and  90,000  infantry  means 
120,000  with  the  cavalry  and  artillery  .  .  . 

Leave  only  depots  at  Mainz  and  in  your  fortresses.  Collect  all  your 
strength  between  Strasbourg  and  Constance.  With  an  advance-guard 
of  30,000  men  and  a  reserve  of  50,000  one  can  talk  big. 

1,500,000  francs  left  for  your  army  last  week. 

I  salute  you  as  a  friend, 

BONAPARTE 
*  Chief  of  Staff,  Army  of  the  Rhine. 

Marengo  385 

538 
To  General  Mass£na 

C.-w-C.,  Army  of  Italy  Paris 

21  Ventose,  Year  VIII  (12  Mar,  1800} 

Your  aide-de-camp,  Reille,  has  given  me  your  letter  of  9  Ventose, 
Citizen  General.  News  from  Marseilles  tells  me  that  several  ships  full  of 
corn  have  already  left  for  Genoa;  I  hope,  therefore,  that  you  will  find 
yourself  rather  better  supplied  .  .  . 

The  campaign  will  soon  be  opening  on  the  Rhine.  Our  blows  there 
will  draw  the  attention  of  the  enemy.  Melas,  who  is  opposed  to  you, 
is  not  a  very  clever  man;  he  has  neither  your  military  talents  nor  your 
energy.  The  Russians,  whom  your  troops  seem  to  respect,  are  now 
back  in  their  own  country  .  .  . 

Hold  no  line,  but  keep  all  your  troops  grouped  together  round 
Genoa,  with  your  depots  in  Savona.  Those  are  true  military  principles; 
acting  thus  you  will  beat  50,000  men  with  30,000  and  cover  yourself 
with  immortal  glory.  The  Government  and  the  public  will  know  how 
to  appreciate  the  difficulties  you  will  have  had  to  overcome.  .  .  . 

Reille  will  leave  in  four  or  five  days  with  the  plan  of  campaign. 

Agents  have  gone  to  Languedoc  to  hasten  the  export  of  corn.  Much 
is  being  sent  down  the  Rhone.  I  cannot  describe  to  you  my  indignation 
with  those  miserable  contractors.  I  am  extremely  grieved  at  the  wretched 
position  you  are  in;  but  I  count  on  your  zeal  and  ability. 

BONAPARTE 

539 
To  General  Moreau 

C.-m-C.,  Army  of  the  Rhine  Paris 

24  VentSse,  Year  VIII  (15  Mar,  1800) 

I  have  only  today  received  your  letter  of  the  2ist,  Citizen  General. 
1,400,000  francs  were  decreed  for  your  Army  yesterday;  I  will  give 
orders  to  have  it  sent  in  silver. 

Since  the  weather  is  still  severe  and  you  see  difficulties  in  feeding 
yourself  in  the  positions  I  indicated,  delay  your  movement .  . . 

I  think  that  by  15  Germinal  the  Reserve  will  be  near  enough  to  you 
for  the  whole  of  your  Army  to  be  available, 

General  Dessolle  will  leave  on  the  26th.  As  a  result  of  conferences  I 
have  had  with  him  it  is  necessary  for  you  to  issue  immediate  orders: 
i.  To  repair  the  roads  from  Brunnen  to  Altorf  so  that  cavalry  and 
infantry  can  use  them.  2.  To  repair  the  roads  from  Stanz  to  Brunnen 
and  Altorf.  3.  To  collect  at  Luzern  10,000  bushels  of  oats  and  500,000 
to  600,000  rations  of  biscuit  and  brandy ...  5.  To  hasten  the  flotilla  on 
Lake  Constance  so  as  to  have  superiority  on  the  lake  if  possible.  I  am 
sending  you  two  or  three  naval  officers  to  command  your  boats. 

3  86  The  Rise  to  Power 

I  am  now  assured  on  all  sides  that  die  25,000  Russians  who  are  on 
Jersey  have  had  orders  to  return  home.  If  that  is  true,  I  shall  be  able  to 
increase  the  Reserve  by  a  good  division  of  8,000  to  10,000  men.  . . 

A  64-gun  English  ship  has  run  aground  off  Brest. 

BONAPARTE 

540 
To  General  Moreau 

C.-m-C.,  Army  of  the  Rhine  Paris 

25  Ventose,  Year  VIII  (16  Mar,  iSoo) 

Citizen  General,  General  Dessolle  will  give  you  my  views  on  the 
campaign  which  is  about  to  open.  He  will  tell  you  that  no  one  takes  a 
greater  interest  than  I  in  your  personal  glory  and  happiness. 

The  English  are  embarking  in  force.  What  are  they  up  to?  Today  I 
am  a  kind  of  puppet  who  has  lost  liberty  and  happiness.  Grandeur  is 
fine,  but  in  memory  and  in  the  imagination.  I  envy  your  happy  lot:  at 
the  head  of  brave  men  you  are  going  to  do  splendid  things.  I  would 
gladly  exchange  my  consular  purple  for  the  epaulettes  of  a  colonel 
under  your  command. 

I  much  hope  that  circumstances  will  allow  me  to  come  and  shake 
your  hand.  But,  in  any  case,  my  confidence  in  you  is  complete,  in  all 

respects. 

BONAPARTE 

Note  in  The  Monitor' 

Paris 

29  VentSse,  Year  VIII  (20  Mar,  1800) 

The  First  Consul  receives  many  letters  from  young  citizens  eager  to 
show  their  attachment  to  the  Republic  and  their  desire  to  be  associated 
with  its  efforts  to  conquer  peace.  Touched  by  their  devotion,  he 
receives  this  assurance  of  it  with  keen  interest;  glory  awaits  them  at 
Dijon.  It  is  when  he  sees  them  enrolled  under  the  flags  of  the  Reserve 
Army  that  he  proposes  to  thank  and  reward  them  for  their  zeal. 

BONAPARTE 

542 
To  Citizen  Talleyrand 

Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs 

2pVentSse9  Year  VIII  (20  Mar,  1800} 

Citizen  Minister,  I  wish  you  to  make  known  to  Citizens  Serbelloni, 
Justiniani  and  to  the  Neapolitan  agents  that  it  appears  to  me  necessary 
for  their  Government  to  issue  proclamations  and  decrees  requiring 

Marengo  387 

the  Cisalpines,  Neapolitans  and  Romans  to  rejoin  the  Italic  legions 
without  delay  to  serve,  each  as  he  best  may,  in  the  coming  campaign. 
You  will  put  nothing  on  paper. 

BONAPARTE 

543 
To  General  Moreau 

C.-m-C.,  Army  of  the  Rhine  Paris 

1  Germinal  Year  VIII  (22  Mar,  1800} 

Citizen  General,  having  considered  the  position  of  our  troops  in 
Switzerland,  on  the  Rhine,  in  Italy,  and  the  formation  of  the  Reserve 
Army  at  Dijon,  the  Consuls  of  the  Republic  have  ordered  the 
following  plan  of  campaign: 

1.  It  is  necessary  to  open  the  campaign  between  20  and  30  Germinal 
at  the  latest. 

2.  The  present  Army  of  the  Rhine  will  be  divided  into  an  army 
corps  and  a  reserve  corps.  The  reserve  corps,  under  the  orders  of 
General  Lecourbe,*  will  comprise  one  quarter  of  the  infantry  and 
artillery  of  the  army  and  one  fifth  of  the  cavalry. 

3.  Between  20  and  30  Germinal  you  will  cross  the  Rhine  with  your 
army  corps,  taking  advantage  of  the  occupation  of  Switzerland  to 
turn  the  Black  Forest  and  nullify  any  preparations  the  enemy  may 
have  made  to  defend  the  gorges. 

4.  The  reserve  corps  will  be  specially  charged  with  the  defence  of 
Switzerland.  Its  advance-guard,  5,000  to  6,000  strong,  will  occupy  the 
Saint-Gotthard.  It  will  have  six  4-pounders  on  sledge  mountings .  .  . 
The  first  object  of  your  reserve  corps  during  your  movements  in 
Suabia  will  be  to  protect  Switzerland  from  attacks  that  the  enemy 
might  make  through  Feldkirch,  the  Saint-Gotthard  and  the  Simplon. 
It  is  known  to  the  Government  that  the  enemy  has  collected  consider- 
able stores  on  the  Italian  lakes. 

5.  The  aim  of  your  movement  in  Germany  should  be  to  drive  back 
the  enemy  in  Bavaria  so  as  to  intercept  his  direct  communication  with 
Milan  by  way  of  Lake  Constance  and  Graubiinden. 

6.  As  soon  as  this  aim  is  achieved,  and  it  is  certain  that  the  main 
enemy  army  cannot  in  any  circumstances,  even  supposing  it  forces 
you  to  retire,  reconquer  the  ground  it  will  have  lost  in  less  than  ten 
or  twelve  days,  it  is  die  instruction  of  the  Consuls  to  have  Switzerland 
guarded  by  the  rear  divisions  of  the  Reserve  Army,  composed  of  less 
experienced  troops  than  the  units  composing  your  reserve,  and  to 
detach  your  reserve,  with  the  elite  of  the  Reserve  Army,  to  enter 

*  In  the  event  this  command  fell  to  Moncey,  Lecourbe  remaining  as  a  corps 
ommander  under  Moreau. 

388  The  Rise  to  Power 

Italy  by  the  Saint-Gotthard  and  the  Simplon  and  join  with  the  Army 
of  Italy  in  the  plains  of  Lombardy. 

This  kst  operation  will  be  confided  to  the  Commander-in-chief 
of  the  Reserve  Army  assembled  at  Dijon,  who  will  confer  with  you 
and  whom  the  Consuls  are  about  to  appoint. 

By  order  of  the  First  Consul 

544 
To  General  Berthier 

C.-m-C.,  Reserve  Army  Paris 

12  Germinal  Year  VIII  (2  April,  1800) 

The  confidence  of  the  Government,  Citizen  General,  and  the  military 
talents  of  which  you  have  given  so  many  proofs  call  you  to  the  com- 
mand of  an  army.*  During  the  winter  you  have  reorganized  the 
Ministry  of  War  and  provided  for  the  needs  of  our  armies  so  far  as 
circumstances  have  allowed.  During  the  spring  and  summer  it  remains 
for  you  to  lead  our  soldiers  to  victory,  me  surest  means  of  achieving 
peace  and  consolidating  the  Republic. 

Please  receive,  Citizen  General,  my  assurance  of  the  Government's 
satisfaction  with  your  conduct  at  the  Ministry. 

BONAPARTE 

545 
To  General  Berthier 

C.-m-C.,  Reserve  Army  Paris 

19  Germinal,  Year  VIII  (p  April,  1800) 

Citizen  General, .  .  .  The  moment  approaches  when  the  columns 
of  the  Army  of  the  Rhine  go  into  action,  and  it  is  the  Reserve  Army, 
under  your  orders,  which  must  establish  the  necessary  unity  between 
those  of  the  Rhine  and  of  Italy  and  form  the  centre  of  the  great  line 
of  operations,  whose  right  is  at  Genoa  and  whose  left  on  the  Danube. 

The  most  perfect  co-operation  being  essential,  it  is  the  intention  of 
the  Consuls  that  before  going  to  the  Reserve  Army  you  should  proceed 
to  the  Headquarters  of  die  Army  of  the  RHne  to  confer  with  General 
Moreau  on  the  series  of  combined  operations. 

You  have  three  objects  to  fulfil:  the  first  is  to  support  the  movement 

*  The  formal  command  of  the  Reserve  Army  was  given  to  Berthier  not,  as  is 
often  said,  because  the  Constitution  forbade  the  First  Consul  to  command  troops 
(the  idea  arose  from  his  own  statement  at  St.  Helena),  for  there  was  no  such 
prohibition,  but  for  practical  reasons.  The  army  needed  a  Commander-in-Chief 
at  all  times,  but  Bonaparte  intended,  and  could  afford  the  time,  to  take  control  only 
during  the  decisive  phases;  in  this  way  he  was  able  to  come  and  go  without  dis- 
rupting the  command  structure,  yet  when  he  was  present  Berthier  reverted  in  all 
but  name  to  his  usual  r61e  of  Chief  of  Staff.  The  arrangement  was  not  altogether 
^PPY*  f°r  thsre  was  a  good  deal  of  confusing  duplication  of  work  between 
Berthier  and  the  nominal  Chief  of  Staff,  Dupont. 

Marengo  389 

that  the  Army  of  the  Rhine  will  make  in  Suabia  to  open  the  campaign, 
and  to  help  it  if  necessary;  the  second  is  to  penetrate  into  Italy  with  the 
major  part  of  the  Reserve  Army  and  the  column  of  General  Lecourbe, 
which  will  there  come  under  your  orders;  the  third  is  to  leave  in 
Switzerland,  after  your  passage  of  the  Saint-Gotthard  and  the  Simplon, 
a  force  of  troops  sufficient  to  guarantee  it  against  all  attack  from  the 
direction  of  Rheineck  and  Feldkirch.  As  soon  as  you  enter  Italy  this 
force  will  be  attached  to  the  Army  of  the  Rhine. 

It  is  on  these  various  points  that  you  are  to  consult  with  General 
Moreau.  Since  it  is  essential  that  the  Government  knows  precisely  what 
you  have  agreed,  the  Consuls  require  you  to  forward  me  a  written 
report,  signed  by  both  .  .  . 

By  order  of  the  First  Consul 

546 
To  General  Mass£na 

C.-m-C.,  Army  of  Italy  Paris 

19  Germinal,  Year  VIII  (p  April,  1800} 

Citizen  General,  the  Consuls  of  the  Republic  require  me  to  inform 
you  of  the  plans  they  have  formed  for  the  next  campaign. 

The  operations  of  the  Army  of  the  Rhine,  commanded  by  General 
Moreau,  and  of  the  Reserve  Army  under  the  orders  of  General 
Berthier  will  be  complementary  and  will  be  carried  out  with  the 
closest  co-operation.  The  Army  of  the  Rhine  will  take  the  field  first, 
between  the  20th  and  soth  of  this  month  . .  . 

It  is  at  the  precise  moment  when  the  troops  directed  by  General 
Berthier  reach  Italy  that  you  must  combine  your  movements  with  his, 
so  as  to  draw  the  attention  of  the  enemy,  obliging  him  to  divide  his 
forces,  and  to  effect  your  junction  with  the  corps  which  have  entered 
Italy.  Until  then  you  will  remain  on  the  defensive.  The  mountains 
covering  you,  which  render  the  enemy  cavalry  and  artillery  quite 
inactive,  ensure  your  local  superiority,  that  is  to  say,  the  certainty  of 
holding  your  positions,  which  must  until  then  be  your  sole  true 
objective. 

An  earlier  offensive  on  your  part  would  be  dangerous,  because  as 
soon  as  you  entered  the  plains  it  would  bring  into  action  again  the 
enemy  forces  paralyzed  by  the  mountainous  nature  of  the  country  you 
now  occupy.  It  would  be  impossible  to  send  you  directly  sufficient 
supports  to  give  you  an  effective  superiority.  It  is  through  Switzerland 
that  this  help  will  reach  you,  taking  the  enemy  in  the  rear.  Once  you 
have  joined  forces,  this  superiority  will  be  established,  .  .  .  and,  by  its 
own  courage,  the  French  Army  will  emerge  from  the  fearful  penury 
from  which  we  suffer  and  which  we  cannot  otherwise  remedy 
effectively.  . .  . 

390 

The  Rise  to  Power 

For  your  advance  into  Italy  you  will  assemble  all  the  forces  you  have 
available  in  your  rear  as  far  as  the  Var.  From  those  dispersed  between 
the  Var  and  the  Mont  Cenis  you  will  take  as  reinforcements  all  that  you 
judge  reasonable  and  prudent;  those  remaining  between  the  Mont 
Cenis  and  the  Valais  can  form  a  distinct  force  which  will  be  put  at 
the  disposal  of  General  Berthier  to  assist  his  movements. 

If  you  think  you  can  feed  the  cavalry  that  is  on  the  Rhone  for  this 
short  period,  move  it  up  to  reinforce  what  you  have  with  you.  If  this 
is  not  the  case,  let  me  know  so  that  I  can  have  it  assemble  at  Lyons 
and  approach  by  the  nearest  frontier. 

Once  your  operations  have  reached  this  point  I  will  forward  to  you 
the  further  instructions  given  to  me  by  the  Consuls  for  the  completion 
of  the  campaign. 

There  is  no  need  for  me  to  impress  upon  you,  Citizen  General,  the 
importance  of  the  most  complete  secrecy  in  such  circumstances.  You 
will  make  all  the  demonstrations  and  movements  that  you  judge 
expedient  in  order  to  mislead  the  enemy  as  to  the  true  plan  of  campaign 
and  to  persuade  him  that  he  will  be  first  attacked  by  yourself.  There- 
fore, you  will  exaggerate  the  size  of  your  forces  and  announce  huge 
and  imminent  reinforcements  coming  from  the  interior.  .  .  . 

It  is  the  intention  of  the  Consuls  that  in  effecting  your  junction  with 
General  Berthier  you  should  move  as  far  as  possible  towards  your  left, 
even  passing  on  this  side  of  Turin  if  you  think  it  necessary  to  avoid 
compromising  the  safety  of  the  Army. 

By  order  of  the  First  Consul 

The  Minister  of  War 
CARNOT 

547 
To  General  Massena 

C.-w-C.,  Army  of  Italy  Paris 

21  Germinal,  Year  VIII  (ll  April,  1800} 

Citizen  General,  Adjutant-general  Reille  brings  you  the  plan  of 
campaign.  The  Army  of  the  Rhine  is  120,000  strong,  the  Reserve 
Army  40,000. 1  have  every  reason  to  hope  for  brilliant  successes  which 
will  rescue  you  from  the  unhappy  position  you  are  in. 

You  will  be  informed  by  General  Berthier  and  directly  by  the 
Minister  of  War  of  events  on  the  Rhine  and  in  Switzerland,  so  that 
you  can  act  in  a  worthy  manner  at  the  favourable  moment. 

If  you  can  do  without  Adjutant-general  Reille,  I  should  like  to 
have  him  with  me:  you  know  the  esteem  I  have  always  had  for  this 
officer. 

BONAPARTE 

Marengo  391 

548 
To  General  Moreau 

C.-m-C.,  Army  of  the  Rhine  Paris 

21  Germinal  Year  VIII  (11  April,  1800} 

\  have  just  received  your  letter  of  18  Germinal,  Citizen  General. 
General  Berthier,  Commander-in-chief  of  the  Reserve  Army,  is  going 
to  Bale  to  confer  with  you  on  the  execution  of  the  plan  of  campaign. 

The  confidence  of  the  Government  rests  entirely  on  these  two  armies 
and  their  generals. 

The  Army  of  Italy  is  weak.  It  is  informed  of  the  role  it  has  to  play. 
Its  position  can  be  assured  only  by  the  vigorous  movements  of  the 
Army  of  the  Rhine  and  the  Reserve  Army. 

Everything  has  been  done  to  offer  a  basis  for  peace;  but  moderation 
has  never  been  one  of  the  qualities  of  the  Austrian  when  victorious. 
Let  us  hope  he  will  change  his  tune  if  our  operations  succeed. 

Rest  assured  that  none  hold  you  in  higher  esteem  than  I. 

BONAPARTE 

549 
To  Citizen  Carnot 

Minister  of  War  Paris 

24  Germinal,  Year  VIII  (14  April,  1800) 

Citizen  Minister  .  .  .  You  will  inform  the  general  commanding  the 
Reserve  Army  that  the  I4th  of  the  Line,  which  was  formerly  destined 
for  that  Army,  will  no  longer  form  part  of  it,  as  it  has  been  replaced 
by  the  ipth  Light,  which  has  reached  Dijon  from  the  Army  of  the 
West. 

Thus,  the  Reserve  Army  will  be  composed  of  fourteen  demi- 
brigades  of  the  Line,  apart  from  the  iyth  Light  and  the  39th,  which 
should  join  it  from  the  Army  of  Italy  and  are  two  shattered  units. 

Please  inspect,  on  the  28th,  the  two  battalions  of  the  soth  and  the 
squadrons  of  the  ipth  Dragoons  and  3rd  Cavalry,  which  must  leave 
for  the  Reserve  Army  on  i  Floreal,  and  give  orders  to  have  issued  to 
these  units  whatever  they  are  lacking. 

I  wish  you  to  take  steps  so  that  the  remainder  of  the  ipth  Dragoons 
and  the  3rd  Cavalry  can  leave  for  the  Reserve  Army  during  Floreal. 

BONAPARTE 

550 
To  Citizen  Carnot 

Minister  of  War  ,  Paris 

24  Germinal,  Year  VIII  (14  April,  1800} 

The  ten  sledge-mountings  which  have  been  made  at  Paris  have  not 
yet  left.  But  the  Reserve  Army  can  make  no  movement  until  they 

392  The  Rise  to  Power 

arrive,  since  they  are  for  the  use  of  its  advance  guard.  I  think  it  necessary 
to  have  these  sledges  mounted  on  artillery  wagons  and  to  have  them 
sent  off  tomorrow,  moving  by  forced  marches  and  without  stopping. 
Inform  the  general  commanding  the  Reserve  Army  of  the  route  taken 
by  these  vehicles,  so  that,  in  case  of  urgent  need,  he  can  order  them 
to  come  by  extraordinary  means. 

BONAPARTB 

551 
To  General  Brune 

C.-m-C,  Army  of  the  West  Paris 

28  Germinal,  Year  VIII  (18  April,  1800} 

I  have  just  received  your  letter,  Citizen  General.  Your  desire  to  come 
to  Paris  is  quite  natural;  of  all  tasks  the  one  you  have  been  carrying 
out  these  last  three  months  is  the  most  distasteful. 

In  the  course  of  Floreal  your  presence  will  become  necessary  at 
Dijon.  Operations  are  about  to  begin  on  the  Rhine.  General  Berthier 
will  march  with  part  of  the  Reserve  Army  and  that  army  will  therefore 
need  another  commander-in-chief.  I  destine  this  post  for  you.  It  will 
be  best  if  you  are  able  to  rest  for  a  fortnight  in  Paris. 

However,  I  believe  it  necessary  to  retain  a  commander-in-chief  with 
the  Army  of  the  West  throughout  the  whole  campaign  and  I  propose 
to  appoint  General  Bernadotte;  I  hope  he  will  follow  in  your  steps 
and  continue  your  work.  . .  . 

BONAPARTE 

552 
To  General  Berthier 

C.-m-C,  Reserve  Army,  at  Dijon  Paris 

2  Flortal,  Year  VIII  (22  April  1800} 

Citizen  General,  I  have  received  your  letters  of  the  26th,  from  Bale, 
and  the  29th  from  Dijon.  I  have  read  with  pleasure  what  you  have 
agreed  with  Moreau,  which  seems  to  me  reasonable. 

If  the  war  on  the  Rhine  does  not  develop  decisively  enough  for 
General  Moreau  to  be  able  to  make  so  strong  a  detachment  as  we  wish, 
the  operation  in  Italy  may  still  be  possible  with  a  detachment  of  five 
demi-brigades  and  2,000  cavalry.  From  reports  reaching  me  from  the 
different  departments  I  imagine  your  fourteen  demi-brigades  will  be 
recruited  and  completed  towards  the  middle  of  Floreal,  which  will 
give  you  some  40,000  men;  if  it  is  true  that  you  have  5,000  Italians, 
8,000  men  from  the  depots  of  the  Army  of  the  East,  5,000  cavalry  and 
2,000  artillerymen,  that  would  bring  you  up  to  60,000  men.  What  is 
to  stop  you  acting  independently,  even  if  General  Moreau  is  not  able 
to  give  you  big  reinforcements? 

Marengo  393 

General  Turreau,  who  is  at  Brian^on,  could  also  take  the  field  with 
3,000  or  4,000  men. 

In  any  event,  keep  your  army  together  and  pay  no  attention  to  the 
commandants  of  Lyons  and  other  towns,  who  will  be  asking  you  for 
troops.  I  await  a  situation  report  from  your  army,  which  will  inform 
me  of  its  position  and  requirements  . , , 

Marmont  should  have  arrived. 

Let  me  know  how  the  depot  ordered  at  Geneva  and  the  raising  of 
the  2,000  mules  and  your  herd  of  1,000  bullocks  are  progressing. 

Salute  and  friendship. 

BONAPARTE 

553 
To  General  Moreau 

C.-m-C.,  Army  of  the  Rhine  Paris 

2  P/orArf,  Year  VIII  (22  April,  1800} 

I  have  received  your  letter  of  the  27th,  Citizen  General.  I  have  seen 
the  reply  from  M.  Kray,  which  was  what  I  had  expected.  The  season 
is  fine;  your  troops  are  numerous  and  ably  led.  Our  confidence  is 
complete.  Send  us  flags  quickly  and  take  many  prisoners.  We  must  not 
hold  our  hand  until  we  have  achieved  results  which  wipe  out  our  losses. 

BONAPARTE 

554 
To  Citizen  Carnot 

Minister  of  War  Paris 

4  Floral  Year  VIII  (24  April  1800) 

The  Army  of  Italy  is  at  grips  with  the  Austrian  army.  Whether  it 
is  vanquished  or  victorious  it  is  essential  that  the  Reserve  Army  should 
not  waste  an  hour.  If  we  are  the  victors,  the  Austrian  army  will  be 
considerably  weakened  and  in  no  condition  to  resist  the  Reserve  Army. 
If  our  Army  of  Italy  is  beaten  and  forced  to  hold  the  line  of  Borghetto 
or  some  other  in  order  to  defend  the  Maritime  Alps,  it  is  still  essential 
for  the  Reserve  Army  to  attack  Piedmont  or  the  Milanese  so  as  to 
make  a  diversion  and  oblige  the  Austrian  army  to  return  to  the  defence 
of  Lombardy  and  its  stores. 

Please,  therefore,  order  General  Berthier: 

1.  To  move  the  Reserve  Army  to  Geneva  with  all  speed; 

2.  To  have  all  the  munitions  and  foodstuffs  which  have  been  assem- 
bled at  Geneva  sent  by  the  lake  to  Villeneuve; 

3.  To  move  as  soon  as  possible  into  Piedmont  and  Lombardy,  cross- 
ing either  the  Great  Saint-Bernard  or  the  Simplon. 

Whatever  the  result  of  events  in  Italy,  the  Austrian  army,  which  is 
piled  up  round  Genoa  and  Savona,  is  so  much  the  further  from  the 

394  The  Rise  to  Power 

mountain  passes  and  in  a  state  of  disorganization  such  that  it  is  quite 
out  of  the  question  for  it  to  hold  its  own  against  the  40,000  men  that 
General  Berthier  can  easily  collect .  .  . 

Before  this  army  has  crossed  the  Saint-Bernard  and  the  Simplon 
we  shall  have  positive  news  of  the  situation  of  our  Army  of  Italy. 

I  have  learnt  today  by  the  telegraph  from  Bale  and  Strasbourg  that 
there  is  no  change.  Repeat  the  order  to  General  Moreau  to  attack  the 
enemy.  Impress  upon  him  that  his  deky  is  seriously  compromising  the 
safety  of  the  Republic. 

Send  a  special  message  to  General  Saint-Hilaire,  commanding  the 
8th  Military  District,  to  assemble  all  forces  of  infantry,  cavalry,  etc. 
which  may  be  in  his  District,  so  as  to  be  able  to  reinforce  the  Army  of 
Italy.  .  .  . 

Write  also  to  General  Massena  that  we  still  have  no  official  news  of 
what  is  happening  in  Italy;  that  the  Rhine  and  Reserve  Armies  are  on 
the  march;  that  we  await  impatiently  the  outcome  of  events,  of  which 
we  are  still  only  imperfectly  aware. 

BONAPARTE 

555 
To  General  Berthier 

C.-m-C.,  Reserve  Army,  at  Dijon  Paris 

4  Florid,  Year  VIII  (24  April,  1800} 

Yesterday,  Citizen  General,  the  Minister  of  War  sent  you  a  copy  of 
a  letter  about  the  Army  of  Italy.  I  still  have  no  official  news,  but  what 
has  come  to  my  knowledge  is  as  follows. 

On  16  Germinal  General  Melas  had  his  headquarters  at  Cairo;  he 
had  some  20,000  men  with  him;  he  forced  the  redoubt  of  Monte 
Legino,  captured  Savona  and,  on  the  iyth,  San  Giacomo. 

The  French  division  which  was  at  Montenotte  retreated  to  Genoa 
after  having  reinforced  the  garrison  of  Savona.  The  two  divisions 
under  Suchet's  orders  retreated  to  the  Borghetto  line. 

Meanwhile,  on  the  lyth  a  division  of  15,000  Austrians  attacked  La 
Bocchetta.  Massena  went  there  in  person,  defeated  them  and  took 
2,500  prisoners. 

A  letter  from  Nice,  dated  the  23  rd,  says  didt  General  Suchet  had 
just  taken  1,200  prisoners.  General  Massena's  movements  are  unknown, 
but  it  appears  that  on  the  23rd  communications  had  not  been  re- 
established. 

As  soon  as  Massena  does  reopen  his  communications,  we  shall 
necessarily  receive  a  messenger,  and,  since  I  have  no  news  today,  I 
am  inclined  to  think  he  had  not  succeeded  in  doing  so  by  the  26th. 

^  What  will  Massena  do,  then?  If  he  fails  in  his  efforts  to  re-establish 
his  communications,  he  may  remain  at  Genoa  as  long  as  he  has  rations; 

Marengo  395 

or  he  may  move  rapidly  to  Acqui  so  as  to  reach  the  Alps  from  there; 
or  else  he  may  go  to  the  Parmesan  or  some  other  part  of  Italy  to  find 
food. 

In  this  state  of  affairs  you  will  see  how  essential  it  is  for  the  Reserve 
Army  to  make  a  big  effort  in  Italy  whatever  die  operations  of  the 
Army  of  the  Rhine. 

For  this  you  have  two  approaches:  the  Saint-Bernard  and  the 
Simplon.  You  can  reinforce  yourself  with  the  troops  Moreau  has  left 
in  the  Valais. 

By  the  Saint-Bernard  you  will  be  operating  much  nearer  to  the  lake 
of  Geneva  and  from  there  on  your  supplies  will  be  far  more  assured. 
But  you  must  make  very  sure  of  the  state  of  the  roads  from  Aosta 
to  the  Po.  The  Italian  corps  should  be  able  to  supply  all  the  necessary 
information. 

By  the  Simplon  you  will  at  once  reach  far  better  country. 

Nothing  in  Italy  will  be  able  to  resist  your  40,000  men.  Whether 
the  Austrian  army  emerges  victorious  or  beaten,  it  will  certainly  not 
be  able  to  withstand  the  shock  of  a  fresh  army. 

Before  your  army  reaches  Geneva  and  Villeneuve  I  shall  have 
positive  news  of  the  situation  of  the  Army  of  Italy,  which  will  enable 
me  to  give  you  more  precise  instructions. 

Your  biggest  task  in  all  this  will  be  to  ensure  your  food  supplies .  .  . 

The  30th  left  three  days  ago,  but  there  are  many  conscripts  in  this 
demi-brigade.  The  72nd,  a  good  and  excellent  demi-brigade,  has  left 
Caen  and  is  proceeding  to  Dijon  by  forced  marches.  You  can  regard 
this  unit  as  a  kind  of  reserve. 

Leave  Vignolle  at  Dijon  and  also  the  depots  of  all  units  to  reorganize 
the  conscripts  as  they  arrive  and  send  them  on  to  you. 

Send  back  a  situation  report  on  your  army  by  my  aide-de-camp. 

BONAPARTE 

As  a  precaution,  you  probably  ought  to  send  an  officer  or  a  war 
commissary  to  Chambery  to  prepare  a  commissariat  and  supplies  there 
to  nourish  your  army  in  case,  after  reaching  Geneva,  the  condition  of 
the  Army  of  Italy  forces  you  to  cross  by  the  Mont  Cenis. 

BONAPARTE 

556 

To  General  Moreau 
C.-m-C.,  Army  of  the  Rhine  Paris 

4  Floreal,  Year  VIII  (24  April,  1800) 

On  the  1 6th  General  Melas  attacked  Montenotte  in  strength  and 
occupied  the  town  of  Savona.  Our  troops  occupy  the  citadel  and  the 
Borghetto  line. 
L.D.N. — o 

396  The  Rise  to  Power 

On  the  same  day  General  Massena  was  fighting  against  the  right  of 
the  Austrian  army,  also  very  strong.  He  has  entirely  defeated  it  and 
taken  2,500  prisoners.  He  will  probably  attack  General  Melas,  but  he 
had  not  done  anything  by  22  Germinal,  and  on  the  morning  of  the 
23rd  the  Austrians  were  still  at  Savona. 

The  Minister  of  War  is  ordering  General  Berthier  to  begin  moving 
as  soon  as  possible  in  order  to  act  in  accordance  with  events  taking 
place  in  Italy. 

I  hope  you  have  by  now  crossed  the  Rhine.  Gain  an  advantage  as 
quickly  as  possible  so  that  your  diversion  helps  operations  in  Italy. 
Every  day  of  delay  will  be  disastrous  for  us. 

BONAPARTE 

557 
To  General  Berthier 

C.-m-C.,  Reserve  Army,  at  Dijon  Paris 

5  Flortal,  Year  VIII  (25  April,  1800} 

Citizen  General.  .  .  .  You  should  have  received  1,500,000  francs  by 
Murat,  You  will  see  from  the  attached  what  I  have  accorded  to  the 
Reserve  Army  at  the  last  two  meetings  of  the  Administrative  Council. 
I  will  see  that  what  has  not  yet  reached  you  is  sent  at  once. 

"Write  to  Lambert  and  Boinod  to  speed  up  as  much  as  possible  the 
supply  of  all  kinds  of  provisions  and  say  they  will  not  kck  money. 

Six  guns  of  the  Guard  with  500  artillery  horses  should  now  have 
arrived. 

I  have  just  received  a  telegraphic  message  that  the  cannonade  has 
been  very  heavy  on  the  Rhine  since  this  morning:  so  Moreau  is  fully 
engaged.  . .  . 

Have  sent  to  me  by  special  messengers  all  letters,  even  private  ones, 
that  reach  Dijon  concerning  the  Army  of  Italy. 

All  goes  perfectly  here,  and  the  day  you  think  my  presence  necessary 
as  a  result  of  events  either  in  Italy  or  on  the  Rhine  I  will  leave  within 
an  hour  of  receiving  your  letter. 

I  am  sorry  to  see  that  life  at  Dijon  is  making  you  unhappy.  Cheer 

BONAPARTE 

*  At  the  end  of  a  long  letter,  dated  from  Dijon  on  23  April,  in  which  he  com- 
plained of  the  kck  of  news,  arms,  supplies  and  money,  Berthier  had  written:  1  am 
unwell;  I  am  too  tired  for  war.  But  I  will  use  my  remaining  strength  in  the  service 
of  my  country  and  in  giving  you  further  proofs  of  my  loyalty.  If  I  deserve  any 
reward,  I  will  ask  what  I  have  long  wanted — rest  and  oblivion:  that  is  what  I  would 
have  liked  when  you  saw  fit  to  call  me  to  a  ministry  I  did  not  seek.'  Tired  or 
not,  Berthier  was  to  serve  Napoleon  uninterruptedly  for  the  next  fourteen  years  in 
the  exacting  posts  of  Minister  of  War  and  Chief  of  Staff  of  the  Grand  Army. 

Marengo  397 

558 
To  General  Berthier 

C.-w-C.,  Reserve  Army,  at  Dijon  Paris 

6  Floreal  Year  VIII  (26  April,  1800) 

I  have  your  letter  of  5  Floreal,  Citizen  General. 

Since  the  ipth  Light  will  arrive  only  on  26  Floreal,  I  think  you 
would  do  well  to  put  the  I3th  Light,  which  arrives  on  10  Floreal, 
into  the  Loison  Division  instead.  You  could  put  the  ipth  Light  with 
the  yoth  and  72nd,  which  will  be  able  to  leave  Dijon  at  the  end  of 
Floreal. 

This,  then,  is  how  I  see  your  Army: 

The  Loison  Division,  composed  of  the  I3th  Light,  58th  and  6oth 
of  the  Line:  6,000  to  7,000  men. 

The  Chambarlhac  Division,  composed  of  the  24th  Light,  43rd  and 
96th  of  the  Line:  9,000  men. 

The  Boudet  Division,  composed  of  the  pth  Light,  3Oth  and  59th 
of  the  Line:  7,000  to  8,000  men. 

The  Watrin  Division,  composed  of  the  6th  Light,  22nd  and  40th 
of  the  Line:  6,000  to  7,000  men. 

These  four  divisions  available  and  ready  to  march  on  10  Floreal. 

The  5th  Division,  General  Chabran's,  composed  of  nine  battalions 
of  the  fifteen  of  the  Army  of  the  East,  which  you  will  brigade  as  I 
suggested:  that  will  give  you  a  division  of  6,000  men,  which  could 
march  after  the  first  four. 

The  6th  Division,  which  could  leave  Dijon  between  25  and  30 
Floreal,  would  be  composed  of  the  I9th  Light,  7Oth  and  72nd  of  the 
Line:  6,000  to  7,000  men. 

The  7th  Division  would  be  composed  of  the  I7th  Light  and  the  six 
remaining  battalions  of  the  Army  of  the  East. 

Finally,  your  4,000  Italians,  leaving  a  depot  which  can  enrol  the 
3,000  or  4,000  Italians  still  in  different  parts  of  France  .  . . 

General  Turreau  can  support  you  with  3,000  men.  The  Army  of  the 
Rhine  has  3,000  troops  in  the  Valais. 

Thus  between  20  and  30  Floreal  you  could  reach  Aosta  and  Susa 
with  44,000  infantry,  and  you  would  be  followed  ten  days  later  by  a 
complete  division  of  8,000  men  and  twenty  days  later,  by  a  further 
6,000.  This  is  independent  of  the  detachment  from  the  Army  of  the 
Rhine,  which  could  be  from  10,000  to  30,000  men  according  to  the 
circumstances  of  that  Army.  But  I  see  you  assured  of  50,000  to  60,000 
infantryman  of  your  own. 

As  to  cavalry,  you  have:  the  nth  and  I2th  Hussars;  the  2nd,  7th, 
I5th  and  2ist  Chasseurs;  the  8th  and  9th  Dragoons;  the  2nd,  3rd  and 
2oth  Cavalry:  4,000  men.  That  is  enough  cavalry  for  your  first  ten  or 
fifteen  days  of  operations. 

398  The  Rise  to  Power 

The  ist  Hussars,  ist  and  5th  Cavalry  and  5th  Dragoons  will  leave 
during  the  month;  they  will  have  six  guns  with  them  and  amount  to 
1, 800  well-mounted  and  equipped  men  .  .  . 

That  makes  60,000  men  who,  after  the  stupidities  of  the  Austrians 
in  bottling  themselves  up  in  the  Genoese  Riviera,  put  you  in  a  position 
to  act  entirely  on  your  own. 

As  to  artillery,  you  have  forty-eight  guns;  that  means  eight  for  each 
of  your  first  five  divisions  and  a  small  park.  Decrease  the  number  of 
your  howitzers  and  increase  the  4-pounders,  since  you  have  plenty  at 
Auxonne.  They  will  serve  you  well  and  be  much  easier  to  transport. 

General  Turreau's  column  could  bring  five  or  six  guns  from 
Brianfon . . . 

As  to  cartridges,  Brianc/m  can  provide  some;  have  all  available  at 
Grenoble  and  Besanc.on  sent  to  Geneva.  Have  a  factory  established 
there.  With  a  little  effort  and  money  a  city  like  Geneva  should  provide 
enough  lead  for  a  million  cartridges. 

Leave  the  cadres  of  the  six  battalions  of  the  Reserve  Army;*  they 
will  be  completed  with  conscripts  as  they  arrive,  so  that  the  two 
demi-brigades  formed  from  them  and  the  iyth  Light  can  provide  you 
with  a  yth  division  in  the  course  of  Prairial. 

I  shall  be  at  Geneva,  where  I  will  substitute  troops  in  accordance 
with  events  on  the  Rhine,  leaving  the  Chabran  Division  on  the 
defensive  in  Switzerland  and  sending  up  the  better  organized  units. 

The  divisions  are  strong  enough  at  truree  demi-brigades.  It  is  neces- 
sary for  you  to  have  at  least  five  or  six  divisions  in  your  hands.  .  .  . 

Have  General  Marmont  send  a  senior  officer  to  Brianfon  and  another 
to  Grenoble  to  have  everything  possible  put  on  the  move ...  It  is 
essential  that  he  has  a  return  of  the  ammunition  and  artillery  equipment 
available  at  Brian^on  and  in  the  fortresses  of  Dauphine. 

Send  General  Marescot  to  the  Saint-Bernard  so  as  to  be  back  at 
Geneva  on  I5th  Floreal  with  exact  sketches  of  the  route.  If  he  has  any 
pioneers,  let  him  take  them  with  him. 

I  hope  to  be  at  Dijon  on  the  loth  or  nth  if  nothing  prevents  it. 

All  wishes  and  friendship. 

BONAPARTE 

559 
To  Citizen  Lefebvre-Desnoettes 

Aide-de-camp  to  the  First  Consul  Paris 

7  Floreal,  Year  VIII  (27  April,  1800} 

Please  go  at  once  with  all  speed  to  Chalons-sur-Marne.  You  will 
have  the  6,000  muskets  and  six  field  forges  which  are  there  sent  to 
Dijon.  You  will  remain  till  they  have  left. 

*  Presumably  an  error  for  Army  of  the  East. 

Marengo  3  £9 

Thence  you  will  proceed  to  the  capital  of  each  department  through 
which  these  convoys  will  pass  and  see  that  the  Prefects  give  orders  that 
they  travel  day  and  night  without  stopping.  You  will  remove  all 
obstacles  that  may  be  encountered  and  will  await  me  at  Dijon,  whither 
I  shall  be  proceeding  shortly. 

BONAPARTE 

560 
To  Citizen  Lauriston 

Aide-de-camp  to  the  First  Consu  Paris 

7  Flortal,  Year  VIII  (27  April,  1800} 

You  will  proceed  to  Lyons.  You  will  see  Quartermaster  Lambert 
and  will  assure  him  that  he  will  not  lack  for  money.  Instruct  him  to 
expedite  the  departure  of  biscuit,  brandy  and  corn  to  Geneva,  which 
I  shall  reach  on  12  Floreal. 

See  the  commandant  of  the  town  and  the  fortress  so  that  all  the 
cartridges,  lead  and  muskets  in  store  at  Lyons  are  sent  by  forced 
marches  to  Geneva. 

Note  the  number  of  troops  in  Lyons  and  the  ipth  District. 

From  there  go  to  Grenoble  and  have  the  lead,  cartridges  and  muskets 
that  are  there  sent  by  forced  marches  to  Geneva. 

From  there  proceed  to  the  headquarters  of  the  general  commanding 
the  left  wing  of  the  Army  of  Italy,  who  should  be  at  Brian^on,  and 
obtain  from  him  a  return  of  all  the  troops  under  his  orders.  You  will 
tell  him  that  on  the  I4th  or  I5th  I  shall  be  at  Geneva,  where  you  will 
rejoin  me  and  report  on  the  exact  strength  of  all  troops  in  the  yth  and 
ipth  Military  Districts,  infantry,  cavalry,  artillery,  material  and 
harness. 

You  will  pass  through  Chambery  on  your  return. 

BONAPARTE 

561 
To  General  Berthier 

C.-w-C.,  Reserve  Army,  at  Dijon  Paris 

7  Flortal,  Year  VIII  (27  April,  1800),  4.0  p.m. 

Your  aide-de-camp  has  just  arrived,  Citizen  General.  I  wish  you  to 
assemble  the  whole  army  at  Geneva  and  to  order  the  transport  of 
biscuit,  corn  and  brandy  by  the  lake  to  Villeneuve, 

Of  the  two  millions  which  General  Murat  has  brought  to  you  you 
will  see  that  there  are  300,000  francs  for  Lambert;  have  them  passed 
to  him  at  once. 

Two  hundred  horses  left  yesterday  with  a  convoy  for  Dijon.  I  have 
sent  aides-de-camp  to  CMlons-sur-Marne,  Tours,  etc.  to  have  cart- 
ridges sent  as  promptly  as  possible  to  Geneva  and  Dijon. 

400  The  Rise  to  Power 

My  plan  is  no  longer  to  cross  by  the  Saint-Gotthard.  I  regard  that 
operation  as  possible  and  within  the  ordinary  limits  of  prudence  only 
if  General  Moreau  has  obtained  a  great  advantage  over  the  enemy. 

Besides,  we  may  no  longer  go  to  Milan;  we  may  be  obliged  to 
march  rapidly  on  Tortona  in  order  to  extricate  Massena  who,  if  he  has 
been  beaten,  will  be  shut  up  in  Genoa  where  he  has  rations  for  thirty 
days.  So  I  wish  the  crossing  to  be  by  the  Saint-Bernard.  Once  at 
Aosta,  should  there  be  no  need  to  go  at  once  to  Genoa,  we  shall  be 
in  a  position  to  move  on  Lake  Maggiore  and  Milan  in  a  few  days  and 
in  fruitful  country  such  as  we  need.  Moreover,  the  crossing  of  the 
Saint-Bernard  seems  to  me  much  more  proportionate  to  your  existing 
means,  since  (being  able  to  transport  your  rations  by  lake  to  Ville- 
neuve)  you  will  have  to  feed  yourselves  only  between  Villeneuve  and 
Aosta.  That  is  only  four  days. 

You  will  see  that  in  each  of  these  operations  you  will  have  either 
the  passes  from  Dauphine  on  your  right  flank,  or  else  the  Swiss  passes 
occupied  by  the  Army  of  the  Rhine,  on  your  left  flank.  So  you  will 
in  any  case  have  an  assured  line  of  operation  and  remain  in  contact 
with  the  Republic. 

If  you  go  to  Milan  everything  on  the  Saint-Gotthard  and  the  Simplon 
will  subsequently  join  you. 

I  shall  leave  here  on  the  loth  for  Geneva,  by  way  of  Dijon. 

BONAPARTE 

Have  all  the  biscuit,  etc.,  at  Lyons,  Chambery  and  Grenoble  put  on 
the  road  for  Geneva  without  delay. 

562 
To  General  Berthier 

C.-m-C.,  Reserve  Army,  at  Dijon  Paris 

7  Flortal,  Year  VIII  (27  April,  1800) 

....  i.  You  should  have  received  at  Geneva  100,000  Ib.  of  lead 
from  Lyons.  2. 100,000  Ib.  left  Paris  yesterday  for  Dijon.  3. 250,000  Ib. 
have  left  Tours.  4.  You  should  find,  enough  at  Dijon  and  Geneva  to 
begin  manufacture.  5.  200  horses  left  yesterday  drawing  several  guns. 
6.  A  million  francs  leaves  for  your  army  tomorrow. 

8.  Five  million  cartridges  will  reach  here  tomorrow  and  will  be 
sent  on  to  Auxonne. 

10.  Three  pontoon  companies  will  be  ordered  to  leave  Constance 
for  Geneva. 

12.  Until  the  loth  200  horses  will  leave  daily  bringing  artillery 
ammunition  of  all  kinds;  they  will  reach  Auxonne  before  20  Flor6al. 

13.  Six  guns  will  leave  here  on  the  pth  with  a  detachment  of  the 
Guard. 

BONAPARTE 

563 

To  Brigadier-General  Marmont 

Cdr.,  Artillery,  Reserve  Army  Paris 

7  Flortal,  Year  VIII  (27  April,  1800)  midnight 

You  will  see  from  my  letter  to  General  Berthier,  Citizen  General,  the 
various  details  I  have  given  him  about  your  artillery. 

Look  to  your  harness,  shoeing,  etc.  Set  up  workshops  for  all  this 
at  Geneva. 

I  imagine  you  now  have  as  much  lead  as  you  need,  and  that  you 
have  factories  at  both  Auxonne  and  Geneva. 

You  should  have  received  ten  gun-sledges.  Take  a  wheeled  carriage 
behind  each  one,  so  that  once  over  the  mountains  your  field  train 
contains  all  the  guns. 

Organize  your  repair  shop  at  Geneva;  arrange  that  it,  as  well  as 
the  one  at  Auxonne,  can  work  without  using  the  company  of  artisans 
you  should  have  available  at  your  park. 

Send  me  a  return  of  your  material,  personnel  and  horses,  so  that  I 
can  see  exactly  how  you  are  placed. 

BONAPARTE 

564 
To  General  Berthier 

C.-m-C.,  Reserve  Army,  at  Dijon  Paris 

8  FlorM,  Year  VIII  (28  April,  1800} 

I  have  received  your  letter  of  the  yth,  Citizen  General. 

The  3Oth  Demi-brigade  should  by  now  have  arrived,  as  well  as  the 
1 3th  Light. 

What  you  kck  is  the  artillery  horses  and  munitions,  i.  400  horses 
have  left  with  Chambarlhac's  division;  2.  460  have  left  with  the  Guard 
.  .  .  Total  3,000  horses.  Groups  numbered  5,  6,  7,  8  are  bringing  you 
cartridges,  muskets  and  other  war  supplies. 

Send  for  a  certain  Colombini,  who  is  a  road  contractor  at  Vienne 
in  Dauphin^  and  who  knows  perfectly  the  Great  and  Little  Saint- 
Bernard  and  all  their  outlets.  Send  also  for  Citizen  Pavetti,  a  major 
in  the  Italic  Legion,  who  is  at  the  depot  and  knows  all  this  area  well. 

Give  orders  that  as  the  horses  arrive  at  Auxonne  they  are  sent  on  to 
reinforce  your  teams  and  draw  the  rest  of  your  provisions. 

Set  up  an  artillery  repair  shop  at  Geneva  and  a  factory  to  make 
artillery  harness,  which  is  always  needed.  Take  steps  to  have  a  thousand 
sets  of  harness  and  horseshoes  in  reserve  there. 

I  do  not  wish  to  leave  Paris  until  you  tell  me  that  everything  is  ready. 
From  the  return  you  have  sent  me  I  see  that  you  will  not  have  a 
respectable  force  at  Geneva  till  nearly  the  ifth  of  the  month. 

BONAPARTE 

402  The  Rise  to  Power 

565 
To  Citizen  Carnot 

Minister  of  War  Paris 

9  Florial,  Year  VIII  (29  Apr,  1800} 

Please,  Citizen  Minister,  give  orders  to  General  Gardanne  to  proceed 
to  Dijon  to  take  command  of  the  6th  Division  of  the  Reserve  Army, 
composed  of  the  ipth,  yoth  and  y2nd  Demi-brigades.  Before  leaving  he 
will  hand  over  command  of  his  district  to  whichever  of  his  brigadiers 
he  thinks  most  suitable.  This  general,  who  was  a  prisoner  of  war,  will 
be  exchanged  for  General  Mack.  You  will  inform  Citizen  Bacher  at 
Frankfurt,  so  that  he  declare  this  to  the  Austrian  commissioner. 

General  Berthier  is  beginning  to  march  and  will  be  moving  his  head- 
quarters to  Geneva  and  then  wherever  military  operations  may  take 
him.  But  the  general  headquarters  of  the  Reserve  Army  will  remain 
notionally  at  Dijon.  Thus  the  muskets,  provisions,  recruits  and  officers 
destined  for  that  army  will  proceed  to  Dijon,  where  General 
Berthier  will  send  orders  as  to  their  destination. 

The  depot  of  each  demi-brigade  of  the  Reserve  Army  will  remain 
at  Dijon  and  in  the  i8th  District  until  further  orders.  The  depots  of  the 
units  in  each  division  will  be  in  the  same  town  and  under  the  orders 
of  a  senior  officer  from  the  division.  They  will  correspond  with  the 
Deputy  Chief  of  Staff,  who  will  remain  at  Dijon  and  will  forward  the 
orders  of  the  Chief  of  Staff  for  the  departure  of  conscripts  destined  to 
join  the  army. 

There  will  be  a  quartermaster  at  Dijon  responsible  for  the  food, 
clothing  and  quartering  of  the  .depots. 

BONAPARTE 

566 
To  General  Berthier 

C.-w-C.,  Reserve  Army,  at  Dijon  Paris 

n  Florid,  Year  VIII  (l  May,  1800) 

You  will  find  attached  a  copy  of  the  letter  I  have  just  received  from 
Suchet;  you  will  see  there,  Citizen  General,  our  true  situation  in  Italy. 

Order  the  Loison  Division  to  proceed  to  Lausanne  or  Geneva  by 
the  shortest  route.  The  Watrin  Division  should  by  now  have  reached 
Geneva;  send  it  at  once  to  Villeneuve  and  Saint-Maurice. 

The  Boudet  Division  should  have  reached  Geneva  and  Nyon;  have 
it  also  proceed  to  Villeneuve. 

Send  off  from  Bourg  a  detachment  of  1,500  Italians  and,  in  general, 
all  who  are  armed  and  in  condition  to  fight.  Have  them  go  with  all 
speed  to  Geneva.  The  rest  will  await  the  arrival  of  arms  before 
marching. 

Marengo  403 

If  my  memory  is  right,  General  Chabran  should  be  at  Geneva  with 
1,500  men  of  his  division.  Send  him  to  the  Little  Saint-Bernard.  With 
this  force  and  the  500  or  600  men  he  will  find  there  he  will  draw  the 
attention  of  the  enemy  from  that  side. 

Have  the  battalions  of  the  Army  of  the  East,  which  are  armed  and 
which  you  count  on  using,  leave  CMlon  and  Macon  and  move  by 
forced  marches  to  the  Little  Saint-Bernard  where  they  will  come  under 
the  orders  of  General  Chabran. 

My  calculation  is  that  on  the  lyth  or  i8th  General  Chabran  could 
be  on  the  Little  Saint-Bernard  with  a  division  of  5,000  men;  this  will 
join  at  Aosta  with  General  Victor's  corps,  which  equally  can  be  on  the 
Great  Saint-Bernard  on  that  day. 

I  believe  the  28th  of  the  Line  is  intended  by  General  Moreau  to 
defend  the  Great  Saint-Bernard.  You  can  take  it  to  form  General 
Watrin's  advance-guard,  since  it  knows  the  roads  better  and  is  more 
rested.  .  ,  . 

I  shall  reach  Geneva  on  the  i6th  without  fail.  I  shall  then  have  news 
of  General  Moreau  and  we  will  arrange  for  the  diversion  which  it  is 
indispensable  to  make  on  the  Simplon. 

Get  into  touch  with  the  general  commanding  in  Switzerland,  so  as 
to  learn  the  state  of  his  forces. 

I  think  your  presence  at  Geneva  essential,  especially  to  assemble  the 
stores  at  Villeneuve,  where  the  troops  must  draw  biscuit  for  six  days. 
Put  as  many  cattle  as  you  can  on  the  march  for  Villeneuve. 

BONAPARTE 

Let  the  whole  of  the  Consular  Guard  leave  for  Geneva.  But  leave 
twenty-five  cavalrymen  at  Dijon  for  my  quarters, 

567 
To  General  Berthier 

C.-m-C.,  Reserve  Army,  at  Dijon  Paris 

12  Flortal,  Year  VIII  (2  May,  1800} 

Citizen  General,  .  .  .  General  Vigovich,  with  whom  we  had  to  do 
in  Italy,  is  charged  with  the  defence  of  the  Simplon,  Bellinzona  and  the 
Saint-Gotthard  with  a  force  of  9,000  men,  of  which  only  3,000  are 
good  troops.  His  headquarters  are  at  Arona. 

I  imagine  you  will  establish  two  weapon  repair  shops,  one  at  Geneva 
and  one  at  Auxonne.  Re-activate  the  one  at  Chambery,  if  it  still  exists, 
and,  if  not,  have  the  remains  of  it  sent  to  Geneva. 

You  have  seven  cavalry  squadrons  of  the  Army  of  the  East;  are 
they  fit  for  active  service? 

I  have  received  a  letter  from  Murat  from  which  it  appears  that  the 
yth  Chasseurs  is  in  a  very  bad  state.  If  there  is  one  squadron  of  120  men 
fit  for  active  service,  attach  it  to  a  division,  and,  if  you  judge  the  rest 

404  The  Rise  to  Power 

unfit,  send  it  to  Holland.  It  will  be  replaced  by  the  loth  Dragoons, 
which  are  there.  I  am  having  an  order  sent  by  special  courier  to  General 
Augereau  to  send  this  regiment  to  Geneva.  It  will  arrive  in  time  to 
replace  your  losses.  . .  . 

General  Gardanne  will  command  the  6th  Division  of  your  army.  He 
is  now  on  the  road  for  this  purpose  .  . . 

With  the  Austrian  army  in  Italy  in  its  present  position,  considerably 
weakened  by  the  terrible  struggle  it  is  waging  in  the  Genoese  Riviera, 
30,000  men  and  thirty  guns  make  you  for  the  moment  master  of  Italy. 
But  I  feel  the  need  to  send  a  great  many  horses  to  Auxonne  so  as  to  be 
able  to  bring  up  infantry  weapons  and  the  12-pounders,  which  you 
need,  if  not  in  the  first,  at  least  in  the  second  and  third  acts  of  the 
campaign.  . .  . 

I  imagine  you  have  as  many  boats  as  you  wish  on  the  lake  to  trans- 
port your  supplies  to  Villeneuve,  where  you  must  at  once  put  in  a 
military  commandant  and  organize  a  depot. 

From  all  I  see  of  the  manoeuvres  of  General  Melas  I  am  fully  con- 
vinced that  he  did  not  have  more  than  40,000  men  on  the  whole  line 
of  the  Genoese  Riviera,  At  the  present  time  he  has  lost  15,000 
in  prisoners,  killed  and  sick.  So  now  he  has  not  25,000. 1  do  not  include 
the  6,000  cavalry  he  may  have  on  the  plains  of  Italy,  nor  the  corps  of 
8,000  men  under  the  general  I  spoke  of  above. 

You  must  try  to  have  your  first  four  divisions  at  Aosta  on  the  22nd, 
as  well  as  General  Chabran's  division. 

From  all  the  information  I  have  been  given,  I  imagine  that  from 
Villeneuve  to  Aosta  is  only  five  days.  It  will  need  at  least  two  days  for 
these  five  divisions  to  cross  the  Saint-Bernard. 

The  enemy  is  not  at  all  expecting  the  operation  that  you  are  carrying 
out.  He  thinks  it  quite  possible  that  a  division  of  10,000  to  12,000  men 
may  present  itself  to  disengage  the  Army  of  Italy,  and  in  that  case  he 
does  not  fear  it.  I  have  reliable  information  that  they  are  laughing  at 
the  Reserve  Army  in  Vienna  and  Italy;  they  do  not  believe  it  wiEbe 
ready  before  the  month  of  August,  and  they  regard  it  as  a  collection 
of  conscripts  to  complete  the  Army  of  the  Rhine. 

There  must  be  400,000  to  500,000  rations  at  Villeneuve  by  the  i6th 
and,  by  the  20th,  double  the  amount  of  biscuit  and  at  least  150  mules, 
requisitioned  or  otherwise,  which  will  carry  30,000  rations  to  the 
village  of  Saint-Pierre  . .  .  You  must  at  once  send  a  transport  agent, 
a  war  commissary,  several  troops  of  your  mules,  if  you  have  any,  and 
money  for  this  essential  transport. 

It  is  necessary  thereafter  to  establish  a  store  at  a  village  between 
Saint-Pierre  and  the  foot  of  the  Saint-Bernard,  where  it  would  also 
be  as  well  to  put  a  commandant  and  set  up  a  hospital  which  will 
evacuate  on  the  hospitals  at  Villeneuve  and  Saint-Maurice. 

Marengo  405 

Thus  the  troops  could  draw  biscuit  for  four  days  at  Villeneuve;  they 
would  draw  for  three  at  Saint-Pierre,  or  rather  the  infantry  only.  The 
cavalry,  the  drivers,  the  staff,  all  who  are  mounted  would  have  to  draw 
for  eight  days,  which  would  take  them  to  Aosta.  Meanwhile  the  depot 
at  Saint-Pierre  would  continue  to  be  supplied  to  provide  for  the 
crossing  and  for  the  retreat,  if  we  are  driven  to  that. 

Fortunately,  the  season  makes  the  feeding  of  the  horses  easier;  but 
it  is  necessary  to  have  a  little  oats  at  the  foot  of  the  Saint-Bernard  and 
at  the  convent.  I  am  assured  that  the  monks  should  have  oats  and 
barley,  which  they  would  unearth  for  a  little  money. 

You  see  that  I  concern  myself  much  with  your  details;  but  in  truth 
the  success  of  the  campaign  rests  upon  your  operations,  and  I  have  no 
doubt  at  all  that  yours  will  be  the  glory  of  reconquering  this  fine 
theatre  of  French  valour. 

As  for  the  Army  of  the  Rhine,  it  is  quite  clear  that  something  will 
have  been  decided  by  the  20th.  Then,  while  you  are  on  the  way  to 
Aosta,  it  can  prepare  a  strong  diversion  for  the  Saint-Gotthard  and  the 
Simplon,  so  as  to  emerge  at  the  moment  when  you  have  concentrated 
all  the  enemy  forces  on  yourself.  I  estimate  that  at  the  lowest  a  simple 
division  of  6,000  infantry  and  1,000  cavalry  by  the  Saint-Gotthard  and 
4,000  by  the  Simplon  would  be  a  powerful  help  to  you  and  would 
render  your  operation  infallible. 

If  Massena  does  not  get  too  badly  mauled,  and  if  he  has  the  wit  either 
to  force  the  line  and  take  up  some  position  in  the  Genoese  Riviera  or 
to  let  himself  be  besieged  in  Genoa,  the  attack  on  Genoa  will  be  a  great 
advantage  to  us.  For  you  could  not  have  made  the  same  diversion 
without  an  immense  co-operation  from  the  Army  of  the  Rhine  had 
the  Austrian  army  had  the  good  sense  to  remain  cantoned  on  the  Po. 

BONAPARTE 

568 
To  Citizen  Carnot 

Minister  of  War  Paris 

12  Flortal,  Year  VIII  (2  May,  1800) 

Please,  Citizen  Minister,  order  Citizen  Bual,  live-meat  contractor  for 
the  Reserve  Army,  to  go  to  Dijon  to  ensure  his  service,  which  is 

failing. 

I  see  in  a  note  from  the  Minister  of  Finance  that  200,000  francs  have 
been  paid  to  Citizen  Placy  de  Gayde,  forage  contractor.  But  you  will 
see  from  his  letter,  which  I  am  sending  you,  that  he  does  not  wish  to 
undertake  the  service.  So  this  contractor  will  have  received  200,000 
francs  and  there  will  be  no  forage  service. 

BONAPARTE 

406  The  Rise  to  Power 

569 

To  General  Berthier 

C.-m-C.,  Reserve  Army,  at  Chdlon  Paris 

14  Floreal,  Year  VIII  U  May,  1800) 
I  have  just  received  your  letter  of  12  Floreal.  Here  is  the  latest  news 

from  Italy. 

On  the  3rd  Massena  was  at  the  bridge  of  Cornigliano;  so  he  appears 
decidedly  blockaded  in  Genoa.  It  could  happen:  i.  That  Massena 
capitulates  and  evacuates  Genoa,  without  being  taken  prisoner,  rejoins 
the  rest  of  his  army  and  takes  up  the  Borghetto  line  or  some  other. 
2.  That  he  is  overwhelmed  in  Genoa. 

In  either  case,  you  will  see  that  General  Meks  needs  only  eight  days 
to  move  from  Genoa  to  Aosta,  and,  if  he  were  to  arrive  before  you 
had  crossed  with  more  than  20,000  men,  it  would  give  him  immense 
advantages  in  disputing  your  entry  into  Italy. 

Try,  therefore,  to  have  General  Chabran,  your  first  six  demi- 
brigades,  their  artillery  train,  the  demi-brigade  of  the  Army  of  the 
Rhine  which  is  guarding  the  Saint-Bernard  and  the  Valais  and  1,000 
cavalry  at  Aosta  on  the  20th,  with  the  rest  arriving  there  on  the  22nd 
and  23rd. 

I  am  putting  a  few  more  cavalry  squadrons  on  the  march,  among 
others  the  yth  Dragoons,  which  has  been  exchanged,  and  I  leave  during 
tomorrow  night;  I  shall  be  at  Geneva  on  the  i8th. 

Inform  General  Moreau  of  the  position  of  the  Army  of  Italy ;  impress 
on  him  that  a  few  demi-brigades  more  are  nothing  to  him,  but  that 
a  few  demi-brigades  less  will  compromise  not  only  the  Reserve  Army 
but  also  the  county  of  Nice. 

Write  to  General  Moncey  to  send  as  many  forces  as  he  can  onto  the 
Simplon,  so  that  you  have  5,000  or  6,000  men  there  in  a  position  to 
join  you  and  make  a  powerful  diversion.  .  .  . 

BONAPARTE 

570 
To  Citizen  Gaudin 

Minister  of  Finance  Paris 

15  Flortal,  Year  VIII  (5  May,  1800} 
Citizen  Minister,  please  have  the  500,000  francs,  together  with  a 

reliable  and  intelligent  paymaster,  sent  by  the  post  to  Geneva  where 
it  must  without  fail  arrive  by  the  evening  of  10  [May], 

This  cashier  will  hold  these  funds  and  will  use  them  only  on  my 
orders. 

I  wish  you  to  send  me  an  intelligent  paymaster,  so  that  I  can  use 
him  as  a  kind  of  central  fund  and  so  that  he  can  account  to  the  director 
of  the  Public  Treasury  for  all  the  measures  I  may  take  to  have  money. 

Marengo  407 

I  have  instructed  Councillor  of  State  Petiet,  who  is  following  me, 
to  see  you  about  various  other  matters. 

BONAPARTE 

571 
Order 

Paris 
IS  Flor&al,  Year  VIII  (5  May,  1800) 

In  view  of  the  critical  situation  of  the  Army  of  Italy  and  the  need 
to  prevent  encroachment  on  French  territory  and  to  save  the  southern 
departments  threatened  by  land  and  sea,  the  Consuls  of  the  Republic 
order: 

ARTICLE  i.  The  detachment  into  Italy,  which,  in  accordance  with 
Article  2  of  the  Order  of  26  Germinal,  the  Army  of  the  Rhine  is  to 
make  when  it  has  driven  the  enemy  back  ten  days'  march,  will  take 
place  at  once. 

To  this  end,  in  conformity  with  detailed  instructions  to  be  issued  by 
the  Minister  of  War,  a  column  of  25,000  men,  including  infantry, 
cavalry  and  artillery,  will  cross  by  the  Saint-Gotthard  and  the  Simplon 
to  act  under  the  orders  of  the  Commander-in-Chief  of  the  Reserve 
Army. 

ART.  2.  The  Minister  of  War  will  leave  during  the  course  of  today 
for  the  headquarters  of  the  Army  of  the  Rhine  in  order  to  confer  with 
the  Commander-in-Chief  concerning  this  movement,  to  give  all 
necessary  instructions  and  to  inform  himself  fully  as  to  the  situation 
of  the  armies. 

ART.  3.  As  soon  as  he  has  given  these  orders,  the  Minister  of  War 
will  proceed  to  Geneva  to  join  the  First  Consul. 

ART.  4.  This  order  will  not  be  published. 

BONAPARTE 

572 
To  General  Berthier 

C.-fn-C,  Reserve  Army,  at  Geneva  Paris 

15  Flortal,  Year  VIII  (5  May,  1800) 

Citizen  General,  I  leave  tomorrow  morning;  I  shall  reach  Dijon 
on  the  lyth  and  Geneva  on  the  evening  of  the  i8th.  I  hope  to  stop  for 
one  day  only  in  Geneva  and  then  go  on  to  Villeneuve. 

The  Minister  of  War  is  leaving  today  for  the  Army  of  the  Rhine 
with  the  proposed  order  and  instructions  which  you  will  find  attached. 
He  will  return,  to  Lausanne  or  Villeneuve,  on  the  22nd  or  23rd. 

The  million  francs  promised  in  my  last  letter  left  only  this  morning 
by  the  post  and  will  reach  Geneva  on  the  25th.  You  must  have  means 

The  Rise  to  Power 

of  transport  ready  to  enable  it  to  follow  the  army.  Make  up  some  of 
the  pay  of  those  unfortunate  battalions  from  the  Army  of  the  East .  .  . 

It  you  have  a  major-general  available,  send  him  at  once  to  take 
command  on  the  Simplon,  to  get  to  know  the  area  and  the  troops 
there.  Those  on  the  Simplon  and  the  Saint-Bernard  will  be  very  useful 
as  they  know  the  country  perfectly.  They  can  guide  the  columns. 

All  my  regards. 

BONAPARTE 

573 
To  Citizen  LacuSe 

Councillor  of  State,  Acting  Minister  of  War  Paris 

15  Flortal,  Year  VIII  (5  May,  1800) 

Please,  Citizen  Minister,  order  Citizen  Yvan,  surgeon  at  the  Hotel 
des  Invalides,  to  leave  at  once  for  the  headquarters  of  die  Reserve  Army 
at  Geneva,  where  he  will  be  attached  to  me.* 

BONAPARTE 

574 
To  General  Berthier 

C.-m-C.,  Reserve  Army,  at  Geneva  Paris 

12  Flortal,  Year  VIII  (5  May,  1800} 

I  have  just  learnt  by  telegraph,  Citizen  General,  that  Moreau  has 
had  an  affair  with  the  enemy  at  Stockach,  has  taken  7,000  prisoners, 
nine  guns  and  considerable  stores.  .  .  . 

Massena's  aide-de-camp  has  arrived.  He  assures  me  that  he  has 
supplies  for  twenty-five  days,  reckoned  from  Flore*al.  Thus  you  will  see 
that  he  must  be  relieved  during  the  last  week  of  the  month. 

March  with  all  speed. 

BONAPARTE 

575 
To  General  Moreau 

C.-m-C.,  Army  of  the  Rhine  Paris 

IS  Flortal,  Year  VIII  (5  May,  1800} 

I  was  leaving  for  Geneva  when  the  telegraph  informed  me  of  your 
victory  over  the  Austrian  army.  Glory,  threefold  glory! 

The  Minister  «of  War  will  reach  your  headquarters  a  few  hours 
after  this  letter;  from  there  he  will  come  and  join  me  in  Geneva. 

*  Thereafter  Yvan  remained  Bonaparte's  personal  surgeon.  He  went  through 
all  the  imperial  campaigns,  always,  on  the  march  and  in  battle,  riding  close  behind 
the  Emperor. 

Marengo  409 

The  position  of  the  Army  of  Italy  is  fairly  critical.  Massena.,  shut  up 
in  Genoa,  has  supplies  till  5  or  6  Prairial.  Melas's  army  seems  pretty 
considerable,  although  seriously  weakened. 

I  salute  you  affectionately. 

BONAPARTE 

Send  me  news  at  Geneva.  Is  Leclerc*  doing  well?  A  thousand  regards 
to  Dessolle. 

576 
To  Lieutenant- General  Suchet 

Deputy  C.-in-C.9  Army  of  Italy,  at  Nice  Paris 

15  Floreal,  Year  VIII  (5  May,  1800} 

Citizen  General,  ...  On  the  24th  of  the  month  I  shall  myself  be  on 
the  plains  of  Piedmont  with  the  Reserve  Army,  40,000  strong.  Keep 
this  secret.  Send  an  intelligent  officer  to  tell  General  Massena,  but 
without  putting  it  in  writing  for  fear  he  may  be  captured  on  the 
way  ,  .  . 

Tell  General  Massena,  too,  that,  whatever  happens,  I  count  on  him 
to  eke  out  his  rations  to  last  till  15  Prairial.  Continue  to  send  what 
supplies  you  can  to  Genoa  and  Savona. .  .  . 

BONAPARTE 

577 
To  Citizen  Maret 

Secretary  of  State  Geneva 

19  Flor&l,  Year  VIII  (9  May,  1800) 

I  thank  you,  Citizen,  for  the  bulletin  you  sent  me.  I  was  very  pleased 
with  the  town  of  Dijon.  It  seemed  to  me  that  there  they  were  also 
very  pleased  with  the  Reserve  Army. 

The  demi-brigades  coming  from  Paris  were  a  little  unruly  and  gave 
rise  to  a  few  complaints.  I  wish  you  to  make  known  their  good 
behaviour.  Everywhere  I  have  had  reason  to  be  proud  of  the  troops. 

BONAPARTE 

578 
To  Citizen  Lacu6e 

Councillor  of  State,  Acting  Minister  of  War  Paris 

20  Floreal,  Year  VIII  (lo  May,  1800} 

You  will  find  attached,  Citizen  Minister,  an  order  that  I  have  made 
for  the  prompt  organization  of  the  siege  artillery  of  the  Reserve  Army. 
General  Lacombe  Saint-Michel  will  present  various  requests  to  you 
for  personnel  and  material.  You  will  know  how  necessary  it  is  to 
ensure  that  measures  decided  on  in  your  offices  are  promptly  executed. 
*  Husband  of  Pauline  Bonaparte. 

410  The  Rise  to  Power 

All  the  steps  taken  in  the  artillery  offices  to  form  the  field  train 
of  the  Reserve  Army  were  wrongly  conceived.  At  Grenoble  alone 
there  was  enough  to  form  three  field  trains  of  the  kind  we  needed. 
Send  to  us  at  Geneva  by  the  shortest  route  all  the  horses  you  can 
procure  in  Paris,  harnessed  and  unmounted. 

BONAPARTE 

579 
To  Lieutenant- General  Lannes 

G.O.C.,  Advance-guard,  Reserve  Army  H-Q-*  Geneva 

20  Fhre'al,  Year  VIII  (10  May,  1800} 

Citizen  General,  in  accordance  with  the  orders  of  the  Commander- 
in-Chief,  you  will  proceed  on  the  23rd  to  Saint-Maurice  with  the 
advance-guard  which  you  command  and  at  Villeneuve  you  will  have 
biscuit  issued  to  the  troops  for  the  23rd,  24th,  25th  and  26th,  During 
the  24th  you  will  advance  six  leagues  beyond  Saint-Maurice  and  on  the 
25th  you  will  reach  the  foot  of  the  Great  Saint-Bernard.  While  passing 
through  Saint-Pierre  you  will  take  biscuit  for  three  days,  the  27th, 
28th  and  2pth. 

General  Mainoni  is  to  assemble  the  three  battalions  of  the  28th 
Demi-brigade,  the  Swiss  battalion  and  the  Italic  battalion  at  the  hospice 
of  Saint-Bernard  on  the  24th  and  to  have  biscuit  issued  for  four  days. 
Give  him  the  necessary  orders. 

You  will  take  all  necessary  steps  to  hasten  the  transport  of  your 
artillery  to  the  Saint-Bernard  and  you  will  have  the  sledge-mountings 
that  have  been  assigned  to  you  brought  up  with  all  speed  so  that  they 
reach  the  foot  of  the  mountain  before  the  head  of  the  column. 

You  will  calculate  your  march  with  such  precision  that  one  hour 
before  dawn  on  the  26th  you  will  have  crossed  the  Saint-Bernard  and 
have  reached  the  forward  posts  of  the  enemy  which  you  will  destroy. 

You  will  order  the  I2th  Hussars  and  the  2ist  Chasseurs  to  be  at 
Vevay  on  the  23rd. 

The  movement  of  the  Army  will  follow  that  of  the  advance-guard 
and  you  will  receive  further  orders. 

General  Marmont  has  orders  to  send  an  officer  to  mount  on  the 
Saint-Bernard  an  8-pounder,  a  howitzer  and  the  4-pounders  of  the 
Watrin  Division.  You  will  give  this  convoy  such  escort  as  you  think 
necessary  and  will  decide  where  these  guns  should  halt  to  await  the 
attacking  column. 

The  Chabran  Division  will  cross  the  Little  Saint-Bernard  on  the 

*  Bonaparte  held  no  official  position  in  the  Reserve  Army  and  his  personal 
headquarters  were  theoretically,  though  not  always  geographically  distinct  from 
those  of  the  army.  Only  documents  which  were  formally  signed  by  Berthicr 
or  members  of  the  staff  were  issued  under  army  letterheads. 

Marengo  411 

26th,  will  overthrow  any  of  the  enemy  who  may  be  occupying  that 
route  and  join  you  as  soon  as  possible. 

Please  report  frequently  to  the  Commander-in-Chief  as  to  your 
position. 

I  salute  you. 

The  Chief  of  Staff,  Reserve  Army 

DUPONT 

The  cavalry  units  should  take  oats  for  four  days. 

580 
To  Citizen  Petiet 

Councillor  of  State  Geneva 

21  Floreal,  Year  VIII  (n  May,  1800} 

You  will  rejoin  me,  Citizen,  in  five  or  six  days  with  the  detachment 
of  the  Guard  which  will  be  passing  through  here.  Until  then  organize 
your  war  stores. 

Report  to  me  daily  as  to  everything  passing  through  Geneva  in  the 
way  of  provisions  for  the  Army  and  hasten  its  movement  by  all 
possible  means. 

You  will  bring  with  you  the  paymaster  specially  attached  to  me  with 
the  500,000  francs  in  gold  which  he  will  have  carried  on  mules. 

Several  millions  should  arrive  from  Paris  which  this  paymaster  will 
receive  and  bring  with  him,  apart  from  what  may  be  judged  necessary 
on  the  lines  of  communication.  You  will  have  all  the  money  coming 
from  the  i8th  and  20th  Districts  deposited  at  Dijon  for  the  pay  of 
those  units  of  the  Reserve  Army  that  are  still  on  the  SoSne  and  for  its 
depots. 

BONAPARTE 

581 
To  General  Augereau 

C.-w-C.,  French  Army  in  Holland  Geneva 

21  Floreal,  Year  VIII  (11  May,  1800} 

A  month  ago,  Citizen  General,  you  received  orders  to  select  a  camp 
between  Maastricht  and  Breda.  Now  I  wish  you  to  raise  this  camp  to 
8,000  or  9,000  French  and  4,000  or  5,000  Dutch,  with  a  proportionate 
field  artillery  train,  and  to  be  in  a  position  to  move  to  Main/,  at  the  first 
order.  You  can  easily  draw  5,000  or  6,000  men  from  the  24th,  25th  and 
26th  Districts  and  particularly  from  the  garrison  of  Mainz.  By  this 
means  we  should  be  able  to  improvise  an  army  corps  of  18,000  to 
20,000  men,  which  could  march  into  the  heart  of  Germany  and  facili- 
tate the  main  military  operations  by  causing  the  enemy  acute  disquiet. 

You  will  realize  how  secret  a  plan  of  this  kind  must  be  kept.  Let  it 
appear  that  you  intend  to  move  to  the  coasts  and  the  mouth  of  the 

412  The  Rise  to  Power 

Escaut.  Arrange  matters  so  that  you  could  be  on  the  march  for  your 
destination  within  twenty-four  hours  of  receiving  the  order.  In  a  fort- 
night the  Reserve  Army  may  be  in  the  heart  of  Italy,  linking  the  Army 
of  Italy  to  that  of  the  Rhine.  It  is  then  that  your  role  would  begin. 

All  this  is  based  on  the  assumption  that  we  do  not  expect  England  to 
attack  Holland  for  a  month  or  six  weeks,  and  it  is  especially  for  this 
reason  that  speed  and  secrecy  are  essential. 

Take  all  steps  to  mount  the  i6th  Dragoons. 

BONAPARTE 

582 
To  Major- General  Dupont 

Chief  of  Staff,  Reserve  Army  H.Q.,  Lausanne 

22  Floreal,  Year  VIII  (12  May,  1800} 

Give  orders  for  the  artillery  of  the  three  divisions,  Boudet,  Loison 
and  Chambarlhac,  to  leave  tomorrow,  the  23rd,  for  Villeneuve  where 
it  will  park  and  complete  its  establishment  of  supplies,  cartridges,  etc. 
and  where  it  will  be  inspected  by  General  Marmont. 

Order  the  Boudet  Division  to  proceed  to  Bex,  near  Saint-Maurice, 
on  the  24th:  the  Loison  Division  to  proceed  to  Aigle,  two  leagues 
beyond  Villeneuve,  on  the  24th:  the  Chambarlhac  Division  to  proceed 
to  Villeneuve  on  the  24th.  You  will  order  each  of  these  divisions  to 
draw  biscuit  for  the  25th  to  2pth  inclusive  when  passing  through 
Villeneuve. 

Give  orders  that  all  cavalry  units  except  the  I2th  Hussars,  the  2ist 
Chasseurs,  the  ifth  Chasseurs  and  the  two  squadrons  of  the  nth 
Hussars,  which  are  under  orders  to  rejoin  the  divisions  to  which  they 
are  attached,  should  be  assembled  at  Lausanne  by  the  25th  to  be 
inspected  by  the  First  Consul;  General  Harville  will  consequently 
proceed  to  Lausanne,  and  you  will  advise  General  Murat  of  these  dis- 
positions so  that  he  seeks  the  Commander-in-Chief 's  orders  for  this 
review. 

Take  care  to  warn  the  Quartermaster-General  of  these  movements 
as  well  as  the  lieutenant-generals  insofar  as  they  are  concerned. 

Order  all  the  forward  depots  of  units  to  be  centralized  at  Geneva 
whither  all  conscripts  arriving  singly  or  in  small  detachments  will  pro- 
ceed and  be  armed,  etc.,  before  joining  their  units.  In  conformity  with 
the  arrangements  laid  down  in  general  orders,  the  base  depots  will 
remain  in  the  localities  assigned  to  them  in  the  i8th  District. 

Give  orders  that  as  from  tomorrow  all  conscripts  in  all  the  demi- 
brigades  must  fire  a  few  rounds,  must  be  instructed  which  eye  to  use  in 
aiming  and  how  to  load  their  muskets. 

Instruct  a  staff  officer  to  proceed  to  Villeneuve  where  he  will  see  that 
all  units  passing  through  have  fifty  rounds  and  two  flints  per  man. 

Marengo  413 

Instruct  the  Quartermaster-General  that  he  must  order  the  Pay- 
master-General to  issue  funds  to  the  divisional  paymasters  to  cover  the 
pay,  as  prescribed  in  general  orders.  Before  moving  to  Villeneuve  the 
army  should  receive  all  pay  due  up  to  I  Prairial,  Year  VIII.  The  Pay- 
master-General will  be  responsible  for  the  execution  of  this  order.  . . 

Order  H.Q.  and  all  services  of  the  army  to  be  at  Villeneuve  on  the 
24th.  The  staff  officers  will  proceed  tomorrow  to  Vevay. 

I  shall  leave  for  Vevay  tomorrow  morning  with  the  First  Consul  for 
the  review  at  midday.  From  there  I  shall  go  to  Villeneuve  to  see  how 
things  are,  returning  in  the  evening  to  sleep  at  Lausanne.  You  are  free 
either  to  come  with  me  or  to  remain  if  you  have  work  to  do  in  Lau- 
sanne during  tomorrow.  In  any  case,  send  your  horses  and  some  of  the 
staff  officers  to  Villeneuve.  On  the  24th  I  shall  pick  up  my  horses  at 
Villeneuve  and  go  on  to  join  the  advance-guard. 

Insert  in  general  orders  that  thirty  sous  wfll  be  deducted  from  the  pay 
of  any  man  who  has  lost  a  bayonet. 

By  order  of  the  First  Consul 
The  Commander-in-Chief,  Reserve  Army 
ALEX.  BERTHIER 

583 
To  Lieutenant- General  Lannes 

G.O.C.,  Advance-guard,  Reserve  Army  Vevay 

23  Floreal  Year  VIII  (13  May,  1800} 

Citizen  General,  the  Commander-in-Chief  has  received  your  letter 
telling  him  that  the  advance-guard  will  be  assembled  at  Martigny  on 
the  evening  of  the  22nd.  He  instructs  me  to  impress  upon  you  the  pre- 
cautions demanded  by  the  nature  of  the  country  you  will  be  passing 
through.  The  local  inhabitants  and  Quartermaster  Dalbon,  who  has 
long  lived  there,  will  give  you  useful  information,  of  which  you  cannot 
have  too  much  in  view  of  the  difficulties  presented  by  the  crossing  of 
the  Saint-Bernard. 

General  Berthier  hopes  that  you  will  have  crossed  the  pass  by  the 
26th  as  arranged.  On  reaching  Aosta  you  will  mass  your  whole  advance- 
guard  for  an  attack  on  the  castle  of  Bard.  Do  not  appear  before  this 
fortress  without  all  your  forces.  Once  you  have  captured  the  heights 
dominating  it,  forbid  all  musketry  fire  which  will  only  uselessly  waste 
cartridges.  Mount  your  guns  on  a  hill  from  which  they  can  effectively 
fire  on  the  fort;  put  two  howitzers  on  the  road  and,  when  these  batteries 
are  ready,  open  a  heavy  cannonade.  As  soon  as  this  has  had  its  effect  on 
the  protective  works  over  the  enemy  batteries  and  there  are  targets  for 
musketry,  allow  the  fusillade  which  could  then  be  very  effective  and 
hasten  the  fall  of  the  fort. 

414  The  Rise  to  Power 

General  Marescot  has  orders  to  join  the  advance-guard  to  attend  to 
everything  concerning  the  attack  on  the  fort  of  Bard.  I  have  also  to 
inform  you  that  the  Commander-in-Chief  will  be  at  Aosta  at  the  same 
time  as  the  advance-guard. 

By  order  of  the  First  Consul 

584 
To  Lieutenant- General  Desaix 

At  Toulon  Lausanne 

24  Flortal,  Year  VIII  (14  May,  1800} 

My  dear  Desaix,  I  have  just  received  your  letter  of  15  Floreal.  Your 
first  letter  told  me  that  you  should  have  left  a  few  days  after  the  ship 
bringing  General  Kleber's  aide-de-camp,  and  I  was  very  worried,  there- 
fore, to  see  a  month  go  by  without  news  of  you;  I  feared  everything  of 
Punic  faith.  But  now  you  have  arrived;  good  news  for  the  whole 
Republic,  but  especially  for  me,  who  have  for  you  all  the  esteem  due  to 
men  of  your  talents  together  with  such  friendship  as  my  heart,  old  now 
and  knowing  men  too  well,  holds  for  no  other. 

Two  months  ago  I  received  the  capitulation  [of  El'  Arish].  I  will 
say  nothing  thereon,  since  you  have  signed  it;  but  how  could  16,000  or 
18,000  Frenchmen  be  afraid  of  30,000  Turks!  You  did  not  need  6,000 
men  to  beat  them,  take  their  guns  and  camels  and  put  them  out  of 
action  for  a  year. 

When  I  reached  France,  I  found  the  Republic  lost,  the  Vendeeans  at 
the  gates  of  Paris;  the  fleet,  far  from  being  at  Toulon,  was  at  Brest  and 
already  disarmed,  Brest  itself  threatened  by  the  English.  We  have  had 
to  destroy  the  Vendee,  find  money,  rearm  the  fleet.  It  was  leaving, 
forty-six  ships  strong  with  all  kinds  of  munitions  and  6,000  troops, 
when  the  news  from  Constantinople  told  us  of  the  capitulation. 

But  let  us  not  speak  of  it:  come  and  rejoin  me  wherever  I  may  be  as 
quickly  as  possible. 

I  am  going  down  into  Italy  with  30,000  men  to  relieve  Massena  and 
chase  out  Melas.  After  that  I  shall  return  to  Paris.  At  this  very  moment 
the  advance-guard  is  crossing  the  Saint-Bernard.  I  hope  to  be  at  Ivrea 
when  you  read  this  letter. 

Moreau  is  at  Biberach;  he  has  routed  Kray  three  times. 

BONAPARTE 

585 
To  Major- General  Mortier 

G.O.C.,  l^th  Military  District  Lausanne 

24  Flortal,  Year  VIII  (14  May,  1800} 

I  have  received  your  letter  of  19  Floral,  Citizen  General.  Most  of  the 
conscripts  sent  to  the  30th  Demi-brigade  have  deserted  with  arms  and 

Marengo  415 

GG  ^  0  Dijon.  I  fear  the  same  may  happen  to  the  I4th. 

Have  searches  made  to  find  out  what  has  happened  to  these  conscripts. 

Keep  Paris  quiet.  That  will  enable  me  to  stay  away  a  few  more  days, 
which,  I  hope,  will  not  be  without  interest  to  M.  de  Melas. 

I  salute  you  affectionately. 

BONAPARTE 
Tell  Lefebvre  to  get  his  arm  healed  quickly. 

586 
To  Major- General  Dupont 

Chief  of  Staff,  Reserve  Army  H.Q.,  Lausanne 

24  Flortal,  Year  VIII  (14  May,  1800} 

Give  orders  thatMajor-GeneralMonnier  is  to  command  the  reserve, 
composed  of  ipth  Light  and  the  44th  and  yoth  of  the  Line.  The  yoth 
will  leave  Lausanne  on  the  26th  to  rejoin  the  army.  The  ipth  Light, 
which  reaches  Nyon  on  the  2yth  will  join  the  yoth  as  quickly  as  possible 
...  As  to  the  44th  you  will  see  from  the  following  dispositions  that 
General  Monnier  will  find  two  battalions  at  Martigny  and  later  the 
third.  Brigadiers  [Carra]  Saint-Cyr  and  Schilt  and  the  adjutant-general 
who  is  with  the  yoth  will  be  under  his  orders. 

Tell  the  Quartermaster-General  that  he  must  immediately  organize 
all  administrative  services,  ambulances,  etc.,  for  this  reserve  division. 
The  First  Consul  will  give  orders  as  to  the  artillery  it  is  to  have. 

Give  orders  to  General  Moncey  instructing  him  that  he  forms  part 
of  the  army  I  command. 

Order  him  to  have  the  two  battalions  of  the  44th  Demi-brigade 
leave  at  once,  my  intention  being  that  this  whole  regiment  should 
join  the  army  on  the  Saint-Bernard.  Consequently,  the  battalion  that 
General  Moncey  had  to  send  to  the  Simplon  will  be  directed  as  soon  as 
possible  to  Martigny,  where  it  must  arrive  on  the  soth  at  the  latest  to 
join  General  Monnier's  column;  the  other  two  battalions  will  march 
there  at  once.  Give  definite  orders  to  General  Moncey  to  collect  about 
1,000  men  of  the  Swiss  levies  nearest  to  the  Simplon  to  be  sent  there 
and  joined  to  the  400  men  of  the  Swiss  battalion  already  under  the 
orders  of  General  Bethencourt.  .  . .  The  1,400  men  who  will  then  be  on 
the  Simplon  will  suffice  for  the  moment,  and  General  Moncey  will  not 
send  more. 

You  will  order  General  Bethencourt  to  send  the  battalion  of  the  44th 
to  Martigny  as  soon  as  he  receives  600  of  the  1,000  men  that  General 
Moncey  has  orders  to  send  to  the  Simplon  in  place  of  the  44th. 

You  will  instruct  the  general  commanding  the  Simplon  that  after 
reaching  Ivrea  the  army  will  probably  wheel  left  and  into  the  Ticino; 
that  he  must  seek  to  convince  the  enemy  that  he  has  large  forces  and  to 
frighten  them  by  attacking  their  positions,  but  not  rashly.  You  will 

41 6  The  Rise  to  Power 

inform  him  that  General  Moncey  has  orders  to  take  large  forces  over 
the  Saint-Gotthard  and  that  therefore  he  has  nothing  to  fear. 

Warn  General  Moncey  that,  in  accordance  with  a  decree  of  the 
Consuls,  General  Moreau  is  detaching  from  his  army  the  following 
troops  which  will  come  under  the  command  of  General  Moncey:- 
one  battalion  of  the  iO2nd  Demi-brigade,  two  battalions  of  the  loist, 
one  battalion  of  the  ist  Light:  these  four  battalions,  already  under 
General  Moncey's  orders,  make  up  a  force  of  more  than  3,000  men. 
Two  battalions  of  the  I02nd,  coming  from  Vandamme's  division;  the 
9ist  of  the  Line,  from  Laval's  division,  near  Mainz;  the  I2th  Light, 
from  the  central  reserve  of  the  Army  of  die  Rhine;  the  2pth  of  the  Line, 
from  Sainte-Suzanne's  formation.;  finally,  two  demi-brigades,  not 
named,  drawn  from  the  divisions  of  Generals  [Gouvion]  St-Cyr  and 
Lecourbe. 

All  these  troops  will  make  a  force  of  about  15,000  infantry  which 
will  arrive  very  soon,  except  for  the  pist  and  the  two  battalions  of  the 
29th,  which  are  coming  from  the  Mainz  area. 

He  will  also  receive  in  cavalry:  the  ist  Dragoons,  the  6th  and  I4th 
Cavalry,  the  I5th,  25th  and  I2th  Chasseurs,  making  about  2,400  horses. 

Order  GeneralMoncey  to  assemble  these  troops  on  the  Saint-Gotthard 
as  they  arrive,  except  those  he  may  have  sent  to  die  Simplon. 

Warn  him  that  on  the  29th  or  3Oth  I  shall  be  at  Ivrea  with  the  army; 
that,  once  there,  I  shall  march  straight  for  Milan  by  the  shortest  route 
.  .  .  that  when  I  can  establish  communication  with  Switzerland  and 
with  him  by  way  of  the  Simplon,  I  shall  have  the  little  force  he  is  to 
send  to  the  Simplon  join  me.  Inform  him  that  General  Bethencourt  is 
in  command  at  that  point. 

Inform  him  also  that  I  shall  probably  be  at  Romagnano  and  Arona 
on  2  or  3  Prairial.  Impress  upon  him  that  the  corps  under  his  command 
will  greatly  alarm  the  enemy.  During  my  movements  he  must  show  as 
many  forces  as  possible  and  make  the  enemy  believe  he  has  many  more 
than  he  really  has  and  that  he  is  threatening  at  any  moment  to  march 
on  Milan. 

It  is  possible  that  on  reaching  Ivrea  I  may  have  news  from  General 
Massena  obliging  me  to  move  straight  on  Genoa.  In  that  case  it  is 
equally  necessary  for  General  Moncey  to  draw  the  attention  of  the 
enemy,  so  that  they  keep  as  many  forces  as  possible  in  the  Milanese. 
Warn  him  that  should  I  carry  out  this  movement  it  will  delay  my 
arrival  on  the  Ticino  only  by  five  or  six  days. 

It  is  essential  that  he  should  manoeuvre  to  establish  our  communi- 
cations through  Bellinzona  and  Locarno,  so  that  we  can  act  in  concert 
for  our  different  attacks. 

Inform  General  Moncey  that  there  is  biscuit,  corn  and  brandy  at 
Zurich  and  Luzern,  with  which  he  can  feed  his  troops;  at  Luzern  tnere 

Marengo  417 

are  1,500,000  cartridges,  which  he  should  move  as  far  forward  as 
possible  so  as  to  supply  us  on  the  Ticino  via  the  Saint-Gotthard,  if  the 
enemy  holds  me  for  long  in  that  position. 

General  Moncey  must  try  to  send  us  500,000  cartridges  through 
Bern  and  Fribourg  to  the  foot  of  the  Saint-Bernard;  if  he  can  also  send 
us  1,500  rounds  each  of  8-pound  and  4-pound  shot  and  howitzer  shells 
he  will  be  doing  us  a  good  service. 

Tell  him  that  I  think  his  troops  will  not  all  have  arrived  before  2 
Prairial,  but  that  he  should  begin  to  move  those  under  his  orders  to  the 
Saint-Gotthard,  and  the  others  as  they  arrive.  Tell  him  to  send  officers 
to  meet  the  columns  and  hasten  their  march.  But  for  the  situation  in 
Genoa,  which  forces  on  our  movements,  I  should  have  waited  a  week, 
but  that  is  not  possible. 

Order  General  Moncey  to  correspond  with  us  frequently  by  way  of 
the  Saint-Bernard  until  I  have  advanced  far  enough  to  communicate 
with  the  Simplon. 

The  First  Consul,  who  is  with  this  Army,  counts  on  the  zeal  and 
talents  of  General  Moncey  to  overcome  the  difficulties  presented  by  the 
speed  and  character  of  the  movement. 

The  Commander-in-Cliief,  Reserve  Army 
ALEX.  BERTHIER 

587 
To  Major- General  Dupont 

Chief  of  Staff,  Reserve  Army  H.Q.,  Lausanne 

24  Florlal,  Year  VIII  (14  May,  1800) 

Warn  General  Turreau  that  I  expect  to  reach  Ivrea  with  the  army  on 
the  28th,  crossing  by  the  Great  Saint-Bernard. 

Inform  him  that  in  concentrating  their  forces  the  enemy  will  neces- 
sarily weaken  themselves  on  his  front;  that  he  must,  therefore,  move  on 
Susa  with  all  possible  forces;  that  he  should  have  with  him  the  4th  and 
9th  Chasseurs  and  the  2ist  Cavalry  and  as  much  artillery  and  ammu- 
nition as  possible. 

On  reaching  Susa  he  will  establish  communication  with  the  army  by 
way  of  Lanzo  and  Ponte.  From  my  side,  I  will  send  patrols  to  these  two 
towns  to  gain  news  of  him. 

Inform  General  Turreau  that  my  intention  is  that  he  should  march 
leftwards  and  join  the  army  at  Ivrea,  passing  as  far  as  possible  from 
Turin,  but  by  a  route  where  he  can  take  his  artillery.  I  hope  that  our 
junction  will  take  place  about  i  or  2  Prairial .  .  . 

Tell  him  that  the  First  Consul  and  I  count  upon  his  zeal  and  talent  to 
ensure  the  execution  of  this  important  movement. .  . 

Send  these  orders  by  the  courier  Belin  and  a  duplicate  by  a  staff 
officer  who  will  rejoin  me  at  Aosta  by  way  of  the  Little  Saint-Bernard 

4i  8  The  Rise  to  Power 

as  soon  as  General  Turreau  is  master  of  Susa.  You  will  understand  that 
there  is  no  time  to  be  lost  in  forwarding  these  orders. 

General  Turreau  will  send  me  an  exact  return  of  the  troops  and  artil- 
lery he  will  have  with  him,  and  another  of  what  he  has  left  in  the 
positions  and  strong  points  he  thinks  it  essential  to  garrison. 

The  Commander-in-Chief,  Reserve  Army 
ALEX.  BERTHIER 

588 
To  Citizen  Petiet 

Councillor  of  State,  at  Geneva  Lausanne 

24  Flortal,  Year  VIII  (14  May,  1800} 

Yesterday,  Citizen,  I  visited  Villeneuve.  You  will  see  that  four  boats 
had  arrived  carrying  in  all  430,000  rations  of  biscuit,  300,000  to  400,000 
rations  of  brandy  and  very  little  corn.  I  ask  you,  first  to  call  for  a  report 
on  the  boats  which  have  left  Geneva  for  Villeneuve  apart  from  the 
above  four  and  the  quantity  of  rations  they  carried;  secondly,  to  verify 
what  remains  in  store  at  Geneva  so  as  to  know,  by  adding  these  three 
amounts  together,  the  total  of  biscuit  on  which  we  can  count.  It  seems 
to  me  it  can  hardly  reach  the  1,500,000  I  was  told  had  been  made  and 
for  which  funds  were  issued. 

No  boots  had  yet  arrived  at  Villeneuve;  you  know  the  importance 
of  that  article. 

The  sooner  you  can  join  me  the  better.  This  army  has  great  need  of 
an  administrator. 

BONAPARTE 

589 
To  General  MassSna 

C.-m-C.,  Army  of  Italy  Lausanne 

24  Flortal,  Year  VIII  (14  May,  1800) 

I  have  been  at  Lausanne  for  two  days,  Citizen  General.  The  army  is 
in  full  movement.  The  aide-de-camp  you  sent  me  will  tell  you  verbally 
how  things  are  here. 

You  are  in  a  difficult  position,  but  what  reassures  me  is  that  you  are 
in  Genoa:  it  is  in  cases  such  as  yours  that  one  man  is  worth  20,000. 
I  embrace  you. 

BONAPARTE 

590 
To  General  Moreau 

C.-m-C.,  Army  of  the  Rhine  Lausanne 

24  Flortal,  Year  VIII  (14  May,  1800) 
Citizen  General,  the  Minister  of  War  has  sent  me  your  letter  from 

Marengo  419 

Biberach  of  20  Floreal.  Your  three  fine  victories  have  given  lustre  to 
French  arms  and  will  lower  Austrian  pride  a  little. 

I  have  received  news  dated  the  isth  from  Genoa.  Massena  is  still 
defending  himself  stubbornly,  but  he  is  surrounded  by  considerable 
forces.  The  Genoese  are  showing  great  devotion  to  our  cause. 

The  Reserve  Army  is  beginning  to  cross  the  Saint-Bernard.  It  is 
weak  and  there  will  be  obstacles  to  overcome,  which  has  decided  me  to 
go  myself  into  Italy. 

It  is  essential  that  you  furnish  a  good  corps  of  troops  to  General 
Moncey.  The  one  you  intend  is  very  weak;  besides  it  can  never  assemble 
in  time.  For  example,  the  2pth  has  two  battalions  at  Mainz;  the  pist  is 
also  near  Mainz:  these  units  will  certainly  arrive  too  late.  It  is  essential 
that  you  replace  them  and  manoeuvre  so  as  to  put  18,000  to  20,000 
men,  present  and  under  arms,  under  the  orders  of  General  Moncey,  so 
that  he  can  descend  by  the  Saint-Gotthard  during  the  first  week  of 
Prairial.  Nothing  must  be  spared  to  save  the  city  of  Genoa  and  the 
headquarters  of  our  army  blockaded  there. 

The  English  are  continually  making  small  landings  on  the  Provencal 
coast,  and  it  is  beyond  doubt  that  a  considerable  expedition  is  at  sea ... 

If  the  diversion  ordered  by  the  Government  for  die  Saint-Gotthard  is 
not  carried  out  with  all  the  diligence  and  zeal  that  the  circumstances 
demand,  it  could  happen  that  the  12,000  to  14,000  men  we  have  in 
Genoa  will  be  taken  prisoner  together  with  the  headquarters  and  that 
the  Reserve  Army  will  be  beaten.  Then  you  will  have  to  detach  20,000 
men  to  hold  the  south;  you  will  have  to  fight  against  the  Austrian  army 
in  Italy,  and  your  army  might  even  have  to  be  drawn  upon  for  help  in 
the  interior,  since  successes  like  that  would  give  a  general  encourage- 
ment to  the  Vendeeans. 

You  see  the  circumstances  we  are  in.  The  success  of  the  campaign 
can  depend  on  the  promptness  with  which  you  carry  out  the  required 
diversion.  If  it  is  executed  promptly  and  decisively  and  you  have  it  at 
heart,  Italy  and  peace  are  ours. 

Perhaps  I  am  saying  too  much.  Your  zeal  for  the  prosperity  of  the 
Republic  and  your  friendship  for  me  will  speak  to  you  enough. 

BONAPARTE 

59i 
To  the  Consuls  of  the  Republic 

Lausanne 

25  Floral,  Year  VIII  (15  May,  1800} 

.  .  .  The  advance-guard  is  now  crossing  the  Saint-Bernard:  it  is 
commanded  by  General  Lannes.  I  have  today  reviewed  the  cavalry. 
Wait  a  few  days  without  giving  news  of  the  Reserve  Army;  say  only 
that  it  is  on  the  march, 

420  The  Rise  to  Power 

It  will  perhaps  be  useful  to  insert  in  various  papers,  other  than  the 
Official  Journal,  that  I  have  crossed  Switzerland  and  passed  through 
Basle,  so  as  to  put  off  the  scent  those  who  wish  to  spread  false  news  and 
alarm  good  citizens. 

We  shall  have  various  obstacles  to  overcome;  the  transport  of  the 
artillery  across  the  Alps  is  not  one  of  the  least;  but  every  kind  of  means 
will  be  used. 

I  salute  you  affectionately. 

BONAPARTE 

592 
To  General  Berthier 

C.-w-C.,  Reserve  Army,  at  Villeneuve  Lausanne 

25  Floreal,  Year  VIII  (15  May,  1800} 

Citizen  General,  600  men  of  the  6oth  have  arrived.  Half  their  arms 
are  in  a  bad  state;  I  estimate  they  need  300. 1  wish  you  to  let  me  know 
whether  there  are  not  any  at  Villeneuve;  in  that  case,  they  will  have  to 
Wait  there  tomorrow  to  allow  time  to  have  some  brought  from  Geneva. 

You  must  give  orders  to  General  Sauret  to  establish  his  headquarters 
at  Villeneuve  or  Saint-Maurice.  Give  him  command  of  the  Leman,  of 
all  the  shores  of  the  lake  and  the  whole  of  the  Valais.  Attach  a  war 
commissary  or  quartermaster  to  him.  Order  General  Sauret  to  see  to  it 
that  all  conscripts  and  troops  reaching  Geneva  and  Villeneuve  are 
inspected,  so  that  they  can  be  fully  equipped  with  arms,  boots  and 
forty  cartridges  per  man. 

All  units  and  detachments  leaving  Geneva  should  take  bread  for  four 
days  and,  on  leaving  Villeneuve,  biscuit  for  five  days .  .  . 

It  remains  to  make  arrangements  for  the  cavalry.  Much  will  be 
passing  and,  if  it  is  not  better  fed  than  it  has  been  so  far,  the  horses  will 
arrive  in  Italy  dead.  ...  It  will  be  possible  to  have  oats  brought  up  by 
the  lake,  and  this  is  the  season  when  there  is  no  lack  of  forage. 

I  urge  you  to  take  steps  about  the  cavalry.  A  large  number  of  artillery 
horses  will  be  arriving.  They  will  all  die  on  the  mountain  if  they  are  not 
fed  for  eight  days. 

I  have  just  sent  five  munition  wagons  from  Lausanne  carrying  ten 
sledges  made  at  Auxonne  to  transport  the  limbers  and  8-pounders. 
Have  the  horses  changed  at  Villeneuve  and  send  them  with  afl  speed  to 
the  Saint-Bernard. 

BONAPARTE 

General  Murat  is  not  organizing  his  cavalry;  there  are  neither  war 
commissaries  nor  heads  of  services  with  the  result  that  they  can  barely 
keep  alive. 

The  best  organization  seems  to  be  to  divide  it  into  four  brigades:  I, 
the  I2th  Hussars  and  2ist  Chasseurs;  2,  ist  Hussars,  znd  and  I5th 

Marengo  421 

Chasseurs;  3,  5th,  yth  8th,  pth  Dragoons;  4,  ist,  2nd,  3rd,  5th  and  2oth 
Cavalry.  Each  brigade  must  have  a  forage  officer,  a  war  commissary 
and  a  light  artillery  squadron  with  two  guns.  These  can  be  drawn  from 
the  Consular  Guard  until  the  army  light  artillery  arrives. 

For  three  decades  the  quartermaster  must  arrange  to  have  2,000  or 
3,000  pairs  of  boots  per  decade  at  Lausanne  for  the  units  and  detach- 
ments passing  through. 

593 
To  Citizen  LacuSe 

Councillor  of  State,  Acting  Minister  of  War  Lausanne 

25  Flortal,  Year  VIII  (15  May,  1800} 

General  Peyron,  who  was  with  the  Army  of  the  Pyrenees  under 
General  Dugommier,  is  a  bad  officer.  Therefore  I  do  not  approve  your 
proposal  to  post  him  to  the  Reserve  Army.  It  would  be  much  simpler 
to  place  him  on  retired  pay.  He  is  good  for  nothing. 

BONAPARTE 

594 
To  General  Berthier 

C.-m-C.,  Reserve  Army,  at  Villeneuve  Lausanne 

25  Floreal,  Year  VIII  (15  May,  1800) 

Lauriston  has  just  arrived,  Citizen  General.  He  tells  me  that  the  whole 
of  the  artillery  of  General  Lannes's  division  has  crossed.  Have  the  whole 
of  General  Duhesme's  corps  cross  at  once  and  advance  as  quickly  as 
possible  on  the  fort  at  Bard.  If  General  Chabran  has  been  able  to  bring 
the  12-pounders,  have  them  sent  there.  You  know  that  there  is  no  time 
to  be  lost  in  capturing  the  castle  of  Bard. 

I  imagine  that  Lannes  has  occupied  Aosta  today.  I  hope  you  will  be 
master  of  Bard  on  the  2yth  at  the  latest. 

The  cavalry  will  camp  tomorrow  at  Villeneuve;  Monnier,  with  his 
division,  at  Vevay.  The  Italians  should  have  reached  you. 

Tomorrow  evening  I  shall  probably  be  at  Saint-Maurice;  my  guard 
and  equipment  leave  in  the  morning. 

I  have  had  news  from  Paris,  where  everything  goes  well . . . 

BONAPARTE 

595 
To  Citizen  Petiet 

Councillor  of  State,  at  Geneva  Lausanne 

25  Floreal,  Year  VIII  (15  May,  1800) 

Citizen,  order  the  biscuit  to  be  sent  on  as  soon  as  it  is  made.  I  wish  the 
1,500,000  rations  to  be  completed  and  at  Villeneuve  by  8  Prairial  at  the 
latest. 

The  Rise  to  Power 

I  do  not  know  what  steps  have  been  taken  by  Quartermaster-General 
Dubreton  to  organize  a  clothing  depot  at  Geneva.  Enquire  from  the 
war  commissary  and,  if  insufficient  has  been  done,  take  steps  to  meet  a 
consumption  of  10,000  boots  per  decade,  half  to  be  sent  to  Villeneuve 
and  half  for  the  troops  passing  through  Geneva,  for  a  period  of  three 
decades.  Collect,  also  for  three  decades,  1,000  coats,  2,000  breeches, 
2,000  haversacks  and  4,000  shirts.  Geneva  should  be  able  at  once  to 
provide  die  materials  for  making  what  you  require. 

Get  a  report  on  the  steps  taken  to  establish  a  hospital  at  Geneva. 
There  may  soon  be  a  thousand  wounded. 

BONAPARTE 

Please  send  an  officer  through  Chambery  to  Valence  to  expedite  the 
departure  of  the  pontoons,  which  are  indispensable  to  the  Army. 

596 
To  Citizeness  Josephine  Bonaparte 

At  Paris  Lausanne 

25  FlorM,  Year  VIII  (15  May,  1800} 

I  have  been  at  Lausanne  since  yesterday  and  leave  tomorrow.  I  am 
quite  well.  This  country  is  very  beautiful.  I  see  nothing  against  your 
coming  to  join  me  in  ten  or  twelve  days'  time;  but  you  must  travel 
incognito  and  not  say  where  you  are  going,  as  I  do  not  want  anyone  to 
know  what  I  am  going  to  do.  You  can  say  you  are  going  to  Plom- 
bieres.  I  will  send  you  Moustache,  who  has  just  arrived. 

A  thousand  thoughts  to  Hortense.  Eugene  is  on  his  way,  but  will  not 
arrive  for  a  week. 

BONAPARTE 

597 
To  General  Berthier 

C.-/W-C.,  Reserve  Army,  at  Saint-Pierre  Lausanne 

26Flor6al,  Year  VIII  (16  May,  1800} 

Citizen  General,  I  have  just  received  a  letter  from  General  Suchet, 
sent  from  Nice  on  the  2ist.  The  enemy  has  forced  the  Tenda  Pass 
and  the  line  of  Borghetto.  General  Suchet  had  his  headquarters  at  Nice 
and  occupied  the  Braus  Pass  and  the  forts  at  Vintimigua  and  Montal- 
ban  which  he  had  provisioned.  Nice  has  been  evacuated  to  the  last  gun; 
he  is  going  to  cross  the  Var  and  will  resume  the  offensive  with  7,000  to 
8,000  men  as  soon  as  the  enemy  is  weakened  by  our  movement. 

As  a  result  of  all  that,  you  must  at  once  order  General  Lannes  to 
march,  even  if  the  rest  of  the  army  has  not  crossed  the  Saint-Bernard. 
It  is  essential  to  be  at  Ivrea  as  soon  as  possible,  even  with  only  half 
the  army.  I  shall  be  at  Saint-Maurice  tonight. 

BONAPARTE 

Marengo  423 

598 
To  Lieutenant- General  Suchet 

Deputy  C.-in-C.,  Army  of  Italy  Lausanne 

26Floreal,  Year  VIII  (16  May,  1800} 

I  have  just  received  your  letter  of  the  2ist,  Citizen  General.  The 
artillery  of  the  advance-guard  has  crossed  the  Saint-Bernard  mountain 
with  ease.  General  Lannes,  who  is  commanding  it,  is  today  at  Aosta. 
The  army  is  at  the  foot  of  the  Saint-Bernard;  during  the  night  it  will  be 
in  Piedmont.  Another  strong  detachment  is  preparing  to  cross  the 
Saint-Gotthard.The  enemy  will  not  cross  theVar  unless  they  take  it  into 
their  heads  to  be  buried  in  Provence.  If  you  cannot  hold  Nice,  defend 
the  bridgehead.  Enlist  the  National  Guards.  I  am  arranging  to  give  the 
generals  and  prefects  of  Provence  extraordinary  authority;  I  will 
send  you  details  in  an  hour  by  another  courier. 

I  shall  be  at  the  foot  of  the  Saint-Bernard  tonight;  I  shall  go  to  Ivrea 
and  then  manoeuvre  in  the  light  of  the  enemy's  later  movements. 

BONAPARTE 

599 
To  General  Moreau 

C.-w-C.,  Army  of  the  Rhine  Lausanne 

26Flore'al,  Year  VIII  (16  May,  1800} 

Citizen  General,  part  of  the  artillery  has  already  crossed  the  Saint- 
Bernard,  and  I  am  leaving  at  once  to  rejoin  the  army. 

I  have  had  a  letter  from  General  Suchet  dated  the  2ist,  from  Nice. 
The  enemy  had  forced  the  line  of  the  Borghetto  and  the  Tenda  Pass; 
Nice  was  evacuated.  The  little  fort  of  Vintimigha,  Montalban  and  the 
castle  of  Nice  were  provisioned  for  two  months.  We  still  held  the 
Braus  Pass,  which,  like  Nice,  had  to  be  evacuated  during  the  night  of 
the  2ist  to  22nd,  when  General  Suchet  had  to  recross  the  Var.  The 
enemy  appears  to  have  very  considerable  forces  in  Italy;  all  reports  are 
at  one  on  that  point. 

I  shall  be  at  Aosta  tomorrow.  I  am  relying  on  the  diversion  from  the 
Saint-Gotthard  taking  place  in  conformity  with  the  general  plan  of 
campaign  and  the  order  which  the  Minister  of  War  has  sent  you.  All 
depends  on  that. 

BONAPARTE 

600 
To  Citizeness  Josephine  Bonaparte 

At  Paris  Lausanne 

26Flortal,  Year  VIII  (16  May,  1800} 

I  am  leaving  at  once  to  sleep  at  Saint-Maurice.  I  have  had  no  letters 
from  you;  that  is  not  good.  I  have  written  to  you  by  each  courier. 

424  The  Rise  to  Power 

Eugene  should  arrive  the  day  after  tomorrow.  I  have  a  slight  cold, 
but  that  will  come  to  nothing. 

A  thousand  tender  things  to  you,  my  good  little  Josephine,  and  to  all 
that  belongs  to  you. 

BONAPARTE 

60 1 
To  General  Berthier 

C.-m-C.,  Reserve  Army,  at  Etroubles  Martigny 

27  Floreal,  Year  VIII  (17  May,  1800) 
I  have  arrived  at  Martigny,  Citizen  General.  ...  I  shall  spend  the 

night  here  to  await  news  of  the  capture  of  the  fort  at  Bard,  which  I  hope 
to  receive  tomorrow  morning. 

Two  4-pounders  on  sledge-mountings  could  easily  be  set  up  on  the 
heights  dominating  it,  without  being  dismounted  and  without  needing 
the  empkcement  required  by  an  ordinary  carriage. 

General  Monnier  camps  tonight  at  Saint-Maurice  with  the  yoth. 

The  cavalry  will  be  here  tomorrow. 

BONAPARTE 

602 
To  the  Consuls  of  the  Republic 

Martigny 

28  Flortal,  Year  VIII  (18  May,  1800} 
Citizen  Consuls,  I  thank  you  for  your  sympathy  at  the  death  of  my 

brother's  wife.*  She  had  long  been  ill. 

We  are  fighting  against  ice,  snow,  gales  and  avalanches.  Astonished 
at  being  so  rudely  attacked,  the  Saint-Bernard  is  putting  certain  ob- 
stacles in  our  way.  But  a  third  of  our  field  artillery  is  already  over. 
General  Berthier  sent  word  on  the  2<5th  that  he  had  entered  Aosta. 
General  Lannes,  commanding  the  advance-guard,  has  had  a  minor 
skirmish  with  a  battalion  of  Croats,  which  tried  to  defend  the  entrance 
to  Aosta  but  was  driven  back. 

In  three  days  the  whole  army  will  have  crossed.  Unless  it  is  quite 
essential,  I  think  it  would  be  wise  not  to  make  the  news  public.  It  will 
be  better  to  wait  until  we  are  in  Italy  and  serious  fighting  begins. 

BONAPARTE 

603 
To  General  Berthier 

C.-m-C.,  Reserve  Army,  at  Aosta  Martigny 

28  Florfal,  Year  VIII  (18  May,  1800) 

I  have  received  simultaneously,  Citizen  General,  your  two  letters 
from  Etroubles,  one  of  i.o  p.m.  and  one  of  9.0  p.m.  on  the  27th. 
*  Catherine  Boyer,  first  wife  of  Lutien  Bonaparte. 

Marengo  '  425 

Today  has  been  fine,  which  has  helped  the  passage  of  munitions. 

All  the  cavalry  is  here.  I  have  slowed  its  movement  a  litde  so  as  not  to 
overwhelm  you  on  the  other  side  until  I  know  that  cursed  fort  of  Bard 
has  been  captured.  The  Italians  left  this  morning.  .  .  . 

I  have  written  to  Geneva  that  Petiet  must  send2OO,ooo  cartridges  and 
200,000  biscuit  rations  over  the  Litde  Saint-Bernard. 

The  bullocks  are  moving  fast;  the  front  of  the  herd  has  reached 
Lausanne.  .  .  . 

BONAPARTE 

604 
To  Citizen  Petiet 

Councillor  of  State,  at  Geneva  Martigny 

28  Florfal,  Year  VIII  (18  May,  1800) 

Send  the  first  200,000  rations  of  biscuit  you  have  ready  either  at 
Chambery  or  Geneva  to  Aosta  by  way  of  the  Litde  Saint-Bernard. 
Since  this  is  of  the  utmost  importance,  use  all  possible  means  of  trans- 
port; put  a  war  commissary  in  charge  of  the  operation.  Write  to  the 
prefect  of  Mont-Blanc  so  that  he  requisitions  the  necessary  quantity  of 
mules  and  carts. 

200,000  cartridges  must  also  be  sent  to  Aosta  by  the  same  route. 

Write  to  Adjutant-general  Boyer,  commanding  in  the  Mont-Blanc, 
so  that  he  supports  the  prefect  in  arranging  the  necessary  transport. 

The  line  of  operations  over  die  Great  Saint-Bernard,  which  draws 
on  the  central  depot  at  Villeneuve,  is  beginning  to  be  adequately 
provisioned.  It  is  now  necessary  to  send  supplies  to  the  army  by  the 
other  line  of  operations,  which  is  the  Litde  Saint-Bernard. 

Artillery  Major  Gueriot  should  have  received  orders  from  General 
Marmont  to  form  an  ammunition  dump  at  the  foot  of  the  Litde 
Saint-Bernard.  If  he  has  not  received  them  inform  him  of  this  letter. 

BONAPARTE 

605 
To  Citizen  Petiet 

Councillor  of  State,  at  Geneva  Martigny 

28  Flortal,  Year  VIII  (18  May,  1800} 

Twelve  guns  have  already  crossed  the  Saint-Bernard,  but  not  with- 
out difficulty,  less  over  the  guns  than  over  the  wretched  limbers. 

Berthier  writes  to  me  that  he  has  entered  Aosta.  A  Croat  battalion 
tried  to  defend  the  bridge;  twelve  men  were  killed  and  then  the  enemy 
fled.  The  fort  of  Bard  will  be  invested  tomorrow. 
The  army  is  crossing  fast. 

BONAPARTE 

426  The  Rise  to  Power 

606 
To  the  Consuls  of  the  Republic 

Martigny 
29  Floral,  Year  VIII  (ip  May,  1800) 

Citizen  Consuls.  ...  At  last  the  weather  has  become  fine,  which  was 
very  necessary  to  expedite  the  passage  of  our  artillery  over  the  Saint- 
Bernard. 

A  letter  from  General  Suchet  informs  me  that  the  enemy  attacked  the 
bridgehead  on  the  Var  on  the  23rd.  They  were  driven  off  and  lost  150 
prisoners.  General  Suchet  also  tells  me  that  the  enemy  is  beginning  to 
be  worried  at  the  movement  of  the  Reserve  Army  and  has  sent  a 
detachment  against  Berthier  .  . . 

I  read  in  the  newspapers  that  I  have  written  a  letter  to  my  mother 
saying  I  shall  be  in  Milan  within  a  month.  That  is  not  my  character. 
Often  I  do  not  say  what  I  know,  but  never  do  I  say  what  is  going  to 
happen.  I  wish  you  to  have  a  note  to  this  effect,  in  humorous  tone, 
inserted  in  The  Monitor. 

BONAPARTE 

607 
To  Citizen  Talleyrand 

Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs  Martigny 

2$  Flortal,  Year  VIII  (19  May,  1800) 

Citizen  Minister,  I  am  returning  to  you,  signed,  the  papers  you 
sent  me. 

At  last  the  Reserve  Army  is  entering  the  scene.  The  Saint-Bernard 
put  a  few  difficulties  in  our  way.  Since  Charlemagne  it  has  not  seen  such 
a  krge  army  and,  most  of  all,  it  hindered  the  passage  of  our  heavy 
field  pieces.  But  now  half  our  artillery  is  at  Aosta. 

BONAPARTE 

608 
To  Citizen  Reinhard 

French  Minister  to  Switzerland  Martigny  , 

29  Florlal,  Year  VIII  (19  May,  1800) 

Citizen  Minister,  please  see  the  Executive  Council  and  ask  them  to 
order  a  battalion  of  300  to  400  men  to  proceed  to  Saint-Pierre  to  guard 
the  Saint-Bernard  and  the  line  of  communication  of  the  Army. 

I  also  hope  that  the  Swiss  Executive  Council  can  enlist  three  battalions 
of  the  National  Guard,  each  of  300  men.  One  should  be  held  at 
Martigny,  the  second  at  VUleneuve,  the  third  at  Lausanne.  The  purpose 
of  these  battalions  will  be  to  provide  escorts  for  the  army  convoys 
and  prisoners,  to  guard  our  stores  and  maintain  the  security  of 

Marengo  427 

communications  with  France.  Each  national  guard  will  be  paid  at  the 
rate  often  sous  per  day  from  army  funds. 

BONAPARTE 

609 
To  Citizen  Lacu£e 

Councillor  of  State,  acting  Minister  of  War  Martigny 

29  Mortal,  Year  VIII  (19  May,  1800} 

Citizen  Minister,.  .  .  The  army  is  not  yet  all  across;  we  still  have 
only  half  our  artillery  on  the  other  side. 

We  shall  need  a  battalion  of  veterans  at  Villeneuve  to  guard  our 
stores  and  escort  prisoners  to  Geneva.  Also  afew  companies  at  Geneva . . . 

The  military  police  will  need  reinforcing  by  100  men.  You  should 
take  one  man  in  ten  from  the  most  peaceful  departments  and  send  them 
to  Villeneuve,  whence  they  will  join  the  army. 

BONAPARTE 

610 
To  General  Berthier 

C.-m-C.,  Reserve  Army,  at  Verres 

Martigny 
29  Flortal,  Year  VIII  (19  May,  1800) 

I  congratulate  you,  Citizen  General,  on  this  first  victory;  it  is  the 
prelude  to  greater  ones. 

At  last  500  or  600  requisitioned  mules  are  beginning  to  arrive  here, 
and  I  hope  that  from  tomorrow  we  shall  have  pretty  considerable 
means  for  getting  our  artillery  over, 

I  shall  probably  leave  tomorrow. 

According  to  the  news  from  Nice  on  the  24th  it  is  physically  impos- 
sible for  Melas  to  be  at  Turin,  should  he  go  there,  before  5  or  6  Prairial. 

You  must  be  beyond  Ivrea  with  everything  completely  ready  by 
the  4th.  The  cavalry  and  the  Chambarlhac  and  Monnier  divisions  will 
have  joined  us  by  men. 

BONAPARTE 

611 
To  General  Berthier 

C.-m-C.,  Reserve  Army,  at  Verres  Martigny 

29  Florlal,  Year  VIII  (19  May,  1800) 

Citizen  General,  I  have  just  received  news  from  the  Var,  dated  7.0 
a.m.  on  the  24th.  General  Suchet  informs  me  that  General  Melas  him- 
self is  at  VintimigUa.  The  corps  at  Nice  appears  to  be  of  15,000  men. 
On  the  23rd  the  Lattermann  Grenadiers  attacked  the  bridge  over  the 
L.D  N. — * 

428  The  Rise  to  Power 

Var;  they  were  vigorously  repulsed  and  pursued  as  far  as  the  outskirts 
of  Nice.  200  grenadiers  were  made  prisoner. 

General  Mdas  has  sent  a  detachment  of  5,000  men,  commanded  by 
General  Bellegarde,  into  Piedmont  by  the  Tenda  Pass.  This  movement 
took  pkce  when  they  had  news  that  you  had  reached  Geneva  with 
15,000  men. 

There  is  not  a  moment  to  lose  in  pressing  forward.  If  the  fort  of  Bard 
holds  out  longer  than  we  think,  the  advance-guard,  with  four  sledge- 
mounted  4-pounders,  which  will  go  anywhere,  and  the  light  cavalry- 
brigade,  will  have  to  take  up  a  good  position  between  Ivrea  and  the 
fort;  place  the  ist  Division  in  position  to  support  it.  But  I  hope  you 
will  have  invested  this  fort  today.  The  weather  is  superb,  which  will 
greatly  ease  the  passage  of  the  artillery.  ...  I  shall  probably  cross 
tomorrow. 

BONAPARTE 

612 
To  Lieutenant- General  Moncey 

G.O.C.,  Saint-Gotthard  Corps  Martigny 

29  Floral,  Year  VIII  (ig  May,  1800} 

I  have  received  your  letter,  Citizen  General,  together  with  die  copy 
of  the  one  you  sent  to  General  Berthier,  who  is  far  away;  I  am  taking  it 
upon  myself  to  answer  for  him. 

Huningue,  Neu£-Brisach  or  Strasbourg  should  be  able  to  supply  you 
with  gunners.  Nothing  can  replace  their  knowledge  and  experience  for 
the  transport  of  artillery  on  the  bad  roads  you  will  be  passing  over. 

I  am  ordering  Citizen  Petiet  to  send  you  50,000  francs  and  I  am 
writing  to  Paris  to  have  100,000  in  gold  sent  direct  to  you;  you  will  not 
lack  for  money. 

If  on  the  8th  youareontheSaint-Qotthard  with  12,000  to  15,000  men, 
all  will  go  well. 

The  difficulties  presented  by  the  crossing  of  the  Saint-Bernard  have 
dekyed  us  a  little.  The  army  will  not  be  assembled  at  Ivrea  and  in  a 
position  to  undertake  major  operations  until  5  Prairial .  .  .  Afterwards 
it  will  perhaps  take  the  course  of  going  straight  to  Milan.  It  will  cross 
the  Sesia  as  soon  as  possible,  will  be  joined  by  the  column  from  the 
Simplon  and  will  advance  to  the  Ticino.  In  that  case  it  will  reach  the 
Ticino  only  on  the  8th. 

On  this  hypothesis,  the  Reserve  Army  will  be  making  a  very  daring 
march  between  5  and  9  Prairial.  The  Sesia  will  be  disputed  by  the  force 
defending  the  Milanese.  It  is  essential  that  you  find  ways  of  seeming  to 
be  ready  and  in  great  strength  and  of  keeping  the  headquarters  of  the 
division  opposing  you  constantly  on  the  alert.  It  will  then  be  less  ready 
to  weaken  itself  so  as  to  oppose  the  advance  of  the  Reserve  Army, 

Marengo  429 

which  will  be  able  to  manoeuvre  as  a  whole  according  to  circumstances 
to  crush  Melas,  who  will  be  on  its  right  flank  after  the  yth  or  8th  when 
it  arrives  on  the  Ticino. 

Then  you  must  proceed  to  Bellinzona  to  form  the  left  of  the  Reserve 
Army  and  to  Lugano  and  Varese,  which  will  turn  the  Ticino. 

If,  on  the  other  hand,  the  Army  goes  straight  down  to  the  Genoese 
Riviera  to  disengage  General  Massena,  then  you  will  have  five  or  six 
days  more,  during  which  it  is  essential  that  you  keep  up  patrol  activity 
to  give  the  impression  that  you  are  going  to  Milan.  Tne  arrival  of  the 
Reserve  Army  in  Lombardy  will  be  delayed  five  or  six  days,  which 
means  that  you  will  be  the  more  ready. 

If  the  enemy  determines  to  pay  absolutely  no  attention  to  you  and 
thins  out  considerably  so  as  to  march  against  the  Reserve  Army,  then 
take  count  of  your  strength,  carry  Belfinzona,  march  on  Lugano  and 
make  as  great  a  diversion  as  you  can. 

BONAPARTE 

613 
To  Citizen  Boinod 

Asst.  Q.M.G.,  Reserve  Army  Martigny 

29  Floreal,  Year  VIII  (19  May,  1800} 

16,000  rations  of  biscuit  and  10,000  rations  of  bread  are  leaving  at 
once  for  Saint-Branchier.  Distributed  to  the  Chambarlhac  division, 
that  will  give  it  three  days'  supply  of  bread  .  . . 

There  is  no  shortage  of  foodstuffs  at  Villeneuve;  only  transport  is 
lacking,  which  puts  us  in  danger  of  dying  of  hunger  in  the  Aosta  valley 
where  there  is  nothing  but  hay  and  wine. 

Answer  me,  please,  on  this  point  and  let  me  know  who  is  the 
quartermaster  in  charge  of  transport  between  Villeneuve  and  Aosta  and 
therefore  responsible  for  the  subsistence  of  the  army. 

BONAPARTE 

614 
To  Lieutenant- General  Suchet 

Deputy  C.-w-C.,  Army  of  Italy  Martigny 

29  Flortal,  Year  VIII  (ip  May,  iSoo) 

I  have  received  your  two  letters  of  the  23  rd,  Citizen  General. 

The  Saint-Bernard  mountain  is  crossed.  Half  our  artillery  is  at  Aosta. 
I  myself  am  going  over  tomorrow.  When  you  receive  this  letter  the 
diversion  should  be  fully  made  and  uncertainty  being  felt  by  the  enemy 
at  Nice. 

The  first  operation  at  Nice  will  be  to  have  the  coastal  batteries 
rearmed. 

430  Tlie  Rise  to  Power 

Have  those  inhabitants  who  have  misbehaved  and  helped  the  enemy 
arrested  to  be  severely  punished  .  .  . 
The  army  will  be  assembled  at  Ivrea  on  4  Prairial. 

BONAPARTE 

615 
To  General  Berthier 

C.-w-C.,  Reserve  Army,  at  Verres  Etroubles 

30  Floreal,  Year  VIII  (20  May,  1806],  9.0  p.m. 

I  have  just  received  your  letter,  Citizen  General.  A  war  commissary, 
sent  by  the  Quartermaster-General,  is  going  at  once  to  Saint-Pierre  to 
send  up  biscuit,  of  which  he  will  find  enough  there  and  which  can  be 
delivered  at  Aosta  on  the  evening  of  the  2nd. 

I  am  assured  here  that  the  sledge-mountings  have  left.  I  shall  not  leave 
until  late  tomorrow  so  as  to  see  for  myself  the  state  of  the  artillery. 

I  wish  you  to  send  me  a  detailed  report  on  the  detour  that  must  be 
made  because  of  the  castle  of  Bard,  the  time  needed  and  the.  state  of  the 
route. 

Choose  good  positions  on  the  edge  of  the  plain  which  the  army  can 
take  up  to  cover  the  siege  of  Bard  and  where  it  can  receive  the  attack 
of  the  enemy  army.  These  positions  can  be  selected  so  that  his 
superiority  in  cavalry  is  unimportant  and  the  advantage  of  his  artillery 
is  considerably  lessened.  That  will  also  ensure  our  ability  to  scour  the 
plain  and  spread  out  to  feed  ourselves.  Joined  to  what  will  reach  us  by 
the  Little  Saint-Bernard  and  to  the  million  rations  of  biscuit  we  have 
beyond  Villeneuve,  that  will  keep  us  alive. 

The  movements  on  the  Simplon  and  the  Saint-Gotthard  will  be 
strongly  felt  by  the  enemy  about  5  or  6  Prairial.  We  have  ten  sledge- 
mounted  guns  which  can  support  the  positions  taken  up  by  the  army. 
Meanwhile  the  crossing  of  tne  artillery  will  be  completed,  the  rear 
corps  will  arrive  and  yet  the  diversion  at  Genoa  will  none  the  less  be 
paray  made. 

Order  a  party  of  sappers  and  as  many  peasants  as  can  be  collected  to 
start  work  at  once  to  repair  the  new  road  [round  Bard],  which  will 
become  the  Army's  line  of  communication;  it  must  be  very  bad  if  it 
is  worse  than  the  Saint-Bernard  over  which  we  have  brought  part  of 
our  artillery.  With  time  and  trouble  most  obstacles  can  be  surmounted. 

Send  your  adjutants-general  and  engineer  officers  to  find  out  the 
formation  of  the  country  between  Bard  and  Ivrea. 

Keep  on  the  alert.  Lannes  will  have  7,000  to  8,000  men  upon  him 
within  three  or  four  days.  Melas  cannot  reach  you  before  the  6th. 

To  sum  up,  we  must  work  on  the  new  road  and  do  much  recon- 
naissance. As  soon  as  your  artillery  is  ready  start  bombarding  the  fort. 

BONAPARTE 

Marengo  431 

616 
To  General  Berthier 

C.-ftt-C.,  Reserve  Army,  at  Verres  Aosta 

1  Prairial,  Year  VIII  (21  May,  1800} 

Citizen  General,  General  Harville  and  General  Chambarlhac  have 
reached  Etroubles  today;  as  the  latter  has  brought  his  artillery,  he  must 
have  a  third  of  bis  division  still  the  other  side  . .  .  We  never  hoped  to 
be  assembled  and  ready  to  meet  the  enemy  in  force  before  4  or  5 
Prairial,  so  until  now  the  fort  of  Bard  has  not  delayed  you. 

The  Austrian  force  opposite  the  Simplon  might  go  up  the  Val-Sesia 
as  far  as  Riva,  cross  the  Valdobbia  to  Gressoney,  and  from  there  fall 
upon  CMtillon  by  the  Ranzola  pass  and  Brusson,  or  else  go  by  way  of 
Fontana-Mora  to  Perloz  and  the  heights  above  Bard. 

It  is  certain  that  vehicles  can  go  the  whole  length  of  the  Val-Sesia 
below  Riva.  It  is  even  suggested  that  they  could  cross  to  Gressoney 
and  from  there  to  Chatillon  and  Saint-Martin  without  very  serious 
difficulty.  We  must,  therefore,  as  quickly  as  possible  reconnoitre  from 
CMtillon,  Saint-Martin  and  Verres  to  Gressoney,  and  establish  an 
observation  corps  there  which  will  ensure  your  defence  and  show  us 
how  far  we  can  count  on  the  nature  of  these  roads.  I  have  seen  people 
of  the  country  who  have  often  been  from  Riva  to  Chitillon  in  a  day 
and  they  reckon  even  less  time  from  Riva  to  Saint-Martin. 

A  few  years  ago  the  King  of  Sardinia  established  a  line  from  Saint- 
Martin  to  Gressoney.  I  am  assured  that  cannon  passed  by  the  route 
from  Arnaz  to  Perloz,  Perloz  to  Lilliana  and  Lilliana  to  Saint-Martin. 
Those  seem  to  me  to  be  three  reconnaissances  that  must  be  made. 
Independently,  send  spies  to  Riva  as  soon  as  possible.  The  Italian  corps 
here  could  be  sent  to  Gressoney;  it  would  occupy  the  Valdobbia  and 
send  patrols  into  the  Val-Sesia,  which  would  facilitate  our  communica- 
tion with  the  Simplon  force. 

From  the  other  side  the  enemy  could  approach  Aosta  itself  through 
Ceresole.  The  two  or  three  roads  he  would  have  to  follow  meet  on 
the  Cogne  Pass;  these  roads  appear  to  be  mountainous,  rough  and 
difficult.  I  think  it  is  equally  important  to  survey  and  watch  the  Cogne 
Pass,  from  which  the  castle  of  Bard  can  be  reached  by  the  Champorcher 
valley. 

If  it  is  true  that  artillery  can  use  the  route  from  CMtillon  to 
Gressoney,  we  could  avoid  Bard,  for  it  seems  certain  that  the  road  from 
Gressoney  to  Saint-Martin  is  fairly  good. 

Your  artillery  is  going  to  increase  daily,  and,  if  die  Saint-Bernard 
has  not  stopped  us,  a  secondary  mountain  will  not  put  an  insurmount- 
able obstacle  in  our  path.  ... 

The  best-informed  people  here  think  that  were  about  thirty  shells 
to  fall  in  die  fort  with  the  Albard  battery  keeping  up  a  brisk  fire,  Bard 

432  The  Rise  to  Power 

would  be  carried  if  we  had  ladders  ready  for  the  assault,  especially  on 
the  Saint-Martin  side. 

You  must  erect  a  bridge  near  Donnaz,  at  least  for  infantry,  so  that 
if  the  occasion  arises  we  can  use  the  road  up  the  Champorcher  valley 

to  the  Cogne  Pass. 

BONAPARTE 

617 
To  General  Berthier 

C-w-C,  Reserve  Army,  at  Vems  Aosta 

2  Prairial,  Year  VIII  (22  May,  1800),  11.00  a.m. 

Citizen  General,  I  have  received  your  letter  of  3.0  a.m.  this  morning, 
with  that  from  General  Lannes.  I  hope  that  by  now  I  have  to  con- 
gratulate you  on  the  capture  of  the  fort  of  Bard.  Once  you  hold  it, 
do  not  let  its  equipment  be  dissipated;  a  garrison  must  be  put  in  with 
a  good  commander.  You  will  understand  that,  should  we  change 
the  plan  of  operations,  it  will  be  extremely  important  to  have  this  little 
fort  to  close  the  valley  and  ensure  our  means  of  renewing  the  line  of 
communication  through  Aosta  should  we  so  wish.  Once  the  campaign 
assumes  a  different  character  we  can  then  give  it  up  and  raze  it.  ... 

The  Italians  are  going  to  Chitillon  tonight.  If  you  are  master  of  the 
fort  of  Bard,  you  can  send  them  on  to  Ivrea;  otherwise  you  will  do 
well  to  send  them  to  Gressoney.  .  .  . 

BONAPARTE 
Try  to  send  some  local  men  to  see  if  there  is  news  of  General  Turreau. 

618 
To  General  Berthier 

C.-m-C.,  Reserve  Army,  at  Vems  Aosta 

2  Prairial,  Year  VIII  (22  May,  1800),  10.0  p.m. 

General  Chambarlhac  informs  me,  Citizen  General,  that  he  will  be 
at  Aosta  on  the  evening  of  the  4th  with  the  whole  of  his  division  and 
all  his  artillery;  so  he  can  be  at  Ivrea  on  the  6th. 

The  Monnier  Division  and  the  whole  of  the  cavalry  can  be  there 
on  the  sth.  Thus  we  can  reckon  that  by  the  yth  the  whole  of  your  army 
will  be  assembled  between  Saint-Martin  and  Ivrea.  I  hope  you  will 
have  taken  the  fort  before  then.  If  it  is  not  taken,  you  could  leave  the 
Chabran  Division  to  continue  the  siege  and  some  of  the  Italians  to 
occupy  the  head  of  the  Val  di  Valla,  die  cavalry  and  artillery  passing 
by  night  along  the  road  between  the  fort  and  the  village. 

If  General  Lannes  can  put  a  good  commander  with  200  or  300  men 
in  the  castle  of  Ivrea  and  can  bring  General  Turreau  there,  you  will 
have  a  sure  line  of  retreat  on  the  Dora-Baltea  enabling  you  to  retire  on 

Marengo 433 

Susa.  Thereby  you  will  be  in  a  position  to  act  in  complete  freedom  in 
accordance  with  the  movements  of  the  enemy  and  the  news  of  General 
Moncey.  .  .  . 

Give  orders  to  General  Lechi  to  occupy  Gressoney  and  to  send 
detachments  from  Riva  into  the  Val-Sesia  and  to  Biella  via  Monte- 
Mosso. 

It  is  important  to  get  as  many  guns  as  possible  to  General  Lannes  and 
General  Boudet  tomorrow.  Meanwhile,  tell  General  Lannes  to  watch 
closely  the  movements  of  the  enemy  in  the  Biella  and  Santhia  areas. 
He  must,  provisionally,  establish  himself  between  Ivrea  and  Saint- 
Martin,  so  as  not  to  be  cut  off  from  the  Val  di  Valla.  But  that  must  not 
prevent  him  from  sending  detachments  to  search  the  plain  for  news 
of  the  enemy  and  of  General  Turreau.  Above  all,  see  that  Generals 
Lechi  and  Lannes  send  spies  and  troops  towards  Biella  so  that  we  are 
fully  informed  of  the  movements  of  the  enemy  on  that  side. 

BONAPARTE 

619 
To  the  Consuls  of  the  Republic 

Aosta 

4  Prairial,  Year  VIII  (24  May,  1800) 

Citizen  Consuls,  ...  A  letter  that  I  have  received  from  Nice  and  the 
news  reaching  me  from  Ivrea  inform  me  that  on  29  Floreal  Melas  was 
at  Nice  and  suspecting  nothing.  His  confidence  was  based  on  the 
knowledge  that  there  were  no  troops  between  Lyons  and  the  Mont 
Cenis  and  that  the  camp  at  Brian^on  was  very  weak.  As  a  precaution 
he  had,  however,  posted  3,000  cavalry  on  the  approaches  from 
Brian?on.  I  am  assured  that  he  reached  Turin  yesterday  in  great  haste. 

BONAPARTE 

620 
To  Citizen  Joseph  Bonaparte 

At  Paris  Aosta 

4  Prairial,  Year  VIII  (24  May,  1800) 

Please  give  my  wife  30,000  francs. 

The  worst  obstacles  have  been  overcome;  we  are  masters  of  Ivrea 
and  its  citadel,  where  we  found  ten  guns.  We  have  come  down  like 
a  thunderbolt;  the  enemy  was  not  expecting  it  at  all  and  can  scarcely 
believe  it. 

Great  events  are  coming;  I  hope  the  results  will  be  splendid  for  the 
happiness  and  glory  of  the  Republic. 

A  thousand  things  to  Julie. 

BONAPARTE 

434  The  Rise  to  Power 

621 
To  Citizen  Masc 

President,  Municipality  of  Saint-Pierre  Aosta 

4  Prairial,  Year  VIII  (24  May,  1800) 

I  have  received  your  letter  of  20  May,  Citizen.  I  am  very  pleased 
with  the  zeal  shown  by  all  the  inhabitants  of  Saint-Pierre  and  with  the 
services  they  have  rendered  us.  Have  an  estimate  prepared  of  the 
damage  caused  by  the  passage  of  the  army  and  I  will  repay  the  whole. 
That  is  no  more  than  justice,  and  I  hope  to  do  something  further  for 
the  benefit  of  your  commune. 

BONAPARTE 

622 
To  Lieutenant -General  Moncey 

G.O.C.,  Saint-Gotthard  Corps  Aosta 

4  Prairial,  Year  VIII  (24  May,  1800} 

Yesterday,  Citizen  General,  the  advance-guard  captured  Ivrea  and 
the  citadel;  200  prisoners  were  taken.  On  the  6th  the  whole  army  will 
occupy  all  Piedmont  between  Ivrea  and  the  Sesia.  The  fort  of  Bard, 
closing  the  valley,  is  presenting  great  difficulties  to  the  passage  of  our 
artillery.  Have  all  the  munitions  you  can  brought  via  the  Saint- 
Gotthard  and  collected  at  Altorf. 

Attack  on  the  7th  or  8th;  advance  to  Bellinzona,  to  Locarno.  We 
may  well  be  on  the  Ticino  on  the  8th  or  pth. 

BONAPARTE 

General  Bethencourt,  with  the  24th,  will  attack  from  the  Simplon 
and  advance  to  Domodossola.  Establish  contact  with  him.  A  force  of 
chasseurs  from  the  army,  now  at  Gressoney,  will  be  at  Riva  on  the 
6th  to  make  contact  with  General  Bethencourt. 

623 
To  Brigadier- General  Bethencourt 

G.O.C.,  Simplon  Force  Aosta 

4  Prairial,  Year  VIII  (24  May,  1800} 

If  you  have  2,000  men  under  your  orders,  Citizen  General,  overrun 
the  enemy  outposts  on  the  yth  and  advance  to  Domodossola. 

1,500  men  now  occupy  Gressoney.  They  will  reach  Riva  by  the 
6th.  You  can  then  make  contact  with  this  force. 

Take  200,000  or  300,000  cartridges  with  you  and  two  or  three 
4-pounders. 

General  Moncey  is  crossing  the  Saint-Gotthard  on  the  8th  to  occupy 
Bellinzona,  Locarno  and  Lugano.  Get  in  communication  with  him. 

BONAPARTE 

Marengo  435 

624 
To  Major- General  Chabran 

G.O.C.,  5th  Division,  Reserve  Army  Aosta 

4  Prairial,  Year  VIII  (24  May,  1800) 

Citizen  General,  The  First  Consul  wishes  you  to  leave  today  with 
two  demi-brigades  of  your  division  to  proceed  to  Chatillon  and 
tomorrow  to  the  castle  of  Bard,  to  which  you  will  lay  siege. 

The  third  demi-brigade  of  your  division  will  furnish  one  battalion 
for  the  garrison  of  Aosta,  one  battalion  to  guard  the  gorge  of  Cogne 
and  one  battalion  to  guard  the  artillery  park  at  Etroubles. 

The  First  Consul  wishes  you  to  carry  bread  for  four  days  if  you  can 
draw  supplies  here. 

By  order  of  the  First  Consul 

625 
To  General  Berthier 

C.-w-C,  Reserve  Army,  at  Verres  Aosta 

4  Prairial,  Year  VIII  (24  May,  1800] 

.  .  .  General  Champeaux's  cavalry  brigade,  which  was  at  ChStillon 
yesterday,  is  moving  into  Piedmont  today.  The  two  brigades  of 
dragoons  and  heavy  cavalry  are  encamped  between  Bard  and  Chatillon. 
Give  orders  for  them  to  move  into  Piedmont  tomorrow.  .  . . 

The  ipth  Light  will  be  at  Aosta  tomorrow  and  will  join  General 
Monnier  with  all  speed.  General  Monnier  is  encamped  between  Verres 
and  Chatillon  and  tomorrow  will  take  up  position  between  Ivrea  and 
Saint-Martin.  General  Chambarlhac  will  camp  tonight  at  Aosta  with 
the  whole  of  his  Division,  so  that,  if  necessary,  he  can  be  at  Ivrea  on 
the  evening  of  the  6th.  Thus  on  the  yth  the  whole  of  your  army  will 
be  assembled  at  Ivrea. 

The  great  difficulty  will  be  the  artillery.  The  people  of  Bard  itself 
assure  me  that  it  should  be  possible  to  make  a  road  between  Bard  and 
the  town,  working  on  it  at  night:  we  could  also  send  the  artillery  past 
at  night. 

The  artillery  is  beginning  to  move,  so  you  should  have  a  good 
number  of  pieces  of  aft  calibres  at  Bard. 

Could  we  not  fire  for  three  or  four  hours  with  a  large  number  of 
guns  and  escalade  the  outer  wall,  or  else  escalade  it  at  night  with  a 
number  of  feint  attacks? 

You  must  make  use  of  your  lieutenant-generals,  as  they  are  your 
best  divisional  commanders.  As  things  are  they  are  without  anything 
to  do.  Victor  could  command  Chambarlhac  and  Monnier,  which  in 
reality  makes  only  a  big  division,  and  Duhesme,  Boudet  and  Loison. 

BONAPARTE 

436  The  Rise  to  Power 

626 
To  General  Brune 

At  Dijon  Aosta 

2  Prairial,  Year  VIII  (24  May,  1800) 

Citizen  General.  .  .  .  The  enemy  seems  completely  astonished  by  our 
movement.  He  still  hardly  believes  it.  Judge  for  yourself.  This  was  the 
enemy  situation  on  28  Floreal:  12,000  men  at  Nice,  6,000  at  Savona 
and  the  Genoese  Riviera,  25,000  in  front  of  Genoa,  8,000  at  Susa, 
Pignerol  etc.,  3,000  in  the  Aosta  valley,  8,000  opposite  the  Simplon 
and  Saint-Gotthard;  this  all  infantry.  Two  regiments  of  hussars  at 
Genoa  and  Nice,  four  regiments  near  Turin;  the  rest  in  cantonments 
round  Acqui  and  in  the  interior  of  Lombardy. 

He  remained  in  this  position  till  the  moment  we  reached  Ivrea. 

The  3,000  men  who  were  in  the  valley  have  been  beaten  and  dis- 
persed. The  whole  force  from  Susa  and  Pignerol  has  moved  between 
Turin  and  Ivrea.  Nice  has  probably  been  evacuated  by  now  . . . 

I  count  on  having  the  whole  army,  about  33,000  men,  at  Ivrea 
on  the  6th  or  yth.  I  shall  be  master  of  the  whole  country  from  the  Dora- 
Baltea  to  the  Sesia.  The  same  day  Moncey  will  cross  the  Saint-Gotthard 
with  15,000  men.  Suchet  and  Mass6na,  who  are  informed  of  qur 
movements,  will  follow  the  enemy  when  they  see  him  weakening  in 
front  of  them  .  .  . 

If  we  are  successful,  it  will  be  only  a  beginning.  You  are  going  to 
organize  a  good  army  corps  with  which  you  will  have  a  fine  r&le  to 
play  at  the  beginning  of  July.  Work  without  pause  to  arm  and  equip 
the  conscripts  reaching  you.  The  army  paymaster  has  just  received  a 
million  francs  from  Paris,  and  I  am  ordering  him  to  send  you  400,000 
to  make  up  the  pay  and  provide  you  with  additional  arms  and  clothing, 
though  the  Minister  of  War  should  already  have  provided  for  that. 

You  will  find  yourself  commanding  the  Reserve  Army  as  soon  as 
it  has  secured  its  junction  with  the  Army  of  Italy. 

BONAPARTE 

627 
Bulletin  of  the  Reserve  Army* 

At  Dijon  Rear  H.Q.,  Aosta 

4  Prairial,  Year  VIII  (24  May,  1800) 

On  26  Flore*al  the  advance-guard,  commanded  by  General  Lannes, 
crossed  the  Saint-Bernard  and  reached  Aosta.  A  Hungarian  battalion 
defending  the  entrance  to  the  town  was  driven  back  and  lost  a  few  men 
kilkd. 

*  This  and  succeeding  bulletins  were  signed  by  Berthier  as  C.-in-C.,  but 
they  were  written  in  consultation  with  Bonaparte,  and  many  of  the  original 
drafts  show  manuscript  corrections  in  his  hand. 

Marengo  437 

On  the  27th  General  Lannes  resumed  his  march  and  advanced  to 
Chitillon.  The  enemy  disputed  the  crossing  of  a  bridge  at  the  end  of 
a  very  narrow  gorge;  they  were  overwhelmed  by  the  grenadiers,  who 
took  300  prisoners  and  killed  about  100  men.  Two  3-pounders  and 
four  limbers  filled  with  munitions  were  captured. 

The  army  crossed  the  Saint-Bernard  from  the  2yth  to  the  soth. 
On  the  26th  General  Chabran's  division  crossed  the  Little  Saint- 
Bernard.  The  great  difficulty  was  the  carriage  of  the  artillery.*  The 
Saint-Bernard  was  snow-bound  and  the  gradient  very  steep.  General 
Marmont,  commanding  the  artillery,  employed  two  methods. 

The  first  was  a  simple  tree-trunk,  hollowed  into  the  shape  of  a 
trough,  in  which  8-pounders  and  howitzers  were  laid;  100  men, 
harnessed  to  a  rope,  pulled  the  gun,  taking  two  days  for  the  crossing. 

The  second  method  was  sledges  on  rollers  which  Colonel  Gassendi 
had  had  made  at  Auxonne.  The  gun-carriages  were  dismantled  and 
carried  piece  by  piece,  except  those  of  the  4-pounders  which  ten 
men  carried  on  poles.  The  limbers  had  to  be  emptied  and  the  ammuni- 
tion put  into  boxes  carried  by  men  or  mules  .  .  . 

The  First  Consul  descended  from  the  top  of  the  Saint-Bernard  by 
sliding  on  the  snow  and  water-courses  and  leaping  over  precipices. 

On  the  28th  General  Berthier  surrounded  the  castle  of  Bard,  seized 
the  heights  of  Albard  which  dominate  it  and  summoned  the  com- 
mander to  surrender,  which  he  refused.  On  2  Prairial  he  occupied  the 
whole  of  the  lower  part  of  the  castle,  four  companies  of  grenadiers 
having  broken  in  during  the  night  and  lowered  the  drawbridges.  The 
enemy  retired  into  the  keep  and  another  rampart  he  had  built  on  the 
rocks. 

On  2  Prairial  the  advance-guard  encountered  the  enemy,  who  were 
defending  the  outlet  from  the  gorge  near  Saint-Martin,  drove  them 
back  and  took  50  prisoners.  On  the  same  day  the  Commander-in-Chief 
having  sent  forward  the  Boudet  division  to  support  the  advance-guard, 
ordered  the  capture  of  Ivrea.  The  enemy  had  a  garrison  in  the  citadel 
and  seemed  to  be  ready  to  defend  the  town;  but  he  had  too  few  men 
to  be  able  to  resist.  General  Lannes  arrived  there  on  the  3rd,  ordered 
an  assault  and  captured  both  town  and  citadel,  where  ten  guns  were 
found;  he  pursued  the  enemy,  who  retreated  towards  Turin,  and  took 
400  prisoners. 

*  The  difficulty  of  the  operation  can  be  gauged  from  the  fact  that  each  8- 
pounder  or  6-inch  howitzer,  excluding  its  carriage,  weighed  over  one  and  a  half 
tons;  a  4-pounder  weighed  over  a  ton.  Each  carriage,  fully  assembled,  was  of 
about  the  same  weight  as  its  gun.  In  addition  to  the  guns,  carriages  and  limbers, 
many  thousands  of  tons  of  ammunition  and  other  stores  were  carried  on  the  backs 
of  men  and  mules  over  an  ill-made,  snow-bound  path  that  was  often  narrow, 
steep  and  precipitous. 

438  The  Rise  to  Power 

In  these  different  engagements  we  have  lost  but  7  men  killed  and  25 
wounded. 

It  was  reported  at  the  First  Consul's  headquarters  on  the  4th  that 
Massena  had  recently  made  a  completely  successful  sortie. 

628 
To  General  Berthier 

C.-w-C.,  Reserve  Army,  at  Verres  Aosta 

5  Prairial,  Year  VIII  (25  May,  1800} 
I  have  your  letter  of  the  4th,  Citizen  General.  I  imagine  you  have 

sent  an  artillery  company,  nominated  a  commandant  and  ordered  a 
cartridge  factory  to  be  established  in  the  citadel  of  Ivrea. 

General  Lannes  has  probably  attacked  the  enemy  this  morning  and 
either  beaten  him  or  forced  him  to  fall  back  beyond  Chivasso.  If  he 
has  not  done  so,  order  him  to  do  it  tomorrow.  The  enemy  cannot 
have  more  than  7,000  to  8,000  men.  Besides,  this  is  the  only  way  to 
gain  sure  news  of  General  Turreau  and  to  mislead  the  enemy. 

Order  General  Murat  to  send  out  reconnaissances  to  Biella  and 
Santhia;  General  Monnier  to  take  up  position  three  leagues  beyond 
Ivrea  on  the  main  road  to  Santhia:  the  Italic  Legion  to  proceed  on  the 
7th  by  the  Valdobbia  to  Riva  and,  on  the  8th,  down  the  Val  Sesia 
as  far  as  Varallo.  Tell  the  commander  to  send  patrols  on  the  9th  to 
Crevacuore  and  Masserano,  where  they  will  meet  patrols  from  the 
army. 

BONAPARTE 

629 
Bulletin  of  the  Reserve  Army 

Rear  H.Q.,  Aosta 

6  Prairial,  Year  VIII  (26  May,  1800} 
The  First  Consul  is  at  Verres.  The  soldiers  are  calling  for  the  assault 

of  the  fort  of  Bard,  which  is  still  holding  out.  Tomorrow  we  expect 
General  Moncey,  with  his  20,000  men,  at  the  foot  of  the  Saint- 
Gotrhard,  All  routes  into  Italy  are  covered  by  our  cannon  and  our 
soldiers,  whose  devotion  is  sublime;  it  must  be  seen  to  be  believed. 
The  24th  Light  has  refused  the  gratuity  of  2,400  francs  due  to  it, 
saying  that  this  debt  must  be  discharged  by  the  Austrians. 

630 
To  the  Consuls  of  the  Republic 

Ivrea 

7  Prairial,  Year  VIII  (27  May,  1800} 
Citizen  Consuls,  I  have  received  your  mails  dated  I  Prairial.  I  arrived 

at  Ivrea  yesterday  evening.  Here  we  are,  at  last,  in  the  heart  of  Italy; 
in  ten  days'  time  a  great  many  things  will  have  been  settled.  Enclosed 

Marengo  439 

is  a  short  bulletin  that  you  can  have  inserted  without  signature  in  the 
official  journal.  The  Commander-in-Chief  is  about  to  draw  up  an 
account  of  the  different  events. 

Everything  goes  well.  I  shall  be  in  Paris  before  the  end  of  Prairial. 

Send  me  news  of  Consul  Lebrun;  I  was  very  worried  to  hear  that 
he  had  been  ill. 

BONAPARTE 

631 
Report  on  the  First  Operations 

of  the  Reserve  Army  HQ.,  Chivasso 

8  Prairial,  Yew  VIII  (28  May,  iSoo] 

The  Reserve  Army  has  been  only  a  few  days  in  the  field  and  has 
already  distinguished  itself  by  signs  of  courage  and  devotion  that  will 
find  a  place  in  history. 

Arrived  at  the  foot  of  the  Saint-Bernard,  the  first  obstacle  to  be 
surmounted  was  the  crossing  of  the  artillery.  Nothing  could  frighten 
the  soldiers:  not  the  prospect  of  several  leagues  of  road  eighteen  inches 
wide,  built  over  precipitous  rocks;  not  those  mountains  of  snow 
threatening  to  roar  down  on  their  heads;  not  those  chasms  which  at 
the  least  false  step  might  engulf  them.  They  pressed  around  the  guns 
eager  for  the  honour  of  dragging  them.  Various  units  of  the  Loison 
Division,  the  ipth  and  24th  Light,  the  43rd  and  96th  of  the  Line, 
particularly  distinguished  themselves  in  that  competition  of  ardour  and 
devotion.  At  last,  after  indescribable  labours  and  unprecedented  efforts, 
the  guns  arrived  beyond  the  Saint-Bernard. 

THE  ACTION  OP  AOSTA 

On  26  Flor6al  the  advance-guard,  which  had  crossed  the  mountains 
the  day  before,  marched  against  the  enemy.  It  met  him  on  the  bridge 
of  Aosta,  attacked  and  drove  him  from  the  favourable  position  he  was 
occupying.  The  senior  officer  commanding  the  town  of  Aosta  was 
mortally  wounded  in  this  action. 

THE  ACTION  OF  CHATILLON 

On  the  28th  the  advance-guard  continued  forwards  to  occupy  the 
heights  of  Chatillon  which  were  defended  by  a  Croation  battalion  with 
four  pieces  of  artillery.  While  several  of  our  columns  turned  these 
heights,  the  centre  column  attacked  from  the  front.  The  enemy  was 
routed  and  pursued  by  100  men  of  the  I2th  Hussars  who  captured 
three  guns  and  300  prisoners. 

The  same  day  the  advance-guard  approached  within  half  a  league  of 
the  castle  of  Bard.  The  enemy  was  occupying  the  high  ground  which 

dominates  the  village,  but  by  scaling  the  sneer  rocks  one  of  our  columns 
turned  their  position  and  forced  them  to  retire  within  the  walls. 

440  The  Rise  to  Power 

I  ordered  the  capture  of  the  town.  The  sappers  and  grenadiers 
lowered  the  draw-bridges,  blew  up  the  gates  and  the  town  was  taken. 
Three  companies  of  grenadiers  are  quartered  there  and  the  castle  is 
blockaded  at  musket-range. 

On  5  Prairial  I  ordered  General  Loison  to  invest  the  castle  more 
closely,  so  as  to  ease  the  passage  of  our  artillery.  The  grenadiers  of  the 
28th  went  in  with  rare  courage. 

The  enemy  had  regarded  the  castle  of  Bard  as  an  insurmountable 
barrier,  closing  the  entry  into  Piedmont  at  a  point  where  the  mountains 
enclosing  the  valley  of  Aosta  come  together  leaving  a  gap  of  only  fifty 
yards.  But  1,500  men  ordered  to  construct  a  road  over  the  mountain 
of  Albard,  were  quickly  successful.  Wherever  the  slope  was  too  steep, 
steps  were  cut;  where  the  path  was  too  narrow  and  flanked  by  pre- 
cipices, walls  were  built  to  prevent  falling;  where  there  were  ravines 
between  the  rocks,  these  were  joined  by  bridges;  and  now  French 
cavalry  has  crossed  a  mountain  regarded  for  centuries  as  inaccessible 
even  to  infantry. 

A  yet  more  extraordinary  effort  astonished  the  enemy.  While  work 
was  going  on  without  rest  on  the  Albard  road,  soldiers  carried  two 
4-pounder  guns  on  their  backs  over  the  Col  de  la  Cou  and,  after  scaling 
fearful  rocks  for  thirty  hours,  were  able  to  set  them  up  on  the  heights 
overlooking  the  castle. 

We  were  masters  of  the  town  of  Bard,  but  the  road  below  the  fort 
was  exposed  to  continuous  musketry  and  artillery  fire  which  stopped 
all  movement.  The  advance-guard  was  already  in  contact  with  the 
enemy  and  had  an  urgent  need  of  guns.  Since  the  delay  involved  in 
passing  them  over  the  mountain  of  Albard  presented  grave  dangers, 
brave  men  were  ordered  to  drag  the  guns  through  the  town  by  night 
under  fire  from  the  castle.  This  order  was  carried  out  with  enthusiasm, 
and  such  devotion  was  crowned  with  success.  One  after  another  all  the 
guns  went  through,  and,  despite  the  hail  of  bullets  that  the  enemy 
rained  down,  we  had  only  a  few  wounded. 

General  Marmont,  commanding  the  artillery,  was  everywhere;  his 
zeal  and  talent  contributed  not  a  little  to  the  success  of  this  important 
and  difficult  operation. 

CAPTURE  OF  IVREA  (4  PRAIRIAL) 

General  Larmes  had  been  ordered  to  move  with  the  advance-guard 
to  San  Martino  and  from  there  to  Ivrea.  This  last  town  was  occupied 
in  force  by  the  enemy.  Our  troops  surrounded  it  and  thrust  into  the 
town,  every  accessible  point  being  attacked.  The  enemy  abandoned 
both  the  town  and  the  citadel  and  we  took  500  prisoners  and  fifteen 
pieces  of  artillery.  It  was  high  time,  for  later  we  should  have  been 
involved  in  a  regular  siege. 

Marengo  441 

General  Watrin,  commanding  one  division  of  the  advance-guard, 
and  Adjutant-general  Hullin  gave  proofs  of  ability  and  courage  on  this 
occasion.  General  Malher  also  distinguished  himself.  Our  losses  were 
but  twenty  dead  or  wounded.  Major  Ferrat,  commanding  a  battalion 
of  the  22nd  Demi-brigade,  is  among  the  dead. 

Supported  by  General  Boudet's  division,  the  advance-guard  took 
up  positions  beyond  Ivrea.  Strengthened  by  reinforcements  arriving 
from  Turin  and  other  parts  of  Piedmont,  the  enemy  had  checked  his 
retreat  and  established  himself  on  the  heights  of  Romano,  behind  the 
Chiusella,  ready  to  defend  the  crossing  with  5,000  infantry,  4,000 
cavalry  and  a  number  of  guns. 

ACTION  OF  THE   CHIUSELLA    (6  PRAIRIAL) 

General  Lannes,  whom  I  had  ordered  to  drive  the  enemy  from  this 
position,  advanced  along  the  Turin  road  and  soon  reached  the  banks 
of  the  Chiusella.  The  6th  Light  opened  the  attack  at  three  points; 
the  centre  rushed  onto  the  bridge  at  the  double,  while  two  battalions 
threw  themselves  into  the  river  in  a  hail  of  bullets  and  case-shot.  The 
enemy  could  not  resist  such  dash  and  valour  and  already  his  first  line 
of  infantry  was  in  complete  confusion.  His  second  line,  comprising  the 
Kinski  and  Banat  Regiments,  charged  the  6th  and  succeeded  in  holding 
it  for  a  time.  But  the  22nd  of  the  Line,  formed  into  close  column  by 
General  Gency,  hurled  itself  against  the  enemy,  overthrew  him  and 
forced  him  to  seek  safety  in  flight.  He  was  vigorously  pursued  by  the 
6th  Light,  the  22nd  of  the  Line,  the  I2th  Hussars  and  2ist  Chasseurs. 
The  enemy  cavalry,  4,000  strong,  attacked  in  turn.  The  40th  and  22nd 
of  the  Line  held  the  charge  firmly  with  their  bayonets;  never  has 
infantry  shown  more  courage  and  coolness.  Three  successive  charges 
were  repulsed.  The  commander  of  the  enemy  cavalry,  General  Palfry, 
and  six  other  Austrian  officers  were  killed. 

The  enemy  lost  more  than  500  men  and  300  horses,  and  we  took  60 
prisoners.  We  had  250  killed  and  wounded;  among  these  were  Major 
Sarret  of  the  6th  Light  and  Major  Dumont  of  the  22nd  of  the  Line. 

CAPTURE  OF  SUSA  AND  LA  BRUNETTE   (2  PRAIRIAL) 

While  the  advance-guard,  under  General  Lannes,  was  advancing  on 
the  Po  and  Chivasso,  the  division  under  the  orders  of  General  Turreau 
was  attacking  the  enemy  at  Susa.  On  the  2nd  he  attacked  the  positions 
at  Gravere  where  the  heights  were  lined  with  entrenchments  and 
bristling  with  cannon.  Adjutant-general  Liebault,  commanding  the 
advance-guard,  advanced  with  800  men  of  the  28th  Light  and  150  men 
of  the  1 5th  to  take  all  these  works  by  storm.  General  Turreau  supported 
the  attack  with  three  companies  of  carabiniers,  four  of  grenadiers,  one 
howitzer  and  an  8-pounder.  It  was  a  stubborn  fight,  and  the  outcome 
was  for  long  uncertain.  General  Turreau's  only  reserve  was  the  26th 

442  The  Rise  to  Power 

Demi-brigade.  This  received  orders  to  attack  the  enemy,  together  with 
100  sappers  who  arrived  at  the  very  moment  of  the  action. 

One  oattalion  of  the  26th  managed  to  turn  the  Saint-Francis  fort; 
it  then  occupied  it,  established  itself  on  the  plateau  and  forced  the 
enemy  to  evacuate  the  village  of  Gravere.  Soon  the  troops  rushed 
forward  at  the  double  from  aD  sides.  All  the  positions  were  forced  and 
La  Brunette  capitulated  at  10  p.m. 

After  this  victory  General  Turreau  advanced  beyond  Susa. 

CAPTURE  OF  VERCELLI   (7  PRAIRIAl) 

On  his  side,  General  Murat  took  Vercelli  by  storm  on  7  Prairial. 
The  2nd  and  isth  Chasseurs,  supported  by  three  companies  of  grena- 
diers of  the  Monnier  Division,  overthrew  1,000  enemy  cavalry  on  the 
Sesia;  60  of  them  were  taken  together  with  their  horses. 
General  Lannes  is  beyond  Chivasso. 

By  order  of  the  First  Consul 
The  Commander-in-Chief,  Reserve  Army 
ALEX.  BERTHIER 

632 
To  Citizen  Carnot 

Minister  of  War  Ivrea 

9  Prairial,  Year  VIII  (29  May,  1800) 

Citizen  Minister,  we  are  going  to  have  various  places  to  invest  or 
besiege.  Major-General  Chasseloup  will  be  needed  here,  for  he  is  the 
officer  most  familiar  with  the  Italian  fortresses.  Give  him  orders  to 
join  us. 

BONAPARTE 

633 
To  Citizen  Carnot 

Minister  of  War  Ivrea 

p  Prairial,  Year  VIII  (29  May,  1800} 

You  will  see  from  the  staff  reports,  Citizen  Minister,  what  have 
been  the  various  operations  of  the  army.  All  goes  well  here,  and  the 
enemy  appears  completely  routed. 

The  ipth  Light,  which  has  just  arrived,  is  only  800  strong;  its  third 
battalion  and  various  detachments  have  been  left  in  France.  Order 
them  to  rejoin  their  unit. 

The  I3th  Light  is  only  1,100  strong;  one  battalion  and  its  carabiniers 
are  in  France.  Order  them  to  rejoin  their  unit. 

The  6th,  22nd  and  40th  and  many  other  demi-brigades  have  detach- 
ments on  the  Brest  squadron.  They  must  be  disembarked  and  sent  to 
their  units. 

Marengo  443 

The  pth  Dragoons,  the  nth  Hussars  and  I5th  Chasseurs  have  not 
arrived.  They  seem  to  have  remained  on  the  Saone.  Send  them  orders 
to  join  the  army. 

Have  the  infantry  depots  of  the  army  sent  to  Chambery. 

Appoint  a  cavalry  general  to  inspect  all  the  cavalry  depots  on  the 
Saone  and  to  dispatch  all  available  men  in  detachments  of  300. 

We  have  still  a  great  need  of  artillery  horses.  We  shall  need  another 
bridging  train  unless  we  can  catch  one  off  the  enemy. 

Our  most  serious  want  is  artillery  labourers;  we  ought  to  have  200 
and  have  but  30.  Lastly,  a  battalion  of  sappers. 

BONAPARTE 

634 
Bulletin  of  the  Reserve  Army 

Rear  H.Q.,  Ivrea 
9  Prairial,  Year  VIII  (29  May,  1800} 

After  the  action  of  the  Chiusella  the  enemy  withdrew  on  Turin, 
cutting  the  bridges  and  burning  all  the  boats  on  the  Oreo.  General 
Lannes  occupied  Chivasso  yesterday.  He  found  a  number  of  laden 
boats  on  the  Po. 

At  Chivasso  the  First  Consul  reviewed  the  advance-guard.  He  made 
known  his  satisfaction  with,  this  brave  division,  which  has  already 
rendered  such  great  services.  He  praised  the  22nd  Demi-brigade  for  its 
vigorous  crossing  of  the  Chiusella,.  and  the  40th  for  the  courage  with 
which  it  received  the  charge  of  3,000  cavalry.  .  .  . 

General  Murat  entered  Vercelli  on  the  yth  with  the  cavalry  and 
General  Monnier's  division.  .  .  . 

Two  couriers  have  been  intercepted.  It  is  confirmed  that  General 
Melas  is  still  at  Turin;  that  he  arrived  from  Nice  in  haste,  cursing  the 
generals  who  had  told  him  from  Turin  that  there  were  no  more  than 
6,000  men  in  the  Aosta  valley.  .  .  . 

The  conscripts  are  behaving  well.  At  the  fight  on  the  Chiusella  they 
ducked  at  the  first  shells,  but  the  old  soldiers  controlled  them.  Next 
day  they  were  saying  to  General  Watrin:  'General,  we  must  not  be 
called  conscripts  any  more;  we  know  what  it  is  like  and  are  three  times 
the  men  we  were/ 

635 
Bulletin  of  the  Reserve  Army 

Rear  H.Q.,  Ivrea 

9  Prairial,  Year  VIII  (29  May,  1800} 

On  4  Prairial  the  Cisalpine  Legion,  2,000  strong  and  commanded 
by  the  Cisalpine  General  Lechi,  left  Aosta  and  camped  at  CMtillon. 
On  the  6th  it  crossed  Mount  Ranzola  and  took  up  position  at 

444  The  Rise  to  Power 

Gressoney.  On  the  yth  it  crossed  the  Valdobbia  and  reached  Riva 
where  it  crossed  the  Sesia.  On  the  8th  it  advanced  to  Varallo.  The 
Prince  of  Rohan,  with  his  legion  and  one  gun,  was  holding  a  position 
in  front  of  this  important  place,  where  the  valley  of  the  Sesia  begins  to 
be  practicable  for  vehicles.  The  Cisalpine  Legion  attacked  with  great 
bravery  and  carried  the  enemy  entrenchments,  took  the  gun,  three 
limbers  and  350  prisoners  and  killed  50  men.  Their  own  losses  were 
2  officers  and  4  soldiers  killed  and  12  wounded. 

On  the  same  day  the  column  which  is  on  the  Simplon  should  have 
moved  to  Domodossola,  thereby  turning  what  troops  the  enemy  still 
has  there. 

General  Murat  crossed  the  Sesia  this  morning. 

General  Moncey  should  have  crossed  the  Saint  Gotthard  and  have 
attacked  the  enemy  strongly. 

The  First  Consul  and  the  Commander-in-Chief  leave  tonight  for 
Vercelli  where  H.Q.  will  be  established  tomorrow. 

636 
To  the  Consuls  of  the  Republic 

Vercelli 

10  Pr dried,  Year  VIII  (30  May,  1800} 

Citizen  Consuls,  I  enclose  the  bulletin  of  the  army.  I  am  continually 
on  the  move.  I  leave  tonight  for  Novara.  Tomorrow  I  shall  be  on  the 
banks  of  the  Ticino  to  see  to  the  means  of  crossing.  It  is  extremely 
wide  and  fast. 

BONAPARTE 

637 
Bulletin  of  the  Reserve  Army 

H.Q.,  Vercelli 
lo  Prairial,  Year  VIII  (30  May,  1800} 

The  advance-guard  remained  at  Chivasso  for  the  whole  of  the  pth. 
Learning  that  we  had  collected  boats  on  the  Po,  the  enemy  believed 
we  intended  to  cross  it  at  Chivasso  so  as  to  march  on  Asti  and  intercept 
the  troops  coming  up  from  Nice.  He  brought  all  his  available  infantry 
from  Turin  up  to  the  right  bank  of  the  Po  opposite  Chivasso. 

Meanwhile,  General  Murat  completed  his  bridge  over  the  Sesia, 
crossed  over  and  moved  to  Novara,  taking  up  positions  along  the  right 
bank  of  the  Ticino. 

The  First  Consul  reached  Vercelli  this  morning.  It  would  be  difficult 
to  describe  the  joy  of  the  Italians  at  being  freed  from  the  Austrian  yoke. 

All  the  divisions  of  the  army  are  on  the  march  and  will  cross  the 
Sesia  tomorrow.  Last  night  General  Lannes  crossed  the  Dora-Baltea 
and  is  moving  on  Vercelli  by  way  of  Crescentino  and  Trino. 

Marengo  445 

The  Austrians  had  celebrated  the  capture  of  Nice  throughout  all  the 
cities  of  Italy;  they  little  knew  how  disastrous  it  would  be  for  them. 
Their  consternation  is  at  its  height.  Today  the  inhabitants  of  Milan 
heard  the  guns  of  our  forward  units. 

It  is  reported  that  Melas's  headquarters  is  today  still  at  Turin. 

638 
To  Lieutenant- General  Lannes 

G.O.C.,  Advance  Guard,  at  Vercelli  Novara 

12  Prairial,  Year  VIII  (ljune,  1800) 

As  my  courier  leaving  for  Paris  carries  very  important  dispatches, 
please  have  him  escorted  as  far  as  Ivrea. 

We  have  crossed  the  Ticino  opposite  Galliate.  General  Monnier  has 
fought  a  useful  action  at  Turbigo;  he  took  300  prisoners  and  killed 
many  enemy  cavalry.  Troops  are  crossing  all  day.  General  Murat  with 
the  advance-guard  of  4,000  men  and  200  or  300  cavalry  is  half-way  to 

Milan. 

Move  to  Mortara  as  soon  as  possible  and  push  your  outposts  towards 
Pavia,  whither  you  will  probably  be  ordered  to  march. 

Let  me  know  when  you  will  arrive  at  Mortara. 

BONAPARTE 

639 
Bulletin  of  the  Reserve  Army 

JFf.Q.,  Novara 
12  Prairial,  Year  VIII  (ljune,  1800) 

General  Murat  entered  Novara  on  the  loth;  he  at  once  moved  on  to 
the  Ticino.  The  Italic  Legion  has  moved  from  Romagnano  to  Sesto. 

General  Duhesme  with  the  divisions  under  his  orders  has  taken  up 
positions  along  the  Ticino. 

The  First  Consul  reached  the  Ticino  on  the  mornine  of  the  nth. 
The  enemy  had  a  large  number  of  cavalry  and  sever al  guns  on  the 
left  bank.  General  Murat  set  up  a  battery  and  the  cannonade  lasted  for 
an  hour.  The  enemy  had  withdrawn  all  the  boats  to  the  left  bank,  but 
the  people  of  Galliate  had  hidden  four  or  five  small  boats  which  they 
offered  to  the  army.  These  were  used  to  pass  some  companies  of 
grenadiers  onto  an  island,  which  forced  the  enemy  to  evacuate  the 
point  on  the  left  bank  where  we  wished  to  cross.  In  six  hours  nearly 
1,500  men  and  two  guns  were  put  over. 

General  Monnier  took  up  a  position  along  the  Naviglio-Grande. 
But,  seeing  the  crossing  taken,  the  enemy  rallied  from  all  sides  at 
Turbigo.  Several  enemy  generals  arrived  there  in  the  evening.  They 
attempted  a  number  of  unsuccessful  cavalry  charges.  Adjutant-general 
Girard  covered  himself  with  glory. 

446  The  Rise  to  Power 

At  8.0  p.m.  General  Monnier  attacked  the  village  of  Turbigo  and 
occupied  it  after  a  sharp  action,  taking  200  prisoners.  As  the  village 
had  been  surrounded,  all  who  were  inside  were  massacred.  Nearly 
300  corpses  were  counted,  almost  all  cavalrymen. 

General  Duhesme,  having  acquired  a  small  boat,  sent  some  com- 
panies of  grenadiers  over  to  Buffalora.  Colonel  Duroc  fell  into  the 
Ticino  and  was  on  the  point  of  drowning  when  happily  he  was  saved. 

During  the  first  five  days  of  the  decade  General  Turreau  has  had 
some  sharp  encounters  with  the  enemy  and  has  held  in  check  a  con- 
siderable quantity  of  troops.  He  is  continuing  to  manoeuvre  in  his 
position  between  Turin,  and  Susa. 

From  the  latest  letters  arriving  from  Nice  it  seems  that  Melas  left 
only  on  I  Prairial  and  that  on  the  3rd  the  enemy  attacked  the  bridge 
of  Saint-Laurent-du-Var  with  considerable  forces;  he  was  firmly 
repulsed. 

The  Ticino  is  being  crossed  in  force.  General  Murat,  with  the 
advance-guard,  is  at  Corbetta,  three  leagues  from  Milan. 

640 
To  the  Consuls  of  the  Republic 

Milan 

14  Prairial  Year  VIII  (3  June,  1800) 

You  will  find  attached,  Citizen  Consuls,  the  Bulletin  of  the  Army. 
I  am  also  sending  a  copy  of  a  letter  from  General  Suchet.  On  the  yth 
and  the  8th  the  enemy  still  had  part  of  his  forces  at  Nice. 

I  have  received  your  letters  of  the  8th.  You  can  announce  publicly 
that  I  shall  be  back  in  Paris  on  25  Prairial. 

BONAPARTE 

641 
Bulletin  of  the  Reserve  Army 

H.Q.,  Milan 
14  Prairial  Year  VIII  (3  June,  1800).  Morning 

General  Murat  entered  Milan  on  the  I3th.  He  at  once  surrounded 
the  citadel.  Three  hours  later  the  First  Consul  and  the  whole  of  the 
staff  made  their  entry  in  the  midst  of  a  people  showing  the  greatest 
enthusiasm.  The  horrors  committed  by  the  Emperor's  agents  in  Milan 
are  unexampled.  They  have  spared  neither  sex,  nor  age,  nor  talents .  .  . 

The  details  of  all  that  has  happened  this  year  will  be  collected  with 
the  greatest  care.  It  is  necessary  that  the  French  people  know  the  fate 
that  the  kings  of  Europe  have  in  store  for  them  if  the  counter-revolu- 
tion succeeds.  This  thought  above  all  should  imbue  the  nation  with 
gratitude  for  the  courage  of  the  Republican  phalanxes  which  ensure  for 
ever  the  triumph  of  equality  and  of  all  liberal  ideas. 

Marengo  447 

General  Moncey  has  passed  the  Saint-Gotthard.  He  should  reach 
Varese  tomorrow. 

642 
Bulletin  of  the  Reserve  Army 

H.Q.,  Milan 
14  Prairial,  Year  VIII  (3  June,  1800).  Evening 

General  Lannes's  Corps  had  formed  the  advance-guard  from  the 
Saint-Bernard  to  Ivrea  and  advanced  as  far  as  Chivasso  to  make  the 
enemy  believe  that  our  plan  was  to  join  up  with  General  Turreau, 
who  had  entered  at  Rivoli  and  Susa.  During  that  time  the  army  was 
marching  in  the  opposite  direction  and  crossed  the  Sesia  and  the 
Ticino. 

When  we  had  advanced  far  enough,  General  Lannes  recrossed  the 
Dora-Baltea  and  marched  to  Crescentino,  Trino  and  Vercelli,  where 
he  received  orders  to  move  on  Pavia,  which  he  entered  this  morning. 
He  has  found  there  very  considerable  stores  of  foodstuffs,  50  tons  of 
powder,  1,000  Austrian  sick  and  wounded,  500  bronze  guns  with 
carriages,  stores  of  powder,  shot,  etc.  We  expect  the  full  inventory 
tomorrow. 

General  Lechi,  with  the  Cisalpine  Legion,  has  gone  to  Cassano. 
General  Duhesme,  with  the  corps  under  his  orders,  is  marching  on 
Lodi. 

The  movement  to  Milan  has  been  so  quick  that  the  people  of  that 
city  knew  that  the  French  were  in  Italy  only  twenty-four  hours  before 
their  entry  into  Milan.  .  .  . 

Two  i2-pounders  which  General  Chabran  had  had  placed  in  a 
church  have  breached  the  walls  of  the  fort  at  Bard,  which  forced  it  to 
capitulate.  Seventeen  guns  were  found  there.  The  garrison,  400  strong, 
has  been  taken  prisoner  and  is  on  the  way  to  France. 

The  two  attached  letters,  one  from  It-General  Suchet,  the  other, 
intercepted  at  Pavia,  from  the  Prince  of  Hohenzollern,  commanding 
the  blockade  of  Genoa,  show  perfectly  the  present  position  of  the  two 
armies  in  Italy. 

After  reading  these  two  letters,  one  wonders  how  it  was  possible 
that  M.  Melas  did  not  know  on  5  Prairial  of  the  extensive  movements 
taking  place  in  Piedmont,  since  it  was  then  ten  days  after  the  Reserve 
Army  had  entered  Aosta. 

But  what  is  even  more  surprising  is  that  the  Prince  of  Hohenzollern 
was  unaware  of  the  strength  of  the  Reserve  Army,  which  he  calls  a 
detachment.  At  the  time  he  was  writing,  this  so-called  detachment  had 
invaded  Piedmont  and  Lombardy  and  captured  all  the  stores  at  Pavia. 
M,  Melas  has  always  held  that  the  Reserve  Army  had  been  called  to 
Paris  to  hold  down  the  people. 

448  The  Rise  to  Power 

643 
To  Citizen  Carnot 

Minister  of  War  Milan 

IS  Prairial,  Year  VIII  (4  June,  1800} 

We  are  at  Milan,  Citizen  Minister.  At  Pavia  we  found  300  cannon 
on  their  mountings,  half  field,  half  siege  guns,  100  tons  of  powder, 
10,000  new  muskets  and  a  great  quantity  of  war  stores  of  all  kinds. 

Here  is  the  situation  in  Italy. 

The  enemy  long  thought  we  were  no  more  than  7,000  to  8,000  men 
attempting  an  incursion  to  make  him  raise  the  siege  of  Genoa  and  Nice. 
He  persisted  in  this  idea  until  8  Prairial.  At  the  fight  of  the  Chiusella 
their  cavalry  took  seven  or  eight  prisoners,  from  whom  the  enemy 
got  information  he  still  refuses  to  believe.  On  the  1 3th  General  Hohen- 
zollern,  who  commands  the  blockade  of  Genoa,  seemed,  as  you  will 
have  seen  from  the  letter  I  sent  to  the  Consuls,  still  not  to  set  much 
store  by  our  forces.  General  Melas  wrote  to  Pavia,  to  a  woman  he  has 
with  him:  'I  know  they  are  saying  in  Lombardy  that  a  French  army  is 
arriving;  fear  nothing;  I  forbid  you  to  leave/  Twelve  hours  later  we 
were  entering  Pavia. 

We  are  at  Lodi.  Moncey's  advance-guard  is  arriving  at  Como;  he  is 
collecting  boats  for  the  crossing  of  the  Po. 

All  the  hospitals  of  Lombardy  are  in  our  power;  we  have  found 
5,000  to  6,000  sick  and  wounded  in  them.  Part  of  the  garrison  of 
Savona,  who  were  going  back  as  prisoners,  have  now  joined  us. 

You  will  understand  that  within  a  few  days  important  events  are 
going  to  take  place  which  may  have  a  very  peculiar  effect  on  the  future 
position  of  the  house  of  Austria. 

As  to  the  second  Reserve  Army:  remount  the  cavalry  and  equip  it 
with  everything  it  may  need  so  as  to  get  out  of  the  depots  this  mass 
of  men  who  cost  much  and  render  no  service  .  .  . 

Salute  and  friendship. 

BONAPARTE 

644 
To  Citizen  Carnot 

Minister  of  War  Milan 

15  Prairial,  Year  VIII  (4  June,  1800} 

I  have  your  letter  of  the  pth,  Citizen  Minister.  Have  the  Italic  Legion 
sent  to  Milan.,  where  its  organization  will  be  completed. 

I  strongly  approve  the  tide  Second  Line  Reserve  Army.  Appoint 
Brune  Commander-in-Chief.  It  will  be  proper  to  consult  him  as  to 
the  appointment  of  a  chief-of-staff.  Appoint  the  administrative  officers 
independently. 

BONAPARTE 

Marengo  449 

645 
To  General  Bernadotte 

C.-m-C,  Army  of  the  West  Milan 

15  Prairial,  Year  VIII  (4  June,  1800} 

I  will  say  nothing,  my  dear  General,  except  that  we  are  at  Milan 
and  have  captured  the  enemy's  park,  300  siege  and  field  guns  and  all 
his  hospitals  and  stores.  Moreau  is  maintaining  himself  around  Ulm. 

Take  that  wretch  Georges  dead  or  alive.  Once  you  have  caught 
him,  have  him  shot  within  twenty-four  hours  for  having  been  in 
England  after  the  capitulation. 

I  salute,  and  love  you. 

BONAPARTE 

646 
To  General  Berthier 

C.-m-C.,  Reserve  Army,  at  Milan  Milan 

15  Prairial,  Year  VIII  (4  June,  iSoo) 

Citizen  General,  give  orders  to  General  Duhesme  that,  if  the  enemy 
has  not  armed  Crema  as  a  fortress,  he  should  push  on  to  Orzinovi  and 
try  to  capture  it,  which  is  possible  with  the  enemy  in  his  present 
disorder. 

If  the  enemy  has  got  a  good  garrison  and  adequate  supplies  in 
Orzinovi,  then  he  must  arm  the  castle  of  Soncino  or  Crema,  whichever 
is  in  better  condition;  let  him  put  in  a  garrison  of  100  men  with  a  good 
major  and  four  guns  from  the  Loison  Division  and  supplies.  Impress 
on  General  Duhesme  how  valuable  it  would  be  to  have  Orzinovi. 

Give  orders  to  replace  the  squad  of  gunners  of  the  Guard  which  is 
manning  two  4-pounders  before  the  citadel.  These  guns  will  remain, 
but  without  horses.  The  crews  will  go  to  Pavia  to  take  over  8-pounders. 
By  these  dispositions  General  Murat  will  take  with  him  only  the 
howitzers  at  present  held  by  the  Guard;  between  Pavia  and  Casale  he 
will  be  joined  by  the  two  guns  collected  by  the  horses  and  gunners  now 

before  the  citadel. 

BONAPARTE 

647 
To  Lieutenant- General  Lannes 

G.O.C.,  Advance-guard,  at  Pavia  Milan 

IS  Prairial  Year  VIII  (4  June,  iSoo) 

Citizen  General,  I  have  received  your  letter  of  the  isth.  General 
Marmont  should  have  reached  Pavia  with  the  bridging  train.  Throw 
a  bridge  between  the  Ticino  and  Castel-San-Giovanni.  Another 
division  will  cross  at  Piacenza  where  a  bridge  will  also  be  put  across. 

BONAPARTE 

450 

648 
To  Lieutenant- General  Moncey 

G.O.C.,  Saint-Gotthard  Corps  Milan 

IS  Prairial,  Year  VIII  (4  June,  1800} 

Citizen  General,  I  have  received  your  letter  of  the  isth.  Push  your 
cavalry  and  all  your  infantry  into  Lombardy  by  forced  marches,  and 
come  yourself  to  Milan  as  soon  as  possible. 

The  troops  are  manoeuvring  to  cross  the  Po  at  Piacenza  and  Castel- 
San-Giovanni  and  to  cut  off  the  Austrian  army  which  was  at  Nice  on 
8  Prairial  and  before  Genoa  on  the  13.  You  will  see,  therefore,  how 
essential  it  is  to  speed  up  your  movement  into  Lombardy. 

BONAPARTE 

649 
To  the  Cisalpine  People 

Milan 
16  Prairial,  Year  VIII  (5  June,  1800} 

For  the  second  time  the  French  people  are  breaking  your  chains. 

The  birth  of  states  is  subject  to  storms  and  vicissitudes;  the  sorrows 
you  have  undergone  will  be  useful  to  you. 

You  have  learned  to  recognize  the  traps  laid  by  the  enemies  of  your 
happiness.  They  boasted  of  their  respect  for  property,  yet  they  have 
despoiled  numerous  families;  of  their  zeal  for  religion,  yet  they  have 
handed  Italy  over  to  heretics  and  even  infidels. 

Run  to  arms,  Citizens  of  the  Cisalpine;  form  your  national  guard 
and  protect  your  towns  from  incursions  by  the  enemy's  light  troops. 

Can  the  pride  of  forming  an  independent  nation  be  strange  to  you? 
Forget  your  quarrels,  then.  Have  but  one  aim:  to  consolidate  a  free 
country.  I  shall  recognize  as  friends  of  liberty  only  those  who  know 
how  to  obey  the  laws,  to  suppress  hatred  and  respect  unhappiness. 

Cisalpine  People,  as  soon  as  your  territory  is  freed  from  the  enemy, 
the  Republic  wul  be  reorganised  on  the  firm  bases  of  religion,  liberty, 
equality  and  good  order.  Hasten  that  moment  by  your  efforts. 

By  order  of  the  First  Consul 
ALEX.  BERTHIER 

650 
Bulletin  of  the  Reserve  Army 

H.Q.,  Milan 

16  Prairial,  Year  VIII  (5  June,  1800) 

With  General  Duhesme's  Corps  General  Berthier  has  invested  the 
fortress  of  Pizzeghettone  and  occupied  Crema.  According  to  informa- 

Marengo  45  j 

don  from  General  Suchet,  the  enemy  began  his  evacuation  of  the 
Nice  area  only  on  9  Prairial. 

The  Commander-in-Chief  and  the  First  Consul  have  attended  a 
concert,  which,  though  improvised,  was  extremely  pleasant.  Italian 
singing  has  a  charm  that  is  ever  new. 

651 
Order  of  the  Day 

Reserve  Army  H.Q.,  Milan 

17  Prairial  Year  VIII  (6 June,  1800} 

Soldiers,  one  of  our  Departments  was  in  the  hands  of  the  enemy;  all 
southern  France  was  in  consternation. 

Most  of  the  territory  of  the  Ligurian  people,  surest  friends  of  the 
Republic,  was  invaded. 

Destroyed  since  the  last  campaign,  the  Cisalpine  Republic  had 
become  the  plaything  of  the  grotesque  feudal  regime. 

Soldiers,  you  are  on  the  march  and  already  the  land  of  France  is 
delivered !  Joy  and  hope  are  chasing  fear  and  dismay  from  our  country. 

You  will  give  back  freedom  and  independence  to  the  people  of 
Genoa;  they  shall  be  freed  forever  from  their  external  foe. 

The  terrified  enemy  seeks  only  to  regain  his  frontiers;  you  have 
taken  his  hospitals,  his  magazines,  his  reserve  stores  from.  him.  The 
first  act  of  the  campaign  is  over. 

But  shall  the  land  of  France  have  been  violated  with  impunity? 
Will  you  let  this  army  that  has  carried  fear  into  your  families  return 
to  its  homes?  You  run  to  arms!  March  out  to  meet  it;  oppose  its 
retreat;  tear  from  it  its  laurels,  and  show  the  world  that  the  curse  of 
destiny  lies  on  those  rash  enough  to  insult  the  territory  of  a  great 
people. 

The  result  of  all  our  efforts  will  be  cloudless  glory  and  secure  peace. 

BONAPARTE 

652 
To  Lieutenant- General  Lannes 

G.O.C.,  Advance-guard,  at  Stradella  Milan 

17  Prairial,  Year  VIII  (6  June,  1800} 

General  Berthier,  Citizen  General,  is  on  his  way  to  Pavia.  General 
Victor  and  General  Monnier  with  their  divisions  and  the  force  brought 
by  General  Lapoype  are  all  going  to  Pavia,  so  as  to  cross  the  Po  and 
support  you. 

General  Murat  has  captured  the  bridgehead  at  Piacenza,  on  this  side. 
He  has  taken  about  100  prisoners  from  the  enemy,  who  seems  to  have 
a  great  deal  of  baggage  and  artillery  on  the  other  side.  The  bridge  is 

452  The  Rise  to  Power 

complete  except  for  the  last  three  boats  on  the  Piacenza  side  which  the 
enemy  has  had  time  to  cut.  You  can  see  how  useful  it  would  be  if  you 
can  make  a  movement  on  Piacenza  so  as  to  give  us  possession  of  the 
bridge,  since  we  should  then  have  two  outlets  instead  of  one,  and,  with 
litde  repair,  the  Piacenza  bridge  could  be  used  at  once. 

I  could  wish  that  we  had  20,000  rations  at  Stradella.  The  enemy 
army  evacuated  Nice  on  9  Prairial,  half  by  way  of  Tenda,  half  by  way 
of  Vintimiglia.  General  Suchet  is  on  their  tail  and  has  made  1,900 
prisoners  in  different  actions. 

BONAPARTE 

I  do  not  believe  that  at  the  moment  the  enemy  can  have  more  than 
10,000  infantry  on  the  Tanaro,  or  that  he  can  have  20,000  before  the 
20th  or  2ist. 

653 
To  Brigadier- General  Lechi 

G.O.C.,  Cisalpine  Legion  Milan 

17  Prairial,  Year  VIII  (6  June,  1800) 
Citizen  General,  I  am  giving  orders  that  cartridges  be  sent  to  you 

at  once. 

We  have  crossed  the  Po  and  occupy  Stradella;  thus  the  enemy  army 
is  cut  off. 

Let  me  know  soon  that  you  have  set  up  the  standard  of  the  Republic 
at  Bergamo  and  Brescia. 

BONAPARTE 

654 
To  General  Berthier 

C.-m-C.,  Reserve  Army,  at  Pavia  Milan 

18  Prairial,  Year  VIII  (7  June,  1800) 
Citizen  General,  .  .  .  every  moment  is  precious.  Double  the  means 

of  crossing.  It  is  essential  to  march  against  the  force  at  Piacenza  so  as 
to  join  up  with  General  Murat  there.  Besides,  that  will  be  one  force 
cleared  from  the  field  of  battle. 

General  Murat's  courier  has  just  arrived,  having  left  Noceto  at  ten 
o'clock  this  morning.  You  will  see  how  much  more  urgent  it  has 
become  to  march  to  his  help.  But  if  our  corps  learns  on  the  way  that 
General  Murat  is  master  of  the  bridgehead  on  the  Piacenza  side  it  will 
be  enough  to  send  on  a  patrol  and  return  to  take  up  position  at 
Stradella. 

I  am  at  once  sending  a  courier  to  General  Murat  to  give  him  a  few 
instructions  in  case  he  has  not  been  able  to  force  the  enemy  front 
before  Piacenza.  I  shall  await  his  return. 

BONAPARTE 

Marengo  453 

655 
To  Major-General  Murat 

Cdr.,  Cavalry,  Reserve  Army,  at  Piacenza  Milan 

18  Prairial,  Year  VIII  (7  June,  1800) 

Citizen  General,  I  have  this  moment  received  your  letter  from 
Nfoceto  to  General  Berthier. 

General  Lannes  crossed  the  Po  yesterday  morning  at  Stradella  with 
the  whole  of  his  division.  He  had  a  pretty  warm  action  with  a  force, 
part  of  which  had  come  from  Genoa,  part  from  Piacenza.  He  killed 
some,  took  200  prisoners  and  pursued  it  till  9.0  p.m.  and  for  three 
leagues  towards  Piacenza.  This  force  can  reach  there  only  during  today 
and  it  is  possible  you  may  by  now  be  master  of  Piacenza  since  part 
of  the  troops  which  were  there  were  in  this  force.  You  will  have  learnt 
the  enemy's  strength  from  prisoners.  General  Lannes  is  marching  on 
Piacenza  to  reach  your  position.  Manoeuvre  so  as  to  join  up  with  him 
as  soon  as  possible. 

BONAPARTE 

656 
Bulletin  of  the  Reserve  Army 

H.Q.,  Milan 
18  Prairial,  Year  VIII  (7  June,  1800} 

General  Loison,  after  crossing  the  Adda  at  Lodi  and  taking  Crema, 
crossed  the  Oglio  during  the  idth  and  took  Orzinovi,  a  fortress 
between  Brescia  and  the  Po  with  a  steep  bastioned  enceinte  and 
counterscarp.  After  pursuing  the  enemy  along  the  highway  towards 
Brescia,  General  Loison  countermarched  and  fell  upon  Cremona  in 
order  to  seize  the  numerous  stores  the  enemy  has  there,  to  cross  the 
Po  and  link  up  with  General  Murat's  corps  at  Piacenza. 

General  Murat  reached  Piacenza  on  the  i6th.  The  enemy  defended 
the  bridge  with  heavy  artillery  fire.  At  n.o  p.m.  General  Murat 
occupied  the  bridgehead  and  took  prisoner  a  picket  of  100  men  which 
had  remained  to  defend  the  crossing.  We  now  hold  the  whole  of  the 
bridge  apart  from  two  or  three  boats  on  the  Piacenza  side  which  the 
enemy  had  time  to  cut. 

At  4.0  a.m.  on  the  iyth  General  Lannes  opened  a  cannonade  at 
different  points  on  the  Po  to  draw  the  enemy  forces.  Meanwhile,  he 
crossed  the  river  at  the  village  of  Belgiojoso  and  immediately  occupied 
the  famous  strong-point  of  Stradella.  Thereby  the  sole  remaining 
enemy  line  of  communication  has  been  intercepted.  Knowing  the 
importance  of  Stradella,  the  enemy  grouped  his  different  forces  and 
attacked  General  Lannes  most  fiercely.  The  28th  Demi-brigade  covered 
itself  with  glory.  The  enemy  was  routed,  leaving  200  dead,  300 
prisoners  and  as  many  wounded,  and  retreated  on  Piacenza. 

454  The  Rise  to  Power 

General  Victor's  corps,  the  cavalry  and  General  Monnier's  and 
General  Gardanne's  divisions  are  now  crossing  the  Po.  In  the  course  of 
tomorrow  the  greater  part  of  the  French  army  will  be  assembled  at 
Stradella.  M,  Melas  has  no  recourse  but  to  give  batde  with  no  refuge 
but  the  fortresses  of  Alessandria  or  Tortona. 

General  Murat  crossed  the  Po  at  Noceto  this  morning. 

General  Moncey  has  just  reached  Milan  with  the  advance-guard  of 
his  corps. 

657 
To  General  Berthier 

C.-w-C.,  Reserve  Army,  at  Pavia  Milan 

ig  Prairial,  Year  VIII  (8  June,  1800),  4.0  a.m. 

I  have  your  letter  of  the  i8th,  Citizen  General.  With  General  Moulin 
watching  the  enemy  at  Casale,  you  must  send  spies  and  a  cavalry 
section  to  keep  him  under  observation  around  Valenza  so  as  to  know 
all  his  movements  in  good  time. 

Have  a  third  intermediate  pontoon  established  and  send  to  see  if  the 
one  at  Parpanese  cannot  be  rebuilt.  We  used  to  have  a  bridge  beyond 
the  Ticino;  have  a  fifth  pontoon  put  across  in  that  area. 

At  mid-day  yesterday  I  sent  Lauriston  to  General  Murat.  I  await  his 
return  before  leaving. 

Before  sending  off  General  Lannes  be  sure  that  the  enemy  is  not  in 
a  position  to  attack  General  Victor  today  and  that  he  has  not  reached 
Voghera.  The  whole  of  General  Lannes's  division  is  not  needed  for 
the  attack  on  Piacenza.  Order  him,  therefore,  to  keep  his  demi- 
brigades  in  echelon  so  as  to  be  able  to  come  quickly  to  the  support  of 
General  Victor.  At  Castel-San-Giovanni  he  may  well  hear  news  of 
General  Murat. 

You  can  be  certain  that  Stradella  will  be  attacked  by  20,000  men  on 
the  20th  at  the  latest. 

Reconnoitre  a  strong  position  near  your  bridges  which  could  serve 
as  a  retreat.  It  should  contain  houses,  canals  and  embankments.  If  there 
is  an  island  have  two  or  three  siege  guns  put  there  to  give  as  much 
protection  as  possible  to  your  crossing. 

BONAPARTE 

658 
To  General  Berthier 

C.-ttt-C.,  Reserve  Army,  at  Pavia  Milan 

19  Prairial,  Year  VIII  (8  June,  1800) 

I  have  received  your  various  letters  during  the  night,  Citizen 
General. 

Marengo  455 

General  Murat  has  sent  me  the  intercepted  enemy  dispatches.  They 
are  now  being  translated  and  contain  some  very  interesting  details. 

A  letter  from  Melas  to  the  Aulic  Council,  dated  5  June  from  Turin, 
shows  that  Massena  surrendered  on  the  4th.  His  army  is  not  taken 
prisoner,  but  is  marching  to  join  General  Suchet.  It  seems  that  Massena 
himself  boarded  a  frigate  so  as  to  reach  Nice  more  quickly. 

General  Melas  also  states  in  his  letters  that  Baron  d'Elsnitz  has  not 
been  able  to  retreat  by  the  Tenda  Pass  because  one  of  his  brigadiers 
was  defeated  on  the  Braus  Pass  and  that  has  cut  his  route.  He  has 
retreated  through  Oneglia  and  General  Melas  says  he  hopes  he  will 
arrive  at  Ormea  on  18  Prairial. 

M.  Elsnitz  has  with  him  only  6,000  men  of  his  own  division  and 
3,400  of  Morzin's,  a  total  of  9,400  of  which  he  must  leave  1,000  men 
at  Cuneo,  1,000  at  Savona  and  300  at  Ceva. 

General  Hohenzollern  will  remain  at  Genoa.  General  Ott,  with  9,000 
men,  will  withdraw  through  Ovada  onto  Alessandria. 

Thus  it  appears  that  the  enemy  will  not  be  able  to  group  his  forces 
at  Alessandria  before  the  23rd  or  24th  and  that  even  then  he  will  have 
only  the  following  troops: 

Elsnitz  Division  7,000 

Ott  Division  9,000 

Hadik  Division,  now  on  the  Oreo  6,000 

Total     22,000 

Have  our  formations  press  on  briskly  and  crush  any  troops  you 
encounter.  The  advance-guard  can  push  as  far  as  Voghera.  Send  the 
cavalry  and  artillery  across  so  that  all  our  divisions  are  at  full  strength 
with  their  cartridges  and  everything  in  order. 

BONAPARTE 

659 

To  General  Berthier 

C.-w-C.,  Reserve  Army,  at  Pavia  Milan 

19  Prairial,  Year  VIII  (8  June,  1800) 

Citizen  General,  Lauriston,  who  has  arrived  from  Piacenza,  tells 
me  that  the  bridge  is  quite  complete. 

My  last  two  letters  have  shown  you  the  true  situation  of  the  enemy. 
You  need  have  no  kind  of  alarm. 

Do  not  fail  to  send  me  exact  reports  on  all  prisoners  taken  so  that 
I  can  know  to  what  division  they  belong.  It  is  essential,  for  instance, 
to  know  whether  the  enemy  who  appeared  at  Broni  belonged  to 
General  Ott's  corps,  which  three  days  ago  was  before  Genoa,  or  to  that 
of  General  Hadik.  The  essential  thing  is  not  to  let  yourself  be  surprised; 
have  the  advance-guard  under  arms  to  reconnoitre  the  country  from 
first  light. 

456  The  Rise  to  Power 

If  tomorrow  an  enemy  force  advances  against  Stradella,  as  is  possible, 
launch  an  all-out  attack  on  it  so  as  to  take  2,000  or  3,000  prisoners; 
any  such  force  can  only  be  weak. 

Let  Generals  Victor  and.  Lannes  know  part  of  the  news  I  have  given 
you.  General  Lapoype  left  this  morning  and  should  have  reached  you. 
General  Lorges  has  arrived. 

I  do  not  agree  that  your  troops  should  cross  at  Piacenza;  it  would  tire 
them  out  and  be  thoroughly  inconvenient.  The  Po  will  go  down,  and 
in  any  case  with  a  large  ferry  you  can  get  a  great  many  men  over  in 
twenty-four  hours. 

What  is  very  good  about  your  position  is  that  whatever  happens 
the  forces  at  Stradella  have  a  natural  place  of  retreat  in  Piacenza. 

I  have  told  Vignolle  to  send  on  to  Piacenza  the  800  Italians  who 
arrived  this  morning;  there  they  will  come  under  General  Murat's 
orders. 

I  have  no  news  of  General  Duhesme.  If  I  hear  during  the  night  that 
he  has  reached  Cremona  I  will  write  to  him  to  send  500  men  and  500 
horses  to  Parma  where  they  would  arrive  in  time  to  catch  100  wagons 
of  the  enemy's  baggage  train. 

This  evening  Murat  is  waiting  for  two  battalions  of  the  Thurn  regi- 
ment. He  took  one  this  morning.  If  he  can  capture  these  two  as  well, 
it  will  be  a  fine  success. 

BONAPARTE 

660 
To  General  Berthier 

C.-m-C,  Reserve  Army,  at  Pavia  Milan 

ig  Prairial,  Year  VIII  (8  June,  1800} 

Citizen  General,  I  am  sending  you  translations  of  the  letters  from 
Melas.  You  will  see  the  situation  of  his  army. 

He  hopes  that  General  Elsnitz  will  be  at  Ormea  on  the  lyth.  That 
means,  the  i8th  at  Ceva,  the  ipth  at  Salicetto,  the  2Oth,  very  late  and 
tired  out,  at  Acqui,  supposing  he  takes  that  route.  I  assume  that 
General  Ott  will  have  left  Genoa  on  the  morning  of  the  lyth.  He  will 
be  at  Alessandria  or  Voghera  on  the  evening  of  the  20th.  General 
Hadik,  supposing  he  left  his  position  on  the  Oreo  before  the  head- 
quarters, cannot  be  at  Alessandria  before  the  22nd.  These  three  divisions 
together,  after  the  losses  they  have  sustained  in  wounded,  killed, 
prisoners  and  sick,  do  not  amount  to  more  than  18,000  Hungarians 
and  Austrians  and  2,000  Piedmontese.  I  do  not  include  the  cavalry. 

General  Lannes's  corps,  which  is  8,000  strong,  including  his  cavalry 
brigade,  can  move  off  tomorrow  for  Voghera. 

Victor's  corps  should  support  him,  as  also  Monnier's  and  Gardanne's 
divisions,  all  of  which  will  give  you  23,000  or  24,000  men. 

Marengo  457 

Generals  Murat  and  Duhesme,  who  between  them  have  10,000 
men,  will  equally  follow  the  same  movement.  Thus  you  will  crush 
Melas  with  this  whole  army. 

General  Moncey,  with  the  Italians,  will  have  one  force  beyond  the 
Oglio  and  one  force  blocking  the  citadel  of  Milan.  A  third  force,  for 
the  defence  of  the  Ticino,  should  march  along  the  left  bank  of  the  Po, 
keeping  level  with  the  army,  which  would  facilitate  the  means  of 
crossing  from  one  bank  to  the  other:  then,  if  the  enemy  were  to  cross 
the  Po,  this  division  should  retire  before  him  and  join  up  with  any 
troops  that  may  have  arrived  at  Milan  to  defend  the  Ticino. 

I  shall  soon  be  at  Pavia;  we  will  plan  this  movement  together. 

For  tonight,  order  Generals  Lannes  and  Victor  to  take  up,  the  first, 
a  good  position  at  Voghera,  with  the  second  one-and-a-half  leagues 
in  rear.  Give  General  Victor  all  the  cavalry  you  have.  It  is  essential 
that  they  have  their  cartridges,  with  reserves  at  the  rear,  and  their 
complete  supplies. 

Generals  Monnier  and  Gardanne  have  no  artillery,  They  must  be 
given  some  of  that  found  at  Pavia  of  whatever  calibre. 

There  is  no  word  of  General  Chabran,  of  the  y2nd,  nor  of  all  the 
artillery  from  the  Saint-Bernard.  If  the  crossing  of  the  Po  has  delayed 
you  so  that  you  are  not  ready  for  these  movements,  confine  yourself 
to  having  the  advance-guard  take  up  position  at  Casteggio. 

Send  orders  to  General  Chabran  to  march  with  all  his  troops  to 
Vercelli  and  send  patrols  to  gain  intelligence  at  Casale.  He  will  leave 
strong  garrisons  in  the  castle  of  Bard  and  the  citadel  of  Ivrea. 

BONAPARTE 

If  troops  appear  between  Voghera  and  Stradella,  they  should  be 
attacked  without  hesitation;  they  are  certainly  less  than  10,000  men. 

661 
To  Lieutenant- General  Suchet 

Deputy  C.-w-C.,  Army  of  Italy  Milan 

ip  Prairial,  Year  VIII  (8  June,  1800) 

You  will  find  attached,  Citizen  General,  various  papers  which  will 
show  you  the  situation  of  the  army.  We  have  crossed  the  Po  at  Stradella 
and  Piacenza.  We  are  masters  of  Orzinovi,  Crema,  Brescia  and 
Cremona.  Melas  has  lost  his  line  of  communication.  His  parks,  his 
magazines,  his  hospitals,  his  couriers,  all  are  taken. 

From  a  letter  intercepted  this  morning  at  Piacenza  we  learn  that 
Genoa  has  capitulated.  The  garrison  has  not  been  made  prisoner,  so  it 
should  have  rejoined  you  when  you  receive  this  letter. 

Elsnitz  reached  Ormea  yesterday.  I  imagine  you  are  on  his  tracks. 
If  General  Massena's  corps  has  joined  you,  you  should  be  strong.  I 

458  The  Rise  to  Power 

am  going  in  pursuit  of  the  enemy,  who  intends  to  assemble  at  Alessan- 
dria. It  may  be  that  when  I  arrive  he  will  not  be  ready  and  will  with- 
draw towards  either  Turin  or  the  Genoese  Riviera. 

It  is  difficult  for  me  to  give  you  definite  instructions  since  I  do  not 
know  either  your  strength  or  what  has  happened.  But  your  one  aim 
should  be  this:  to  hold  in  check  a  force  equal  to  your  own. 

Once  your  front  reaches  Ceva  you  will  have  indirect  news  of  the 
army  through  the  local  inhabitants,  which  will  show  how  you  should 
manoeuvre  so  as  to  join  it. 

BONAPARTE 

662 
Bulletin  of  the  Reserve  Army 

Rear  H.Q.,  Milan 
19  Prairial,  Year  VIII  (8  June,  1800} 

General  Loison  has  moved  from  Orzinovi  to  Brescia.  General 
Laudon,  who  was  in  that  town,  had  time  only  to  escape  by  himself. 
The  Cisalpine  Legion,  commanded  by  General  Lechi,  has  seized  the 
flotilla  that  the  enemy  had  on  Lake  Maggiore,  has  crossed  the  Adda 
at  Lecco,  occupied  Bergamo  and  taken  fifty  prisoners  and  four  guns. 

General  Murat  managed  to  collect  five  or  six  boats  on  the  Po, 
crossed  the  river  at  Noceto  and  took  Piacenza  by  storm.  At  dawn  on 
the  ipth  he  surrounded  and  took  prisoner  an  entire  force  coming  up 
to  occupy  the  citadel. 

General  Murat  found  all  the  army  stores  at  Piacenza  and  intercepted 
a  courier  of  M.  de  Melas  with  extremely  interesting  dispatches.  He  has 
taken  more  than  2,000  prisoners. 

The  dispatches  of  General  Melas  to  the  court  of  Vienna  report  that, 
at  the  very  moment  when  General  Ott  received  orders  to  raise  the  siege, 
General  MassSna  sent  an  intermediary  to  capitulate.  It  appears  that  he 
has  surrendered  Genoa,  but  that  his  army  has  not  been  made  prisoner. 

General  Elsnitz,  who  has  evacuated  Nice,  has  not  been  able  to 
retreat  by  the  Tenda  Pass.  Driven  from  the  Braus  Pass  by  General 
Suchet,  he  reached  the  sources  of  the  Tanaro  and  was  at  Ormea  on 
the  evening  of  the  I7th.  From  the  intercepted  letters  of  General  Melas 
it  seems  that  Alessandria  is  poorly  provisioned.  The  speed  with  which 
the  army  has  crossed  the  Sesia,  die  Ticino  and  the  Po  has  astonished 
the  Italians  and  even  the  enemy.  The  fighting  at  the  Chiusella  and  the 
Ticino,  at  Stradelk  and  Piacenza  have  convinced  them  that  this  is  no 
toy  army  or  one  made  up  of  recruits. 

The  position  of  General  Melas  is  extraordinary.  The  French  army  is 
astride  the  Po,  occupying  Stradelk  and  the  Ticino.  Some  think  that 
if  the  next  events  are  unfavourable  to  him  General  Melas  will  take 
refuge  in  Genoa. 

Marengo  459 

663 
To  Citizen  Carnot 

Minister  of  War  Milan 

20  Prairial,  Year  VIII  (p  June,  1800) 

Citizen  Minister,  General  Moncey  has  reached  Milan.  We  had 
counted  on  his  bringing  me  two  thirds  of  the  number  of  men  shown 
in  the  situation  report  which  you  sent  me.  He  has  not  one-third,  and 
half  of  those  composed  of  units  on  which  we  can  rely  but  little. 

You  will  have  seen  from  Melas's  letters  that,  forced  by  an  absolute 
lack  of  food,  Massena  asked  to  capitulate  on  the  very  day  that  orders 
reached  General  Ott  to  raise  the  siege.  It  appears  that  General  Massena 
has  10,000  men  under  arms;  General  Suchet  has  8,000.  If,  as  I  think, 
these  two  corps  have  joined  up  between  Oneglia  and  Savona,  they  will 
quickly  be  able  to  enter  Piedmont  by  way  of  the  Tanaro  and  will  be 
very  useful,  while  the  enemy  will  be  obliged  to  leave  troops  in  Genoa. 

Most  of  the  army  is  now  at  Stradella.  We  have  a  bridge  at  Piacenza 
and  several  ferries  opposite  Pavia.  Orzinovi,  Brescia,  Cremona  are 
ours.  I  do  not  yet  see  how  Meks  will  extricate  himself.  Either  he  will 
come  and  attack  at  Stradella,  where  he  will  be  beaten  and  lost,  and 
meanwhile  Suchet's  corps  will  reach  the  sources  of  the  Tanaro:  or 
else  he  will  try  to  cross  tie  Po,  the  Sesia  and  the  Ticino  and  will  have 
no  happier  result.  His  position  is  extraordinary,  and,  if  Genoa  could 
have  held  out  another  seventy-two  hours,  very  few  of  his  army  would 
have  escaped. 

As  soon  as  the  coming  military  events  have  settled  things  in  this 
country  I  shall  leave  for  Paris. 

BONAPARTE 

664 
To  General  Berthier 

C.-m-C.,  Reserve  Army,  at  Pavia  Milan 

20  Prairial,  Year  VIII  (9  June,  1800) 

You  will  find  enclosed,  Citizen  General,  letters  from  General 
Suchet.  You  will  see  that,  between  the  capture  of  Braus  and  the 
evacuation  of  the  Vintimiglia  line,  he  has  taken  1,500  prisoners. 

I  see  no  objection  to  General  Murat  remaining  at  Piacenza  today. 

I  have  no  news  of  General  Duhesme,  nor  of  Loison;  order  him  to 
move  to  Piacenza.  He  will  act  as  a  reserve. 

There  must  be  no  siege  work  until  there  has  been  a  battle.  Four  guns 
are  nothing  unless  they  have  1,000  rounds  apiece,  and  General 
Marmont  cannot  send  this  without  disorganizing  his  field  batteries. 

The  defence  of  the  Ticino,  of  the  Oglio  or  the  Adda  and  of  the  bridge 
at  Piacenza  must  be  thought  of.  Put  General  Moncey  in  charge  of  all 
these  operations. 
L.D.N. — Q 

460  The  Rise  to  Power 

General  Lorges  with  Lechi's  2,000  Cisalpines,  one  battalion  of  the 
I2th  Light,  two  battalions  of  the  6yth  and  400  cavalry  drawn  from  the 
first  to  arrive  from  the  Rhine  should  form  a  mobile  column  to  cover 
Brescia  and  Cremona.  He  should  take  up  position  between  the  Chiese 
and  Orzinovi  and  move  according  to  circumstances.  This  column  will 
be  successively  reinforced  as  General  Moncey's  tail  arrives. 

A  second  force,  composed  of  the  1,600  Cisalpines  who  left  this 
morning  for  Piacenza,  one  battalion  of  the  I2th  Light  and  one  of  the 
ist  will  blockade  Pizzighettone  and  the  castle  of  Piacenza.  A  brigadier 
will  command  this  force  and  will  hold  a  quarter  of  it  in  reserve  at 
Codogno  so  as  to  be  able  to  reinforce  either  Pizzeghettone  or  Piacenza 
as  may  be  needed. 

A  third  force,  composed  of  one  battalion  of  the  I2th,  one  of  the 
ist  and  one  of  die  27th  will  blockade  the  citadel  of  Milan. 

Finally,  one  battalion  with  200  cavalry  will  remain  on  watch  on  the 
Ticino  from  Buffalora  to  Sesto  and  will  establish  communication  with 
General  Bethencourt. 

It  will  still  remain  to  guard  the  part  of  the  Ticino  between  Pavia  and 
Buffalora.  One  of  the  small  divisions,  Lapoype's  or  Gardanne's,  must 
advance  on  the  left  of  the  Po,  always  keeping  level  with  the  army,  so 
as  to  be  able  to  fall  back  if  the  enemy  crosses  the  Po  and  hold  the 
Ticino  until  the  rearguard  can  come  up. 

It  will  be  necessary,  therefore,  to  have  one  division  a  day's  march 
in  rear  of  the  Army,  in  reserve,  and  a  few  boats  on  the  Po,  following 
the  movement  of  the  army,  to  establish  the  quickest  possible  com- 
munication with  the  division  on  the  other  bank  .  .  . 

I  shall  be  at  Pavia  at  2.0  p.m.;  please  wait  for  me  there  .  .  . 

BONAPARTE 

665 
Bulletin  of  the  Reserve  Army 

Rear  H.Q.,  Milan 
20  Prairial,  Year  VIII  (9  June,  1800) 

General  Duhesme  has  occupied  Cremona,  where  he  jfound  very 
considerable  stores  .  . . 

An  intercepted  special  dispatch  rider  coming  from  Mantua  to  Turin 
has  given  us  the  situation  of  the  artillery  and  military  hospitals. 

General  Elsnitz  has  been  badly  mauled  on  his  retreat  from  Nice* 
On  the  isth  and  I4th  General  Suchet  took  1,500  prisoners  off  him. 
General  Gorrupp  was  surrounded,  lost  all  his  artillery  and  retired  to 
Cuneo  with  few  troops. 

General  Suchet  should  have  joined  up  in  the  Albenga  area  with  the 
army  corps  which  was  in  Genoa;  he  therefore  has  very  considerable 
forces. 

Marengo  461 

Continuous  rain  is  greatly  tiring  the  army.  The  Po  has  risen  very 
high,  which  will  somewhat  delay  operations. 

666 
To  Citizeness  Josephine  Bonaparte 

At  Paris  Milan 

Undated,  presumed  9  June,  1800 

I  am  at  Milan  with  a  bad  cold.  I  cannot  stand  rain,  and  I  have  been 
out  in  it  for  several  hours;  but  it  is  getting  better.  I  will  not  ask  you 
to  come  here;  I  will  be  back  myself  in  a  month.  I  hope  I  shall  find  you 
well.  I  am  going  to  Pavia  and  Stradella.  We  are  masters  of  Brescia, 
Cremona  and  Piacenza. 

A  thousand  tender  things.  Murat  is  doing  very  well. 

BONAPAJtTE 

667 

To  Citizen  Merlin 

Aide-de-camp  to  the  First  Consul  Stradella 

21  Prairial,  Year  VIII  (10  June,  1800} 

Citizen  Merlin  will  go  to  Pavia,  where  he  will  see  General  Marmont. 
He  will  inform  himself: 

1.  As  to  the  eighteen  pieces  of  artillery  which  should  have  arrived 
long  before;  namely,  six  for  the  Boudet  division,  six  for  the  Guard, 

six  for He  will  impress  upon  him  how  essential  it  is  that  we  have 

these  guns  in  the  course  of  tomorrow,  because,  if  we  do  not  have  a 
battle  tomorrow,  there  will  certainly  be  an  engagement  at  dawn  the 
next  day. 

2.  The  two  guns  that  were  sent  for  the  Gardanne  and  Monnier 
divisions  have  not  arrived;  stress  the  importance  of  this. 

3.  Five  cannon  were  captured  at  the  battle  of  Montebello;  they 
need  gunners  and  horses.  Take  steps  that  they  can  be  used  the  day  after 
tomorrow. 

4.  100,000  cartridges  were  ordered  for  the  advance-guard;  they  have 
not  arrived.  A  further  400,000  or  500,000  must  be  sent  to  Serraville. 
2,000  or  3,000  cannon  balls  are  also  needed  to  ensure  supplies  in  the 
battle. 

It  was  ordered  that  the  ferry  between  Casatisma  and  Corti  should  be 
established  the  same  day.  It  has  not  been.  When  will  it?  The  ferry  from 
Sommo  to  Bastida  on  the  Voghera-Pavia  road  was  also  to  be  re- 
opened; can  that  be  done  during  tomorrow?  There  are  various  detach- 
ments of  infantry  and  cavalry  at  Pavia.  Find  their  condition  and 
arrange  for  them  to  rejoin  their  units  in  the  course  of  tomorrow.  They 
can  afl  cross  by  the  Casatisma  ferry;  that  is  the  shorter  route  and  better 
road. 

462  The  Rise  to  Power 

From  there  Citizen  Merlin  will  go  to  see  General  Lapoype  and  recon- 
noitre his  position.  He  will  inform  him  that  he  may  tomorrow  receive 
orders  to  cross  by  the  Casatisma  and  Sommo  ferries.  These  ferries 
must  therefore  be  in  order  .  .  . 

He  will  bring  precise  information  as  to  whether  there  is  any  change 
in  the  situation  around  Vercelli  and  Valenza.  He  will  cross  by  the 
Casatisma  ferry  and  will  ensure  that  he  returns  tomorrow. 

BONAPARTE 

668 
Bulletin  of  the  Reserve  Army 

H.Q.,  Stradella 
21  Prairial,  Year  VIII  (10  June,  1800} 

Yesterday  the  First  Consul  left  Milan  for  Pavia.  He  stayed  there  but 
one  hour,  mounted  his  horse  and  crossed  the  Po  to  join  the  advance- 
guard,  which  was  already  at  grips  with  the  enemy. 

General  Ott  had  reached  Voghera  from  Genoa  in  three  forced 
marches  with  a  corps  of  15,000  men  which  was  covering  that  town. 
He  had  been  reinforced  by  a  force  of  4,000  to  5,000  men  which  General 
Melas  had  instructed  for  the  defence  of  the  Po.  The  advance-guard  of 
this  army  and  that  of  the  French  army  met  towards  mid-day.  The 
enemy  was  occupying  the  heights  in  front  of  Casteggio.  Fighting 
continued  throughout  the  day  with  the  greatest  stubbornness. 

General  Victor  threw  in  the  Chambarlhac  Division  most  effectively. 

The  96th  decided  the  fate  of  the  still  uncertain  battle  with  a  bayonet 
charge.  The  enemy  left  3,000  dead  or  wounded,  6,000  prisoners  and 
five  guns.  The  rout  was  complete.  The  I2th  Hussars  covered  themselves 
with  glory.  Our  losses  were  600  killed  and  wounded. 

It  appears  that  General  Melas  has  evacuated  Turin  and  is  concentrat- 
ing all  his  forces  at  Alessandria. 

The  enemy  has  been  pursued  beyond  Montebello.  General  Watrin 
showed  talent  and  an  enthusiasm  that  greatly  encouraged  the  troops. 

The  battle  of  Montebello  has  brought  fear  and  discouragement  to  the 
partisans  of  Austria.  They  see  that  future  policy  is  not  to  hold  Italy 
but  to  extricate  the  Austrian  army. 

One  enemy  general  has  been  killed,  several  wounded. 

General  Massena  should  have  joined  General  Suchet  and  reached 
Oneglia  on  the  i6th;  he  too  should  soon  enter  Piedmont. 

669 
To  Citizen  Petiet 

Councillor  of  State,  at  Milan  Broni 

21  Prairial,  Year  VIII  (lojune,  1800) 
Yesterday  we  had  a  splendid  action.  Without  exaggeration,  the 

Marengo  463 

enemy  had  1,500  killed,  twice  as  many  wounded;  we  took  4,000 
prisoners  and  five  guns.  It  was  General  Ott's  corps,  come  from  Genoa 
by  forced  marches.  He  wanted  to  reopen  communication  with 
Piacenza. 

Put  50,000  francs  at  the  disposal  of  Citizen  Gassendi,  director  of  the 
artillery  park.  We  have  a  great  need  of  infantry  cartridges  and  artillery 
ammunition  of  every  calibre. 

See  General  Vignolle  about  having  measures  taken  to  prevent  the 
prisoners  who  are  going  to  Milan  from  escaping  .  .  . 

Have  boots  made;  we  are  all  nearly  barefoot. 

BONAPARTE 

Since  I  have  no  time  to  send  a  dispatch  to  Paris,  I  beg  you  to  pass 
our  news  to  the  Consuls  by  special  courier. 

The  First  Consul  left  on  horseback  after  dictating  this  letter  and 
ordered  me  to  sign  it. 

BOURKIENNE 

670 
To  Lieutenant- General  Lannes 

G.O.C.,  Advance-guard,  Reserve  Army  Vcghera 

24  Prairial,  Year  VIII  (13  June,  1800),  5.0  a.m. 
We  have  had  no  report  from  you  tonight,  Citizen  General,  which 
makes  me  think  that  there  is  no  news  beyond  what  you  wrote  yesterday 
to  the  First  Consul.  His  intention  is  that  you  should  attack  and  over- 
throw whatever  is  in  front  of  you.  General  Victor  is  moving  towards 
San  Giuliano.  General  Desaix's  reserve  is  in  front  of  Pontecurone. 

By  order  of  the  First  Consul 

671 
To  the  Consuls  of  the  Republic 

Torre  dei  Garoffoli 

26  Prairial,  Year  VIII  (15  June,  1800) 

The  news  of  the  army  is  very  good.  I  shall  soon  be  in  Paris.  I  cannot 
tell  you  more;  I  am  in  the  deepest  sorrow  at  the  death  of  the  man  I 
loved  and  esteemed  the  most. 

BONAPARTE 

672 
Bulletin  of  the  Reserve  Army 

H.Q.,  Tom  dei  Garoffoli 
26  Prairial,  Year  VIII  (15  June,  1800} 
After  the  battle  of  Montebello,  the  army  was  put  on  the  march  in 

The  Rise  to  Power 

arder  to  cross  the  Scriva.  On  the  24th  the  advance-guard,  commanded 
by  General  Gardarme,  encountered  the  enemy,  who  was  defending  the 
approaches  to  the  Bormida  and  his  three  bridges  near  Alessandria, 
drove  him  back  and  captured  two  guns  and  100  prisoners. 

At  the  same  time  General  Chabran's  division  advanced  along  the  Po 
to  a  point  opposite  Valenza  to  prevent  the  enemy  from  crossing  that 
river.  Thus  M.  Melas  found  himself  trapped  between  the  Bormida  and 
the  Po.  His  sole  line  of  retreat  to  Genoa  remaining  after  the  battle  of 
Montebello  was  cut.  The  enemy  appeared  to  have  no  plan  and  to  be 
very  uncertain  in  his  movements. 

At  dawn  on  the  25th,  resolved  to  break  out,  he  crossed  the  Bormida 
in  force  by  his  three  bridges,  surprised  our  advance-guard  and  with 
great  ardour  began  the  batde  of  Marengo,  which  has  finally  decided  the 
fate  of  both  Italy  and  the  Austrian  army. 

Four  times  during  the  battle  we  were  in  retreat  and  four  times  we 
advanced.  At  different  points  and  different  times  more  than  sixty  guns 
were  taken  and  retaken.  There  were  more  than  twelve  cavalry  charges 
with  varying  success. 

At  3.0  p.m.  10,000  cavalry*  outflanked  our  right  in  this  superb 
plain  of  San  Giuliano.  They  were  supported  by  a  fine  of  cavalry  and 
much  artillery.  The  grenadiers  of  the  Guard  were  placed  like  a  granite 
redoubt  in  the  midst  of  this  immense  plain;  nothing  could  breach  it. 
Cavalry,  infantry,  artillery,  all  were  hurled  at  this  battalion;  but  in 
vain.  Then  indeed  one  saw  what  a  handful  of  brave  men  can  do. 

This  stubborn  resistance  held  the  left  wing  of  the  enemy  and  sup- 
ported our  right  until  the  arrival  of  General  Monnier,  who  took  the 
village  of  Castel-Ceriolo  at  the  point  of  the  bayonet. 

The  enemy  cavalry  then  made  a  rapid  movement  against  our  left, 
which  was  already  shaken;  this  attack  precipitated  its  retreat. 

The  enemy  was  advancing  along  the  whole  line  and  firing  case-shot 
from  over  100  guns.  The  roads  were  strewn  with  fugitives,  wounded 
and  debris.  The  battle  appeared  lost.  The  enemy  was  allowed  to  ad- 
vance to  wi  hin  musket  range  of  the  village  of  San  Giuliano  where 
General  Desaix's  division  was  drawn  up  in  Hue  of  battle  with  eight 
light  guns  in  front  and  two  flanking  battalions  in  close  column  on  the 
wings.  All  the  fugitives  rallied  behind.  Already  the  enemy  was  making 
mistakes  which  foreshadowed  catastrophe;  he  was  over-extending  his 
flanks. 

The  presence  of  the  First  Consul  revived  the  morale  of  the  troops. 
'My  children/  he  addressed  them,  'remember  it  is  my  custom  to  camp 
on  the  field  of  battle/ 

To  cries  of  'Long  live  the  Republic!  Long  live  the  First  Consul  I' 
Desaix  attacked  the  centre  at  the  double.  In  a  moment  the  enemy  was 
*  As  original  text;  clearly  an  error  for  'infantry*. 

Marengo  465 

thrown  back.  General  KeUerman,  whose  brigade  of  heavy  cavalry  had 
throughout  the  day  been  covering  the  retreat  of  our  left,  made  a  charge 
so  vigorous  and  well-judged  that  6,000  grenadiers  and  General  Zach, 
chief  of  the  general  staff,  were  taken  prisoner,  and  several  enemy 
generals  killed. 

The  whole  army  followed  this  movement.  The  right  of  the  enemy 
became  cut  off;  disorder  and  fear  began  to  appear  in  his  ranks. 

The  Austrian  cavalry  had  moved  to  the  centre  in  order  to  cover  the 
retreat.  Colonel  Bessieres,  at  the  head  of  the  grenadiers  of  the  guard, 
charged  valiantly  and  pierced  the  line  of  enemy  cavalry.  This  brought 
about  the  complete  rout  of  the  army. 

We  have  taken  fifteen  flags,  forty  guns  and  six  to  eight  thousand 
prisoners.  More  than  6,000  of  the  enemy  were  killed. 

The  pth  Light  Infantry  have  earned  the  tide  'Incomparable'.  The 
heavy  cavalry  and  8th  Dragoons  covered  themselves  in  glory.  Our 
losses  have  also  been  heavy:  we  have  lost  600  men  killed,  1,500  wounded 
and  900  prisoners.  Generals  Champeaux,  Mainoni  and  Boudet  are 
wounded. 

The  Commander-in-Chief,  General  Berthier,  had  his  clothes  riddled 
with  bullets  and  several  of  his  aides-de-camp  were  unhorsed.  But  a  loss 
which  is  keenly  felt  by  the  army  and  will  be  so  by  the  whole  Republic 
closes  our  heart  to  joy.  Desaix  was  struck  by  a  bullet  at  the  beginning  of 
the  charge  of  his  division;  he  died  instantly.  He  had  rime  only  to  say  to 
young  Lebrun,  who  was  with  him:  'Go  tell  the'First  Consul  that  I  die 
regretting  not  having  done  enough  to  live  in  posterity.'* 

In  the  course  of  bis  life  General  Desaix  had  four  horses  killed  under 
him  and  received  three  wounds.  He  had  joined  this  headquarters  only 
three  days  earlier.  When,  in  the  midst  of  the  hottest  fire,  the  news  of 
his  death  was  brought  to  the  First  Consul,  there  escaped  him  but  this 
word:  'Why  am  I  not  allowed  to  weep?'  His  body  has  been  carried  to 
Milan  to  be  embalmed. 

673 
Armistice  Convention 

Alessandria 

26  Prairial,  Year  VIII:  15  June,  1800 

ARTICLE  i.  There  will  be  an  armistice  and  suspension  of  hostilities 
between  the  army  of  His  Imperial  Majesty  and  that  of  the  French 
Republic  in  Italy  until  the  reply  from  Vienna. 

ART.  2.  The  army  of  His  Imperial  Majesty  will  occupy  all  the  lands 
between  the  Mincio,  the  Fossa-Maestra  and  the  Po,  that  is  to  say 

*  These  famous  words  are  almost  certainly  apochryphal;  Desaix  was  shot 
through  the  heart  and  died  instantly. 

Peschiera,  Mantua,  Borgo-Forte,  and  thereafter  the  left  bank  of  the  Po 
and,  on  the  right  bank,  the  town  and  citadel  of  Ferrara. 

ART.  3.  The  army  of  His  Imperial  Majesty  will  also  occupy  Tuscany 
and  Ancona. 

ART.  4.  The  French  Army  will  occupy  the  lands  lying  between  the 
Chiese,  the  Oglio  and  the  Po. 

ART.  5.  The  area  between  the  Chiese  and  the  Mincio  will  not  be 
occupied  by  either  army.  The  army  of  His  Imperial  Majesty  may  draw 
supplies  from  the  parts  of  this  area  which  formed  part  of  the  duchy  of 
Mantua.  The  French  Army  will  draw  supplies  from  the  lands  which 
formed  part  of  the  province  of  Brescia. 

ART.  6.  The  fortresses  of  Tortona,  Alessandria,  Milan,  Turin, 
Pizzeghettone,  Arona  and  Piacenza  will  be  restored  to  the  French  Army 
between  16  and  20  June.  .  . 

ART.  9.  The  artillery  of  the  fortresses  will  be  divided  as  follows: 
I.  All  artillery  of  Austrian  foundries  or  calibres  will  belong  to  the 
Austrian  Army.  2.  All  artillery  of  Italian,  Piedmontese  and  French 
foundries  or  calibres  will  be  restored  to  the  French  Army.  .  . 

ART.  10.  The  garrisons  will  withdraw  with  military  honours,  and 
will  proceed  to  Mantua,  with  arms  and  baggage,  by  the  shortest  route. 

ART.  ii.  The  Austrian  Army  will  retire  to  Mantua,  via  Piacenza,  in 
three  columns:  The  first  from  16  to  20  June,  the  second  from  20  to  24 
June,  the  third  from  24  to  26  June.  .  . 

ART.  13.  No  person  shall  be  maltreated  on  account  of  services 
rendered  to  the  Austrian  Army  or  of  political  opinions.  The  Com- 
mander-in-Chief  of  the  Austrian  Army  will  release  all  persons  arrested 
in  the  Cisalpine  Republic  for  their  political  opinions  and  still  remaining 
in  the  fortresses  under  his  command. 

ART.  14.  Whatever  the  reply  of  the  Court  of  Vienna,  neither  of  the 
two  armies  shall  attack  the  other  without  ten  days'  advance  warning. 

ART.  15.  During  the  suspension  of  hostilities  neither  army  shall  send 
any  detachment  to  Germany. 

ALEX.  BERTHIER.       MELAS. 

674 
To  the  Consuls  of  the  Republic 

Tone  del  Garoffbli 

27  Prairial,  Year  VIII  (16  June,  1800} 

Citizen  Consuls,  on  the  day  following  the  battle  of  Marengo, 
General  Melas  asked  at  our  outposts  to  send  General  Skal  to  me,  and  the 
attached  convention  was  agreed  during  the  day  and  signed  that  night 
by  General  Berthier  and  General  Melas.  I  hope  the  French  people  will 
be  pleased  with  their  army.  I  shall  be  at  Milan  tonight. 

BONAPARTE 

Marengo  467 

675 
To  General  Moreau 

C.-w-C.,  Army  of  the  Rhine  Milan 

28  Prairial,  Year  VIII  (17  June,  1800} 

The  fate  of  Italy,  Citizen  General,  has  just  been  decided  by  two 
pretty  serious  battles,  one  at  Montebello,  near  Casteggio,  the  other 
between  Marengo  and  San-Guiliano.  Desaix,  who  had  just  arrived,  was 
killed  at  the  second.  His  family  and  the  Republic  have  suffered  a  great 
loss;  but  ours  is  greater  still. 

After  that  battle  M.  Melas  found  .himself  surrounded  on  every  side, 
and  he  has  signed  the  convention  which  you  will  find  attached. 

Here,  as  with  your  army,  the  weather  is  bad,  which  tires  us  greatly. 

I  have  reached  Milan  and  am  rather  tired. 

BONAPARTE 

As  soon  as  most  of  the  fortresses  are  in  our  hands,  I  will  let  it  be 
known  to  the  court  of  Vienna  that  the  expression  until  the  reply  from 
Vienna  in  the  first  article  can  extend  to  fifteen  days  only.  Tne  army 
needs  this  time  to  organize  its  artillery. 

676 
Order 

Milan 

28  Prairial,  Year  VIII  (17  June,  1800) 
Bonaparte,  First  Consul  of  the  Republic,  orders:- 
ARTICLE  I.  In  consequence  of  the  Convention  of  27  Prairial,  General 
Massena  will  take  all  necessary  measures  to  occupy  the  fortresses  of 
Ceva,  Cuneo,  Savona  and  the  city  of  Genoa. 
ART.  2.  General  Turreau  will  occupy  Turin. 
ART.  3.  General  Berthier  will  undertake  the  occupation  of  Milan, 
Arona,  Pizzeghetone,  Alessandria  and  Tortona. 

BONAPARTE 

677 
Bulletin  of  the  Reserve  Army 

H.Q.,  Milan 
28  Prairial,  Year  VIII  (17  June,  1800} 

The  gunners  of  the  Consular  Guard  cover  themselves  with  glory  in 
every  action.  At  the  battle  of  Montebello,  with  the  snipers  and  three 
guns,  they  were  always  within  twenty  paces  of  the  enemy,  2nd  Lieute- 
nant Marin,  of  that  company,  distinguished  himself  outstandingly. 

At  the  battle  of  Marengo  M.  Melas  had  two  horses  killed  under  him 
and  his  arm  was  crushed.  General  Saint-Julien,  with  four  or  five  other 
generals  was  taken  prisoner,  but  they  had  time  to  escape  while  our 
soldiers  were  seizing  the  guns. 

468  The  Rise  to  Power 

Several  Hungarian  and  German  grenadier  prisoners,  who  had  been 
taken  prisoner  in  the  campaigns  of  the  years  IV  and  V,  recognized  the 
First  Consul  when  passing  near  him.  With  a  kind  of  satisfaction  many 
of  them  began  to  shout:  Long  live  Bonaparte! 

When  he  was  returning  and  saw  that  inevitable  aftermath  of  a  great 
battle,  a  large  number  of  wounded  soldiers  in  distress  and  privation, 
the  First  Consul  said:  'When  one  sees  all  these  brave  fellows  suffering 
one's  only  regret  is  not  to  be  wounded  too,  so  as  to  share  their  pain/ 

The  Austrian  generals,  officers  and  soldiers  are  angry  with  Thugut. 
They  respect  the  good  intentions  of  their  Emperor  and  seem  convinced 
that  we  are  fighting  only  to  raise  the  price  of  English  coffee  and  sugar. 
A  distinguished  Austrian  general  said  at  headquarters:  'We  shall  have 
no  peace  and  happiness  on  the  continent  until  we  all,  with  one  accord, 
drive  out  that  venal  and  mercantile  nation,  which  reckons  to  increase 
its  commerce  at  the  expense  of  our  blood/  They  all  seem  certain  that, 
if  we  do  not  have  peace,  it  is  the  fault  of  England  and  its  ministry.  .  . . 

678 
Bulletin  of  the  Reserve  Army 

H.Q.,  Milan 
2)  Prairial,  Year  VIII  (18  June,  1800) 

General  Rivaud  was  wounded  at  the  battle  of  Marengo  while 
defending  that  village,  where  he  held  out  with  great  courage  for 
several  hours. 

General  Desaix  had  brought  from  Egypt  two  little  negroes  given 
him  by  the  king  of  Darfur  and  these  children  are  wearing  mourning  for 
the  death  of  their  master  in  a  most  touching  way  and  in  the  manner  of 
their  country. 

The  First  Consul  has  taken  for  himself  the  two  aides-de-camp  of 
General  Desaix,  Savary  and  Rapp.  The  general's  body  has  been  taken 
by  coach  to  Milan,  where  it  has  been  embalmed.  It  is  not  yet  known 
whether  the  First  Consul  will  send  it  to  Paris  or  will  place  it  in  a  monu- 
ment to  be  erected  on  the  Saint-Bernard  to  commemorate  the  crossing 
of  the  Reserve  Army. 

General  Desaix  is  die  first  European  to  carry  the  glory  of  the  French 
name  beyond  the  Cataracts.  He  was  adored  by  the  people  of  Upper 
Egypt,  who  called  him  The  Just  Sultan.  He  had  a  lively  resentment  of 
the  ill-treatment  he  had  received  from  Lord  Keith  who  had  loaded  him 
with  insults  in  a  way  unworthy  of  a  European  nation. 

General  Desaix  had  left  Alexandria  on  a  Ragusan  ship.  He  had  pass- 
ports from  the  Grand  Vizir  and  from  the  English  commander  before 
Alexandria,  who,  further  to  ensure  his  passage,  had  placed  an  English 
officer  on  board  with  him.  Contrary  to  the  law  of  nations  he  was 
arrested  by  Admiral  Keith  and  taken  to  Leghorn.  In  vain  did  he  show 

Marengo  469 

his  passports,  and  the  English  officer  protested  against  such  signal  bad 
faith.  Once  in  the  harbour  of  Leghorn,  the  ship  was  unrigged,  and  its 
rudder  removed,  putting  it  in  danger  of  foundering. 

General  Desaix  was  put  in  a  kind  of  prison  in  the  quarantine  station. 
Admiral  Keith  was  so  base  as  to  add  insult  to  his  violation  of  the  law  of 
nations;  he  suggested  paying  twenty  sous  a  day,  to  him  and  to  each  of 
the  French  soldier  prisoners,  adding,  with  heavy  sarcasm,  that  the 
equality  proclaimed  in  France  demanded  that  he  should  be  no  better 
treated  than  they. 

Consequently,  he  was  put  in  the  same  courtyard  as  the  soldiers,  and 
his  every  request  was  refused,  even  to  the  newspapers  and  a  few  military 
books.  'I  ask  nothing  of  you,'  replied  Desaix,  'except  that  you  relieve 
me  of  your  presence.  If  you  will,  nave  straw  given  to  the  wounded  who 
are  with  me.  I  have  dealt  with  Mamelukes,  Turks,  Anatolians  and  the 
Arabs  of  the  desert,  with  Ethiopians,  Tartars  and  the  blacks  of  Darfur; 
all,  once  they  had  given  their  word,  kept  it,  and  did  not  insult  men  in 
misfortune.'  M.  Keith  did  more:  he  went  so  far  as  to  persuade  the 
master  of  the  ship  to  say  that  it  belonged  to  General  Desaix,  promising 
him  1,000  guineas  reward  and  hoping  thereby  to  set  up  a  prize  claim 
against  General  Desaix.  The  good  Genoese  master  objected  throughout 
'Very  well,  Admiral/  wrote  Desaix,  'take  the  ship,  take  my  baggage; 
we  care  not  for  the  interest.'  This  Admiral  Keith  is  the  man  who  so 
often  made  a  fool  of  himself  before  Genoa  through  drinking  too  much 
punch. 

The  French  nation  does  well  to  be  victorious.  If  it  were  to  suffer 
reverses,  there  is  no  excess  its  enemies  would  not  commit.  But,  thanks 
to  the  number  and  the  courage  of  its  soldiers,  it  will  triumph  over  them 
all,  and  opprobrium  and  the  contempt  of  civilized  nations  will  be  the 
lot  of  men  who  behave  like  Lord  Keith.  That  admiral  went  through  the 
farce  of  forging  a  supposedly  intercepted  letter  from  the  First  Consul 
to  General  Massena,  which  was  full  of  absurdities  and  of  a  piece  with  the 
libels  of  every  kind  against  our  chief  magistrate  being  printed  by  the 
court  of  London. 

But  whatever  the  court  of  London  may  do,  there  will  be  no  civil 
war  in  France.  Belgium  will  form  part  of  the  territory  of  the  great 
nation.  Holland  and  Spain,  united  by  interest  as  by  opinion,  will 
redouble  their  efforts  against  the  tyrants  of  the  seas  .  .  .  Through  its 
arrogance,  venality  and  corruption  England  will  come  to  be  hated  and 
despised  by  French,  Austrians  and  Russians  alike. 

This  morning  the  First  Consul  attended  the  Te  Deum  sung  hi  the 
cathedral  of  Milan  in  honour  of  the  deliverance  of  the  Republic  and  the 
glory  of  French  arms.  He  was  received  at  the  door  by  all  the  clergy  and 
conducted  into  the  choir  to  a  specially  prepared  dais,  on  which  the 
consuls  and  first  magistrates  of  the  Empire  of  the  West  used  to  be 

470  The  Rise  to  Power 

received.  The  music  of  the  Te  Deum  was  by  the  best  composers  of 
Italy.  The  ceremony  was  imposing  and  superb.  This  respect  for  the 
altar  is  a  memorable  event  which  will  have  an  effect  on  the  peoples  of 
Italy  and  make  more  friends  for  the  Republic.  .  ,  . 

679 
Order  of  the  Day 

Reserve  Army  H.Q.,  Milan 

5  Messidor,  Year  VIII  (24  June,  1800} 

On  leaving  the  army,  the  First  Consul  wishes  to  congratulate  it  on 
the  victories  it  has  won. 

The  day  of  Marengo  will  be  famous  in  history.  Thirteen  fortified 
towns,  containing  a  thousand  heavy  guns,  are  in  our  hands,  and  we  are 
in  a  position  to  conclude  a  solid  peace  or,  if  the  blindness  of  our  enemies 
prevents  it,  to  start  a  brilliant  and  decisive  campaign  for  the  peace  of 
Europe  and  the  glory  of  the  nation.  The  First  Consul  urges  generals  and 
unit  commanders  to  lose  no  time  in  reorganizing  so  as  to  be  able  to  take 
the  field,  if  necessary,  before  our  enemies. 

BONAPARTE 

680 
Decree 

Presumed  Mont-Cenis 
8  Messidor,  Year  VIII  (27  June,  1800) 
The  Consuls  of  the  Republic  decree: 

ARTICLE  i.  The  body  of  General  Desaix  will  be  carried  to  the  con- 
vent of  the  Great  Saint-Bernard  where  a  tomb  will  be  erected, 

ART.  2.  The  numbers  of  the  demi-brigades,  the  regiments  of  cavalry 
and  artillery  and  of  the  generals  and  colonels  will  be  engraved  on  a 
marble  tablet  opposite  the  monument. 

ART.  3.  The  Ministers  of  the  Interior  and  of  War,  in  so  far  as  each  is 
concerned,  are  charged  with  the  execution  of  this  decree. 

BONAPARTE 

681 
To  Citizen  Lucien  Bonaparte 

Minister  of  the  Interior  Lyons 

lo  Messidor,  Year  VIII  (29  June,  1800) 

I  have  your  letter,  Citizen  Minister.  I  shall  arrive  at  Paris  unex- 
pectedly. My  intention  is  to  have  neither  triumphal  arches  nor  any 
kind  of  ceremony.  I  have  too  good  an  opinion  of  myself  to  set  mucn 
store  by  such  trumpery.  I  know  no  triumph  other  than  public  esteem. 

BONAPARTE 

Lunfoilk  and  Amiens 

'Madame  M&re' 

Letizia  Bonaparte,  from  an  engraving  in  the  Bibliotheque  Nationale 
after  the  portrait  by  Gerard. 

A  SOON  AS  HE  HAD  GRANTED  MELAS  AN  ARMISTICE  BONAPARTE 
again  wrote  to  the  Emperor,  proposing  peace  on  the  basis  of 
the  treaty  of  Campo  Fonnio  (No.  682),  This  approach  was 
undoubtedly  sincere,  for  he  was  anxious  to  return  to  the  tasks  awaiting 
him  in  France;  at  the  same  time,  he  was  determined  that  the  settlement 
should  be  on  his  own  terms.  The  upshot  was  to  be  nearly  two  years  of 
hard  bargaining,  punctuated  by  military  operations  and  culminating 
in  a  short-lived  general  peace.  In  the  process,  Bonaparte  was  to  put 
out  some  interesting  diplomatic  proposals— for  agreed  disarmament 
(No.  704)  and  treaties  guaranteeing  the  small  states  (No.  682) — which 
had  little  immediate  effect. 

By  their  treaty  with  England  the  Austrians  were  bound  not  to  make 
a  separate  peace  before  I  February,  1801,  and  Thugut,  the  advocate  of 
war,  was  still  in  power  in  Vienna;  yet  they  were  incapable  of  successful 
military  operations.  Five  days  after  the  battle  of  Marengo  Moreau 
defeated  Kray  at  Hochstadt  and  during  the  following  weeks  he  besieged 
Ulm  and  Ingolstadt,  occupied  Munich  and  on  15  July  signed  the  armis- 
tice of  Parsdorf.  In  these  circumstances  the  Austrians  sought  to  gain 
time,  and  their  first  step  was  to  send  Saint-Julien  to  Paris  for  discussions. 
He  had  no  power  to  negotiate,  but  Bonaparte  and  Talleyrand  cajoled 
him  into  signing  what  purported  to  be  preliminaries  of  peace,  and  when 
these  were  rejected  in  Vienna  they  were  able  to  demand  harsher 
armistice  terms  (Nos.  684-5,  687-9). 

Meanwhile  Bonaparte  was  negotiating  with  Russia,  Prussia  and, 
later,  Turkey  in  order  both  to  come  to  terms  with  these  powers  and  to 
isolate  England  and  Austria  (Nos.  686,  699).  He  also  supported  the 
formation  of  the  second  Armed  Neutrality  (No.  698),  which  arose  out 
of  Russian  and  Scandinavian  differences  with  England  but  was  soon 
disrupted  by  the  murder  of  Paul  I  in  March  and  the  Battle  of  Copen- 
hagen in  April,  1801. 

In  October,  1800,  discussions  between  Joseph  Bonaparte  and  Cobenzl 
began  at  Lun£ville,  the  Austrians  seeking  to  have  England  admitted  to 
the  Conference,  the  French  refusing  this  except  on  condition  of  an  un- 
attainable naval  truce.  In  November  Bonaparte  lost  patience,  and  de- 
nounced the  armistice.  On  2  December  Moreau  utterly  crushed  the 
Archduke  Charles  at  Hohenlinden  and  advanced  to  within  sixty  miles 
of  Vienna  before  signing  the  armistice  of  Steyr  on  the  25th  (No.  700); 
in  Italy  Brune  and  Macdonald  threw  Bellegarde  back  behind  the 
Tagliamento  and  signed  the  armistice  of  Treviso  on  15  January.  A 
secondary  effect  of  this  campaign  resulted  from  Murat's  incursion  into 
Naples,  which  led  in  March  to  the  treaty  of  Florence  whereby  the 
French  occupied  Taranto. 

Powerless  and  nearly  free  of  its  obligation  to  England,  the  Austrian 
government  now  agreed  to  a  separate  peace,  and  after  a  few  days  of 

474  The  Rise  to  Power 

negotiation  the  treaty  of  Luneville  was  signed  on  9  February,  1801.  It 
granted  Bonaparte  all  his  demands,  which  had  latterly  been  increased 
by  the  substitution  of  the  Adige  for  the  Mincio  as  the  eastern  frontier 
of  the  Italian  Republic  (Nos.  702-3). 

England  alone  was  now  actively  at  war  with  France;  but  even  there 
opinion  was  tending  towards  peace.  Addington  succeeded  Pitt  at  the 
time  of  Luneville,  and  almost  at  once  the  new  ministry  made  approaches 
through  Otto,  the  French  commissioner  for  the  exchange  of  prisoners. 
For  a  time  Bonaparte  held  back,  partly  because  he  still  hoped  to  secure 
his  Egyptian  colony,  partly  because  he  wished  by  a  Franco-Spanish 
conquest  of  Portugal  to  gain  a  bargaining  counter  to  ensure  the  return 
to  France  and  her  allies  of  their  overseas  possessions  (Nos.  705,  707-9). 
But  by  May  serious  negotiations  were  in  train  and,  after  very  hard 
bargaining,  preliminaries  were  signed  in  London  on  I  October.  After 
further  protracted  negotiations  at  the  conference  the  treaty  of  Amiens 
was  signed  on  25  March,  1802. 

By  the  terms  of  the  treaty  England  retained  Ceylon  and  Trinidad, 
but  returned  all  the  other  colonies;  Egypt  was  restored  to  Turkey, 
Malta  to  the  Order  of  St.  John;  the  English  were  to  evacuate  the  island 
within  three  months,  during  which  time  the  French  were  to  evacuate 
Taranto  and  the  Papal  States;  the  English  gave  up  Elba  which,  with  the 
neighbouring  mainland  areas,  became  French;  the  independence  of  the 
Ionian  islands  was  recognized.  Other  clauses  dealt  with  the  return  of 
prisoners  of  war,  indemnities  and  various  minor  points.  A  significant 
omission  was  any  reference  to  trade,  with  the  result  that  English  goods 
continued  to  be  virtually  excluded  by  France  and  her  allies. 

The  diplomatic  settlement  was  completed  later  in  the  year  when 
France  signed  treaties  with  Prussia,  Bavaria,  Turkey  and  Russia.  Yet 
none  of  the  great  powers  was  satisfied  with  the  result.  Alexander  of 
Russia  disliked  much  of  it  and  was  personally  jealous  of  Bonaparte; 
Austria  was  humiliated  and  revengeful;  in  England,  where  the  pre- 
liminaries had  been  greeted  with  joy,  the  final  treaty  was  generally  dis- 
approved, and  even  Addington  when  speaking  to  it  in  the  House  of 
Commons  plainly  looked  forward  to  a  renewal  of  war.  Bonaparte,  too, 
though  momentarily  satisfied,  was  under  no  illusions;  even  setting 
aside  the  element  of  personal  ambition,  it  is  clear — and  it  was  clear  to 
him — that  the  policies  he  was  to  pursue  would  soon  bring  a  rupture.* 
It  was  in  fact  inherent  in  its  nature  that  the  general  peace  of  1802  could 
be  no  more  than  a  truce. 

*  At  Ste.  Helena  he  was  to  maintain  that  he  had  really  hoped  and  believed  that 
the  peace  of  1802  would  be  permanent.  His  words  at  the  time  were  very  different: 
'I  will  keep  the  peace  as  long  as  my  neighbours  keep  it;  but ...  in  the  present 
situation  every  treaty  of  peace  means  no  more  than  a  brief  armistice;  I  believe  it  is 
my  destiny  to  be  fighting  almost  continuously.* 

Lunfoille  and  Amiens 

475 

HOLLAND 

Antwerp* 

AUSTRIAN  i 
Brussels  I 

\DENMARK 

-v"^ 

k  HOLSTEIN,. 

Sc 

STATES 
7 

HANOVER 

~V^ 

OF  THE 

PRUSSIA 

1  NETIIERLANDsS       H  O  L  Y 

ROMAN 

FRANCE 

Mmridt 

BmlcL 

•  Bent 
SWITZERLAND 

AUSTRIA 

•  Lyons 

\MILAN  V 

VENICE 

CENTRAL  EUROPE 
In  1792 

Antwerp 

FRANCE 

The  Rise  to  Power 

HOLY  ROMAIC 

J.Btrti 
HELVETIC  REPUBLIC 

Munich 

AUSTRIA 

KDM.  Of 
J5TKURIA 

HHH. 

or  RACUSA 

CENTRAL  EUROPE 
After  the  treaties  of  LuueVifle  and  Amiens 

Luntville  and  Amiens  477 

682 
To  H.M.  the  Emperor,  King  of  Hungary  and  Bohemia 

Marengo 
27  Prairial,  Year  VIII  (16  June,  1800) 

I  have  the  honour  to  write  informing  Your  Majesty  of  the  desire  of 
the  French  people  to  stop  the  war  which  is  ravaging  our  countries. 

English  cunning  prevented  my  simple  and  frank  approach  from 
having  the  effect  it  should  naturally  have  had  on  Your  Majesty's  heart. 

We  have  had  war.  Thousands  of  Frenchmen  and  Austrians  are  no 
more.  Thousands  of  desolate  homes  cry  out  for  their  fathers,  their 
husbands,  their  sons.  But  the  evil  that  has  been  done  cannot  be  undone; 
let  us  at  least  learn  from  it  and  avoid  that  which  would  ensue  from  a 
continuation  of  hostilities!  This  prospect  so  afflicts  my  heart  that  I  am 
not  letting  the  ineffectiveness  of  my  first  approach  discourage  me,  but 
am  again  taking  the  step  of  writing  to  urge  Your  Majesty  to  put  an  end 
to  the  ills  of  the  continent, 

It  is  from  the  battlefield  of  Marengo,  in  the  midst  of  suffering  and 
surrounded  by  15,000  corpses,  that  I  implore  Your  Majesty  to  listen 
to  the  cry  of  humanity  and  to  spare  a  whole  generation  of  two  brave 
and  powerful  nations  from  massacring  each  other  for  interests  that 
are  not  their  own.  It  is  for  me  to  urge  Your  Majesty,  for  I  am  the 
closer  to  the  theatre  of  war.  My  heart  is  the  more  affected. 

Your  Majesty  has  military  glory  enough  and  rules  over  a  great  many 
states.  So  what  arguments  have  those  in  Your  Majesty's  cabinet  who 
want  war  to  continue? 

The  interests  of  religion  and  the  Church? 

Why  do  they  not  advise  Your  Majesty  to  make  war  on  the  English 
or  the  Muscovites?  They  are  further  from  the  Church  than  we. 

The  form  of  government  in  France,  which  is  elective,  not  hereditary? 

But  the  government  of  the  Empire  is  also  elective;  and  besides, 
Your  Majesty  knows  that  the  whole  world  could  not  change  the  will 
of  the  French  people  to  govern  itself  as  it  pleases.  Why  do  they  not 
advise  Your  Majesty  to  demand  the  suppression  of  Parliament  by  the 
King  of  England  or  of  their  Congress  by  the  United  States? 

The  interests  of  the  German  States? 

But  Your  Majesty  has  ceded  us  Mainz,  which  several  campaigns 
had  not  put  in  our  power  and  which  was  in  a  position  to  withstand 
several  months  of  siege;  and  the  German  States  are  crying  out  for  peace, 
which  alone  can  save  them  from  total  ruin;  most  of  them,  even  those 
of  the  sole  instigator  of  the  war,  the  King  of  England,  are  at  peace  with 
the  French  Republic. 

An  increase  of  territory  for  Your  Majesty  in  Italy? 

But  the  treaty  of  Campo  Formio  has  given  to  Your  Majesty  what 
has  been  the  constant  ambition  of  Your  Majesty's  ancestors. 

The  Rise  to  Power 

The  equilibrium  of  Europe? 

The  last  campaign  shows  well  enough  that  the  equilibrium  of 
Europe  is  not  threatened  by  France,  while  events  are  proving  daily 
that  it  is  so  by  England,  which  has  acquired  such  a  stranglehold  over 
world  trade  and  sea  power  that  today  she  can,  alone,  resist  the  com- 
bined fleets  of  the  Russians,  Danes,  Swedes,  French,  Spanish  and  Dutch. 
But  Your  Majesty,  who  now  has  a  great  trade,  is  interested  in  the 
independence  and  freedom  of  the  seas. 

The  destruction  of  revolutionary  principles? 

If  Your  Majesty  will  consider  the  effects  of  war,  it  will  be  clear  that 
they  are  to  revolutionize  Europe  by  increasing  everywhere  the  public 
debt  and  the  discontent  of  the  people. 

If  the  French  nation  is  forced  to  make  war,  it  will  be  forced  to  think 
only  of  war  and  to  live  only  for  war,  and  the  French  legions  are  brave 
and  numerous.  If  Your  Majesty  desires  peace,  it  is  made;  let  us  both 
carry  out  the  treaty  of  Campo  Formio  and,  by  an  addition  to  it,  increase 
the  guarantees  for  the  small  states  which  appear  to  have  been  the 
principal  cause  of  the  outbreak  of  war. 

Let  us  give  peace  and  quiet  to  the  present  generation.  If  future 
generations  are  so  foolish  as  to  fight,  well  then,  after  a  few  years  of  war 
they  will  learn  to  be  wise  and  to  live  in  peace. 

I  could  have  taken  the  whole  of  Your  Majesty's  army  prisoner.  I 
was  content  with  an  armistice  in  the  hope  that  it  would  be  a  first  step 
towards  the  peace  of  the  world,  which  I  have  the  more  at  heart  since, 
being  reared  and  nourished  by  war,  I  might  be  thought  to  know  more 
of  the  ills  it  brings  with  it.  But  Your  Majesty  will  realize  that  if  the 
present  armistice  does  not  lead  to  peace,  it  is  pointless  and  contrary  to 
the  interests  of  my  nation. 

Thus,  I  think  I  should  propose  to  Your  Majesty: 

1.  That  the  armistice  should  apply  to  all  the  armies. 

2.  That,  secretly  or  openly,  as  Your  Majesty  may  please,  negotiators 
be  sent  by  either  side  to  some  place  between  the  Mincio  and  the  Chiese 
to  draw  up  a  system  of  guarantee  for  the  small  powers  and  to  interpret 
those  articles  of  the  treaty  of  Campo  Formio  which  experience  has 
shown  to  need  it. 

If  Your  Majesty  refuses  these  proposals,  war  will  start  again;  and  let 
me  say  frankly  that  in  that  case  Your  Majesty  would  be  solely  respon- 
sible in  the  eyes  of  the  world. 

I  beg  Your  Majesty  to  read  this  letter  in  the  same  spirit  as  I  have 
written  it,  and  to  believe  that  after  the  well-being  and  interests  of  the 
French  people  nothing  interests  me  so  much  as  the  prosperity  of  that 
warrior  nation  whose  courage  and  military  virtues  I  have  admired  for 
eight  years. 

BONAPARTE 

Luneville  and  Amiens  479 

683 
To  Citizen  Talleyrand 

Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs  Paris 

15  Messidor,  Year  VIII  (4  July,  1800} 

The  First  Consul  has  only  glanced  at  the  Letters  to  a  Deputy  to  the 
German  Diet,  but  he  sees  no  harm  in  having  them  printed  as  a  pamphlet. 
Care  must  be  taken  to  use  German  paper  and  German  type.  They  will 
be  dated  from  Frankfurt. 

I  also  wish  you  to  have  a  caricature  drawn  showing  the  Minister 
Thugut  between  the  Doge  of  Venice  and  a  Cisalpine  Director.  The 
point  to  be  made  is  that  he  robs  the  one  under  the  terms  of  the  treaty 
of  Campo  Formio  and  imprisons  the  other  because  he  does  not  recog- 
nize that  treaty. 

BONAPARTE 

684 
To  H.M.  the  Emperor,  King  of  Hungary  and  Bohemia* 

Paris 
10  Thermidor,  Year  VIII  (29  July  *  iSoo] 

I  have  received  the  letter  Your  Majesty  sent  to  me  by  Count  Saint- 
Julien.  I  hope  that  the  preliminaries  of  peace  which  he  is  carrying  will 
soon  be  followed  by  the  definitive  treaty.  Our  two  nations,  the  most 
powerful  on  the  continent,  are  alike  tired  of  war.  Their  wish  will  lead 
them,  I  hope,  to  a  long  repose  in  the  happiness  of  peace. 

It  will  not  be  due  to  me  if  all  difficulties  are  not  promptly  smoothed 
over,  all  that  is  reasonable  promptly  carried  out,  and  all  clouds  that 
may  arise  later  promptly  dissipated. 

As  a  result  of  Your  Majesty's  action  in  sending  Count  Saint-Julien 
to  Paris  the  preliminaries  are  signed  even  before  Europe  suspects  that 
we  are  talking.  Your  Majesty  will  surely  think  it  desirable  that  the 
final  peace  should  be  signed  before  Europe  knows  we  have  negoti- 
ated. .  .  . 

The  questions  posed  by  the  peace  are  no  longer  new,  as  they  were  at 
the  negotiations  of  Campo  Formio.  Today,  the  definitive  treaty  can  be 
drawn  up  in  less  time  than  the  preliminaries  have  taken;  and  that  will 
save  both  states  a  great  deal  of  worry  and  money. 

As  for  England,  with  which  Your  Majesty  was  led  by  the  circum- 
stances of  war  to  make  alliance,  as  soon  as  peace  is  made  with  Your 
Majesty,  France  wishes  to  make  peace  with  England  also.  Your 
Majesty  can  act  towards  England  as  seems  fit  in  view  of  this  declaration. 

Citizen  Duroc,  my  aide-de-camp,  who  brings  this  letter,  will  inform 
Your  Majesty  verbally  of  my  esteem  and  most  particular  consideration. 

BONAPARTE 
*  This  letter  was  not  sent. 

480  The  Rise  to  Power 

685 
To  Citizen  Carnot 

Minister  of  War  Paris 

14  Thermidor,  Year  VIII  (2  Aug,  1800} 

Please,  Citizen  Minister,  write  to  Generals  Moreau,  Mass&ia, 
Augereau  and  Brune  that  the  Count  Saint-Julien  has  come  to  assure 
the  French  Government  of  the  sincerity  of  the  peaceful  intentions  of  the 
cabinet  at  Vienna.  He  carried  proposals.  After  several  conferences 
agreement  seemed  to  be  reached,  and  we  should  receive  the  reply  on 
15  August.  If  it  is  for  peace,  negotiations  to  conclude  the  definitive 
peace  will  begin.  If  it  is  for  war,  the  generals  must  be  ready  to  start 
hostilities  at  once.  Instruct  them  to  keep  this  information  secret. 

BONAPARTE 

686 
To  Citizen  Talleyrand 

Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs  Paris 

16  Thermidor,  Year  VIII  (4  Aug,  1800) 

The  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs  will  write  a  friendly  letter  to  the 
Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs  of  the  King  of  Prussia;  it  will  say: 

That  the  First  Consul  has  been  extremely  flattered  and  recognizes 
the  concern  of  H.M.  the  King  of  Prussia  for  the  re-establishment  of 
peace,  to  which  the  French  people  attach  great  price; 

That  particular  respect  for  the  personal  qualities  of  H*M.  the  King 
of  Prussia  had  caused  him  to  wish  for  his  intervention  at  the  beginning 
of  the  winter;  but  that  H.M.  had  thought  he  should  first  make  peace 
between  the  French  Republic  and  the  Emperor  of  Russia; 

That,  while  that  negotiation  met  with  unexpected  delays,  the 
campaigning  season  meanwhile  intervened,  English  intrigues  were 
successful  at  the  court  of  Vienna,  and  war  became  the  sole  means  of 
bringing  about  peace; 

That  a  general  armistice  seemed  necessary  to  the  two  belligerent 
powers  to  enable  them  to  reach  agreement:  the  First  Consul  regards 
this  as  a  probable  herald  of  peace;  and  if,  in  the  present  situation,  the 
intervention  of  H.M.  the  King  of  Prussia  does  not  become  essential  for 
peace  with  the  Emperor,  it  remains  very  precious  to  the  First  Consul 
for  peace  with  Russia  and  the  Empire. .  , . 

That  in  order  to  help  as  much  as  possible  the  intervention  of  H.M. 
the  King  of  Prussia  with  the  Emperor  of  Russia  the  First  Consul  has 
informed  him  by  a  special  messenger  of  the  return  of  all  the  Russian 
prisoners  as  a  mark  of  respect  for  these  brave  troops  and  of  his  desire 
to  do  something  agreeable  to  His  Imperial  Majesty; 

That  the  First  Consul  desires  general  peace  because  war  is  now  point- 
less and  barren  for  France  as  for  the  other  belligerent  powers; 

Lunlville  and  Amiens  481 

That  the  known  will  of  a  prince  who  combines  so  much  power  with 
so  loyal  a  character  can  only  speed  the  result  so  much  desired  by  the 
whole  of  Europe  and  above  all  by  the  belligerent  peoples. 

BONAPARTE 

687 
To  Citizen  Carnot 

Minister  of  War  Paris 

3  Fructidor,  Year  VIII  (21  Aug,  1800) 

Please,  Citizen  Minister,  dispatch  three  special  couriers  before  mid- 
night, one  for  General  Moreau,  one  for  General  Brune  and  one  for 
General  Augereau,  to  warn  them  that  hostilities  will  re-commence 
during  the  first  decade  of  September :  each  of  these  generals  must  inform 
the  generals  opposing  them  that,  since  His  Imperial  Majesty  has  not 
ratified  the  preliminaries  of  peace  signed  in  Paris  on  9  Thermidor 
between  the  French  Government  and  M.  de  Saint-Julien,  hostilities 
will  re-commence  between  5  and  10  September.  Inform  them  that 
you  are  sending  them  this  message  so  that  they  may  have  as  much 
time  as  possible  to  make  their  preparations. 

BONAPARTE 

68S 
To  General  Bernadotte 

C.-m-C.,  Army  of  the  West  Paris 

27  Fructidor,  Year  VIII  (14  Sept,  1800) 

The  First  Consul  requires  me,  Citizen  General,  to  send  you  several 
copies  of  the  official  journal  in  which  appear  the  preliminary  articles 
of  peace  agreed  and  signed  at  Paris  between  the  Government  and  the 
Count  Saint-Julien,  representing  the  Emperor,  It  is  his  intention  that 
the  whole  army  should  know  these  articles  so  that  it  may  see  this  new 
proof  of  the  generous  moderation  of  the  Government  of  the  French 
Republic  and  the  proud  obstinacy  of  its  enemies,  and  so  that  its 
indignation  may  give  renewed  energy  to  all  the  efforts  which  bring  its 
victories,  its  renown  and  its  courage,  and  ensure  that  the  evils  of  war 
fall  upon  those  who  have  refused  peace. 

By  order  of  the  First  Consul 

689 
To  the  Prefects  of  Departments 

Paris 

i  Ventttmiaire,  Year  IX  (23  Sept,  1800} 

The  preliminaries  of  peace  were  signed  at  Paris  on  9  Thermidor  by 
Citizen  Talleyrand,  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  and  Count  Saint- 
Julien,  and  were  ratified  by  the  Consuls  twenty-four  hours  later. 

482  The  Rise  to  Power 

Citizen  Duroc  was  instructed  to  carry  them  to  Vienna.  Intrigues  by 
the  enemies  of  peace,  who  seem  still  to  enjoy  some  credit  there,  led  the 
Emperor  to  refuse  to  ratify  them.  The  refusal  was  based  on  a  note 
from  the  King  of  England,  who  demanded  that  his  envoys  should  be 
admitted  to  the  Congress  conjointly  with  those  of  the  Emperor. 

Thereupon  the  Government  was  forced  to  break  the  armistice  so  as 
not  to  lose  the  rest  of  the  autumn  in  vain  discussions. 

General  Moreau  was  ordered  to  transmit  the  preliminaries  as 
printed  in  the  official  journal  to  the  enemy  commander  and  to  inform 
him  that  if  they  were  not  ratified  within  twenty-four  hours,  or,  should 
H.M.  the  Emperor  require  further  explanations,  the  three  fortresses  of 
Ulm,  Ingolstadt  and  Philippsburg  must  be  delivered  to  the  French 
army,  otherwise  hostilities  would  re-open. 

The  Government  has  also  informed  the  King  of  England  that  it  sees 
no  objection  to  the  admission  of  his  envoys  to  the  Congress  of  Lun^ville 
if  he  will  agree  to  a  naval  truce  offering  France  the  same  advantages 
as  a  continuation  of  the  continental  truce  offers  to  the  Emperor. 

The  Government  has  just  received  by  telegraph  the  news  that  *H.M, 
the  Emperor  has  himself  joined  his  army  on  the  Inn  and  has  agreed  to 
deliver  the  three  fortresses,  which  are  now  occupied  by  the  troops  of 
the  Republic;  also  that  M.  von  Lehrbach,  holding  the  necessary  powers 
from  H.M.  the  Emperor,  is  at  the  headquarters  at  Alt-Oetting  with 
orders  to  proceed  to  Luniville/ 

The  difficulties  necessarily  presented  by  the  drafting  of  a  naval 
truce  will  bring  some  further  delay;  but  should  the  two  Governments 
fail  to  agree  the  conditions  of  such  a  truce,  then  France  and  the 
Emperor  will  negotiate  alone  for  a  separate  peace  on  the  basis  of  the 
preliminaries;  and  should  the  English  party  still  succeed  in  influencing 
the  Viennese  ministers,  which  is  not  to  be  expected,  then  the  troops  of 
the  Republic  will  fear  neither  snow  nor  the  rigour  of  the  season,  but 
will  fight  to  the  uttermost  during  the  winter,  giving  the  enemy  no 
time  to  form  new  armies. 

Thus  the  principles  of  the  Government  are:  extreme  moderation  as 
to  the  conditions,  but  a  firm  resolution  to  pacify  the  continent  promptly. 
The  most  vigorous  steps  have  been  taken  to  carry  out  the  will  of  the 
French  people  in  this  important  aim.  That  is  the  whole  secret  of  the 
policy  of  its  Government. 

BONAPARTE 

690 
To  Citizen  Talleyrand 

Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs  Paris 

8  Vencttmiaire,  Year  IX  (30  Sept,  1800) 
Please,  Citizen  Minister,  send  a  special  courier  to  Spain  to  inform 

LunMlle  and  Amiens  483 

Citizen  Alquier  of  all  the  negotiations  that  have  been  held  with  England 
and  of  the  little  hope  left  of  a  naval  truce.  You  will  tell  Citizen  Alquier 
that  it  is  necessary  that  Spanish  troops  master  Portugal  before  15 
October.  That  is  the  only  way  to  obtain  an  equivalent  for  Malta, 
Mahon  and  Trinidad.  Besides,  the  danger  to  Portugal  will  be  felt  in 
England  and  help  bring  about  a  pacific  outlook. 

BONAPARTE 

691 
To  Citizen  Joseph  Bonaparte 

Minister  Plenipotentiary  to  the  Conference  ofLunfoille  Paris 

28  Venddmiaire,  Year  IX  (20  Oct,  1800} 

Citizen  Joseph  Bonaparte,  Minister  Plenipotentiary  to  negotiate 
the  re-establishment  of  peace  between  the  French  Republic  and  H.M. 
the  Emperor,  King  of  Hungary  and  Bohemia,  should  know  that  it  is 
the  intention  of  the  First  Consul  that,  like  the  negotiations  which  are 
about  to  open,  the  instructions  to  be  given  him  will  be  divided  into 
stages. 

Consequently,  since  the  first  question  is  to  know  whether  negotia- 
tions are  to  be  general  amongst  the  belligerent  powers  or  whether  they 
will  first  open  privately  between  France  and  Austria,  Citizen  Joseph 
Bonaparte  must  be  warned  that  General  Clarke  has  already  been 
instructed  to  make  suggestions  on  this  point  to  the  Austrian  minister, 
Count  Cobenzl,  and  to  obtain  from  him  clarifications  which  he  will 
at  once  communicate  to  the  plenipotentiary  of  the  Republic. 

In  his  first  conversations  with  M.  Cobenzl  the  French  plenipoten- 
tiary will,  therefore,  aim  to  impress  upon  him  all  the  advantages  of 
separate  negotiations;  to  this  end  he  will  not  hesitate  to  point  out  how 
far  the  intervention  of  England  may  complicate  and  prolong  them. 

He  will  try  to  discover  why  His  Imperial  Majesty  refused  to  ratify 
preliminaries  whose  moderation  is  today  the  surprise  of  Europe. 

He  will  point  out  that  after  this  refusal  the  Emperor  should  at  least 
explain  the  reasons  for  it  and  put  forward,  in  counter-proposals,  his 
own  views  on  the  peace,  since  he  does  not  accept  those  of  the  Republic. 

Citizen  Joseph  Bonaparte  will  next  insist  on  the  ever  present  neces- 
sity of  agreeing  the  heads  of  negotiation  before  commencing  discussion 
of  the  articles  of  a  definitive  treaty. 

In  this  respect  he  will  let  it  be  known  that  the  views  of  the  French 
Government  have  not  ceased  to  be  those  put  forward  during  the 
preliminaries;  that  consequently  it  wishes  to  retain  within  the  Republic 
the  territories  defined  in  that  convention,  namely  maritime  Flanders, 
the  Belgian  provinces,  those  situated  on  the  left  of  the  Rhine  between 
the  point  where  it  leaves  Swiss  and  enters  Dutch  territory,  and  equally 
Savoy,  the  county  of  Nice,  the  bishopric  of  Basle  and  in  general  all  that 

484  The  Rise  to  Power 

has  been  legislatively  united  with  the  territory  of  France;  but  that  it 
still  recognizes  that  His  Imperial  Majesty  must  obtain  in  Italy  indem- 
nity for  the  loss  sustained  through  these  cessions  made  to  the  Republic; 
also  that,  while  on  this  matter  the  Austrian  plenipotentiary  ought  to 
explain  the  views  of  his  Government  and  put  them  forward  for  dis- 
cussion, he  can  at  first  confine  himself  to  stipulating,  as  a  basis,  what 
will  later  be  developed  as  an  article  of  the  definitive  treaty.  .  . . 

But  if  Count  Cobenzl  refuses  to  enter  into  preliminary  discussions 
separately  from  Great  Britain,  Citizen  Joseph  Bonaparte  will  inform 
the  Government  and  will  receive  the  necessary  instructions  as  to  the 
course  he  should  follow. 

In  general,  he  will  take  care  to  say  nothing,  either  verbally  or  in 
writing,  beyond  what  he  has  been  advised  and  he  will  follow  the 
instructions  issued  to  him  from  time  to  time,  so  that  the  negotiations 
can  never  stray  from  the  policy  of  the  Government  and  the  point 
where  it  wishes  them  to  lead. 

BONAPARTE 

692 
To  Citizen  Cretet 

Councillor  of  State,  Director  General  of  Communications  Paris 

6  Brumaire,  Year  IX  (28  Oct,  1800) 

I  regret  to  see,  Citizen  Minister,  that  there  is  no  communication  with 
Lutneville  by  telegraph.  Please  send  a  signaller  and  everything  necessary 
to  set  up  a  telegraph  station. 

BONAPARTE 

693 
To  Citizen  LacuSe 

Councillor  of  State,  acting  Minister  of  War  Paris 

14  Brumaire,  Year  IX  (5  Nov,  1800) 

Instruct  the  four  Commanders-in-Chief,  Citizen  Minister,  that  they 
are  to  inform  the  enemy  commanders  that  hostilities  will  begin  on 
i  Frimaire  and  to  prepare  accordingly. 

At  the  same  time  you  will  tell  them,  for  their  personal  information, 
that  Count  Cobenzl,  who  is  now  at  Lun^ville  with  the  French  pleni- 
potentiary, has  powers  which  do  not  appear  to  authorize  him  to  sign 
a  separate  peace  with  France,  the  court  of  Vienna  apparently  not 
having  abandoned  its  plan  of  having  England  take  part  in  the  negotia- 
tions at  Lun^ville,  which  would  make  them  interminable.  Negotiations 
are  still  continuing  at  Lun^ville,  but  unless  there  is  agreement  within  a 
fortnight  the  French  Government  will  have  received  proof  of  the  bad 
faith  of  Austria  and  will  be  able  to  convince  Europe  of  it. 

BONAPARTE 

Luneville  and  Amiens  485 

694 
To  H.M.  the  King  of  Spain 

Paris 
17  Brumaire,  Year  IX  (8  Nov,  1800} 

The  position  in  Europe  being  as  it  is,  I  have  thought  it  necessary  to 
send  my  brother,  Citizen  Lucien  Bonaparte,  specially  to  represent  to 
Your  Majesty  the  advantage  to  be  gained  by  the  allies  through  the 
conquest  of  Portugal. 

Malta  and  Mahon  have  fallen  into  the  power  of  our  enemies. 
Louisiana  is  threatened. 

The  greatest  damage  we  could  today  inflict  on  English  trade  would 
be  to  occupy  Portugal.  That  conquest  would  also  recompense  Spain 
for  the  losses  and  expenditure  she  has  sustained  during  the  war  and 
would  make  the  reign  of  Your  Majesty  forever  illustrious.  If  the 
assistance  of  some  French  engineers  and  artillery  is  thought  necessary, 
Your  Majesty  knows  with  what  speed  I  will  set  about  providing  them. 

The  intervention  of  England  is  the  sole  obstacle  still  hindering  the 
peace  of  the  continent.  But  all  the  continental  peoples  are  crying  out 
for  peace  and  even  the  English  are  constantly  showing  a  desire  for 
peace  which  in  the  end  will  influence  His  Britannic  Majesty.  Your 
Majesty's  war  with  Portugal  will  increase  still  further  the  public  dis- 
content in  England  and  will  show  that  ambitious  nation  that  Castilian 
glory  has  taken  on  renewed  vigour  under  Your  Majesty's  reign  and 
that,  if  the  English  attacked  Cadiz  at  a  time  when  that  city  would 
have  been  respected  by  the  fiercest  of  nations,  Your  Majesty  has  not 
allowed  that  treacherous  and  inhuman  act  to  go  unpunished. 

I  beg  Your  Majesty  to  believe  the  consideration,  etc. 

BONAPARTE 

695 
To  Citizen  Joseph  Bonaparte 

Minister  Plenipotentiary  to  the  Conference  ofLunMlle  Paris 

21  Brumaire,  Year  IX  (12  Nov,  1800) 

I  have  received  your  letter  of  18  Brumaire,  Citizen.  You  can 
correspond  with  the  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs  without  restraint. 

The  Minister  has  shown  me  the  notes  concerning  the  exchange  of 
powers.  Your  note  does  not  treat  the  question  well  enough;  matters 
of  this  importance  need  to  be  fully  developed,  and  nothing  in  your 
presentation  of  the  matter  justifies  the  renewal  of  hostilities. 

Nor  do  I  find  the  information  you  give  me  about  the  letter  from 
Lord  Grenville  sufficiently  detailed.  You  must  know  that  confidence 
is  a  part  of  diplomacy  and  that  M.  Cobenzl,  who  took  up  the  career 
of  politics  in  his  youth,  only  says  what  he  wants  one  to  know. 

BONAPARTE 

486  The  Rise  to  Power 

696 
To  Citizen  Talleyrand 

Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs  Paris 

p  Frimaire,  Year  IX  (30  Nov,  1800} 
Reply  to  the  French  plenipotentiary: 

That  the  armistice  can  be  made  only  through  the  cession  of  the 
fortresses  and  that  it  would  be  painful  to  see  us  fighting,  since  accord- 
ing to  the  note  they  have  already  been  ceded; 

That,  if  they  persist  in  refusing  the  armistice,  we  fear  that  French 
troops  may  be  forced  to  enter  Venice,  which  might  alter  the  basis  of 
the  negotiations; 

That  it  is  therefore  important  that  the  armistice  ceding  these 
fortresses  should  be  signed; 

That  the  Government  will  no  longer  consent  to  the  Grand  Duke  of 
Tuscany  obtaining  an  indemnity  on  the  right  bank  of  the  Adige;  and, 
at  the  same  time,  that  the  restitution  ofhis  duchy  would  give  him  a 
precarious  possession  with  few  advantages;  that  the  Republic  wishes 
indemnities  for  the  Grand  Duke  to  be  found  in  Germany,  which  will 
be  the  better  since  our  arrangements  with  Russia  lead  us  to  use  our 
influence  to  obtain  indemnities  in  Germany  for  the  Prince  of  Orange — 

That  in  that  case  Tuscany  would  be  given  to  a  prince  of  the  house  of 
Parma; 

But  that  the  Austrian  dispositions  have  inspired  distrust  in  the 
Republic,  which  sees  no  guarantee  other  than  the  whole  of  the  right 
bank  of  the  Adige  and  part  of  the  Apennines,  so  that  it  can  renew  the 
war  advantageously  if  the  Emperor  or  the  King  of  Naples  allow  them- 
selves to  be  influenced  by  the  English. 

The  French  Minister  Plenipotentiary  will  demand  the  release  of 
Moscati  and  Caprara  in  execution  of  the  convention  of  Marengo.  He 
will  let  it  be  known,  without  inserting  it  in  the  protocol,  that  M* 
Cobenzl  should  write  to  Vienna  that  the  King  of  Naples  must  set  free 
all  Frenchmen  imprisoned  in  Sicily  while  returning  from  the  Army  of 
Egypt. 

BONAPARTE 

697 
To  Citizen  Joseph  Bonaparte 

Minister  Plenipotentiary  to  the  Conference  ofLunlville  Paris 

12  Frimaire,  Year  IX  (3  Dec,  1800) 

Lucien  has  reached  Spain.  .  .  . 

It  will  be  convenient  for  the  Minister  if  the  official  dispatches  are 
addressed  to  him  and  handed  to  him  directly  by  the  courier.  That  does 
not  prevent  you  from  writing  me  a  note  whenever  that  is  worth  while. 

Moreau  writes  to  me  that  the  Austrians  have  requested  passports  for 

Lunhille  and  Amiens  487 

two  couriers  for  Cobenzl;  so  it  is  probable  that  by  now  they  have 
reached  him.  I  am  waiting  for  their  news  before  deciding  to  leave. 

It  would  perhaps  be  useful  to  say  in  conversation  that  once  I  have 
left  Paris  and  begun  military  operations  we  shall  probably  not  agree 
to  give  indemnities  in  Italy  to  the  house  of  Austria.  You  should  also 
say  that  once  I  am  in  Italy  negotiations  would  naturally  move  to 
wherever  I  may  be. 

As  for  the  English,  they  have  themselves  spoiled  everything.  There- 
fore we  can  no  longer  admit  them  to  Luneville,  since  we  too  have 
undertakings  to  fulfil,  and  we  will  negotiate  only  when  they  have 
recognized  the  freedom  of  the  seas. 

...  If  I  leave,  the  house  of  Austria  will  have  reason  to  remember  it. 
I  must  know,  therefore,  when  your  courier  returns,  if  all  hope  is  lost, 
as  one  would  think  from  Pitt's  speech  in  Parliament. 

BONAPARTE 

698 
To  Citizen  Talleyrand 

Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs  Paris 

16  Frimaire,  Year  IX  (7  Dec,  1800) 

Please,  Citizen  Minister,  let  me  have  tomorrow  a  draft  note  to  be 
communicated  to  all  the  ministers  here  of  friendly  and  allied  powers. 
The  note  will  say: 

The  French  Government  has  it  much  at  heart  to  oppose  the  invasion 
of  the  seas  and  to  act  with  the  other  neutral  powers  to  make  their 
flags  respected;  appreciates  the  truly  patriotic  zeal  of  the  Emperor  of 
Russia  for  the  common  cause  of  all  the  continental  powers;  and  will 
not  treat  for  peace  with  England  until  these  sacred  principles  are 
recognized,  the  Russian,  Danish,  Swedish,  American,  Prussian  flags  are 
respected  at  sea  as  their  arms  are  on  the  continent,  and  England  recog- 
nizes that  the  sea  belongs  to  all  nations. 

BONAPARTE 

699 
To  Citizen  Talleyrand 

Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs  Paris 

25  Frimaire,  Year  IX  (16  Dec,  1800} 

I  believe,  Citizen  Minister,  that  a  letter  written  to  the  Sultan  and 
sent  by  the  Ottoman  ambassador  in  Paris  would  be  useful  at  the  present 
moment.  It  should  inform  him,  in  a  suitable  manner,  of  the  European 
situation;  that  only  the  English  opposed  the  evacuation  of  Egypt;  that 
we  will  evacuate  it  only  when  general  peace  has  been  signed,  and  that 
it  is  to  the  interest  of  the  Porte  to  renew  its  contacts  with  France* 

BONAPARTE 

488  The  Rise  to  Power 

700 
To  the  Legislative  Corps* 

Paris 
12  NivSse,  Year  IX  (2  Jan,  1801) 

Legislators,  the  Republic  triumphs  and  its  enemies  beg  for  mercy. 

The  victory  of  Hohenlinden  has  resounded  throughout  Europe; 
history  will  rate  it  as  one  of  the  finest  days  of  French  valour;  but  our 
defenders  hardly  boast  of  it,  for  they  reckon  to  have  conquered  only 
when  the  nation  has  no  further  enemies. 

The  Army  of  the  Rhine  crossed  the  Inn;  each  day  was  a  battle,  each 
battle  was  a  triumph.  The  Franco-Dutch  Army  was  victorious  at 
Bamberg;  the  Army  of  the  Grisons  crossed  the  Spliigen  over  ice  and 
snow  to  turn  the  formidable  lines  of  the  Mincio  and  the  Adige.  The 
Army  of  Italy  crossed  the  Mincio  in  strength  and  is  blockading  Mantua. 
Moreau  is  no  more  than  five  days'  march  from  Vienna,  master  of  an 
immense  territory  and  of  all  the  enemy's  magazines. 

At  that  point  Prince  Charles  requested  and  the  Commander-in-Chief 
of  the  Army  of  the  Rhine  granted  the  armistice  whose  terms  will  be 
laid  before  you. 

Count  Cobenzl,  the  Emperor's  plenipotentiary  at  Lun^ville,  in  a 
note  dated  3 1  December,  has  declared  that  he  is  ready  to  open  negotia- 
tions for  a  separate  peace.  Thus  Austria  is  freed  from  the  influence  of 
the  English  Government. 

Faithful  to  its  principles  and  to  the  will  of  humanity,  the  Govern- 
ment lays  its  intentions  before  you  and  proclaims  them  to  France  and 
to  the  whole  of  Europe. 

The  frontier  of  the  French  Republic  will  be  the  left  bank  of  the 
Rhine;  it  has  no  claims  on  the  right  bank.  It  is  against  the  interests  of 
Europe  that  the  Emperor  should  cross  the  Adige.  The  independence 
of  the  Swiss  and  Dutch  Republics  will  be  assured  and  recognized. 
Our  victories  add  nothing  to  French  claims.  Austria  must  not  expect 
to  gain  from  defeat  what  she  could  not  have  gained  from  victory. 

Such  are  the  unalterable  intentions  of  the  Government.  The  happi- 
ness of  France  will  be  to  restore  peace  to  Germany  and  Italy;  her  glory 
to  free  the  continent  from  the  evil  and  greedy  genius  of  England.  If 
good  faith  is  again  betrayed,  we  will  go  to  Prague,  Vienna,  Venice. 

The  devotion  and  successes  of  our  armies  call  for  all  the  thanks  of 
the  nation.  The  Government  would  like  to  find  new  means  of  com- 
memorating their  exploits;  but  there  is  one  which,  by  its  simplicity, 
will  always  be  worthy  of  the  thoughts  and  courage  of  the  French 
soldier.  The  Government  proposes  to  you  the  four  attached  draft  laws. 

BONAPARTE 

*  Similar  messages  to  the  Tribunate  and  the  Senate.  The  bills  submitted  pro- 
claimed that  the  four  armies  concerned  had  deserved  well  of  the  nation. 

LunMtk  and  Amiens  489 

701 
To  Citizen  Joseph  Bonaparte 

Minister  Plenipotentiary  to  the  Conference  ofLuneville  Paris 

1  Pluviose,  Year  IX  (21  Jan,  1801} 

You  should  have  received  the  instructions  which  left  Paris  on  29 
Nivose,  Citizen  Minister. 

Yesterday  a  courier  arrived  from  Russia,  who  had  done  the  journey 
in  fifteen  days;  he  brought  me  a  very  friendly  letter  from  the  Emperor's 
own  hand.  ...  In  four  or  five  days  I  expect  a  Russian  plenipotentiary. 

The  Russian  attitude  is  very  hostile  towards  England.  You  will  easily 
see  that  we  must  not  be  over-hasty,  for  peace  with  the  Emperor  is 
nothing  compared  with  an  alliance  that  would  master  England  and 
keep  Egypt  for  us. 

The  armistice  in  Italy  is  not  yet  signed;  you  must  protest  at  that 
constantly.  If  Austria  is  in  good  faith  in  giving  up  the  right  bank  of 
the  Adige,  why  does  she  not  make  an  armistice  ceding  the  fortresses 
on  that  bank? 

Tuscany  is  to  the  right  of  the  Adige;  so  the  House  of  Austria  is 
presumed  to  have  renounced  it. 

France  must  adopt  as  a  first  political  principle  that  the  Emperor  must 
never  cross  the  Adige.  If  events  demand  that  the  Grand  Duke  be 
restored,  at  least  we  will  not  consent  while  our  war  with  England 
lasts:  for,  as  long  as  we  are  at  war  with  England,  we  must  always  dis- 
trust Austria  and  always  have  a  strong  army  in  Italy;  the  port  of 
Leghorn  and  the  Tuscan  coast  must  be  withheld  from  the  English 
and  that  can  be  done  only  by  occupation  of  the  country. 
,..  You  must  never  discuss  Naples  or  the  Pope.  Whenever  they  are 
mentioned,  you  will  reply:  Do  you  hold  powers  from  those  princes? 
France  will  make  terms  with  them. 

Whenever  they  speak  of  the  King  of  Sardinia,  you  will  simply  say 
that,  if  it  was  we  who  deposed  the  King  of  Sardinia,  the  Emperor 
should  have  re-established  him  in  his  states,  if  he  was  fighting  on  his 
behalf;  that  in  any  case  we  will  negotiate  with  the  King  of  Sardinia  and 
will  set  up  in  Italy  a  system  such  that  he  cannot  cause  alarm  to  neigh- 
bouring states. 

As  to  the  stipulations  Cobenzl  may  make  for  the  Empire,  we  must 
agree  to  nothing;  we  will  act  according  to  circumstances  and  the 
men  who  rule  at  Vienna;  we  have  no  confidence  in  Thugut,  and  can 
make  no  agreement  with  the  Emperor  so  long  as  that  minister  is  heard 
in  his  council.  Besides,  it  is  difficult  to  make  terms  for  Germany  except 
in  concert  with  Paul  I.  So  I  repeat: 

i.  Continue  with  the  protocol,  discuss  the  questions  thoroughly, 
even  the  terms  of  the  final  treaty;  but  sign  nothing  for  ten  days,  by 
which  time  we  shall  be  in  agreement  with  Paul. 

49O  The  Rise  to  Power 

2.  Try,  meanwhile,  to  have  the  Grand  Duke  of  Tuscany  placed  in 
Germany. 

3.  Do  not  discuss  the  King  of  Naples,  the  Pope  or  the  King  of 
Sardinia.  .  .  . 

4.  Do  not  discuss  the  Cisalpine  except  to  say  that  it  will  be  organized 
so  as  to  cause  no  alarm  to  neighbouring  states. 

5.  Commit  us  to  nothing  in  Germany  except  for  the  Grand  Duke  of 
Tuscany;  for  the  rest,  say  we  will  reach  agreement  at  the  peace  with 
the  Empire. 

6.  Allow  no  mention  in  the  treaty  of  the  methods  of  executing  it; 
that  should  be  in  a  separate  convention. 

7.  Delay  our  evacuation  of  the  occupied  territory  beyond  the  Inn 
and  the  Adige  as  long  as  possible  and  insist  on  payment  of  the  con- 
tributions which  have  been  imposed. 

8.  Evacuation  of  the  right  bank  must  not  take  place  until  the  peace 
with  the  Empire. 

9.  You  can  stipulate  independence  and  neutrality  for  Switzerland. 
You  must  send  two  couriers  each  day.  .  .  . 

BONAPARTE 

702 
To  the  Senate,  the  Legislative  Corps  and  the  Tribunate 

Paris 
24  PluviSse,  Year  IX  (13  Feb>  1801) 

Peace  on  the  continent  has  been  signed  at  Lun6ville;  it  is  such  as  the 
French  people  desired.  Their  first  wish  was  the  RJiine  frontier;  defeats 
did  not  shake  their  purpose,  victories  have  not  added  to  their  pre- 
tensions. 

Having  restored  the  ancient  limits  of  Gaul  they  had  to  bring  back 
liberty  to  the  peoples  united  with  them  by  a  common  origin,  by 
interest  and  custom.  The  freedom  of  Liguria  and  the  Cisalpine  is 
assured. 

After  this  duty,  justice  and  generosity  demanded  another.  The  King 
of  Spain  has  been  faithful  to  our  cause  and  has  suffered  for  it;  neither 
our  reverses  nor  the  treacherous  insinuations  of  our  enemies  could 
detach  him  from  us:  he  will  be  paid  a  just  return.  A  prince  of  his  blood 
will  sit  on  the  throne  of  Tuscany.  He  will  remember  that  he  owes  it 
to  the  fidelity  of  Spain  and  the  friendship  of  France;  his  ports  and  bays 
will  be  closed  to  our  enemies'  ships  ana  trade. 

Austria,  and  it  is  this  that  ensures  peace,  Austria,  now  separated 
from  France  by  vast  areas,  will  no  longer  feel  the  rivalry  and  supicion 
that  for  so  many  centuries  have  been  the  torment  of  these  two  powers 
and  the  calamity  of  Europe. 

The  Government  owes  a  mark  of  its  satisfaction  to  the  minister 

LunMlk  and  Amiens  491 

plenipotentiary  who  has  conducted  the  negotiations  to  this  happy 
outcome.  There  are  no  interpretations  to  be  feared,  no  explanations 
to  be  sought,  none  of  those  equivocal  clauses  in  which  the  art  of 
diplomacy  sows  the  seeds  of  future  war. 

Why  could  not  this  be  the  treaty  of  general  peace?  That  was  the 
wish  of  France,  the  constant  aim  of  the  Government;  but  all  its  efforts 
were  in  vain.  Europe  knows  all  that  the  English  ministry  has  attempted 
to  bring  about  the  failure  of  the  negotiations  at  Luneville. 

In  vain  an  agent  of  the  Government  informed  it  on  9  October,  1800, 
that  France  was  ready  to  enter  into  separate  negotiations  with  it;  that 
approach  was  rejected  on  the  pretext  that  England  could  not  desert  her 
ally.  Then,  when  that  ally  agreed  to  treat  without  England,  her  Govern- 
ment sought  other  means  of  preventing  a  peace  so  necessary  to  the 
world.  It  violates  conventions  consecrated  by  humanity  and  makes 
war  on  helpless  fishermen.  It  asserts  pretensions  contrary  to  the  rights 
and  dignity  of  all  nations.  All  the  trade  of  Asia  and  of  her  immense 
colonies  does  not  satisfy  her  ambition;  the  whole  ocean  must  submit 
to  the  exclusive  sovereignty  of  England. 

She  is  arming  against  Russia,  Denmark  and  Sweden  because  they 
have  protected  their  sovereignty  and  the  independence  of  their  flags  by 
treaties  of  guarantee.  Unjustly  attacked,  the  northern  powers  have  the 
right  to  count  on  France.  Together  with  them  the  French  Govern- 
ment will  avenge  an  insult  to  all  nations,  but  will  never  forget  that  it 
must  fight  only  for  peace  and  the  happiness  of  the  world. 

BONAPARTE 

703 
To  Citizen  Joseph  Bonaparte 

Minister  Plenipotentiary  to  the  Conference  ofLunMlle  Paris 

24  PluviSse,  Year  IX  (13  Feb,  1801} 

The  treaty  of  Lun6ville  was  published  this  morning,  Citizen  Minister. 
It  completely  carries  out  the  aims  of  the  Government. 

Citizen  Talleyrand  is  writing  to  authorize  you  to  come  to  Paris.  I  do 
not  wish  to  write  to  M.  Cobenzl.  I  cannot  treat  him  differently  from  an 
ordinary  minister.  At  the  outset  of  these  negotiations  he  was  unworthy 
of  his  role.  But  we  shall  see  him  here  with  pleasure  and  there  is  no 
objection  to  his  coming.  In  that  case  it  would  be  neither  wise  nor 
proper  for  you  to  show  him  the  same  intimacy  as  on  the  first  occasion. 
Then  he  was  treated  as  we  are  now  treating  M.  Kalitchef,*  that  is  to 
say  as  one  come  to  remove  all  obstacles  and  make  peace,  not  to  gain 
time  and  use  my  special  confidence  in  him  to  promote  the  aims  of 
M.  Thugut.  But  there  will  be  no  harm  in  telling  him  that  if  he  had 
*  Russian  plenipotentiary  in  France. 

492  The  Rise  to  Power 

not  had  the  good  sense  to  stay  at  Lun&ville  harder  conditions  would 
have  been  imposed  on  the  House  of  Austria. 

I  have  one  more  word  to  say  to  you:  the  nation  is  pleased  with  the 
treaty,  and  I  myself  am  particularly  happy  about  it. 

A  thousand  things  to  Julie. 

BONAPARTE 

704 
To  Citizen  Talleyrand 

Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs  Paris 

28  Vent6se,  Year  IX  (18  Mar,  1801} 

When  the  ratifications  are  exchanged,  Citizen  Minister,  or  im- 
mediately after,  a  convention  must  be  agreed  for  the  evacuation  of 
territory  occupied  by  the  French  armies. 

1.  Evacuation  will  not  be  deemed  to  begin  until  8  Germinal. 

2.  Germany  will  not  be  evacuated  until  forty  days  thereafter. 

3.  The  Austrians  will  occupy  no  land  beyond  the  Inn.  They  will  not 
occupy  the  Breisgau  or  the  other  pockets  of  territory  they  may  own 
this  side  of  the  Inn, 

4.  The  Austrian  and  French  armies  will  return  to  a  peace  footing; 
that  is  to  say,  regiments  will  be  reduced  to  peacetime  strength. 

5.  The  supply  and  artillery  teams  will  be  sold. 

6.  The  French  plenipotentiary  will  try  to  lay  the  foundation  for  a 
new  kind  of  treaty,  which  would  regulate  the  number  of  men  to  be 
kept  under  arms  in  time  of  peace  by  France,  Prussia  and  Austria  in 
order  to  relieve  their  finances. 

BONAPARTE 

705 
To  Citizen  Talleyrand 

Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs  Paris 

23  Florlal,  Year  IX  (13  May,  1801} 

You  will  see  from  the  attached  letter,  Citizen  Minister,  that  M. 
d'Aranjo*  has  reached  Lorient.  Inform  him  by  special  messenger  that 
the  French  Government  has  decided  to  make  Madrid  the  seat  of  the 
negotiations  and  not  to  depart  from  the  proposals  of  His  Catholic 
Majesty;  that  you  hasten  to  declare  this  to  him  so  that  his  prince  does 
not  deceive  himself  with  vain  hopes  and  does  not  start  a  war  whose 
inevitable  result  will  be  the  destruction  of  Portugal; 

But  that,  since  it  is  not  the  custom  of  the  First  Consul  to  refuse  to 
hear  the  proposals  of  a  power  at  war,  he  has  given  Citizen  Decris, 
Maritime  Prefect  at  Lorient,  the  necessary  instructions  to  confer  with 
him. 

*  Portuguese  plenipotentiary. 

Lunlville  and  Amiens  493 

You  will  send  Citizen  Decres  full  powers  and  instructions: 

That  negotiations  must  not  last  more  than  five  or  six  days; 

That  at  the  first  meeting  he  must  inform  M.  d'Aranjo  that  the  First 
Consul  does  not  want  negotiations  to  begin  in  Paris  because,  at  a 
moment  when  hostilities  are  about  to  begin  and  large  forces  are  about 
to  enter  Portugal,  he  thinks  it  would  be  absurd  to  have  a  minister  in 
Paris  who  would  hinder  the  negotiations  at  Madrid; 

That  hitherto  Portugal  has  been  an  English  province; 

That  the  first  step  towards  reconciliation  with  France  must  be  to 
place  an  embargo  on  all  English  ships  and  to  forbid  their  ships  to  enter 
Portuguese  ports  until  the.  general  peace; 

That,  since  the  English  have  made  large  conquests  from  France  and 
have  been  aided  by  the  Portuguese  fleets,  the  provinces  of  Entre-Douro- 
e-Minho,  Tras-os-Montes  and  Beira  must  admit  part  Spanish  part 
French  garrisons  until  the  general  peace,  to  serve  as  equivalents  to  the 
conquests  seized  by  the  English  from  the  allies; 

That  I  also  wish  the  ships  which  blockaded  Malta  and  Egypt,  to- 
gether with  the  English  ships,  to  be  delivered  to  us; 

And  finally  20  millions  for  the  cost  of  the  war. 

Citizen  Decres  will  be  authorized  to  sign  preliminaries  based  on 
these  articles;  once  signed  he  can  give  M.  d'Aranjo  passports  to  proceed 
to  Paris. 

BONAPARTE 
706 

To  Citizen  Talleyrand 

Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs  Paris 

8  Prairial,  Year  IX  (28  May,  1801} 

Citizen  Minister,  I  wish  you  at  once  to  send  a  special  messenger  to 
Citizen  Otto  in  London  to  acknowledge  receipt  of  his  letter  of  6 
Prairial. 

You  will  inform  Otto  that  these  insinuations  of  Lord  Hawkesbury, 
that  the  most  influential  people  surrounding  the  First  Consul  wish  for  peace, 
are  to  be  regarded  as  mere  tittle-tattle;  he  must  tell  this  Lord  Hawkes- 
bury that  the  cabinet  is  one,  that  it  certainly  desires  peace,  but  an 
honourable  peace  founded  on  an  equilibrium  on  the  seas  and  in  the 
various  parts  of  the  world; 

That  it  is  time  the  French  Government  knew  precisely  what  it  is  to 
understand  by  the  supposed  moderation  of  the  English  ministers, 

Consequently  you  will  address  to  Lord  Hawkesbury  a  note  pointing 
out  that,  despite  the  proposal  of  the  English  Government  to  send  a 
plenipotentiary  to  Paris,  the  French  Government  is  grieved  to  see  that 
nothing  has  developed  and  wishes  the  negotiations  to  take  on  an 
official  character  through  an  exchange  of  notes  assisted  by  conversations; 

That,  if  the  English  ministry  accepts  this,  Citizen  Otto  will  request 

L.D.N. — R 

494  The  Rise  to  Power 

Lord  Hawkesbury  to  submit  in  a  note  the  proposals  the  ministry  wishes 
to  make  to  the  French  Government  and  the  bases  His  Britannic 
Majesty  wishes  to  adopt  for  the  re-establishment  of  a  definitive  and 
general  peace; 

That  it  is  to  misunderstand  the  spirit  of  the  French  nation  and  the 
personal  character  of  the  First  Consul  to  believe  that  he  will  be  influ- 
enced by  any  fear  whatever;  and  that  it  appears  that  London  little 
knows  the  intentions  of  Alexander  I  and  his  cabinet,  if  it  is  thought  that 
he  will  ever  betray  the  cause  of  the  continental  powers; 

That  the  events  occurring  in  Egypt,  whatever  their  outcome,  are 
acts  of  war  and  should  in  no  way  delay  the  general  negotiations; 

That  the  French  and  Spanish  armies  had  already  entered  Portugal 

That,  as  for  the  few  assassins  instigated  by  England  who  may  be 
active  in  the  interior,  they  are  hardly  to  be  feared,  and  the  English 
Government  should  not  set  much  store  by  their  help; 

That  the  First  Consul  will  never  sign  any  but  an  honourable  peace; 

That  it  is  therefore  open  to  the  English  ministry  to  complete  the 
negotiations  in  a  few  days  and  thereby  to  prove  that  love  for  humanity 
and  the  peace  of  the  world  which  so  far  it  has  been  content  to  proclaim 
in  speeches. 

BONAPARTE 

707 
To  Citizen  Talleyrand 

Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs  Paris 

26  Prairial,  Year  IX  (15  June,  1801} 

I  send  you  a  copy  of  thejnagnificcnt  treaty  our  ambassador  has  made 
for  us.*  Please  inform  him  by  specraHnessenger  that  this  treaty  is 
contrary  to  his  instructions,  contrary  to  our  treaty  with  Spain,  con- 
trary to  the  interests  of  the  Republic  and  entirely  in  favour  of  England; 
that  he  must  at  once  declare  to  Spain  that  the  treaty  is  not  and  cannot 
be  ratified;  that  if  die  three  provinces  are  not  at  once  occupied  by 
French  and  Spanish  troops  I  cannot  answer  for  the  return  of  the 
Spanish  colonies; 

That  this  treaty  is  an  unexpected  blow  which  the  First  Consul 
regards  as  the  most  resounding  defeat  he  has  met  during  his  magis- 
tracy. .  .  . 

That  General  Leclerc  should  now  be  at  the  head  of  15,000  men,  and 
that  10,000  more  are  on  the  French  frontier  and  will  enter  at  the  first 
request  by  Spain;  that  I  wish  the  French  troops  to  be  reinforced  by 
12,000  Spaniards,  who  will  invade  Oporto  and  all  the  provinces  which 
are  to  be  occupied. 

*  Treaty  of  peace  between  France  and  Portugal  negotiated  in  Badajoz  by 
Lucien  Bonaparte. 

Lunlville  and  Amiens  495 

That  it  is  absurd  to  expect  us  to  guarantee  the  restitution  of  the 
Portuguese  colonies;  that  entirely  disgraces  the  Government,  which 
would  suffer  less  dishonour  were  I  to  lose  a  province  than  if  I  signed 
this  treaty; 

That  my  name  appears  only  on  things  that  benefit  the  nation  and 
honour  the  French  people. 

You  will  show  me  this  draft  dispatch  tomorrow  at  midday.  Please 
bring  also  all  your  correspondence  and  our  treaty  with  Spain. 

Prepare  a  draft  note  which  Citizen  Otto  will  present  to  the  court  of 
London.  The  aim  will  be: 

To  inform  Lord  Hawkesbury  that  the  province  of  Alentijo  has  been 
conquered  by  the  Spaniards; 

That  the  Queen  of  Portugal  sent  M.  Pinto,  who  has  agreed  a  kind 
of  treaty  with  the  French  Ambassador;  that  orders  have  already  been 
sent  that  this  treaty  be  regarded  as  void,  since  the  First  Consul  will 
never  withdraw  from  the  declaration  made  to  M.  d'Aranjo  at  Lorient 
that  he  will  never  make  peace  with  Portugal  unless  he  occupies  these 
provinces  which  can  serve  as  compensation  for  the  colonies  of  the 
allies;  that,  while  ordering  the  French  armies  to  prepare  to  renew  their 
attacks  against  Portugal,  the  First  Consul  owes  it  to  the  weakness  and 
impotence  of  the  Portuguese  Government  to  suspend  hostilities  until 
the  court  of  London  has  replied  to  his  latest  proposals,  namely: 
whether  in  the  negotiations  it  will  accept  the  status  quo  ante  bellum  in 
Portugal  as  compensation  for  the  status  quo  ante  bellum  in  America; 

That  the  British  Government  should  recognize  in  the  frankness  of 
this  approach  the  desire  to  deal  lightly  with  a  weak  power,  even  one 
which  has  played  the  part  of  an  English  province,  and  to  avoid  actions 
which  could  exacerbate  relations  between  the  two  nations. 

BONAPARTE 

708 
To  Citizen  Lucien  Bonaparte 

French  Ambassador  to  Spain  Paris 

28Prairial,  Year  IX  (17  June,  180 1) 

I  have  your  dispatch  of  19  Prairial.  I  have  not  told  you  what  I 
thought  of  your  treaty  of  peace  because  I  do  not  like  saying  unpleasant 
things.  Joseph,  who  was  with  me  when  I  got  it,  will  tell  you  the  really 
painful  feelings  it  caused  me.  You  go  much  too  fast  in  negotiations.  In 
a  matter  like  this  a  fortnight  of  discussion  is  nothing. 

Your  explanatory  letters  prove  that  you  should  not  have  done  it; 
for,  if  England  has  allowed  Portugal  to  make  peace  on  condition  that 
she  gives  no  compensation,  our  policy  must  be  thwarted.  I  have  often 
explained  in  my  letters  that  Portugal  now  interests  us  only  as  providing 
sureties  for  the  general  peace.  .  .  . 

496  The  Rise  to  Power 

England  will  not  make  war  on  Portugal  because  that  would  force 
us  to  take  Lisbon.  She  will  be  very  happy  if  we  just  occupy  a  few 
provinces  which  she 'can  make  us  give  up  by  restoring  a  few  islands  in 
America.  For  a  century  Portugal  has  really  been  nothing  but  an  English 
province  and  the  port  of  Lisbon  belongs  entirely  to  that  power. 

An  article  of  your  treaty  that  seems  inconceivable  is  the  one  stipulat- 
ing that  we  will  guarantee  the  Portuguese  possessions  overseas.  That  is 
to  turn  the  question  upside  down:  we  want  compensations  against 
England,  and  you  give  them  to  that  power,  which  could  seize  a  few 
Portuguese  colonies. 

You  want  us  to  guarantee  the  treaty  with  Spain,  yet  you  do  not  send 
us  a  copy  of  it. 

Portugal  once  agreed  to  pay  sixteen  millions  to  the  Directory; 
M.  d'Aranjo  agreed  to  pay  twenty;  now  these  twenty  are  reduced  to 
sixteen.  By  having  them  payable  in  Madrid  you  will  lose  us  nearly  a 
million  because  of  the  rate  of  exchange.  .  .  . 

In  any  case  the  treaty  is  not  in  diplomatic  form  or  style.  It  is  contrary 
to  custom  to  say  that  hostilities  will  not  cease  until  ratification.  It  is 
contrary  to  custom  to  put  in  a  final  treaty  that  if  something  is  decided 
somewhere  else  the  treaty  will  be  void.  In  that  case  the  safe  course  is  to 
wait  for  news.  You  must  have  known  that  you  would  know  the  out- 
come of  M.  d'Aranjo's  negotiations  within  three  days. 

Finally,  it  is  against  the  practice  and  importance  of  diplomatic  affairs 
to  sign  a  final  treaty  without  having  sent  the  text  to  the  government, 
unless  the  various  clauses  have  been  discussed  in  the  protocols  and  suc- 
cessively agreed  by  the  government. .  .  .  The  drafting  is  often  faulty, 
I  will  mention  one  passage  that  struck  me:  you  cannot  oppose  'the 
Portuguese  monarchy*  and  'the  French  people';  it  is  customary  to  say 
'between  the  two  nations,  between  the  two  States'. 

You  know  that  by  our  treaty  with  Spain  a  quarter  of  Portugal 
should  be  in  the  hands  of  the  two  nations  to  serve  as  compensation  for 
the  American  islands  and  Trinidad. 

You  can  give  the  following  ideas  to  the  Spanish  court:  negotiations 
with  England  are  proceeding  actively.  The  English  do  not  seem  to  wish 
to  give  up  Malta,  Ceylon,  the  states  of  Tippoo  and  Trinidad.  I  have 
proposed  the  status  quo  ante  bellum  for  the  Mediterranean  and  America, 
with  the  same  condition  for  Portugal  and  some  compensations  in 
India.  Your  treaty  with  Portugal  makes  all  that  illusory.  .  . . 

You  must  say  and  repeat  to  the  Portuguese  plenipotentiary  that  we 
are  not  making  war  on  Portugal,  but  treating  it  as  an  English  province. 
It  was  an  impertinence  for  M,  Pinto  to  maintain  that  three  Portuguese 
battleships  and  two  frigates  did  not  blockade  Alexandria,  We  parleyed 
with  them. 

All  your  letters  convince  me  that  you  are  far  from  understanding  the 

Lun&ville  and  Amiens  497 

effort,  even  obstinacy,  that  must  be  shown  in  negotiation.  You  can 
be  sure  that  your  treaty,  when  it  reaches  London,  will  show  your  lack 
of  experience  to  that  court  as  well  as  to  M.  Pinto.  That  is  excusable; 
but  in  such  a  case  you  should  surround  yourself  with  advice  and  show 
less  haste  in  concluding.  ... 

BONAPARTE 

709 
To  Citizen  Lucien  Bonaparte 

French  Ambassador  to  Spain  Paris 

3  Messidor,  Year  IX  (22  June,  1801) 

I  have  your  letter  of  24  Prairial.  Matters  of  this  importance  are  not 
children's  games. 

The  last  letters  from  the  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs  and  my  own  will 
have  pointed  out  to  you  that  the  whole  of  our  present  system  depends 
on  the  occupation  of  two  or  three  Portuguese  provinces. 

How  is  it  possible  that  with  your  intelligence  and  knowledge  of  men 
you  could  have  let  yourself  be  taken  in  by  courtly  flattery  and  could 
not  make  Spain  understand  its  own  true  interests? 

In  two  words,  the  whole  question  is  this.  If  we  occupy  the  three 
provinces,  we  shall  have  an  honourable  peace  with  England  before 
Vend6miaire;  if  we  were  forced  to  keep  to  the  treaty  of  Badajoz,  we 
should  still  have  war  for  several  years.  It  is  because  everything  holds 
together  in  a  political  system  that  a  minister  must  walk  carefully  and 
never  decide  things  precipitately. 

How  can  you  have  thought  that,  after  the  treaty  of  Luneville,  I  would 
have  sent  15,000  men  into  Portugal  in  order  to  make  peace  on  the  same, 
or  even  worse  conditions  than  those  obtained  by  the  Directory  six 
months  before  the  treaty  of  Campo  Formic,  when  we  were  still  at  war 
with  Austria? 

'  I  have  already  informed  England  that,  so  far  as  Portugal  is  con- 
cerned, I  will  never  depart  from  the  ultimatum  proposed  to  M. 
d'Aranjo,  and  that  the  status  quo  ante  bellum  for  Portugal  must  involve 
the  restitution  to  Spain  of  Trinidad,  to  France  of  Martinique  and 
Tobago  and  to  Holland  of  Curasao.  When  the  note  was  presented  the 
English  minister  showed  in  conversation  that  he  thought  this  reason- 
able. 

Influence  the  court  where  you  are  placed,  but  do  not  let  yourself  be 
influenced  by  it.  Make  your  statement  to  M.  Pinto  and  to  the  court  of 
Spain;  let  the  armies  do  the  rest.  When  there  is  so  small  an  obstacle  in 
the  way  of  world  peace,  the  Spanish  court  and  the  agents  of  France 
must  overcome  it. 

As  to  your  personal  position,  you  must  stay  in  Spain.  . . . 

BONAPARTE 

498  The  Rise  to  Power 

710 
To  Citizen  Cailland 

Acting  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs*  Paris 

4  Thermidor,  Year  IX  (23  July,  1801) 

You  will  find  attached,  Citizen,  the  note  replying  to  Lord  Hawkes- 
bury.  Send  it  during  the  day  by  special  messenger. 

Inform  Citizen  Otto  that  the  Government  is  not  disposed  to  depart 
from  the  conditions  laid  down  in  the  note;  that  he  must  insist  above  all 
on  the  terms  for  Malta  and  Martinique;  that  he  can  let  Lord  Hawkes- 
bury  understand  that  if  hostilities  continue  Hanover  may  become  an 
object  of  compensation; 

That  the  English  are  not  masters  of  Egypt;  we  have  definite  news 
that  Alexandria  will  hold  out  for  a  year,  and  Lord  Hawkesbury  is  wise 
enough  to  know  that  Alexandria  is  the  key  to  Egypt;  that  100  guns 
already  surround  the  harbour  of  Taranto;  that  that  harbour  is  capable 
of  holding  any  kind  of  fleet,  and  that  it  would  be  a  great  sacrifice  to 
lose  that  fine  position  with  all  it  offers; 

That  to  throw  their  money  into  Europe  to  build  a  new  coalition 
would  be  in  vain;  that,  even  were  they  to  succeed  in  joining  together 
powers  of  very  diverse  interests,  the  sole  result  would  be  a  repetition 
of  the  history  of  the  grandeur  of  Rome,  and  that  the  result  of  the 
turmoil  French  victories  on  the  continent  would  produce  in  London 
would  be  as  disastrous  to  them  as  their  defeats  would  be  to  their 
allies; 

Finally,  that  Citizen  Otto  must  never  let  himself  be  told  that  a 
minister  in  England  can  do  such  and  such  without  clearly  asserting 
that  the  honour,  interest  and  character  of  the  First  Consul  will  always 
lead  him  to  prefer  war  to  a  peace  as  disadvantageous  as  that  proposed  in 
this  note. 

BONAPARTE 

711 
Note  to  be  Handed  to  Lord  Hawkesbury 

Annexed  to  No.  710  Paris 

4  Thermidor,  Year  IX  (23  July,  iSoi) 

The  undersigned  has  communicated  to  his  Government  Lord 
Hawkesbury's  note  dated  20  July.  He  is  instructed  to  reply  as  follows: 

The  French  Government  wishes  to  leave  undone  nothing  that  may 
bring  about  general  peace,  because  that  is  to  the  interest  both  of 
humanity  and  of  the  allies.  It  is  for  the  King  of  England  to  estimate 
whether  it  is  not  also  in  the  interest  of  his  policy,  his  trade  and  his 
nation;  if  so,  then  a  more  or  less  distant  island  cannot  be  sufficient 
reason  to  prolong  the  ills  of  the  world. 

*  Talleyrand  was  unwell. 

LunMlle  and  Amiens  499 

In  his  last  note  the  undersigned  pointed  out  how  grieved  the  First 
Consul  had  been  at  the  retrograde  step  taken  by  the  negotiation;  but, 
since  Lord  Hawkesbury  contests  this  in  his  note  of  20  July,  the  under- 
signed will  recall  the  position  with  the  frankness  and  precision  that 
matters  of  this  importance  deserve. 

The  problem  consists  in  three  parts:  the  Mediterranean;  the  Indies; 
America. 

Egypt  will  be  restored  to  the  Porte.  The  Republic  of  the  Seven 
[Ionian]  Islands  will  be  recognized.  All  ports  on  the  Adriatic  and  the 
Mediterranean  [coasts  of  Italy]  will  be  restored  to  the  King  of  Naples 
and  to  the  Pope.  Mahon  will  be  restored  to  Spain. 

Malta  will  be  restored  to  the  Order,  and  if,  as  the  preponderant  sea 
power,  the  King  of  England  judges  the  destruction  of  its  forts  to  be 
necessary  to  his  interests,  that  clause  will  be  allowed. 

In  the  Indies  England  will  keep  Ceylon  and  thereby  become  the 
master  of  those  vast  and  rich  countries.  The  other  establishments, 
including  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  will  be  restored  to  the  allies. 

In  America  everything  will  be  restored  to  the  former  owners.  The 
King  of  England  is  already  so  powerful  in  that  part  of  the  world  that 
to  seek  for  more  would  be  to  desire  the  same  mastery  of  America  that 
he  already  has  of  India. 

The  whole  integrity  of  Portugal  will  be  preserved. 

Those  are  the  terms  that  the  French  Government  is  ready  to  sign. 

The  British  Government  would  derive  immense  advantages  from 
them;  to  demand  greater  would  be  to  deny  a  just  and  mutually 
honourable  peace. 

Since  Martinique  was  not  conquered  by  English  arms,  but  was 
placed  by  its  inhabitants  in  the  hands  of  England  until  France  had  a 
government,  it  cannot  be  accounted  an  English  possession;  France  will 
never  renounce  it. 

It  is  now  only  for  the  British  cabinet  to  make  known  the  position 
it  wishes  to  adopt;  if  it  is  not  satisfied  by  these  conditions,  it  will  at 
least  have  been  proved  to  the  world  that  the  First  Consul  has  neglected 
nothing,  but  has  shown  himself  ready  to  make  every  sacrifice  in  order 
to  bring  peace  and  to  spare  humanity  the  blood  and  tears  that  would 
inevitably  result  from  a  new  campaign. 

712 
Note  for  the  Letter  to  Citizen  Otto 

Annexed  to  No.  710  Paris 

4  Thermidor,  Year  IX  (23  July,  1801} 

The  two  points  of  difficulty  are  Malta  and  America. 

The  First  Consul  would  agree  to  the  restitution  of  Malta  to  the 
Order,  or  even  to  the  King  of  Naples,  the  former  suzerain. 

500  The  Rise  to  Power 

If  Malta  is  returned  to  the  Order,  the  fortifications  will  be  retained. 
But  if  England  prefers  to  give  it  up  to  the  King  of  Naples,  then  the 
Hrst  Consul  wishes  the  fortifications  to  be  destroyed;  it  is  easy  to 
show  that,  unfortified,  Malta  is  no  longer  of  any  importance. 

As  to  America,  it  could  be  agreed  that  England  should  keep  Trini- 
dad, but  not  Tobago. 

In  that  case  Citizen  Otto  would  be  instructed  to  sign  preliminaries 
more  or  less  in  these  terms: 

1.  There  will  be  peace  and  friendship  between  the  French  Republic 
and  the  King  of  England. 

2.  Hostilities  will  cease  in  Europe  as  from  the  date  of  signature  of 
the  preliminaries;  in  America,  forty  days  later;  in  India,  three  months 
later. 

713 
To  Citizen  Talleyrand 

Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs  Paris 

19  Fructidor,  Year  IX  (6  Sept,  1801} 

You  will  find  attached,  Citizen  Minister,  a  dispatch  from  Citizen 
Otto.  I  wish  you  at  once  and  before  tonight  to  send  him  a  message 
informing  him  quite  definitely  that  the  French  Government  will  never 
agree  to  the  English  demand  for  Essequibo  and  Demerara. 

As  for  the  prisoners,  the  governments  will  repay  the  respective  costs, 
and  a  clause  must  be  inserted  that  what  France  has  paid  for  the  prisoners 
of  powers  subsidized  by  England,  such  as  the  Russians,  Bavarians,  the 
Italian  princes,  will  count  for  compensation. 

In  the  article  about  the  Pope  the  words  in  conformity  with  the  treaty 
of  Tolentino  must  be  inserted. 

BONAPARTE 

To  Citizen  Talleyrand 

Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs  Paris 

30  Fructidor,  Year  IX  (l 7  Sept,  1801) 

You  will  find  attached,  Citizen  Minister,  a  letter  from  Citizen  Otto. 

Answer  him  that  we  will  not  cede  Tobago;  that  we  can  adopt  no 
form  of  words  other  than  will  not  oppose,  which  was  that  used  by  the 
Emperor  when  ceding  Mainz  to  us,  and  by  us  in  ceding  Venice;  to 
do  otherwise  would  be  dishonourable,  since  we  cannot  dispose  of  what 
does  not  belong  to  us. 

It  appears  we  are  in  agreement  over  Demeraxa  and  Portugal. 

Tell  Citizen  Otto  that  the  English  must  always  have  known  that 
we  could  never  cede  two  islands  in  America,  and  that,  if  they  are  in 

Luntville  an d  Amiens  501 

good  faith,  will  not  oppose  seems  to  me  clear  enough  until  we  can  settle 
matters  in  the  final  treaty; 

That  if  they  insist  on  these  two  points,  then  they  are  not  in  good 
faith,  and  the  Government  does  not  intend  these  rumours  of  peace  to 
continue  longer. 

The  equinox  is  coming  and  each  day  is  precious.  In  the  present 
position  of  France  the  First  Consul  is  in  diplomatic  relations  with  every 
power  and  has  made  it  a  rule  never  to  give  a  hint  of  bad  faith;  in  his 
opinion  it  would  be  bad  faith  to  send  out  fleets  from  Toulon,  Cadiz 
and  Brest  when  their  success  or  failure  would  change  the  basis  of  the 
situation. 

Therefore,  either  the  preliminaries  must  be  signed  during  the  first 
decade  of  Vendemiaire  or  negotiations  must  be  broken  off. 

You  will  tell  Otto  that  this  is  a  strict  instruction;  that  it  is  useless 
to  send  messengers;  that,  if  they  press  us  further,  I  have  decided  to 
break,  and  that  I  wish  it  all  to  be  settled  before  10  Venddmiaire. 

You  will  easily  understand  how  important  this  last  item  is  when 
you  think  that  Menou  may  not  be  able  to  hold  out  beyond  i  Vend6- 
miaire;  that  at  this  period  the  winds  are  favourable  and  ships  reach 
Italy  and  Trieste  very  quickly;  that  therefore  it  is  essential  for  us  to 
bring  matters  to  a  head  and  have  done  with  them  by  10  Vend6miaire. 
Otto  can  let  it  be  understood  that  in  view  of  our  weakness  at  sea  and 
our  superiority  on  land  the  campaign  opens  for  us  during  the  winter; 
that  therefore  I  do  not  wish  to  remain  any  longer  in  this  state  of  stagna- 
tion which  for  six  weeks  has  been  leading  the  operations  of  the  Govern- 
ment into  new  paths. 

Citizen  Otto  must  say  that  it  is  not  only  Tobago  that  I  will  not 
cede,  but  the  smallest  island.  He  must  come  back  to  the  original  idea 
that,  when  one  has  done  all  that  honour  allows,  to  go  further  means 
dishonour. 

Please,  therefore,  send  off  your  message  before  you  sleep;  time  is 
against  us.  But  since  this  species  of  ultimatum  may  be  important,  this  is 
how  I  conceive  it: 

Citizen,  I  have  laid  your  letter  of  28  Fructidor  before  the  First  Consul. 
I  am  instructed  to  tell  you  expressly  that: 

Apart  from  Trinidad,  the  First  Consul  refuses  to  cede  not  only 
Tobago,  but  not  even  a  single  rock,  if  such  there  be,  with  a  village  of 
a  hundred  inhabitants;  the  First  Consul's  position  is  that  in  this  treaty 
he  is  yielding  to  England  up  to  the  furthest  limit  that  honour  will 
allow,  and  to  go  further  would  bring  dishonour  upon  the  French 
nation. 

As  to  Malta,  we  cannot  name  the  Emperor  of  Russia,  since  we 
cannot  be  sure  of  his  consent;  we  must  be  content  with  the  first  draft, 
under  the  protection  of  one  of  the  great  powers  of  Europe. 

502  The  Rise  to  Power 

The  First  Consul  will  not  agree  to  accept  any  words  other  than  will 
not  oppose,  for  it  would  be  absurd  for  him  to  pretend  to  dispose  of 
what  does  not  belong  to  him,  and  he  would  never  do  so  even  if  the 
English  fleets  were  anchored  before  Chaillot;  it  is  by  that  formula  that 
the  Emperor  ceded  Mainz  to  France  and  France  ceded  Venice  to 
him. 

You  must  therefore,  Citizen,  maintain  this  position  as  long  as  pos- 
sible; but  if,  contrary  to  all  beliefs,  it  is  made  a  cause  of  rupture,  you 
may  give  guarantees  in  a  secret  article  which  could  be  drafted  as 
follows: 

If,  at  the  general  peace,  the  Dutch  Republic  does  not  agree  to  cede 
to  England  in  full  sovereignty  the  port  of  Trincomalee;  if  the  Bang  of 
Spain  does  not  agree  to  cede  to  England  in  full  sovereignty  the  island 
of  Trinidad,  then  the  public  articles  relating  to  those  powers  shall  be 
void. 

Should  the  English  minister,  in  face  of  all  efforts,  persist  in  demand- 
ing Tobago  or  the  positive  cession  by  France  of  Spanish  and  Dutch 
possessions,  which  is  not  within  the  power  of  the  Republic,  then, 
Citizen,  you  are  authorized  to  break,  since  the  First  Consul  would  be 
justified  in  thinking  that  there  was  some  double  intrigue  going  on 
with  Spain  or  some  other  reason  which  he  could  not  explain.  But,  in 
the  present  situation  in  Europe,  he  could  not  reasonably  further  pro- 
long the  rumours  of  peace,  which  suspend  all  military  operations,  and 
stop  the  allies  from  carrying  out  necessary  movements,  and  cannot 
lose  part  of  the  campaigning  season  which  for  us  begins  in  Vend&niaire. 

I  must  inform  you,  Citizen,  that  6,000  men  are  embarked  on  the 
Rochefort  squadron,  nearly  20,000  on  Admiral  Villaret's  squadron  at 
Brest,  and  means  of  transport  for  15,000  are  ready  in  Holland;  the 
Toulon  and  Cadiz  squadrons  also  have  troops  on  board.  The  carrying 
out  of  the  First  Consul's  plan  of  campaign  requires  that  by  10  Vend6- 
miaire  he  should  know  for  certain  what  the  position  is  and  be  able  to 
devote  himself  and  all  his  resources  to  a  renewal  of  the  war,  since  that 
is  definitely  what  they  will  be  asking  for.  By  that  date,  therefore, 
either  the  preliminaries  must  be  signed  or  negotiations  broken  off. 

Before  going  to  Marengo,  the  First  Consul  made  every  offer  to  the 
Emperor;  he  had  yielded  everything  compatible  with  honour,  as  he  is 
now  doing  to  England.  The  Emperor  wished  for  more  and  in  the  end 
owed  everything  to  the  generosity  and  moderation  of  the  victor. 

It  is  now  useless  for  you  to  ask  for  new  instructions;  you  must 
declare  this  to  Lord  Hawkesbury  and  make  him  understand  that  what 
you  have  said  is  final;  that  the  First  Consul  would  undergo  anything 
rather  than  yield  further.  State  this  with  some  pride.  Like  the  Emperor, 
they  risk  losing  all  if  they  seek  for  more. 

BONAPARTE 

Luneville  and  Amiens  503 

715 
To  Citizen  Talleyrand 

Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs  Paris 

14  Vend6miaire,  Year  X  (6  Oct,  1801} 

I  am  sending  you,  Citizen  Minister,  the  ratifications  of  the  pre- 
liminary articles  signed  at  London  on  9  Vendemiaire  and  of  the  secret 
article. 

I  have  the  honour  to  inform  you  that  a  change  has  been  made  in 
the  translation  of  article  2.  In  the  original  document  this  article  is 
rendered  as  follows; 

'His  Britannic  Majesty  will  restore  to  the  French  Republic  and  to 
its  allies,  namely  to  his  Catholic  Majesty  and  to  the  Dutch  Republic, 
all  possessions  and  colonies  occupied  or  conquered,  etc/  .  .  .* 

The  First  Consul  wishes  you,  Citizen  Minister,  to  inform  Citizen 
Otto  of  the  reasons  for  this  change. 

By  order  of  the  First  Consul 

716 
To  the  Emperor  of  Russia 

Paris 
18  Vendemiaire,  Year  X  (10  Oct,  1801) 

I  am  sending  Colonel  Caulaincourt  to  Your  Majesty  to  express  the 
pleasure  I  feel  at  seeing  the  treaty  of  peace  between  our  two  great 
nations  at  last  signed  and  ratified.  For  the  whole  of  France  it  has  been 
a  cause  for  joy  proportionate  to  the  respect  that  the  French  nation  has 
for  Your  Majesty's  brave  and  loyal  subjects. 

The  Elector  of  Bavaria  has  consulted  me  over  the  proposal  of  the 
House  of  Austria  that  he  should  alienate  part  of  Bavaria;  I  believe  I 
was  acting  in  agreement  with  Your  Majesty  in  advising  him  not  at 
this  time  to  exchange  his  hereditary  states  for  others. 

In  the  preliminaries  of  peace  which  happily  have  been  signed  between 
France  and  England  it  is  agreed  that  Malta  shall  be  restored  to  the 
Order  under  the  protection  of  a  great  power.  I  beg  Your  Majesty  to 
inform  me  of  Your  Majesty's  wishes  concerning  this  island  and  the 
Order  of  Malta,  of  which  Your  Majesty's  august  father  was  chosen 
Grandmaster. 

The  Republic  of  the  Seven  Islands  is  in  the  cruellest  anarchy,  and 
daily  there  is  fighting  among  its  people.  In  their  present  condition  the 
Turks  are  unsuited  to  enforce  a  just  and  equitable  government.  But 
Your  Majesty  must,  by  religion,  be  interested  in  advising  in  concert 
some  means  of  enabling  these  peoples  to  enjoy  the  constitution  they 
have  been  given* 

*  The  trivial  change  involved  concerned  the  French  word  used  for  'namely1  in 
this  article. 

504  The  Rise  to  Power 

The  rest  of  the  Russian  troops  who  were  in  France  are  being 
embarked,  so  as  to  reach  Russia  more  quickly. 

It  remains  for  me  to  pray  Your  Majesty  to  protect  our  trade;  com- 
petition cannot  fail  to  benefit  the  Russian  people,  and,  if  we  could 
be  granted  some  preference  in  respect  of  timber  and  other  naval  needs, 
Your  Majesty  would  thereby  help  the  restoration  of  the  French  navy 
which  must  be  of  advantage  to  all  the  maritime  powers  of  the  north. 

I  saw  with  regret  that  no  French  ambassador  was  present  in  Moscow 
at  Your  Majesty's  coronation,  but  I  beg  Your  Majesty  to  accept  my 
congratulations  and  my  wishes  for  the  happiness  and  prosperity  of 
Your  Majesty's  reign, 

BONAPARTE 

717 
To  Citizen  Chaptal 

Minister  of  the  Interior  Paris 

22  Vendlmiaire,  Year  X  (14  Qct,  1801) 

Give  immediate  orders,  Citizen  Minister,  to  start  work  without 
delay  on  the  road  from  Calais  to  Amiens  and  Amiens  to  Paris.  Nothing 
must  be  spared  in  putting  this  road  into  a  state  that  leaves  nothing 
to  be  desired. 

BONAPARTE 

718 
To  Citizen  Gaudin 

Minister  of  Finance  Paris 

22  Vendlmialre,  Year  X  (14  Oct,  1801) 

I  wish  you,  Citizen  Minister,  to  call  for  a  special  report  on  the  state 
of  the  postal  relays  from  Calais  to  Amiens  and  Amiens  to  Paris,  and 
to  take  steps  at  once  to  ensure  that  the  service  between  Calais  and  Paris 
operates  punctually,  for  traffic  on  this  route  is  about  to  become  very 
active. 

BONAPARTE 

719 
To  Citizen  FouchS 

Minister  of  Police  Paris 

22  Vencttmiaire,  Year  X  (14  Oct,  180 1) 

Please,  Citizen  Minister,  give  orders  that  any  English  who  land  in 
France  can  travel  freely,  provided  only  that  they  hold  English  passports 
and  that  they  are  not  emigrants.  A  report  of  those  landing  will  be 
sent  to  you  daily,  together  with  the  places  to  which  they  are  going* 

BONAPARTE 

Lunfoille  and  Amiens  505 

720 
To  General  Berthier 

Minister  of  War  Paris 

22  Vendtmiaire,  Year  X  (14  Get,  1801} 

Lord  Cornwallis  [English  plenipotentiary  at  the  Conference  of 
Amiens]  will  land  at  Calais,  Citizen  Minister,  on  his  way  to  Paris. 
Please  give  orders  that  he  is  to  be  received  in  the  most  distinguished 
manner.  On  arrival  at  Calais  he  will  be  saluted  with  a  salvo.  There 
will  be  a  guard  of  honour  and  he  will  be  escorted  on  the  road. 

BONAPARTE 

721 
To  Citizen  Fouch6  , 

Minister  of  Police  '        Paris 

23  Vendtmiaire,  Year  X  (15  Oct,  1801} 

The  First  Consul  has  seen  the  report  you  addressed  to  him  today, 
Citizen  Minister. 

He  does  not  think  it  proper  to  prevent  English  travellers  coming  to 
France  from  lauding  at  the  port  of  their  choice.  But  he  does  think  it 
reasonable  to  indicate  the  ports  where  they  will  find  authorities  with 
the  power  to  issue  passports  to  them  at  once.  Those  ports  are  Ostend, 
Dunkirk,  Calais,  Boulogne,  Dieppe,  Cherbourg,  Granville,  Saint- 
Malo,  Nantes,  La  Rochefie,  Rochefort  and  Bordeaux. 

Foreigners  landing  at  other  ports  will  be  obliged  to  wait  for  their 
passports  to  come  from  Paris. 

By  order  of  the  First  Consul 

722 
To  General  Berthier 

Minister  of  War  Paris 

28  Vendlmiaire,  Year  X  (20  Oct,  1801) 

You  will  please  order  the  commander  of  the  ifth  Military  District 
to  send  a  battalion  of  grenadiers  to  Amiens  to  act  as  garrison  during 
the  holding  of  the  conference. 

BONAPARTE 

733 
To  Citizen  Talleyrand 

Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs  Paris 

29  Vendtmiaire,  Year  X  (21  Oct,  1801) 

Please,  Citizen  Minister,  let  Citizen  Otto  know  that  I  wish  him  to 
inform  Lord  Hawkesbury  as  soon  as  possible  that  the  French  Govern- 
ment intends  at  once  to  send  the  squadron  at  Rochefort  and  part  of 

506  The  Rise  to  Power 

that  at  Brest  to  carry  10,000  or  12,000  troops  to  Santo  Domingo, 
to  restore  order  there. 

You  must  also  inform  the  court  of  Spain  that  it  is  essential  they  send 
someone  with  full  powers  to  Amiens,  since  the  English  and  ourselves 
are  determined  to  conclude  quickly. 

Make  the  same  declaration  to  the  Dutch  Government. 

I  wish  Citizen  Otto  to  let  us  know  the  date  negotiations  for  the 
definitive  treaty  are  to  start.  He  can  make  known  our  desire  that  it 
should  be  during  the  first  decade  of  Brumaire. 

BONAPARTE 

724 
To  Citizen  Talleyrand 

Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs  Paris 

$  Brumaire,  Year  X  (30  Oct9  1801) 

You  will  send  a  courier  to  Citizen  Otto,  Citizen  Minister;  you  will 
tell  him  that  he  can  inform  the  English  cabinet  confidentially,  in 
exchange  for  the  communication  they  have  made  to  us  of  the  dispatch 
of  five  ships  to  Jamaica,  that  six  ships  and  four  frigates  of  the  Rochefort 
squadron  .  .  .  will  leave  for  Santo-Domingo  during  the  last  decade  of 
Brumaire;  the  whole  will  carry  about  20,000  landing  troops  under  the 
orders  of  General  Leclerc.  I  wish  the  British  Government  to  give 
orders  at  Jamaica  that  he  is  to  be  supplied  with  all  the  foodstuffs  he 
may  need,  for  it  is  to  the  interest  of  civilization  to  destroy  the  new 
Algiers  that  has  been  growing  up  in  the  middle  of  America. 

BONAPARTE 

725 
To  H.M.  the  King  of  Great  Britain  and  Ireland 

Paris 

p  Frimaire,  Year  X  (30  Not/,  1801) 

The  conclusion  of  the  preliminary  articles  between  the  French 
Republic  and  Your  Majesty  having  happily  brought  to  an  end  all 
hostilities  between  them,  and  the  loyal  frankness  displayed  by  both 
sides  during  this  first  negotiation  leaving  no  doubt  that  it  will  at  once 
be  followed  by  the  final  restoration  of  peace  and  good  understanding, 
I  believe  I  shall  carry  out  Your  Majesty  s  personal  wish  by  accrediting 
Citizen  Otto  to  Your  Majesty  as  Minister  Plenipotentiary  of  the  French 
Republic.  I  am  convinced  that  this  choice,  to  which  I  am  impelled 
by  the  honourable  service  Citizen  Otto  has  just  rendered,  cannot  fail 
to  be  agreeable  to  Your  Majesty  for  the  same  reason.  I  therefore  beg 
Your  Majesty  to  welcome  Citizen  Otto  and  to  place  entire  faith  in 
all  he  will  be  instructed  to  say  particularly  when  he  expresses  the  com- 
plete desire  of  the  French  Government  for  the  restoration  and  mainten- 
ance of  the  best  intelligence  between  England  and  France  and  the 

Lunevilk  and  Amiens  507 

sincere  wishes  I  have  formed  for  the  happiness  of  Your  Majesty  and 
Your  Majesty's  august  family. 

BONAPARTE 

726 
To  Citizen  D'Hauterive 

Director,  2nd  Division,  Ministry  of  Foreign  Affairs  Paris 

5  Nivose,  Year  X  (26  Dec,  1801) 

Citizen  d'Hauterive  will  see  M.  Azara  to  inform  him  verbally  that 
the  negotiations  at  Amiens  are  drawing  to  their  close;  that  it  is  three 
months  since  the  preliminaries  were  signed,  and  that  Spain  has  delayed 
the  negotiations  for  six  weeks; 

That  it  is  no  longer  possible  for  England  and  France  to  lose  another 
day;  peace  will  therefore  be  signed  shortly,  whether  or  not  Spain 
participates;  that  the  First  Consul,  who  has  a  most  personal  sense  of 
benevolence  and  attachment  towards  H.M.  the  King  of  Spain,  will 
sign  on  behalf  of  the  King,  since  he  does  not  wish  to  place  Charles  IV 
in  the  position  of  being  forced  to  adhere  against  his  will  to  what  has 
been  done; 

That,  since  the  King  of  Spain  is  the  most  intimate  ally  of  the 
Republic,  the  First  Consul  believes  he  must  act  in  accordance  with  the 
domestic  circumstances  of  that  court;  the  illness  of  the  King  and  the 
Queen  and  the  extraordinary,  not  to  say  mad  conduct  of  the  Prince  of 
the  Peace,  force  him  to  deal  with  the  interests  of  Spain  as  with  those 
of  France; 

That  the  confidence  of  H.M.  Charles  IV  will  be  better  placed  in 
the  First  Consul  and  that  his  interests  will  be  better  protected  by  him 
than  by  his  present  ministry; 

That  M.  del  Campo  would  arrive  too  late:  the  peace  would  be  signed, 
and  that  would  serve  only  to  prove  to  Europe  the  incompetence  of 
the  Spanish  ministry; 

That  the  First  Consul  sees  only  one  method:  that  M.  d' Azara  should 
go  to  Amiens  in  virtue  of  his  former  powers  and  then  he  and  Citizen 
d'Hauterive  will  draft  the  necessary  papers  to  authorize  him  to  act; . . . 

Or  that  the  First  Consul  will  sign. 

BONAPARTE 

727 
To  Citizen  Joseph  Bonaparte 

Minister  Plenipotentiary  to  the  Conference  of  Amiens  Paris 

13  PluviSse,  Year  X  (2  Feb,  1802) 

I  have  received  your  letter  of  12  Pluvi6se.  It  seems  that  all  goes  well 
at  Amiens.  A  week  more  or  less  is  now  unimportant. , . . 

508  ^he  Rise  to  Power 

I  wish  you  to  speak  to  Lord  Cornwallis  about  the  abominable  piece 
of  work  you  will  find  attached,  and  to  impress  upon  him  how  much 
it  is  against  the  dignity  of  the  two  states  to  allow  an  emigrant  to  publish 
such  stupidities  in  London  at  a  time  when  I  am  especially  occupied  in 
stifling  anything  that  might  cause  complaint. 

You  must  also  tell  Lord  Cornwallis  that  he  should  place  little  faith 
in  the  reports  sent  him  by  Mr.  Jackson,  since  he  keeps  bad  company 
and  gets  his  information  from  rogues  who  only  want  money.  Those 
he  has  sent  so  far  should  go  to  prove  it. 

BONAPARTE 

728 
To  Citizen  Talleyrand 

Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs  Paris 

21  PluviSse,  Year  X  (10  Feb,  1802} 

The  petition  from  the  Maltese,  Citizen  Minister,  is  not  at  all  in 
Maltese  style;  it  has  not  the  colour,  nor  the  style,  nor  the  tone  of  the 
people  of  that  island,  whereas  it  has  the  colour,  style  and  tone  of  a 
revolutionary  Englishman.  If  you  want  proof  of  it,  you  will  find  it  in 
the  freedom  with  which  English  generals  and  troops  are  mentioned. 
Such  freedom  is  not  African.  The  French  plenipotentiary  must  take 
care  to  impress  this  on  M.  Cornwallis.  The  author  of  this  petition  is  an 
Englishman  employed  in  the  customs  and  health  service  of  the  island. 

BONAPARTE 

729 
To  Citizen  Talleyrand 

Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs  Paris 

30  Pluviose,  Year  X  (ip  Feb,  1802) 

I  am  sending  you,  Citizen  Minister,  three  notes  regarding  the 
dispatches  from  Amiens. 

In  the  one  concerning  the  order  of  Malta  you  will  see  a  means  of 
settling  matters  by  raising  a  Swiss  battalion.  Since  this  idea  arose  while 
I  was  dictating  the  notes  it  is  not  placed  in  the  most  suitable  position. 
You  must  give  instructions  to  the  plenipotentiary  to  propose  it  as  a 
means  of  conciliation  and  to  give  the  British  cabinet  time  to  reject 
this  idea  and  return  to  the  other. 

BONAPARTE 

730 
First  Note 

Annexed  to  No.  729  pari$ 

30  Plwi6$e9  Year  X  (ip  Feb,  1802) 
The  dispatches  of  22  Pluviose  from  Amiens,  Citizen  Minister,  deal 

Lunevilk  and  Amiens  509 

first  with  the  question  of  the  Ottoman  Porte.  The  minister  of  the 
Republic  should  have  the  following  note  inserted  in  the  protocol: 

Preliminaries  of  peace  between  France  and  the  Porte  have  been 
signed.  They  have  been  ratified  by  the  latter,  with  this  single  reserva- 
tion: 'in  so  far  as  they  do  not  conflict  with  the  treaty  of  London'. 
Since  they  do  not  conflict  with  this  treaty,  we  regard  them  as  ratified, 

Meanwhile,  a  French  colonel  has  reached  the  Porte  and  frustrated 
certain  secondary  intrigues,  and  the  Sultan,  in  a  letter  to  the  First 
Consul,  has  shown  a  desire  to  treat  directly  with  France  and  to  convert 
the  preliminary  articles  into  a  definitive  treaty.  The  Turkish  ambassador 
in  Paris  has  received  the  necessary  powers  and  instructions.  He  has 
been  presented  to  the  First  Consul  and  appeared  convinced  that  the 
Porte  felt  France  now  to  be  necessary  to  it;  he  was  prepared  to  sign 
the  definitive  peace,  but  in  honesty  and  respect  he  must  first  inform 
the  English  minister.  The  First  Consul  agreed  that  the  Turkish  minister 
should  at  once  write  to  the  English  minister  to  inform  him  of  this  step. 
A  final  peace  will  definitely  be  concluded  with  France.  Any  peace  not 
made  directly  between  such  great  powers  as  the  Porte  and  France 
might  be  a  truce,  but  could  be  only  short-lived.  In  diplomacy  there  are 
two  kinds  of  alliance:  natural  alliance  and  accidental  alliance.  The 
alliance  between  England  and  the  Porte  being  only  accidental,  France 
had  to  agree  the  cessation  of  hostilities  in  the  preliminaries;  but  the 
detailed  arrangements  must  be  treated  directly;  to  do  otherwise  would 
be  to  place  these  two  powers  among  the  ranks  of  secondary  powers, 
whereas  both  are  powers  of  the  first  order. 

All  assurance  that  the  French  plenipotentiary  can  give  is:  I.  That 
this  treaty  will  contain  no  secret  article;  2.  That  it  will  be  entirely  based 
on  the  preliminaries.  Any  further  demand  on  the  part  of  His  Britannic 
Majesty  would  not  be  reasonable. 

BONAPARTE 

Second  Note 

Annexed  to  No.  729  Paris 

30  Pluvi6se,  Year  X  (j(p  Feb,  1802) 

The  second  matter  in  the  dispatch  from  Amiens  is  Malta.  There  is 
no  harm  in  saying,  not  only  that  England  and  France  will  not  have 
Languages  in  the  order  of  Malta,  but  even  that  no  subject  of  these  two 
powers  can  be  considered  a  knight  of  Malta  and  all  who  have  the  cross 
will  cease  to  wear  it.  So  it  could  be  said: 

The  two  contracting  parties,  wishing  to  render  Malta  wholly  inde- 
pendent of  both  of  them,  agree:  I.  This  Order  will  no  longer  contain 
either  an  English  Language  or  a  French  Language;  2.  Trie  citizens, 
subjects,  inhabitants  and  natives  of  the  two  states  cannot  be  knights  of 

510  The  Rise  to  Power 

Malta  or  officers  employed  in  the  garrison  of  the  island;  all  those  who 
are  now  Knights  of  Malta  will  cease  to  be  so  and  can  no  longer  wear 
the  decoration.  .  .  . 

Article  12  is  inadmissible;  we  cannot  recognize  the  word  suzerainty; 
it  is  a  feudal  term  that  we  cannot  accept;  another  word  must  first  be 
found.  .  ,  .  But  there  would  be  something  shocking  in  an  order  com- 
posed of  Spaniards,  Austrians,  Germans,  recognizing  the  suzerainty  of 
the  King  of  Naples.  No  doubt  when  Christendom  formed  but  a  single 
power  it  was  natural  that  an  order  of  knights  hospitaller  should  recog- 
nize the  suzerainty  of  the  nearest  Christian  king;  but  today  this  article 
seems  altogether  unsuitable.  Even  if  Neapolitan  troops  are  granted, 
this  article  must  be  deleted. 

Either  the  Order  can  exist  or  it  cannot.  If  it  can,  how  can  it  be 
thought  that  it  needs  three  years,  in  place  of  six  months,  to  organize 
the  800  men  necessary  to  guard  Malta.  Together  with  400  knights  and 
600  men  who  can  be  raised  locally,  that  is  more  than  enough  to  put 
the  place  in  a  reasonable  condition.  If  it  cannot  exist,  that  is  to  say,  if 
the  powers  having  the  Languages  do  not  support  it,  three  years  will 
not  suffice. 

We  believe  therefore  either  that  England  should  hold  the  island  for 
six  months  after  the  signature  of  the  treaty  (of  course,  for  our  part, 
we  shall  keep  Taranto),  or  that  both  powers  should  keep  their  positions 
for  only  three  months  at  the  most,  and  that  then  England  should  cede 
Malta  to  the  knights  and  to  a  garrison  of  1,000  Neapolitans,  who 
cannot  remain  beyond  i  January,  1803,  or  one  year  from  the  date  of 
signature  of  the  present  treaty.  .  .  . 

Another  via  media  can  be  proposed:  that  would  be  to  raise  a  battalion 
of  1,000  Swiss  at  the  expense  of  the  two  powers.  The  officers  would  be 
appointed  by  the  present  Landsmann  from  among  men  who  have 
been  in  the  service  of  Holland,  Spain  and  the  King  of  Sardinia,  but 
who  have  left  the  service  at  least  three  years  and  have  not  borne  arms 
in  the  present  war.  This  would  appear  the  wisest  course,  since  it  would 
help  the  organization  of  the  Order,  which  badly  needs  it.  As  to  the 
choice  of  men,  if  English  and  French  commissioners  were  appointed 
to  help  the  Landsmann  it  would  be  easy  to  find  men  incapable  of 
betraying  their  military  duty  and  who  would  even  be  much  more 
reliable  than  Neapolitans.  But,  in  any  event,  this  subsidy  must  not 
continue  more  than  a  year  after  the  exchange  of  ratifications* 

The  French  plenipotentiary  will  put  forward  the  proposal  for  the 
Swiss  battalion.  But  he  will  declare  publicly  that  we  do  not  intend 
Malta  to  pass  to  the  King  of  Naples,  and  if  the  British  cabinet  does  not 
accept  the  proposal  for  the  Swiss,  the  Neapolitan  troops  cannot  remain 
in  the  island  more  than  one  year;  and,  in  that  case,  the  French  Govern- 
ment does  not  wish  to  pay  anything,  as  the  King  of  Naples  has  his 

Lunlville  and  Amiens  511 

troops  already  organized  and  is  himself  interested  in  preserving  Malta 
for  the  Order. 

BONAPARTE 

732 
Third  Note 

Annexed  to  No.  729  Paris 

30  PhviSse,  Year  X  (19  Feb,  1802} 

The  undersigned  is  ordered  by  his  Government  to  insist  on  the  pro- 
posal recently  made  regarding  the  Barbary  powers,  that  the  four 
powers  agree  to  put  an  end  to  the  brigandage  of  Algiers,  Tunis  and 
Tripoli  which  shames  both  Europe  and  the  century  in  which  we  live. 
A  simple  joint  notification  by  the  four  powers  to  the  Barbary  states 
would  bring  peace  to  the  trade  of  the  United  States,  Portugal,  the 
King  of  Naples,  the  King  of  Etruria,  Genoa  and  the  northern  powers. 
It  might  perhaps  bring  some  loss  of  power  to  the  high  contracting 
parties,  but,  since  owing  to  their  geographical  position  Mediterranean 
trade  goes  to  France  and  Spain,  it  would  be  these  which  would  make 
the  greatest  sacrifices.  In  any  case,  the  undersigned  certainly  has  too 
high  an  opinion  of  the  honesty  of  the  English  ministry  and  people  to 
believe  that  they  would  judge  on  the  basis  of  interest  a  question  that 
ought  to  be  judged  on  the  basis  of  European  dignity  and  public 
morality;  for  God  has  given  power  to  states  as  to  individuals  so  that 
they  may  protect  the  weak.  It  would  be  glorious  to  see  a  war  that  has 
produced  so  many  calamities  end  with  a  hopeful  and  beneficial  action. 

This  matter  is  closely  linked  with  the  Order  of  Malta;  for  if  the 
contracting  parties  do  not  take  upon  themselves  the  obligation  under- 
taken by  the  Order  since  its  foundation,  the  Order  cannot  cease  from 
being  in  a  state  of  war  with  the  Barbary  powers  without  risking  the 
loss  of  all  its  possessions.  The  gallant  men  who  founded  the  fighting 
orders  did  so  to  protect  Christians  against  Barbary  piracy,  and  all  the 
publicists  of  Europe  would  be  agreed  that  if  the  Order  of  Malta 
formally  refused  to  carry  out  its  engagements  and  betrayed  the  object 
of  its  foundation  it  would  have  lost  its  right  to  hold  possessions. 

BONAPARTE 

733 
To  Citizen  Talleyrand 

Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs  Paris 

30  PluviSse,  Year  X  (ip  Feb,  1802) 

It  seems  to  me  desirable,  Citizen  Minister,  for  the  French  pleni- 
potentiary to  have  a  note  more  or  less  in  the  following  terms  inserted 
in  the  protocol 

BONAPARTE 

512  The  Rise  to  Power 

The  undersigned  has  informed  his  Government  of  the  unwillingness 
of  His  Britannic  Majesty  to  recognize  the  King  of  Etruria,  the  Italian 
Republic  and  the  Genoese  Republic.  Since  the  recognition  of  these 
three  powers  by  His  Britannic  Majesty  is  of  no  advantage  to  the  French 
Republic,  the  undersigned  will  not  insist  further;  but  he  wishes  the 
following  observation  to  be  fully  considered  by  the  British  cabinet. 

The  political  system  of  Europe  is  founded  on  the  existence  and 
recognition  of  all  the  powers  which  share  its  vast  and  beautiful  terri- 
tory. If  England  refuses  to  recognize  three  such  distinguished  powers, 
it  thereby  renounces  the  right  to  take  any  interest  in  the  people 
inhabiting  them.  But  how  can  it  be  thought  that  English  merchants 
can  be  indifferent  to  the  trade  of  Genoa,  Leghorn,  the  mouths  of  the 
Po  and  the  Italian  Republic?  And  if  his  trade  meets  with  obstacles  in 
these  three  states,  whom  will  His  Britannic  Majesty  be  able  to  blame? 
There  could  be  no  reciprocity,  since  the  states  of  Genoa,  Tuscany  and 
the  Italian  Republic  do  no  kind  of  trade  in  England,  but  are  useful  and 
even  necessary  outlets  for  English  trade.  And  if  these  three  states,  fear- 
ful at  seeing  themselves  unrecognized  by  the  great  powers,  change 
their  organization  and  seek  safety  through  union  with  a  great  con- 
tinental power,  does  His  Britannic  Majesty  renounce  his  right  to  com- 
plain, although  he  could  not  witness  it  with  indifference?  Complaint 
is  sometimes  made  of  the  continental  expansion  of  the  French  Republic; 
yet  how  can  it  not  continue  if  the  great  powers  place  the  small  states 
of  Italy  in  a  position  where  they  can  seek  protection  in  France  alone? 

Though  recognized  by  the  Emperor  through  the  treaty  of  Campo 
Formio,  the  Cisalpine  Republic  never  had  its  minister  received  at 
Vienna;  that  prince  continued  to  treat  it  as  though  the  treaty  of  Campo 
Formio  had  never  been.  At  that  time,  no  doubt,  the  court  of  Vienna 
regarded  the  treaty  as  only  a  truce,  since  there  was  no  general  peace. 
But  now  that  a  general  peace  has  been  made,  if  these  states  do  not  see 
their  independence  recognized,  they  will  fear  a  renewal  of  the  discredit 
they  have  already  known  and  feel  the  need  to  draw  even  closer  to  the 
French.  .  .  . 

The  undersigned  begs  Lord  Cornwallis  to  place  these  observations 
before  his  cabinet. 

734 
To  Citizen  Talleyrand 

Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs  Paris 

30  Pluvi6se,  Year  X  (ip  Feb,  1802) 

You  will  explain  to  Citizen  Otto  that  military  events  in  Portugal 
and  Egypt  can  in  no  way  influence  the  peace  negotiations.  If,  tot 
example,  one  article  of  the  treaty  were  to  say  that  the  King  of  Portugal 
will  enjoy  the  integrity  of  his  states,  it  is  evident  that  were  the  French 

Lwilv tile  and  Amiens  513 

and  Spanish  armies  occupying  two  or  three  of  his  provinces  they  would 
evacuate  and  restore  them. 

Similarly,  if  it  is  stated  that  Egypt  will  be  restored  to  the  Sultan, 
it  is  clear  that  it  will  be  restored,  whether  it  is  held  by  the  French,  by 
the  English  or  half  by  each. 

Today  it  is  a  question  of  establishing  a  system  convenient  to  both 
nations  and  ignoring  what  may  happen  between  small  armies  which 
do  not  affect  in  any  important  way  the  main  forces  of  either. 

The  question  therefore  remains  this:  If  under  the  treaty  Egypt  is  to 
remain  French,  England  must  retain  a  greater  part  of  its  possessions. 
But  if  Egypt  is  restored  to  the  Porte,  it  seems  natural  that  the  English 
should  retain  less  in  order  to  restore  the  balance  as  far  as  possible. 

BONAPARTE 

735 
To  Citizen  Joseph  Bonaparte 

Minister  Plenipotentiary  to  the  Conference  of  Amiens  Paris 

17  VentSse,  Year  X  (8  Mar,  1802) 
I  have  your  dispatch  of  16  Ventose,  I  cannot  see  that  there  is  now 

any  important  difference  between  the  two  drafts.  The  last  version  of 
the  English  draft  concerning  Malta  is  not  far  from  ours.  It  will  be  easy, 
too,  to  find  a  via  media  over  the  prisoners.  I  do  not  see  what  can  now 
prevent  the  conclusion  of  the  treaty.  If  Lord  Cornwallis  is  in  good 
faith,  peace  should  be  signed  before  the  ipth.  If  he  is  not,  it  is  clear 
that  the  English  cabinet  must  be  involved  in  new  combinations,  which 
would  be  madness  in  the  present  state  of  Europe.  In  any  case,  I  expect 
to  receive  a  letter  informing  me  exactly  how  things  stand  when  my 
courier  returns  at  midday  on  the  ipth.  I  have  yielded  all  the  English 
wished.  If  peace  is  not  agreed  at  once,  I  do  not  fear  war.  Speak  strongly, 
and  let  me  know  on  the  ipth  what  to  be  at:  since  the  English  have 
given  orders  to  arm  at  Plymouth,  it  is  desirable  that  I  should  be  able 
to  take  precautions  for  our  fleets. 

BONAPARTE 

As  to  the  Turkish  ambassador,  we  cannot  go  back  on  what  we  have 
always  said.  I  do  not  want  to  make  peace  with  Turkey  at  Amiens; 
but  that  need  not  impede  the  article  guaranteeing  the  integrity  of  the 
Ottoman  Empire. 

736 
To  Citizen  Joseph  Bonaparte 

Minister  Plenipotentiary  to  the  Conference  of  Amiens  Paris 

18  Ventose,  Year  X  (g  Mar,  1802} 
I  have  your  letter  of  18  Vent6se.  I  accept,  though  with  regret,  the 

formula:  The  Sublime  Porte  is  invited  to  accede  to  the  present  treaty.' 

514  The  Rise  to  Power 

It  is  no  less  my  intention  to  make  a  treaty  with  the  Porte,  for  this 
article  does  not  settle  all  our  differences.  Not  at  the  moment  having 
the  papers  to  hand,  I  do  not  know  if  there  is  an  article  guaranteeing 
the  integrity  of  Turkey.  That  is  necessary. 

Otherwise  I  give  you  all  necessary  latitude  to  sign  during  the  night. 
You  will  be  in  conference  when  you  receive  this;  I  do  not  think  it 
will  arrive  before  9.0  p.m. 

Like  you,  I  think  it  extremely  important  not  to  lose  another  instant. 
So  do  everything  possible  to  conclude,  and  sign. 

Take  care  to  let  me  know  in  your  reply  if  the  courier  arrived  before 
nine,  as  in  that  case  I  promised  him  600  francs. 

BONAPARTE 

737 
To  Citizen  Joseph  Bonaparte 

Minister  Plenipotentiary  to  the  Conference  of  Amiens  Malmtison 

20  Vent6se,  Year  X  (11  Mar,  1802) 

It  is  5.0  p,m.  and  I  have  not  yet  had  the  letter  you  said  you  would 
send  me  after  your  conference  yesterday  morning  and  which  I  expected 
at  midnight.  But  Otto's  dispatches  and  all  letters  from  England  con- 
firm their  big  armaments  and  the  sailing  of  successive  squadrons.  Lord 
Hawkesbury  told  Otto  that  Cornwallis  had  received  final  instructions. 
But  the  remaining  differences  are  so  slight  that  they  do  not  seem  to 
justify  so  much  fuss  from  that  minister.  A  letter  from  Amiens,  I  suppose 
from  Mr.  Merry,  asserting  that  I  did  not  want  peace  has  alarmed 
London. 

In  these  circumstances  the  least  delay  is  truly  prejudicial  and  might 
have  serious  consequences  for  our  fleets  and  naval  expeditions. 

Please,  therefore,  report  twice  a  day,  in  the  morning  and  evening, 
by  special  messenger,  everything  you  do  and  all  that  is  said  to  you, 
for  it  is  quite  clear  to  me  that  if  by  now  peace  is  not  signed  or  agreed 
there  has  been  a  change  of  plan  in  London. 

BONAPARTE 

Nevertheless,  carry  on  your  negotiations,  but  confine  yourself  to 
inserting  in  the  protocol  notes  making  it  quite  clear  that  it  is  the 
English  who  do  not  want  peace  and  are  causing  delays. 

738 
To  Citizen  Joseph  Bonaparte 

Minister  Plenipotentiary  at  the  Conference  of  Amiens  Malmaison 

21  Vent8se,  Year  X  (12  Mar,  1802) 

I  have  your  letter  of  20  Ventose,  from  which  I  see  that,  though 
agreed,  you  have  signed  nothing.  This  delay  seems  quite  extraordinary; 
it  is  quite  certain  that  Lord  Cornwallis  had  received  final  instructions 

Luntvilk  and  Amiens  515 

and  had  only  to  sign.  Moustache,  whom  I  expect  in  the  afternoon,  will 
no  doubt  help  to  clear  up  the  mystery. 

I  do  not  want  the  word  Genoa  substituted  for  Liguria  under  any 
pretext  whatever;  I  would  rather  it  were  not  mentioned.  Nor  do  I 
wish  to  evacuate  Taranto  before  the  English  evacuate  Malta;  the  way 
out  is  not  to  speak  of  it.  It  was  all  right  on  the  hypothesis  that  they 
could  keep  Malta  six  or  eight  months;  but  now  that  everything  is  to 
be  evacuated  in  three  months  there  is  no  point  in  mentioning  it. 

BONAPARTE 

739 
To  Citizen  Talleyrand 

Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs  Paris 

21  Ventose,  Year  X  (12  Mar,  1802} 

I  wish  you,  Citizen  Minister,  at  once  to  send  a  courier  to  London  to 
inform  Citizen  Otto  of  our  situation  in  Europe  and  to  instruct  him 
to  make  known  officially  in  conference  with  Mr.  Addington  and  Lord 
Hawkesbury: 

That  M.  de  Lucchesini,  at  the  express  order  of  the  King  of  Prussia, 
has  informed  me  of  his  pleasure  at  the  outcome  of  the  Congress  of 
Lyons;*  on  the  lyth  M.  Cobenzl  heard  from  the  Emperor,  who  agrees 
not  only  to  what  was  done  at  Lyons,  but  also  to  what  we  have  done 
in  Switzerland  and  Holland  .  .  .  that  the  reply  to  the  letters  sent  from 
Lyons  to  the  Emperor  of  Russia  was  even  more  satisfactory; 

That,  this  being  so,  I  saw  clearly  that  the  movement  just  produced 
in  London  was  not  a  political  matter  but  a  domestic  intrigue  designed 
to  overthrow  the  ministry  and  gain  power; 

That  the  negotiations  at  Amiens  have  been  languishing  for  a  fort- 
night through  the  fault  of  the  English  cabinet,  and  that  for  a  month, 
since  we  presented  our  second  draft,  the  discussion  has  been  of  little 
interest  or  importance; 

That  I  have  begun  to  resent  the  threatening  air  of  the  English 
Government,  as  though  I  had  to  be  forced  to  make  peace  and  as  if 
the  power  of  England  were  really  such  as  to  be  able  to  force  me; 

I  signed  the  preliminaries  because  it  was  necessary  to  put  an  end  to 
the  evils  of  war,  and  the  immense  advantages  England  gained  thereby 
were  the  result  of  negotiations  not  of  force; 

That  today,  as  for  the  past  fortnight,  the  King  of  England  is  in  a 
position  to  conclude,  since  there  is  no  longer  any  point  in  dispute;  but 
that  if  the  King  wants  war  he  will  be  responsible  for  the  consequences; 
that  in  any  case  he  is  free  to  make  it,  but  this  menace  and  bluster  is  an 
improper  tone  to  adopt  towards  France. 

*  A  congress  held  in  January,  1802,  and  attended  by  Bonaparte,  to  draw  up  the 
political  systems  of  the  new  republics  in  Italy.  Lucchesini  was  Prussian  ambassador. 

5i6  The  Rise  to  Power 

I  want  Citizen  Otto  to  speak  forcefully  and  to  repeat  what  he  says 
so  that  it  sinks  in,  even  if  he  is  assured  that  the  ministry  has  given  orders 
to  sign;  I  want  it  to  be  well  known  that  threats  will  never  succeed 
with  the  French  Government. 

BONAPARTE 

740 
To  Citizen  Joseph  Bonaparte 

Minister  Plenipotentiary  to  the  Conference  of  Amiens  Malmaison 

21  VentSse,  Year  X  (12  Mar,  1802} 

Moustache  has  just  arrived.  I  have  already  told  you,  by  the 
courier  who  left  three  hours  ago,  that  I  attach  no  importance  to  the 
recognition  of  Liguria.  I  attach  no  more  to  the  secret  article  about 
Naples,  since  it  is  pointless,  and  even  with  the  best  will  I  cannot 
evacuate  Taranto  with  the  artillery,  etc.  in  less  than  three  months:  these 
are  quite  useless  articles. 

So  I  see  no  further  obstacle  to  peace.  You  must  just  take  care  to 
draft  the  article  on  prisoners  in  a  form  that  does  not  prevent  Portugal 
paying  us  what  she  owes  under  the  secret  articles  in  her  own  treaty. 
This  is  for  your  guidance,  as  you  must  not  say  a  word  of  it,  since 
England  has  never  mentioned  it. 

You  can  tell  Lord  Cornwallis  personally  that  the  King  of  Prussia 
has  recognized  the  Italian  Republic  and  had  his  ambassador  congratu- 
late me  on  the  results  of  the  Congress  of  Lyons, . . . 

You  will  also  inform  Lord  Cornwallis  that  I  am  not  deceived  by  the 
hostile  movements  in  London;  that  these  are  no  European  intrigues, 
but  cabinet  intrigues  to  bring  about  a  change  of  ministers,  and  that  I 
shall  blame  England  if  such  miserable  intrigues  rekindle  war.  Add,  too, 
that  I  am  quite  convinced  that  with  the  situation  in  Europe  as  it  is, 
England  alone  could  not  reasonably  make  war  against  us. 

If  you  think  peace  will  be  signed  within  twenty-four  hours,  keep 
Moustache;  you  will  send  him  to  London  to  inform  Otto. 

BONAPARTE 

741 
To  Citizen  Joseph  Bonaparte 

Minister  Plenipotentiary  to  the  Conference  of  Amiens  Malmaison 

21  VentSse,  Year  X  (12  Mar,  1802} 

It  is  midnight.  I  learn  by  telegraph  from  Brest  that  our  fleet  reached 
Santo  Domingo  on  16  Pluvi&se;  that  our  army  has  landed  and  the 
Cape  and  the  whole  of  the  superb  plain  to  the  north  are  occupied  by 
our  troops.  I  hasten  to  send  you  this  news  so  you  can  make  such  use 
of  it  as  you  see  fit. 

BONAPARTE 

LunMlle  and  Amiens  517 

742 
To  Citizen  Roederer 

Councillor  of  State  Paris 

25  Ventose,  Year  X  (16  Mar,  1802) 

I  need  a  man  going  to  England  who  is  intelligent,  can  judge  men 
and  has  his  eyes  open.  Citizen  Fiev6e  seems  to  me  such  a  man.  See 
if  I  can  count  on  him  for  this  mission.  All  he  will  have  to  do  is  move 
around,  see  all  that  he  can  and  send  me  reports  on  the  movement  of 
public  opinion,  the  administration,  in  a  word  all  that  is  happening  to 
the  English  nation.  But  since  this  first  mission  may  lead  him  to  others, 
it  is  desirable  that  his  position  should  be  clear;  he  should  have  no  contact 
with  those  who  are  fomenting  troubles  in  France,  but  should  adhere 
to  the  part  of  one  who  supports  the  Government  and  show  it  in  all 
his  talk. 

Let  me  know  if  I  can  count  on  him. 

BONAPARTE 

743 
Note 

Paris 
25  Ventose,  Year  X(l6  Mar,  1802) 

The  article  on  Malta  fixes  no  term  for  the  stay  of  the  Neapolitan 
troops.  This  should  be  three  years,  following  the  English  proposal. 
There  should  be  added  at  the  end  of  paragraph  12  the  words:  'but  the 
troops  cajinot  remain  beyond  1805*. 

The  wording  of  article  18  is  extremely  faulty.  We  cannot  say, 
'France  will  procure  to  the  House  of  Nassau',  since  we  cannot  make 
a  positive  undertaking  as  to  something  that  does  not  belong  to  us;  we 
are  not  masters  of  Germany.  It  should  read:  'The  contracting  parties 
will  use  their  influence  at  the  final  settlement  of  the  affairs  of  Germany 
to  procure  an  indemnity  to  the  Prince  of  Nassau.' 

Article  19  on  the  Sublime  Porte  should  be  the  last  of  all.  The  words 
ally  of  His  Britannic  Majesty  must  be  deleted,  for  they  do  not  describe 
the  Porte,  which  is  a  great  enough  power  to  have  an  existence  of  its 
own.  I  would  prefer  it  to  read  simply:  'The  terms  of  the  present  treaty 
apply  to  the  Sublime  Porte/ 

BONAPARTE 

744 
To  Citizen  Joseph  Bonaparte 

Minister  Plenipotentiary  to  the  Congress  of  Amiens  Paris 

1  Germinal,  Year  X  (22  Mar,  1802) 

I  have  been  shown  your  last  letter.  Your  conduct,  especially  the 
reserve  you  have  shown,  is  fitting. 

5i 8  The  Rise  to  Power 

We  seem  now  to  be  once  again  in  agreement.  Otto  sends  that,  on  the 
prisoners,  the  ministers  have  agreed  that  what  France  has  spent  on 
prisoners  captured  from  England's  allies  shall  count  for  compensation. 
I  think  that  satisfactory. 

As  to  Malta  there  would  be  no  harm  in  declaring  that  the  grand- 
mastership  is  vacant,  since  it  is  a  fact;  it  is  to  be  understood  that  as  a 
result  of  the  article  stating  that  neither  the  English  nor  the  French  will 
have  a  Language  no  French  native  can  be  appointed  Grandmaster. 
This  reservation  applies  particularly  to  the  Bourbons,  since  it  is  said 
that  England  plans  to  have  a  Bourbon  as  Grandmaster.  It  is  our  inten- 
tion that  the  emigrants  should  play  no  part  in  the  choice  since  there 
is  no  French  Language  and  the  emigrants  are  still  French  although 
proscribed.  . .  . 

It  is  most  important  that  there  is  no  question  of  nobility;  that  con- 
flicts with  our  forms,  and  we  cannot  discuss  it.  It  would  be  absurd  to 
make  us  say  that  one  must  be  noble  to  enter  the  Order  of  Malta.  Not 
to  mention  it  is  the  sensible  via  media.  This  is  most  important. 

It  is  also  important  to  place  the  article  on  Turkey  at  the  end  and  to 
delete  the  words  ally  of  Great  Britain]  otherwise  it  would  be  necessary 
to  say:  ally  of  Russia,  of  the  Emperor,  former  ally  of  France.  The  best 
thing  is  to  suppress  the  words  ally  of  Great  Britain.  This  is  very  im- 
portant, for  these  words  alone  would  give  England  a  kind  of  supremacy 
which  we  cannot  accept. 

I  have  just  received  letters  from  Santo  Domingo,  dated  I  VentSse; 
they  are  very  good.  Port-R6publicain*  has  been  taken  with  all  its 
forts  and  with  nothing  having  been  burnt.  Toussaint's  military  chest, 
containing  2,500,000  francs,  has  been  captured.  Port  de  la  Paix  and 
Saint-Dominique  are  occupied.  The  Spanish  part  has  submitted,  and 
General  Leclerc  left  on  the  29th  to  attack  Toussaint,  who  was  in  the 
field  with  7,000  to  8,000  men.  I  enclose  a  letter  from  Jerome, 

BONAPARTB 

745 
To  Citizen  Talleyrand 

Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs  Paris 

3  Germinal,  Year  X  (24  Mar,  1802} 

You  will  find  attached  the  dispatches  I  have  received  from  Joseph. 

France  has  always  refused  the  title  of  Prince  of  Orange  to  the  Stadt- 
halter;  we  cannot  change  this  custom. 

The  third  draft  of  the  articles  on  the  Porte  is  the  best. 

As  for  the  Barbary  states,  we  must  point  out,  either  by  inserting  it 
in  the  protocol  or  by  a  note,  which  is  the  same  thing,  how  unsuitable 
it  is  for  the  Order  of  Malta,  which  was  instituted  to  make  war  on 
*  Port-au-Prince. 

Lun  faille  and  Amiens  519 

them,  to  admit  them  to  its  ports,  whence  they  would  ravage  even  the 
states  of  the  Pope.  How  could  Portugal,  always  in  a  state  of  war  with 
them,  suffer  its  merchant  ships  to  be  captured  as  they  left  the  harbour 
of  Malta?  That  would  be  contrary  to  all  usual  ideas  and  upset  the 
nature  of  things.  It  would  be  best  not  to  mention  the  Barbary  states 
at  all,  and  if  our  plenipotentiary  is  just  thinking  of  Genoa  I  will  force 
them  to  respect  the  Genoese  flag  whenever  I  see  fit. 

Once  he  has  held  firm  on  this  and  presented  the  note  or  insertion 
in  the  protocol,  the  French  plenipotentiary  is  authorized  to  go  ahead 
and  he  will  not  delay  signature  of  the  treaty  for  one  hour  over  this 
article;  it  is  enough  for  me  to  make  clear  that  it  was  the  English  who 
wanted  this  absurd  injustice. 

Thus  the  plenipotentiary  is  authorized  to  sign  once  he  has  deleted 
the  word  noble  from  the  article  on  Malta,  the  words  Prince  of  Orange 
which  we  cannot  recognize,  has  adopted  the  third  draft  relating  to 
Turkey  and  presented  two  notes,  one  on  emigrant  knights  of  Malta, 
the  other  on  the  Barbary  states. 

BONAPARTE 

746 
To  Citizen  Melzi 

Vice-President  of  the  Italian  Republic*  Paris 

5  Germinal,  Year  X  (26  Mar,  1802) 

Citizen  Melzi,  Vice-President  of  the  Italian  Republic,  you  will  find 
attached  the  final  treaty  of  peace  with  England. 

There  is  no  mention  of  the  King  of  Etruria,  or  the  Ligurian,  Italian 
and  Helvetic  Republics;  but  it  will  not  be  long  before  they  are  properly 
recognized.  .  . . 

I  see  with  great  pleasure  that  the  Republic  begins  to  be  organized 
and  that  my  plans  for  its  well-being  and  prosperity  will  soon  be 
realized. 

The  news  from  America  is  extremely  satisfactory. 

BONAPARTE 

747 
To  Rear- Admiral  Lacrosse 

C.-w-C.,  West  Indies  Squadron  Paris 

22  Germinal,  Year  X  (12  Apr,  1802) 

Citizen  Rear-Admiral,  it  is  laid  down  in  articles  3  and  12  of  the 

treaty  of  Peace  signed  at  Amiens  on  4  Germinal,  Year  X,  that  His 

Britannic  Majesty  will  restore  to  the  French  Republic  all  possessions 

and  colonies  formerly  belonging  to  it  which  have  been  occupied  or 

*  Bonaparte  had  himself  been  elected  President. 

520  The  Rise  to  Power 

conquered  by  British  forces  during  the  present  war,  and  that,  in 
America,  this  restitution  will  take  place  within  three  months  of 
ratification  of  the  treaty.  I  write  to  tell  you  that,  having  chosen  you  as 
Commissioner  of  the  Consuls  to  receive  the  island  of  Tobago  from 
His  Britannic  Majesty  in  accordance  with  article  13  of  the  above  treaty, 
it  is  my  intention  that  you  agree  with  the  commander  of  the  English 
forces  as  to  the  day  on  which  you  will  take  possession  of  the  said 
island  of  Tobago  in  the  name  of  the  French  Republic  in  pursuance  of 
the  powers  I  give  you  by  this  present. 

BONAPARTE 

748 
To  Rear- Admiral  Decrfes 

Minister  of  Marine  and  Colonies  Paris 

25  Germinal,  Year  X  (25  Apr,  1802] 

We  must  take  possession  of  the  Indies,  Citizen  Minister,  within  six 
months  of  ratification  of  the  treaty  at  the  latest,  that  is  before  I  Bru- 
maire,  Year  XL  The  colonial  prefect  or  some  other  agent,  with  a  few 
junior  employees  and  engineer  and  artillery  officers,  must  be  sent 
straight  to  Pondicherry  by  corvette  as  soon  as  possible.  General 
Montigny  might  be  sent.  This  commissioner  should  arrive  before  the 
end  of  Thermidor,  so  as  to  make  all  arrangements  for  the  resumption 
of  possession  and  to  send  us  news  of  the  situation  in  India. 

The  expedition  we  shall  have  to  send  has  two  parts:  first  to  take 
possession  of  Mauritius;  second,  to  take  possession  of  India.  I  wish  each 
to  consist  of  at  least  two  battleships. 

It  seems  that  to  occupy  Mauritius  will  need  2,000  men.  I  wish  them 
to  be  ready  to  leave  Toulon  before  the  end  of  Flor^al.  I  wish  the  second 
expedition  to  be  ready  a  month  later* 

The  first  must  carry  the  Captain-General  of  Mauritius,  the  second 
the  Captain-General  of  India.  Send  me  a  report  on  all  these  matters. 

BONAPARTE 

749 
Minute 

Paris 

9  Florlal,  Year  X  (29  Apr,  1802) 

[General  Napper-Tancty  informs  the  First  Consul  that,  his  property  being 
confiscated,  his  sole  resource  is  the  generosity  of  the  French  Government.] 

The  Minister  of  War  will  at  once  have  him  given  a  gratuity  of 
6,000  francs  and  will  send  me  a  report  as  to  what  should  be  done  with 
him. 

BONAPARTE 

Luneville  and  Amiens  521 

750 
To  the  Legislative  Corps 

Paris 
l6Floreal,  Year  X  (6 May,  1802) 

Citizen  Legislators,  the  Government  lays  before  you  the  treaty  which 
puts  an  end  to  the  last  dissensions  of  Europe  and  completes  the  great 
work  of  peace. 

The  Republic  fought  for  its  independence;  its  independence  is 
recognized;  the  oath  of  all  the  powers  confirms  the  rights  which  it 
derives  from  nature  and  the  frontiers  which  it  owes  to  its  victories. 

A  new  republic  has  been  born  out  of  it,  has  absorbed  its  principles 
and  adopted  at  its  source  the  ancient  spirit  of  the  Gauls.  Attached  to 
France  by  the  memory  of  a  common  origin,  by  common  institutions, 
and  above  all  by  the  bond  of  interest,  the  Italian  Republic  has  taken 
its  place  among  the  powers  as  among  our  allies;  it  will  remain  there 
by  its  courage  and  achieve  distinction  by  its  virtues. 

Restored  to  unity  and  freed  from  that  divided  influence  which  has 
bewildered  its  counsels  and  led  its  policy  astray,  Holland  has  regained 
its  freedom  and  finds  in  the  nation  that  had  conquered  it  the  surest 
guarantee  of  its  existence  and  its  rights.  The  wisdom  of  its  government 
will  preserve  its  splendour,  and  the  busy  energy  of  its  citizens  will 
restore  its  prosperity. 

The  Helvetic  Republic,  though  recognized  by  others,  is  still  torn 
within  by  factions  struggling  for  power.  Faithful  to  its  principles,  the 
Government  has  been  unable  to  bring  to  bear  on  an  independent 
nation  any  influence  beyond  advice.  Hitherto,  that  advice  has  been 
ineffective,  but  it  still  hopes  that  the  voice  of  wisdom  and  moderation 
will  be  heard,  and  that  the  powers  adjoining  Switzerland  will  not  be 
forced  to  intervene  to  suppress  troubles  whose  continuance  would 
endanger  their  own  tranquillity. 

The  Republic  owed  it  to  the  fidelity  of  Spain  and  to  its  own  under- 
takings to  make  every  effort  to  preserve  that  nation's  integrity.  It  has 
carried  out  this  duty  throughout  all  the  negotiations  in  every  way  that 
the  situation  allowed.  The  King  of  Spain  has  recognized  the  loyalty 
of  his  allies,  and  at  the  peace  his  generosity  has  made  the  sacrifice  we 
had  tried  to  spare  him.  Thereby  he  has  acquired  new  rights  to  the 
support  of  France  and  a  sacred  title  to  the  gratitude  of  Europe. 
Returning  trade  is  already  restoring  his  dominions  after  the  calamities 
of  war  and  a  robust  spirit  will  soon  bring  new  energy  and  industry 
to  his  vast  possessions. 

Rome,  Naples  and  Etruria  have  returned  to  calm  and  the  arts  of 
peace.  Lucca  has  found  quiet  and  independence  under  a  constitution 
that  has  united  its  people  and  extinguished  hatred.  Liguria  has  based 

522  The  Rise  to  Power 

its  affairs  on  the  absence  of  party  strife,  and  trade  and  wealth  once  more 
flow  into  the  port  of  Genoa. 

The  Republic  of  the  Seven  Islands  is  still,  like  Switzerland,  a  prey 
to  anarchy;  but,  in  agreement  with  France,  the  Emperor  of  Russia  is 
sending  the  troops  he  had  at  Naples  to  take  back  to  those  happy  lands 
the  only  goods  they  lack:  tranquillity,  the  rule  of  law  and  the  absence 
of  hatred  and  faction. 

Thus,  from  one  end  of  the  continent  to  the  other  and  on  the  seas 
Europe  sees  peace  returning  and  its  welfare  established  on  the  agree- 
ment of  the  great  powers  and  on  respect  for  treaties. 

In  America  the  known  principles  of  the  Government  have  restored 
complete  security  to  Martinique,  Tobago  and  Santa  Lucia.  They  no 
longer  fear  the  rule  of  those  foolish  laws  which  would  have  brought 
death  and  devastation  to  the  colonies.  They  aspire  only  to  rejoin  the 
mother  country  and,  with  their  trust  and  devotion,  they  bring  to  it 
no  less  prosperity  than  before. 

In  Santo  Domingo  great  evil  has  occurred  and  there  is  great  damage 
to  repair.  But  each  day  the  revolt  is  more  nearly  suppressed.  Without 
fortresses,  without  money,  without  an  army,  Toussaint  is  no  more  than 
a  brigand  wandering  from  hill  to  hill  with  a  few  others  like  himself 
•whom  our  intrepid  patrols  are  pursuing  and  will  soon  have  destroyed. 

There  is  peace  in  Mauritius  and  India.  The  first  steps  of  the  Govern- 
ment have  already  carried  back  to  them  love  for  the  Republic, 
confidence  in  its  laws  and  every  hope  of  prosperity. 

Many  years  will  now  pass  for  us  without  victories,  without  triumphs, 
without  those  great  negotiations  that  decide  the  destiny  of  states.  But 
nations,  above  all  the  Republic,  should  be  marked  by  other  successes. 
Everywhere  industry  is  reviving,  everywhere  trade  and  the  arts  are 
joining  to  efface  the  miseries  of  war.  Work  of  every  kind  demands  the 
thought  of  the  Government. 

The  Government  will  carry  out  this  new  task  with  success  for  so 
long  as  it  is  supported  by  the  opinion  of  the  French  people. 

Future  years  will,  it  is  true,  be  less  illustrious;  but  the  happiness  of 
France  will  increase  through  the  chances  of  glory  she  will  have  laid 
aside. 

BONAPARTE 

Table  of  Dates,  Addressees,  Subjects  and  Sources 

DEMOCRATIC  INNOCENCE  DEMOCRATIC  HUMILITY 

The  young  Bonaparte  and  his  wretched  Bonaparte  when  a  boy  received  thro'  the 

Relatives  in  their  native  Poverty,  while  King's  bounty  into  the  Ecole  Militaire  at 
Free  Booters  in  the  Island  of  Corsica  Paris 

DEMOCRATIC  RELIGION 

Bonaparte  turning  Turk  at  Cairo  for 
Interest,  after  swearing  on  the  Sacrament 
to  support  y*  Catholic  Faith 

DEMOCRATIC  CONSOLATIONS 

Bonaparte  on  his  Couch  surrounded  by  the 

Ghosts  of  the  Murder* d>  the  dangers  which 

threaten  his  Usurpation,  and  all  the  Horrors 

of  Final  Retribution 

'Democracy,  or  a  Sketch  of  the  life  of  Bonaparte' 

Four  of  a  series  of  eight  cartoons  by  Gillray  published  in  May,  1800 

^  OURCBS  ARE  INDICATED  BY  A  PREFDC  LETTER,  OR  LETTER  AND  HGURB,  AND  A 

^numeral.  The  prefix  letter  shows  the  source-book  referred  to,  the  numeral 
W-/  the  number  of  the  document  there  if  the  documents  are  numbered,  otherwise 
the  page  reference.  Volume  numbers  are  not  given  unless  the  documents  are  un- 
numbered; they  are  then  shown  by  small  roman  numerals  after  the  prefix  letter. 
The  following  are  the  prefix  letters  used  and  the  books  they  represent: 

Bi  de  Brotonne:  Lettres  inldites  de  NapoUon  I 

B2  de  Brotonne:  Demises  Lettres  incites  de  NapoUon  I 

C  Correspondence  de  Napoleon  I 

Ce  Cerf:  Lettres  de  NapoUon  djostphine 

Ch  Chuquet:  Ordres  et  Apostilles  de  Napoleon 

D  Duguit  and  Monnier:  Les  Constitutions  et  les  principals  Lois  politiejues  de  la 

France 

]  du  Casse:  Mdmoires  de  Roi  Joseph 

L  Lecestre:  Lettres  incites  de  NapoUon  I 

M  Masson:  NapoUon  Inconnu 

The  following  are  the  periods  and  serial  numbers  of  documents  covered  by  the 
seven  volumes  of  the  Correspondance  which  are  quoted: 

Vol.  I  25  Oct,  1793-21  Sept,  1796  Nos.  1-1018 

II  22  Sept,  1796-19  Apr,  1797  1019-1746 

III  20  Apr,  1797-4  Mar,  1798  1747-24^5 

IV  5  Mar,  1798-21  Sept,  1798  2426-3364 

V  22  Sept,  1798-15  Oct,  1799  33<55-4383 

VI  19  Oct,  1799-29  Jan,  1801  4384-5332 

VII  2  Fcb,  1801-18  Aug,  1802  5333-6258 

No.    Date     Addressee  Subject  Source 

1784 

1  12.10    Carlo  B.  Joseph's  education  Mi    82 

1785 

2  23.3      Archdcn.  Lucciano  B.  Death  of  his  father  Mi  120 

3  28.3      Letizia  B.  Death  of  his  father  Mi  121 

1786 

4  3.5      Note  Reflections  on  suicide  Mi  145 

5  29.7     Borde  Order  for  books  Mi  138 

1787 

6  1.4     Tissot  His  uncle's  gout  Mi  167 

7  21.4     S6gur  Extension  of  leave  Mi  170 

8  22.11    Note  Meeting  with  prostitute  Mi  181 

1788 

9  -.6     Note  ^Periods  of  his  life  Mi   16 

10  -.7     Notes  History  of  England  Mi  340 

11  23.10    Dissertation  Authority  of  longs  Mi   53 

L.D.N.— s 

526 

Tht 

?  Rise  to  Power 

No. 

Date 

Addressee 

Subject 

Source 

1789 

12 

12.  1 

Letizk  B. 

His  health:  political  news 

Mii  528 

13 

2.4 

The  Intendant 

Affair  of  the  plantation 

Mi  215 

14 

12.6 

Paoli 

Writings  on  Corsica 

Mii   64 

1791 

15 

8.2 

Fesch 

Political  opinion  in  France 

Mii  195 

16 

24.4 

Joseph  B. 

Louis's  education 

Mii  203 

17 

3-4 

Le  Sancquer 

Request  not  to  be  posted 

Mii  205 

18 

-.6 

Notes 

Rousseau;  state  of  nature 

Mii  285 

1792 

19 

17.2 

Sucy    , 

Has  he  been  replaced? 

Mii  339 

20 

27.2 

Sucy 

His  post  in  National  Guard 

Mii  340 

21 

-.4 

Regulations 

National  Guard 

Mii  353 

22 

29.5 

Joseph  B. 

Political  news  from.  Paris 

Mii  387 

^3 

18.6 

Joseph  B. 

State  of  parties;  Marianna 

Mii  390 

24 

22.6 

Joseph  B. 

Invasion  of  Tuileries 

Mii  392 

25 

3-7 

Lucien  B. 

Political  news;  advice 

Mii  396 

26 

7-8 

Joseph  B. 

•"•"News  and  plans 

Mii  403 

27 

1-9 

Versailles 

Marianna's  return  home 

Mii  407 

28 

18.10 

Costa 

Supplies  for  battalion 

Mii  411 

1793 

29 

1.6 

Note 

Situation  in  Corsica 

Mii  462 

30 

3-7 

Bouchotte 

Reverberating  furnaces 

Mii  472 

31 

25.10 

Com.  Public  Safety 

Needs  of  artillery  at  Toulon 

C      I 

32 

4.11 

Gassendi 

Request  for  equipment 

C     3 

33 

14.11 

Bouchotte 

«-*Plan  of  attack  on  Toulon 

C  4-5 

34 

25.11 

Minutes 

Council  of  War 

C      8 

35 

7.12 

Gassendi 

Account  of  English  sortie 

C    it 

36 

24.12 

Dupin 

Capture  of  Toulon 

C     12 

1794 

37 

20.1 

Bouchotte 

Manning  of  batteries 

C    14 

38 

12.2 

Com.  Public  Safety 

Economy  in  the  artillery 

C    17 

39 

28.2 

Com.  Public  Safety 

Plans  for  arming  the  coast 

C    21 

40 

1.3 

Berlier 

The  fleet  at  sea 

C   23 

41 

2.4 

Manceaux 

Request  for  cartridges 

C    24 

42 

16.6 

Pille 

Interference  by  Thevenard 

C   29 

43 

25.6 

Berlier 

Incompetence  at  La  Brague 

C    31 

44 

12.8 

Junot 

Plan  to  release  B.  rejected 

C    35 

45 

14.8 

Albitte,  etc. 

Resignation 

Bl       2 

4<5 

15.9 

Multedo 

Reproach  for  failing  to  aid  B. 

C    36 

47 

23.9 

Multedo 

Operations  of  Army  of  Italy 

C    37 

1795 

48 

23.5 

Joseph  B. 

An  estate  at  Ragny 

Ji  129 

49 

22.6 

Joseph  B. 

Command  in  Army  of  the  West 

C   41 

50 

24.6 

Joseph  B. 

Assurance  of  friendship 

C   42 

51 

6.7 

Joseph  B. 

English  landing  in  Brittany 

C   43 

Tii 

Vk  of  Sources,  etc. 

527 

No.    Date     Addressee 

Subject 

Source 

52    12.7     Joseph  B. 

Luxury  in  Paris 

C   44 

53      -.7      Note 

Plan  for  Army  of  Italy 

C    50 

54    30.7     JosephB. 

The  Terror  over;  Lucien 

C    54 

55    17.8      Sucy 

Infantry  command  refused 

C    55 

56    20.8     Joseph  B. 

Possibility  of  Turkish  post 

C    56 

57    30.8      Com.  Public  Safety 

Mission  to  Turkey  proposed 

C   61 

58      5-9     Joseph  B, 

Unable  to  leave  France;  news 

C   64 

59      6.9     Joesph  B. 

The  Constitution 

C   65 

60    15.9     Joseph  B. 

Quotation  concerning  B. 

C   69 

61    27.9     Joseph  B. 

Turkish  journey  probable 

C   71 

62      6.10   JosephB. 

Events  of  13  Vend6miaire 

C   72 

63      7.10    Report 

Events  of  13  Vend6miaire 

C    73 

64    n.io    Clary 

Introduction  for  Fr&on 

B2     9 

65      i.n    Joseph  B. 

Names  of  Directors 

C    77 

66    17.11    Joseph  B. 

Provision  for  the  family 

Jii57 

67    24.11    Chiteauneuf-Randon  Stoves  in  barracks 

B2     12 

68    19.12    Faypoult 

The  army  short  of  money 

C   80 

69      -.12   Josephine 

First  love  letter 

Ce     i 

1796 

70    19.1      Note 

Plans  for  Army  of  Italy 

C   83 

71    27.1      Merlin 

Troops  not  undisciplined 

Bi     5 

72    12.2     The  Directory 

Progress  of  insurrection 

C    85 

73    29.2      Aubert-Dubayet 

Supplies  for  Army  of  Italy 

C    87 

74    11.3      Letourneur 

Announcement  of  his  marriage 

C    89 

75    28.3      The  Directory 

«*  Assumption  of  command 

C   94 

76    29.3      Order  of  the  Day 

Review;  appointments 

C  104 

77    30.3      Berthier 

Meat  issue 

C  105 

78    31,3      Berthier 

Money  held  by  officers 

Cio6 

79    31-3      Chabran 

Move  of  H.Q.  to  Albenga 

C  109 

80      1.4      Berthier 

Various  appointments 

C  no 

81      1.4      Sucy 

Purchase  of  supplies 

C  112 

82      1.4     Faypoult 

Strength  of  Gavi 

C  113 

83      3.4      Order  of  the  Day 

'Issue  of  equipment,  etc. 

C  115 

84      3-4     Josephine 

Sorrow  at  being  parted 

Ce     7 

85      6.4     The  Directory 

-Enemy  movements,  etc. 

C  121 

86      8.4     The  Directory 

Royalism  in  the  army 

Ci26 

87    11.4      Augereau 

Order  to  occupy  Cairo 

C  131 

88    11.4      Massena 

Order  to  occupy  Altare 

Ci33 

89    1  1-4     Mass6na 

Orders  for  Dommartin,  Joubert 

Cl34 

90    11.4     Laharpe 

To  move  to  Monte-Legino 

Ci35 

91    11.4      S6rurier 

To  hold  Piedmontese 

Cl36 

92    12.4      Laharpe 

Congratulations  and  orders 

CI37 

93     12.4      Mass6na 

Order  to  support  Laharpe 

Cis8 

94    12.4      Order  of  the  Day 

Victory  of  Montenotte 

Cl39 

95    14.4     The  Directory 

Battle  of  Montenotte 

Ci48 

96    22.4      Order  of  the  Day 

Victory  of  Mondovi 

C2I3 

97    22.4      Order  of  the  Day 

Measures  against  looting 

C2I4 

98    23.4      Colli 

Conditions  for  armistice 

C2I9 

99    24.4     The  Directory 

Discipline  in  the  army 

C220 

ioo    24.4     The  Directory 

Piedmont  seeking  armistice 

C222 

101    24.4     Petiet 

Shortage  of  artillery 

C224 

528 

The 

Rise  to  Power 

No.    Date 

Addressee 

Subject 

Source 

102     24.4 

Order 

Passport  for  Junot,  Joseph 

C225 

103      24.4 

Josephine 

To  join  him  at  once 

Ce    13 

104     274 

Armistice 

Bonaparte's  conditions 

C252 

105     28.4 

The  Directory 

Plans  of  campaign 

C257 

106      6.5 

The  Directory 

Plans  for  crossing  the  Po 

C337 

107      6.5 

The  Directory 

Thanks  for  decree 

C338 

108      6.5 

Letourneur 

Responsibility  of  generals 

C339 

109      8.5 

Lanusse 

Patrols  in  Piacenza 

C36i 

no      8.5 

Lambert 

To  set  up  hospital 

C362 

III      8.5 

Stengel  family 

Condolences  on  his  death 

C3<53 

112        9.5 

The  Directory 

The  Po  crossed 

€365 

H3        9-5 

Camot 

News  and  requests 

C366 

114      9-5 

The  Directory 

Officer  casualties,  etc. 

C367 

"5      9-5 

Order  of  the  Day 

Death  of  Laharpe 

C37<5 

116    10.5 

Order  of  the  Day 

Battle  of  Lodi 

C38I 

117    10.5 

The  Directory 

Battle  of  Lodi 

0382 

118     11.5 

Carnot 

Co-operation  with  Rhine  army 

C383 

"9    13.5 

Faypoult 

Thanks  for  drawings 

C4I7 

120     13.5 

Josephine 

Her  pregnancy 

Ce    18 

121      14.5 

The  Directory 

Division  of  command 

0420 

122      14.5 

Carnot 

Reply  to  Directory 

C42I 

123      14.5 

Joseph  B. 

Josephine's  illness 

Jii59 

124      16.5 

de  Lamy 

Summons  to  surrender 

C426 

125      16.5 

Lombard  Communes 

Oath  of  obedience 

C427 

126      17.5 

The  Directory 

Republicanism  in  Lombardy 

C437 

127    17-5 

Lallement 

Request  for  intelligence 

C44I 

128    17.5 

Order  of  the  Day 

Equipment  and  discipline 

C442 

129    18.5 

The  Directory 

Pictures  sent  to  Paris 

C443 

130    18.5 

The  Directory 

Dispatch  of  silver  and  jewels 

C44<5 

131    18.5 

de  Lamy 

Proposals  accepted 

C448 

132    18.5 

City  of  Milan 

Service  of  meals  limited 

C449 

133   19.5 

People  of  Lombardy 

Levy  of  contribution 

C453 

134  19.5 

Decree 

Government  of  Lombardy 

0454 

135    20.5 

The  Army               -«»Past  and  future  victories 

C46i 

136    20.5 

Barthelemy 

Request  for  intelligence 

C468 

137  21.5 

Ramel 

Request  for  funds 

C469 

138    21.5 

Dujard 

Orders  not  carried  out 

0472 

139   22.5 

The  Directory 

Intercepted  letters,  etc* 

C478 

140  23.5 

Josephine 

She  does  not  write 

Ce  21 

141  24.5 

Oriani 

Freedom  of  learning 

C49* 

142  24.5 

Milan  and  Pavia 

Opening  of  university 

C492 

143  25.5 

People  of  Lombardy 

Call  to  end  revolt 

C493 

144    25.5 

Despinoy 

Trial  of  insurgents 

C494 

145      *-<5 

Bessicres 

Equipment  of  Guides 

C349 

146      3.6" 

The  Directory 

Amphitheatre  at  Verona 

C5S9 

147      8.6 

The  Directory 

Mantua  invested 

Cs87 

148      8.6 

Petiet 

Thanks  for  support 

€588 

149      8.6 

Clarke 

Dangers  of  the  autumn 

0590 

150      8.6 

Lambert 

Medical  supplies 

C593 

151      8.6 

Order  of  the  Day 

Admissions  to  hospital 

v 
C595 

152      9-<5 

KeUermann 

Request  for  reinforcements 

C599 

153    10.6 

Chasseloup 

Flooding  of  Mantua 

C603 

Table  of  Sources,  etc. 

529 

No.    Date     Addressee 

Subject 

Source 

154    10.6      Lambert 

Supplies  from  Venice 

C604 

155    1  1.6      The  Directory 

Restitution  to  Laharpe 

C6i2 

156    1  1.6      Moreau 

Dispatch  of  funds 

C6i3 

157    1  1.6      Comeyras 

Supplies  of  com 

C6i4 

158    14.6      Berthier 

Trial  of  prisoners 

C63I 

159    14.6      Lambert 

Thefts  by  contractors 

C637 

160    21.6     The  Directory 

The  military  situation 

C664 

161    21.6      The  Directory 

Relations  with  Pope 

C665 

162    23.6      Duke  of  Tuscany 

Occupation  of  Leghorn 

C678 

163    23.6     Lallement 

Requests  for  daily  reports 

C679 

164    26.6      The  Directory 

Armistice  with  Pope 

C685 

165    17.7     Josephine 

He  loves  her  more  and  more 

Ce    35 

166    20.7      Garrau 

Commissioners'  powers 

C773 

167    20.7      Miot 

English  occupation  of  Elba 

C774 

168    22.7     Josephine 

Generals'  affaires 

Ce   42 

169      9.8      Carnot 

Lucien's  behaviour 

C858 

170      9.8      City  of  Milan 

Commendation 

C86o 

171    12.8      City  of  Brescia 

Sick  to  be  cared  for 

C87I 

172    14.8      The  Directory 

Report  on  generals 

C890 

173     14.8      The  Directory 

Retort  to  journalists 

C  891 

174    25.8      Sauret 

Reason  for  posting 

C922 

175    26.8      The  Directory 

Cowardice  of  commissaries 

C925 

176    26.8      The  Directory 

Negotiations  with  Venice 

C926 

177    31-8      The  Directory 

Sale  of  captured  goods 

C944 

178    31.8      Moreau 

Joint  operations 

C945 

179    16.9      Berthier 

Siege  of  Mantua 

C  looi 

1  80    16.9      Kilmaine 

Orders  for  siege 

C  1002 

181    21.9      Sardinia 
1  82    26.9      Senate  of  Bologna 

Brigandage 
Defence  of  liberty 

C  1018 
CI035 

183    27.9      Berthier 

Genoese  intriguers 

184    28.9      Chasseloup 

To  flood  Mantua 

C  1041 

185    30.9     Berthier 

Hostages  to  be  freed 

C  1045 

1  86      2.10    The  Emperor 

Threat  to  Adriatic 

C  1061 

187    16.10    Wurmser 

Call  to  surrender 

C  1092 

1  88    16.10    Garrau 

The  Flachat  company 

Ci093 

189    17.10    The  Directory 

Occupation  of  Corsica 

Cioo<5 

190    17.10    Cacault 

Mediterranean  free 

Ci098 

191    21.10    Mattei 

Mission  to  Pope 

C  1104 

192    24.10    The  Directory 

Action  against  Modena 

Cno<5 

193    24.10    Cacault 

Policy  towards  Rome 

C  1107 

194    25.10    Carnot 

Handling  of  Lucien 

C  mi 

195    n.ii    The  Army 

The  coming  struggle 

C  1180 

196    13.11    The  Directory 

Plight  of  the  army 

C  1182 

197    19.11    The  Directory 

Battle  of  Arcola 

C  1196 

198    19.11    Clarke 

Death  of  Elliot 

C  1198 

199    19.11    Garrau 

Shortage  of  money 

C  1201 

200    23.11   Josephine 

She  does  not  write 

Ce     45 

201      8.12    Berthier 

..War  histories 

C  1251 

202        8.12     AUZOU 

Reasons  for  arrest 

C1253 

203    10.12   Joseph  B. 

Affairs  in  Corsica 

Ji    160 

204    13.12    Peragallo  Co. 

Responsibility  for  pay 

C  1281 

205    20.12    Berthier 

Commander  to  be  replaced 

C  1298 

530 

Th 

\e  Rise  to  Power 

No. 

Date 

Addressee 

Subject 

Source 

206 

28.12 

The  Dkectory 

Lombard  politics 

Cl32I 

207 

30.12 

Lespinasse 

Artillery  in  Milan 

Ci332 

1797 

208 

17.1 

The  Dkectory 

Battle  ofRivoli 

Ci394 

209 

22.1 

Mattel 

Safety  of  the  Pope 

C  1410 

210 

26.1 

Berthier 

Divisions  to  be  numbered 

C  1418 

211 

1.2 

Proclamation 

War  against  Rome 

Ci434 

212 

1.2 

The  Directory 

Papal  states  attacked 

CI435 

313 

1.2 

Macquart 

Compliments  on  retirement 

Ci440 

214 

3-2 

The  Directory 

Praise  of  Wurmser 

Ci448 

315 

5-2 

San  Marino 

Arrest  of  bishop 

01462 

2I<5 

10.2 

The  Directory 

Surrender  of  Mantua 

01474 

217 

19.2 

The  Directory 

Works  of  art  seized 

C  1509 

218 

19,2 

The  Directory 

Peace  with  Rome 

C  1510 

219 

19.2 

Pius  VI 

Compliments  on  treaty 

C  1512 

220 

19.2 

Josephine 

She  does  not  write 

Ce     53 

221 

10.3 

The  Army 

The  coming  campaign 

Ci552 

222 

25.3 

Carnot 

Plan  of  campaign 

Ci637 

223 

28.3 

Mayor  of  Lienz 

Protection  promised 

C  1649 

224 

31-3 

Archduke  Charles 

Plea  for  peace 

Ci663 

225 

31-3 

Archduke  Charles 

Austrian  wounded 

Ci6<54 

226 

1.4 

Carinthia 

Basis  of  occupation 

Ci<5<57 

227 

74 

Bellegarde 

Acceptance  of  armistice 

C  1700 

228 

8.4 

Bourrienne 

To  join  Bonaparte 

C  1710 

229 

94 

Doge  of  Venice 

Ultimatum 

C  1712 

230 

16.4 

The  Directory 

Dispatches  and  Hags  sent 

Ci734 

231 

16,4 

The  Directory 

State  of  negotiations 

CI735 

232 

17.4 

Order  of  the  Day 

Female  camp-followers 

CI742 

233 

19.4 

Order  of  the  Day 

Armistice  of  Leoben 

C  1746 

234 

20.4 

Delmas 

Corporal  punishment 

C  1747 

235 

24.4 

Order  of  the  Day 

Incompetent  officers 

Ci75i 

236 

30.4 

The  Directory 

Behaviour  of  Venice 

CI758 

237 

30.4 

Venetian  envoys 

Cannot  be  received 

C  1759 

238 

30.4 

Lallement 

To  leave  Venice 

C  1760 

239 

1.5 

The  Directory 

Cispadanc  elections 

CI762 

340 

3-5 

The  Directory 

Venetian  attacks 

C  170*6 

241 

<5.5 

Bishop  of  Coxno 

Functions  of  priests 

CI770 

242 

8.5 

The  Directory 

Action  against  Venice 

C  1780 

243 

19-5 

The  Directory 

Treaty  with  Venice 

C  i8n 

244 

26.5 

The  Directory 

Importance  of  Malta 

Ci828 

245 

7.<5 

Moilet 

Courage  rewarded 

C  1894 

24<5 

16.6 

Genoa 

Policy  to  be  followed 

C  1933 

247 

19.6 

Genoa 

Statue  of  Andrea  Doria 

C  1938 

248 

30.6 

The  Directory 

Protest  at  Dumolard  motion 

C  1970 

249 

1.7 

Dunan 

History  of  the  campaign 

C  *975-<5 

250 

14.7 

The  Army 

Devotion  to  the  Republic 

C20IO 

251 

14-7 

Berthier 

Control  of  newspapers 

C  2012 

252 

15.7 

The  Directory 

Austrian  policy 

€2018 

253 

29-7 

Clarke 

Notes  for  Emperor 

C  2052 

254 

1(5.8 

The  Directory 

Occupation  of  Corfu 

C20I3 

255 

28.8 

Order  of  the  Day 

Swords  of  honour 

C2I37 

Table 

of  Sources,  etc. 

531 

No. 

Date 

Addressee 

Subject 

Source 

256 

2.9 

Joseph  B. 

Clergy  to  obey  laws 

C2I38 

257 

2.9 

Joseph  B. 

Protection  of  supporters 

C2I39 

258 

13-9 

Talleyrand 

Occupation  of  Malta 

C2I95 

259 

19.9 

Talleyrand 

Constitutional  ideas 

C2223 

260 

10.10 

The  Directory 

Opinions  in  the  army 

02295 

261 

10.10 

The  Directory 

Final  negotiations 

C2296 

262 

18.10 

The  Directory 

Dispatch  of  treaty 

C  2306 

263 

5." 

The  Directory 

Plans  for  English  expedition 

C  2321 

264 

ii.  ii 

Cisalpine  people 

The  new  constitution 

€2351 

265 

I2.II 

The  Directory 

Redistribution  of  army 

C2354 

266 

12.11 

Poussielgue 

Instructions  for  mission 

C2355 

267 

14.11 

The  Army 

Farewell  message 

C236i 

268 

15.11 

The  Directory 

Vindication  of  Clarke 

02372 

269 

IO.I2 

The  Directory 

Restoration  of  peace 

02385 

270 

23.12 

Barras 

Friendship  of  Turkey 

C239I 

1798 

271 

6.1 

Bernadotte 

To  command  in  Italy 

C  2400 

272 

9.1 

Sche*rer 

Organization  of  artillery 

C  2402 

273 

12.  1 

Decree 

Postings  to  Army  of  England 

C  2406 

274 

6.2 

Sche*rer 

Thanks  for  award  of  flag 

C24I2 

275 

6.2 

Lannes 

Gift  of  flag 

C24I3 

276 

7.2 

Sch6rer 

Inspection  of  Channel  coast 

C24I4 

277 

12.2 

Order 

Work  to  be  done  at  ports 

02415 

278 

12.2 

Forfait,  etc. 

Mission  to  Holland 

C24I6 

279 

12.2 

Dutch  Republic 

Request  for  co-operation 

C24I7 

280 

23.2 

The  Directory 

Hazards  of  invading  England 

02419 

281 

25.2 

Caffarelli 

Appointment  of  committee 

C  2421 

282 

26.2 

CafFarelli 

Work  to  be  done  at  ports 

C  2422 

283 

5-3 

The  Directory 

Plan  of  Egyptian  expedition 

C  2426 

284 

5-3 

Decree 

Appointments  to  committee 

C  2427 

285 

14.3 

Talleyrand 

Resignation  from  Rastadt 

C244I 

286 

26.3 

B&i6zech 

Printing  type  for  Egypt 

C  2452 

287 

27-3 

The  Directory 

Protest  at  arrest  of  Italians 

C2456 

288 

28.3 

Say 

Order  for  field  library 

C2458 

289 

12.4 

Decree 

Egypt  to  be  occupied 

C2495 

290 

12.4 

Decree 

Malta  to  be  occupied 

C249<5 

291 

22.4 

Brueys 

Plan  of  naval  operations 

C  2540 

292 

18.5 

Desaix 

Instructions  for  leaving 

C26oo 

293 

23-5 

Joseph  B, 

Progress  of  voyage 

C2607 

294 

27.5 

Brueys 

Ships  not  to  be  detached 

C26I2 

295 

10.6 

The  Grandmaster 

Declaration  of  war 

C2629 

296 

11.6 

The  Grandmaster 

Intermediary  sent 

C2634 

297 

Ji.6 

Vaubois 

No  armistice  signed 

C2635 

298 

12.6 

Convention 

Capitulation  of  Malta 

C2636 

299 

12.6 

Order  of  the  Day 

Capitulation  announced 

C2639 

300 

13.6 

Order 

Government  of  Malta 

C  2643-5, 

2647-8,  2668-9,  2671-2,  2687, 

2692,  2694-8 

301 

13.6 

Order 

Seizure  of  treasure 

C26so 

302 

13.6 

Berthier 

Prisoners  to  be  set  free 

C  2652 

303 

14.6 

Brune 

Capture  of  Malta 

C2656 

304 

15.6 

Chabot 

Capture  of  Malta;  orders 

C2663 

532 

The  Rise  to  Power 

No.    Date 

Addressee 

Subject 

Source 

305     15-6 

French  Consuls 

Release  of  slaves 

C2665 

306     17.6 

The  Directory 

Russo-Maltese  treaty 

C2<576 

307     17.6 

Dommartin 

A  Maltese  gun 

C268o 

308     17.6 

Berthier 

Transport  of  army  women 

C268p 

309    21.6 

Order  of  the  Day 

Behaviour  towards  Moslems 

C  2710 

310    30.6 

Pasha  of  Egypt 

Reasons  for  occupation 

02719 

31*      2.7 

People  of  Egypt 

Crimes  of  the  Mamelukes 

€2723 

3"      3.7 

Brueys 

Escape  of  cargo  ships 

02727 

313       3-7 

Caffarelli 

Houses  of  the  consuls 

C  2730 

3H      3-7 

Order 

Regulations  for  Alexandria 

02733 

315      3-7 

G.O's.C.  Divisions 

Freedom  of  worship;  discipline 

02734 

3*5      3-7 

Order 

Release  of  slaves 

C273<5 

317      3-7 

Berthier 

To  free  English  Vice-Consul 

02737 

3i8      3-7 

Menou 

A  wounded  sergeant 

C  2740 

319      4-7 

Decree 

The  dead  to  be  honoured 

€2750 

320      6.7 

The  Directory 

Capture  of  Alexandria 

€2765 

321      7-7 

KMber 

To  command  Alexandria 

C  2778 

322      7-7 
333      9.7 

Order 
Order  of  the  Day 

Disposal  of  printing  presses 
Food  prices  kid  down 

€2784 
€2792 

324    12-7 

Order  of  the  Day 

Maintenance  of  discipline 

€2802 

325    22.7 

Sheiks  of  Cairo 

The  Mamelukes  destroyed 

€2817 

326    22.7 

People  of  Cairo 

Declaration  of  friendship 

C28i8 

327    22.7 

Pasha  of  Egypt 

Friendship  towards  the  Porte 

€2819 

328    24.7 

The  Directory 

Battle  of  the  Pyramids,  etc. 

02834 

329    25.7 

Joseph  B. 

His  private  unhappiness 

Ji    188 

330      — 

Joseph  B. 

His  investments,  etc. 

Ji    188 

331    27.7 

Menou 

Provincial  government 

C$857 

332    27.7 

Order 

Government  of  Egypt 

C2$58 

333    28.7 

Berthier 

Coptic  comptrollers 

€2868 

334    28.7 

Merlin 

Completion  of  hospital 

C  2873 

335    28.7 

Note 

Things  needed  from  France 

C2874 

33<5    30.7 

Brueys 

Fleet  movements  proposed 

C2878 

337    30.7 

Order 

Punishment  of  Alexandria 

C2882 

338    30-7 

Order 

Requisition  of  horses 

C  2884 

339    30.7 

Order 

Financial  contributions 

C2887 

340    31*7 

Order 

Retention  of  existing  laws 

C  2902 

341     31-7 

Order 

Navigation  on  the  Nile 

C2904 

342    31.7 

Menou 

Need  for  severity 

C  2907 

343      2.8 

Order 

Health  committee  for  Cairo 

02937 

344      2.8 

Berthollet,  etc. 

House  for  the  Institute 

€2938 

345      3*8 

Berthier 

Water  transport  by  camel 

C2958 

34<5      4-8 

Dupuy 

Police  patrols  in  Cairo 

02967 

347    15-8 

Ganteaume 

Battle  of  the  Nile 

C30I5 

348     15.8 

Ganteaume 

To  command  remnants  of  fleet 

C  3016 

349    19-8 

The  Directory 

Battle  of  the  Nile 

C3045 

350    21,8 

Villeneuve 

Naval  plans 

03064 

351    21,8 

Najac 

Naval  plans 

C  3065 

359    22.8 

Sucy 

Surgeons  to  be  arrested 

C  3081 

353    22.8 

Decree 

Formation  of  Egyptian  Institute 

C  3083 

354    23.8 

Minutes 

Questions  for  the  Institute 

C  3091 

355    25.8 

Order 

Village  to  be  burnt 

€3105 

356    2<5.8 

Order 

Festival  of  i  Vend&niaire 

C3"7 

Ta 

me  of  Sources*  etc. 

533 

No.    Date     Addressee 

Subject 

Source 

357    26.8      Order 

Bread  rations 

C3H9 

358    28.8      Vaubois 

Unrest  in  Malta 

C3I55 

359      4.9      Th£venard 

Death  of  his  son 

C  3226 

360    10.9     Kteber 

A  suit  of  armour 

C326I 

3<5i     14.9      Poussielgue 

Sketches  of  costumes 

£3305 

362    21.9      Poussielgue 

Money  owed  by  Egyptians 

C33<52 

363    30.9      Order  of  the  Day 

Punishment  of  thieves 

C3406 

364    i  i.i  i    Berthier 

Whipping  to  cease 

C3605 

365     13.11    CafFarelli 

Sets  of  bowls  to  be  made 

C3$I4 

366      8.12    Berthier 

False  medical  certificates 

C3727 

367    17.12    The  Directory 

The  state  of  Egypt 

C3707 

368     19.12    Order 

Mount  Sinai  Monastery 

C3782 

369    21.12    People  of  Cairo 

The  revolt 

C3785 

370    21.12    Order  of  the  Day 

Music  at  hospitals 

C3789 

1799 

371      2.1      Divan  of  Cairo 

Thefts  in  the  city 

C38o8 

372      8.1      Order  of  the  Day 

Conduct  of  medical  officers 

C38I8 

373     IO.I      Berthier 

Reprimand  for  Menou 

C3822 

374    13.1      CafFarelli 

Travel  of  scientists 

C3842 

375    13.1      Order  of  the  Day 

Executions  for  murder 

C3844 

37^    14.1      Marmont 

An  English  letter;  Jenovich 

C3847 

377    25.1      Sherif  of  Mecca 

Customs  dues  at  Suez 

C3899 

378    25,1      Imam  of  Muscat 

Protection  of  trade 

C3900 

379    25-1      Tippoo  Sahib 

Co-operation  proposed 

C390I 

380    28.1      Marmont 

Precautions  against  plague 

C3909 

381      3.2      Desaix 

Syrian  expedition 

C3934 

382    10.2     The  Directory 

Reasons  for  expedition 

C3952 

383    24.2      Sheiks  of  Gaza 

Offer  of  safe  conduct 

C399I 

384    26.2      Menou 

Little  danger  from  English 

C3995 

385    27,2      Desaix 

Operational  news 

C40oo 

386      4.3      Order  of  the  Day 

Camp  discipline 

C4006 

387      9.3      Berthier 

Prisoners  to  be  shot 

04013 

388      9.3      Djezzar  Pasha 

Peace  proposals 

C  4026 

389    13.3      The  Directory 

Progress  of  expedition 

C4035 

390    18.3      Inhabitants  of  Acre 

Offer  of  safe  conduct 

C  4x541 

391    20.3      Emir  Bechir 

Support  for  Druses 

C4047 

392    23.3      Sidney  Smith 

Exchange  of  prisoners 

C4055 

393     17.4      Sheik  of  Nablus 

Threat  of  destruction 

C4096 

394    18.4      Order  of  the  Day 

Battle  of  Mount  Tabor 

C4097 

395    18.4      Berthier 

Barbarity  of  Smith 

C4098 

396    27.4      d'Aure 

Gratuities  for  Larrey,  etc. 

C4in 

397      2.5      Sanson 

Map  of  Jordan  to  be  made 

C4H4 

398    10.5      The  Directory 

Account  of  operations 

04124 

399    13.5      Ahmed  Pasha 

Exchange  of  prisoners 

€4127 

400    15.5      Dommartin 

Stretchers  to  be  made 

04130 

401    17.5      Order  of  the  Day 

Reasons  for  raising  siege 

C4I38 

402    27.5      The  Directory 

Account  of  siege  of  Acre 

C4I56 

403    15.6      Order  of  the  Day 

Compliments  and  reprimands 

C4I76 

404    19.6      The  Directory 

Appearance  of  the  Mahdi 

C4I88 

405    19*6      d'Aure 

Office  workers 

C4W 

40<5    28.6      The  Directory 

Weakness  of  the  army 

C  4225 

534 

The  Rise  to  Power 

No.-  Date     Addressee 

Subject 

Source 

407      1.7      Berthier 

Caffarelli's  papers 

04241 

408    15.8      Sultan  of  Morocco 

Help  for  pilgrims 

C4358 

409    16.8      Order  of  the  Day 

Feast  of  the  Prophet 

04362 

410    17.8      The  Grand  Vizir 

Offer  of  negotiations 

€4364 

411    22.8      Kteber 

To  take  command;  instructions 

C4374 

41  2    22.8      Army  of  the  East 

Farewell  to  the  army 

C4380 

413    10.10    The  Directory 

Reasons  for  return 

C4382 

414      9.11    The  Ancients 

Declaration  of  support 

C4385 

415      9.11    The  army 

Legality  of  decree 

C4387 

416    i  o.  1  1    The  Ancients 

Dangers  threatening  the  state 

C4388 

417    io.ii    The  Nation 

Events  of  Brumaire 

C4389 

418    ii.xi    Order  of  the  Day 

Satisfaction  with  troops 

C4390 

419    I2.li    The  Nation 

Justification  of  Brumaire 

C439I 

420    15.11    Legislative  Com. 

Financial  reforms 

C439* 

421    15.11    Laplace 

Actors  for  Egypt 

04394 

422    20.11    Decree 

Delegates  sent  to  districts 

C4395 

423    24.11    Jourdan 

Offer  of  reconciliation 

C4397 

424    29.11    Berthier 

Question  on  English  invasion 

€4405 

425      2.12    Berthier 

Arms  of  honour 

Ch     27 

426      9.12    Decree 

Emigrants  set  free 

04420 

427    13.12    Constitution 

The  Consulate 

D    118 

428    15.12    The  Nation 

The  Constitution 

C  4422 

429    17.12    K16ber 

Events  in  France 

C4428 

430    19.12    Legislative  Com. 

Metric  system 

C4430 

431    22.12    Legislative  Com. 

Adoption  of  Constitution 

C4435 

432    23.12    Legislative  Com. 

Penalties  without  trial 

C4439 

433    24.12    Legislative  Com, 

Public  festivals 

C4442 

434    24.12    Sieves 

Appointments  to  Senate 

C4444 

435    25.12    George  III 

Appeal  for  peace 

C4445 

43  6    25.12    The  Emperor 

Appeal  for  peace 

C444<5 

437    25.12    The  Nation 
438    25.12    Army  of  Italy 

Principles  of  the  Republic 
Discipline 

C4447 
C4450 

439    25.12    Santo  Domingo 

Colonial  government 

C4455 

440    26.12    Boulay 

Law  on  emigrants 

C4457 

441    27.12    The  Senate 

The  Government  installed 

C44<$7 

442    27.12    The  Senate 

Appeal  to  end  faction 

€44*8 

443    27.12    Fouch6 

The  official  journal 

€4469 

444    27.12    Ganteaume 

Colonial  government 

C4470 

445    28.12    Decree 

Freedom  of  worship 

C447I 

44(5    28.12    Western  Departments 

Call  for  submission 

C4473 

447    27.12    Augereau 

Command  in  Holland 

C4475 

448    30.12    Note 

A  ffcte  not  ordered 

€4481 

449    30.12    Senate  of  Hamburg 

Nappcr  Tandy 

€4482 

450    30.12    Legal  Section 

Request  for  information 

€4483 

451    30.12    Fouche* 

Priests  set  free 

€4485 

452    30.12    Murat 

Qualifications  of  the  Guard 

C4487 

453    31.12    Berthier 

Ranks  and  postings 

Ch     70 

1800 

454      3«*      Berthier 

Request  for  reports 

Ch     77 

455      4^      Saint-Hilaire 

Public  order  in  the  south 

04493 

456     4.1      Berthier 

Posting  of  officers 

Ch     78 

Table  of  Sources,  etc. 

535 

No.    Date 

Addressee 

Subject 

Source 

457      5- 

Army  of  England 

War  against  the  rebels 

C4498 

458      8. 

Gaudin 

Distribution  of  funds 

Ch     84 

459      9- 

Berthier 

Report  on  brigadier-generals 

Ch     90 

460    10. 

Berthier 

Urgent  request  for  reports 

C4505 

461    ii. 

Berthier 

Correspondence  with  the  enemy 

C4507 

462    ii. 

Minute 

Refusal  of  promotion 

C4509 

463      12. 

Decree 

Meetings  of  committees 

C45IO 

464     14. 

Brune 

Orders  for  Vend6e  war 

C4523 

465      15. 

Aune 

Reply  to  letter 

C4529 

466     16. 

Talleyrand 

Reply  to  English  note 

C4530 

467     18. 

Lucien  B. 

Request  for  reports 

C4533 

468     1  8. 

Forfait 

English  to  be  attacked 

C4537 

469    19. 

The  Ministers 

Meeting  to  determine  functions 

Ch  1148 

470     21.  1 

Talleyrand 

Policy  towards  Prussia 

C4542 

471      6.2 

Gaudin 

Deputation  of  merchants 

C4569 

472      6.2 

Brune 

Raising  of  funds 

C4570 

473       7.2 

Order  of  the  Day 

Death  of  Washington 

C4573 

474      8.2 

Decree 

Books  for  the  Invalides 

C4574 

475     1  1.2 

Abrial 

Illegal  exports  of  corn 

C4579 

476      1  1.  2 

Berthier 

Defective  surgical  instruments 

C4584 

477     1  1-2 

Minute 

Employment  of  soldier 

C4585 

478      1  1.  2 

Minute 

Arrest  of  General  Don 

C4586 

479     12.2 

Minute 

Refusal  of  exemption 

C4587 

480     13.2 

Hedouville 

Orders  for  Vend6e  war 

C4588 

481     16.2 

Mazarredo 

Approach  to  George  III 

C4598 

482    16.2 

Talleyrand 

'  Irish  insurgents 

C4599 

483     16.2 

Moreau 

Policy  of  Swiss  government 

C  4600 

484    18.2 

Minute 

Promotion  of  Cesar  Berthier 

C4602 

485      20.2 

Gaudin 

Pay  of  Consular  Guard 

C4609 

486     22.2 

Bruix 

Expedition  to  Malta 

C46I2 

487     22.2 

Gravina 

Request  for  naval  co-operation 

C46I3 

488      23.2 

Talleyrand 

English  violations  of  law 

04614 

489      25.2 

Brune 

Danger  of  English  landing 

04619 

490    27.2 

Thugut 

Proposals  for  peace 

C4623 

491      5-3 

Brune 

Attitude  of  royalist  leaders 

C4639 

492      8.3 

The  nation 

Call  to  arms 

04649 

493      8.3 

Joseph  B. 

Madame  de  Stael 

Ji    190 

494    10.3 

Talleyrand 

Exchange  of  prisoners 

C4655 

495     12.3 

Lacuee 

Law  on  gendarmerie 

C4<557 

493     12.3 

Forfait 

Rations  of  prisoners  of  war 

C4663 

497     14.3 

Decree 

Treatment  of  prisoners  of  war 

04669 

498    20.3 

Louis  B. 

Mission  to  Brest 

04690 

499    20.3 

Bruix: 

Naval  instructions 

04691 

500    20.3 

Brune 

Order  to  support  fleet 

04693 

501    24.3 

The  Senate 

Committee  of  National  Accounts 

04696 

502    28.3 

The  Senate 

Nomination  of  Lefebvre 

04697 

503    28.3 

Brune 

Rebel  spies  in  the  army 

04699 

504    28.3 

Bruix 

Further  instructions 

C470I 

505      5-4 

Lucien  B. 

Censorship  of  the  theatre 

04706 

506      54 

Fouche* 

Censorship  of  the  press 

O4707 

507    21.4 

Rebel  Departments 

Revocation  of  outlawry 

04723 

508    22.4 

Forfait 

Expedition  to  Santo  Domingo 

C4726 

536 

The  Rise  to  Power 

No.    Date 

Addressee 

Subject 

Source 

509    27.4 

Augereau 

Behaviour  of  Dutch  government 

O4734 

510      3.5 

Pres.  of  Tribunals 

Principles  of  justice 

C4750 

511     10.5 

The  Consuls 

Appointment  of  judges 

C47<57 

512    11.5 

Bertin 

Despatches  for  Corsica 

O4776 

513     15-5 

Talleyrand 

Capitulation  in  Egypt 

C48oo 

514    *5»5 

Talleyrand 

Policy  towards  Prussia 

C48oi 

515     *<5-5 

Talleyrand 

Austrian  policy 

04805 

5I<S     1(5.5 

Talleyrand 

Reply  to  Thugut 

04806 

517    24.5 

The  Consuls 

Import  of  colonial  goods 

C4835 

518    24.5 

Fouch6 

Assurance  of  confidence 

C4837 

519      1.6 

Talleyrand 

PoHcy  towards  Russia 

C486o 

520      4.6 

Fouch6 

Cadoudal  to  be  arrested 

04868 

521      4.6 

Talleyrand 

Pamphlet  on  Germany 

04870 

522      4.6 

Talleyrand 

Instructions  to  prize  courts 

C4872 

523       5-6 

Clergy  of  Milan 

The  Roman  Catholic  Church 

04884 

524      7.6 

The  Consuls 

Municipality  of  Calais 

04890 

525    25.1 

Berthier 

Formation  of  Reserve  Army 

04552 

526    31-1 

Moreau 

Mission  of  Duroc 

04557 

527    14.2 

Berthier 

Chabran's  division 

O4594 

528     15.2 

Decree 

Press  security 

O4595 

529      1-3 

Berthier 

Assembly  of  stores  at  Geneva 

C4<526 

530      1-3 

Moreau 

B.  may  visit  him;  various 

04627 

531       1-3 

Lefebvre 

Assembly  of  ist  Division 

C4628 

53^      3-3 

Berthier 

Supplies  for  Dijon 

04<535 

533       5-3 

Massena 

Advice  and  instructions 

C4642 

534      6.3 

Berthier 

Piedmontcse  officers 

O4645 

535      8-3 

Decree 

Formation  of  Reserve  Army 

C4<*5I 

53<5    12.3 

Brune 

Troops  for  Reserve  Army 

O4660 

537    12.3 

Moreau 

Reserve  Army;  Massena 

C466X 

538     12-3 

Massena 

Information  and  advice 

04662 

539     15.3 

Moraeu 

Information  and  instructions 

04672 

540    16.3 

Moreau 

Envy  for  his  lot 

C4674 

541    20.3 

Note 

Call  to  enlist 

04682 

542    20.3 

Talleyrand 

Italians  to  join  up 

04684 

543    22.3 

Moreau 

Plan  of  campaign 

04695 

544      2.4 

Berthier 

Appointment  as  C-in~C* 

C4704 

545      94 

Berthier 

To  consult  with  Moreau 

04710 

546      9-4 

Massena 

Plan  of  campaign 

C47H 

547    H.4 

Mass6na 

Hopes  for  success 

04712 

548     "4 

Moreau 

To  consult  with  Berthier 

O47I3 

549    144 

Carnot 

Strength  of  Reserve  Army 

04615 

550    144 

Carnot 

Despatch  of  sledges 

O47I7 

551     184 

Brune 

To  command  2nd  Reserve  Army 

O47I9 

552    22.4 

Berthier 

Strength  of  Reserve  Army 

O4724 

553    22.4 

Moreau 

Order  to  attack 

C4725 

554    244 

Carnot 

Berthier  to  march  at  once 

O4728 

555    244 

Berthier 

Position  in  Italy 

O4729 

55<5    244 

Moreau 

Position  in  Italy 

O4730 

557    254 

Berthier 

Fighting  on  the  Rhine 

O473I 

558    264 

Berthier 

Organization  of  Reserve  Army 

C3732 

559    274 

Lefebvre 

Transport  of  muskets 

O4735 

560    274 

Lauriston 

Mission  to  Lyons,  etc. 

C4737 

Table  of  Sources,  etc. 

537 

No. 

Date 

Addressee 

Subject 

Source 

56i 

27.4 

Berthier 

Change  of  route 

C4738 

562 

27.4 

Berthier 

Movement  of  ammunition 

C4740 

563 

27-4 

Marmont 

Artillery  workshops 

C474I 

564 

28.4 

Berthier 

Troop  movements,  etc. 

C4742 

565 

29.4 

Carnot 

Movement  of  H.Q. 

Ch    194 

566 

i-5 

Berthier 

Movement  orders 

C4745 

567 

2.5 

Berthier 

Operational  instructions 

C4747 

568 

2.5 

Carnot 

Contractors  to  Reserve  Army 

Ch    198 

569 

4-5 

Berthier 

Situation  in  Italy 

C475I 

570 

5-5 

Gaudin 

Appointment  of  paymaster 

C4753 

571 

5-5 

Order 

St.-Gotthard  detachment 

C4754 

572 

5-5 

Berthier 

B.  leaving  Paris;  various 

C4755 

573 

5-5 

Lacu6e 

Yvan  to  be  attached  to  B. 

Ch   204 

574 

5-5 

Berthier 

To  march  with  all  speed 

C4758 

575 

5-5 

Moreau 

Battle  of  Stockach 

C4759 

576 

5-5 

Suchet 

Mass6na  to  hold  out 

C476X 

577 

9-5 

Maret 

Behaviour  of  troops 

C4765 

578 

10.5 

Lacu£e 

Formation  of  siege  train 

C477I 

579 

10.5 

Lannes 

Order  to  cross  St.-Bernard 

C4772 

580 

XI.5 

Petiet 

Movement  of  money 

C4779 

58l 

11.5 

Augereau 

To  prepare  for  campaign 

C478o 

582 

12.5 

Dupont 

Movement  orders 

C4783 

583 

13-5 

Lannes 

To  attack  fort  at  Bard 

C4785 

584 

14-5 

Desaix 

Welcome;  to  join  him 

C4786 

585 

14.5 

Mortier 

Desertions 

C4790 

586 

14-5 

Dupont 

Movement  orders  for  Moncey 

C4792 

587 

14-5 

Dupont 

Movement  orders  for  Turreau 

C4793 

588 

14-5 

Petiet 

Transport  of  food 

C4794 

589 

14.5 

Mass6na 

Reassurance 

C4795 

590 

14.5 

Moreau 

Importance  of  Moncey's  corps 

C4797 

591 

15-5 

The  Consuls 

What  should  be  published 

C4798 

592 

15-5 

Berthier 

Movement  of  cavalry 

04802 

593 

15.5 

Lacuie 

To  retire  bad  general 

L     24 

594 

15*5 

Berthier 

Duhesme  to  cross 

04803 

595 

15-5 

Petiet 

Clothing  supplies 

04804 

596 

15-5 

Josephine 

She  may  join  him 

Ce     55 

597 

I<5.5 

Berthier 

News  of  Suchet 

C4807 

598 

16.5 

Suchet 

News  and  advice 

C48o8 

599 

16.5 

Moreau 

News  of  Suchet  and  Reserve 

04809 

600 

16.5 

Josephine 

She  does  not  write 

Ce     56 

601 

17-5 

Berthier 

Guns  for  Bard 

04810 

602 

18.5 

The  Consuls 

Progress  of  the  army 

048x1 

603 

18.5 

Berthier 

Reports  of  movements 

048x2 

604 

18.5 

Petiet 

Movement  of  stores 

C48I3 

605 

18.5 

Petiet 

News  of  the  crossing 

048x4 

606 

I9.5 

The  Consuls 

Note  for  The  Monitor 

C48X7 

607 

19-5 

Talleyrand 

Difficulties  of  the  crossing 

04819 

608 

19.5 

Reinhard 

Use  of  Swiss  national  guard 

04821 

609 

19-5 

Lacuee 

Escort  and  police  troops 

04822 

610 

19.5 

Berthier 

Congratulations 

04823 

611 

19-5 

Berthier 

Austrian  movements 

04824 

612 

19-5 

Moncey 

Operation  orders 

04825 

538 

The  Rise  to  Power 

No. 

Date 

Addressee 

Subject 

Source 

613 

19.5 

Boinod 

Transport  of  foodstuffs 

C4826 

614 

19-5 

Suchet 

Diversion  created;  orders 

04827 

615 

20.5 

Berthier 

Route  round  Bard;  the  siege 

C4828 

616 

21.5 

Berthier 

To  reconnoitre  flanks 

04829 

617 

22.5 

Berthier 

Bard  to  be  garrisoned 

C483I 

618 

22.5 

Berthier 

Assembly  of  the  army 

04832 

619 

24.5 

The  Consuls 

Movements  of  Melas 

04833 

620 

24.5 

Joseph  B. 

News  and  hopes 

C4836 

621 

24.5 

Masc 

Reparations  for  damage 

04840 

622 

24.5 

Moncey 

News  and  instructions 

04841 

623 

24.5 

B&hencourt 

To  attack  Domodossola 

04842 

624 

24.5 

Chabran 

To  besiege  Bard 

04843 

625 

24.5 

Berthier 

Passage  by  Bard;  the  It.  -gens. 

04844 

626 

24.5 

Brune 

News,  plans  and  instructions 

04845 

627 

24.5 

Bulletin 

Crossing  the  St.-Bernard 

C4846 

628 

25.5 

Berthier 

Operational  instructions 

€4847 

629 

26.5 

Bulletin 

Progress  of  the  army 

C4848 

630 

27-5 

The  Consuls 

He  will  be  home  soon 

C  4849 

631 

28.5 

Report 

First  operations 

04852 

632 

29.5 

Camot 

Gen.  Chasseloup  to  join 

C4853 

633 

29-5 

Carnot 

Reinforcements  to  be  sent 

C4854 

634 

29.5 

Bulletin 

Praise  of  troops 

C4855 

635 

29.5 

Bulletin 

Various  movements 

04856 

636 

30.5 

The  Consuls 

..-His  own  movements 

04857 

637 

30.5 

Bulletin 

Murat  crosses  the  Sesia 

04858 

638 

1.6 

Lannes 

To  move  to  Mortara 

04861 

$39 

1.6 

Bulletin 

Crossing  of  the  Ticino 

04862 

640 

3.6 

The  Consuls 

He  will  soon  return 

04863 

641 

3.6 

Bulletin 

Entry  into  Mikn 

04864 

642 

3-6 

Bulletin 

Line  of  march;  fall  of  Bard 

04865 

643 

4.6 

Carnot 

The  enemy  misled 

04875 

644 

4.6 

Carnot 

Brune  to  command  2nd  Line 

C  4876 

645 

4.6 

Bernadotte 

To  catch  and  shoot  Georges 

C4877 

646 

4-6 

Berthier 

Duhesme  to  capture  Crema,  etc. 

04879 

647 

4.6 

Lannes 

Order  to  bridge  the  Po 

C4880 

648 

4.6 

Moncey 

»*  Need  for  speed 

04881 

649 

5.6 

Cisalpine  people 

Call  to  arms  and  unity 

04885 

650 

5-6 

Bulletin 

B,  attends  concert 

04886 

651 

6.6 

Order  of  the  Day 

Call  to  avenge  invasion 

04887 

652 

6.6 

Lannes 

To  capture  Piacenza  bridge 

04888 

<5S3 

6.6 

Lechi 

To  capture  Bergamo*  etc. 

04889 

654 

7*6 

Berthier 

Help  for  Murat  urgent 

04891 

655 

7-6 

Murat 

Supporting  movement  by  Lannes 

C4892 

656 

7-6 

Bulletin 

Crossing  ofthePo 

04893 

657 

8.6 

Berthier 

Various  instructions 

C4895 

658 

8.6 

Berthier 

Intelligence  reports 

04896 

659 

8.6 

Berthier 

To  send  exact  reports 

04897 

660 

8.6 

Berthier 

Intercepted  despatches 

04898 

66* 

8.6 

Suchet 

Review  of  the  situation 

04899 

662 

8.6 

Bulletin 

Situation  report 

04900 

663 

9.6 

Camot 

Situation  report 

C490I 

664 

9.6 

Berthier 

Defence  of  rear  areas 

C4902 

Tt 

ible  of  Sources,  etc. 

539 

No.    Date     Addressee 

Subject 

Source 

665      9.6      Bulletin 

Movements  of  Suchet 

C4903 

666      9.6     Josephine 

He  has  a  cold 

Ce     50* 

667    10.6      Merlin 

To  check  execution  of  orders 

C4904 

668     10.6      Bulletin 

Battle  of  Montebello 

C4905 

669    10.6      Petiet 

Urgent  need  of  supplies 

C4906 

670    13.6      Lannes 

Order  to  attack 

C4907 

671     15.6      The  Consuls 

Death  of  Desaix 

C4909 

672     15.6      Bulletin 

Battle  of  Marengo 

04910 

673     15.6      Convention 

Armistice  of  Alessandria 

04911 

674     1  6.6      The  Consuls 

Signature  of  armistice 

C49I3 

675     17.6      Moreau 

News  of  Marengo  and  armistice 

C49I5 

676     17.6      Order 

Occupation  of  fortresses 

C492I 

677    17.6      Bulletin 

Details  of  the  battle 

678     1  8.6      Bulletin 

Career  of  Desaix 

C4927 

679    24.6      Order  of  the  Day 

Farewell  to  the  army 

C4949 

680    27.6      Decree 

Burial  of  Desaix 

C4953 

68  1     29.6      Lucien  B. 

Arrival  in  Paris 

C4955 

682     16.6      The  Emperor 

Peace  proposals 

C49I4 

683      4.7      Talleyrand 

To  prepare  caricature 

684    29.7      The  Emperor 

Preliminaries  signed 

C  5038 

685      2.8      Carnot 

Progress  of  negotiations 

C  5046 

686      4.8      Talleyrand 

Approach  to  Prussia 

C5047 

687    21.8      Carnot 

Warning  to  generals 

C  5071 

688     14.9      Bernadotte 

Notice  of  preliminaries 

C  5100 

689    23.9      The  Prefects 

Progress  of  negotiations 

05103 

690    30.9      Talleyrand 

Instructions  for  Spain 

C  5120 

691    20.  10   Joseph  B. 

Preliminary  instructions 

C5I3* 

692    28.10    Cretet 

Telegraph  to  Lun6ville 

Bi    Ii8 

693      5.  1  1    Lacu£e 

Notice  of  hostilities 

C  5161 

694      8.  1  1    King  of  Spain 

Occupation  of  Portugal 

695    12.  1  1    Joseph  B. 

Reports  inadequate 

C  5178 

696    30.11    Talleyrand 

Further  conditions 

C  5200 

697      3.12   Joseph  B. 

Final  conditions 

C  5204 

698      7.12    Talleyrand 

Freedom  of  the  seas 

C5208 

699    1  6.  1  2    Talleyrand 

Note  to  the  Sultan 

C  $222 

1801 

700      2.1      Legislative  Corps 

Victory  of  Hohenlinden 

€5250 

701    21.1      Joseph  B. 

Further  instructions 

C  5315 

702    13.2      The  Senate,  etc. 

Treaty  of  Lun<£ville 

703     13.2     Joseph  B. 

Compliments  on  treaty 

C  5367 

704    18.3      Talleyrand 

Execution  of  treaty 

C  $462 

705    13.5      Talleyrand 

Ultimatum  to  Portugal 

C  $$62 

706    28.5      Talleyrand 

To  ask  English  conditions 

C  5589 

707    15.6      Talleyrand 

Lucien's  treaty 

C  5604 

708    17,6      Lucien  B, 

Reprimand  on  treaty 

L     46 

709    22.6      Lucien  B. 

Further  explanations 

L     47 

710    23.7      Cailland 

Instructions  for  Otto 

C  5648 

711    23.7      Hawkesbury 

Statement  of  conditions 

C  5649 

712    23.7      Otto 

What  can  be  accepted 

C  5650 

713      6.9      Talleyrand 

Instructions  for  Otto 

C  5733 

714    19-9      Talleyrand 

Ultimatum  to  England 

C  5749 

540 

The  Rise  to  Power 

No.    Date 

Addressee 

Subject 

So 

715      6.10 

Talleyrand 

Signature  of  preliminaries 

Cj 

716    10.10 

The  Tsar 

Compliments  on  peace  treaty 

C< 

71^   14.10 

Chaptal 

Calais  road  to  be  repaired 

c< 

718    14.10 

Gaudin 

Postal  service  to  Amiens 

C< 

719    14.10 

Fouche* 

English  travellers 

C5 

720    14.10 

Berthier 

Reception  of  CornwalHs 

Cs 

721    15.10 

Fouch£ 

Passports  for  English 

Cs 

722     20.10 

Berthier 

Garrison  of  Amiens 

Ch 

723     21.10 

Talleyrand 

Squadron  for  Santo  Domingo 

Cs 

724     30.10 

Talleyrand 

Squadron  for  Santo  Domingo 

Cs 

725     30.11 

George  III 

Appointment  of  Otto 

Cs 

726     26.12 

dHauterive 

Spanish  signatory 

Cs 

1802 

727        2.2 

Joseph  B. 

Complaints  to  Cornwallis 

Cj 

728      10.2 

Talleyrand 

Maltese  petition 

Cs 

729      19.2 

Talleyrand 

Notes  on  negotiatioas 

Cs 

730      19-2 

Note 

Negotiations  with  Turkey 

Cs 

731      19.2 

Note 

Proposals  for  Malta 

Cs 

732      19-2 

Note 

Barbary  pirates 

Cs 

733     19-2 

Talleyrand 

Italian  republics 

Cs 

734    19-2 

Talleyrand 

Egypt  and  Portugal 

C5 

735      8-3 

Joseph  B. 

To  adopt  firm  tone 

C5 

73<S      9*3 

Joseph  B. 

Freedom  to  sign 

C3 

737     II-3 

Joseph  B. 

Change  of  plan  in  London 

Cs 

738     12.3 

Joseph  B. 

Delay  incomprehensible 

C5 

739    12.3 

Talleyrand 

Reply  to  English  threats 

C5 

740    12.3 

Joseph  B. 

Obstacles  removed 

C5 

741     12.3 

Joseph  B. 

Santo  Domingo  occupied 

Cj 

742    16.3 

Roederer 

Agent  in  England 

Cs 

743     *&3 

Note 

Drafting  points 

Cj 

744    22.3 

Joseph  B. 

Bourbons  in  Order  of  Malta 

C<! 

745    24.2 

Talleyrand 

Final  amendments 

CC 

746    26.3 

Melzi 

Text  of  treaty 

C< 

747    12.4 
748    154 

Lacrosse 
Decres 

To  occupy  Tobago 
Reoccupation  of  India 

C< 
C< 

749    29.4 

Minute 

Napper  Tandy  * 

ce 

750      6.5 

Legislative  Corps 

Restoration  of  peace 

c<
