Title: Critical Thinking Assessment on Homeless Couple in Walmart Attic

URL Source: https://www.studocu.com/en-us/document/fayetteville-technical-community-college/basic-anat-physiology/homeless-na/52168122

Published Time: 2023-03-23T13:41:08+01:00

Markdown Content:
Homeless couple found living in Walmart Attic

The 3 suggestions that I decided to use are: Always consider al ternative explanations and

remember that some things just happen by chance. Beware of clai ms based on poor or carefully

selected evidence, and don’t overgenerali ze and look for errors in distinguishing between

correlation and causation.

Always consider alternati ve explanations and remember that some things just happen by chance.

Seen this is a critically thinking assessme nt, I would say that I do believe that some things can

happen by chance, I had seen other articles and short story’s that came back as a huge succ esses

story and some came back as a huge debunk that was only a myth or an idea, so the story wa s not

true. So, with this suggestion I would say any artic le could be dubious or a total false but it does

also matter on what website or paper it is on and if there is way more inform ation about it.

Beware of claims based on poor or carefully selected evidenc e, and don’t overgeneralize. With

this one I would say the research and information should be careful designed, it should have a lot

of information about the claim or articl e, that the article should have some type of evidence more

then a picture because some picture can be edited just like some vi deos can be edited to make

something seem real and truthful when it is not. I had seen a few artic les and topics online that

had used fake pictures and videos to try to get a great story out of it and some tri ed to get a few

funds also.

Look for errors in distinguishing between correlat ion and causation. For this suggestion it can be

very easy to see few errors in some articl es like spellings and missing information, half way done

writing and not enough evaluating sources and also a lot of misl eading information that can

confused individuals, like for example, We see a lot of medic al information and articles online

that people wants to use to deal with a problem quic kly at me. But some of the information

1 out of 2

End of document
Was this document helpful?

Preview text
------------

Homeless couple found living in Walmart Attic The 3 suggestions that I decided to use are: Always consider alternative explanations and remember that some things just happen by chance. Beware of claims based on poor or carefully selected evidence, and don’t overgeneralize and look for errors in distinguishing between correlation and causation.

Always consider alternative explanations and remember that some things just happen by chance. Seen this is a critically thinking assessment, I would say that I do believe that some things can happen by chance, I had seen other articles and short story’s that came back as a huge successes story and some came back as a huge debunk that was only a myth or an idea, so the story was not true. So, with this suggestion I would say any article could be dubious or a total false but it does also matter on what website or paper it is on and if there is way more information about it.

Beware of claims based on poor or carefully selected evidence, and don’t overgeneralize. With this one I would say the research and information should be careful designed, it should have a lot of information about the claim or article, that the article should have some type of evidence more then a picture because some picture can be edited just like some videos can be edited to make something seem real and truthful when it is not. I had seen a few articles and topics online that had used fake pictures and videos to try to get a great story out of it and some tried to get a few funds also.

Look for errors in distinguishing between correlation and causation. For this suggestion it can be very easy to see few errors in some articles like spellings and missing information, half way done writing and not enough evaluating sources and also a lot of misleading information that can confused individuals, like for example, We see a lot of medical information and articles online that people wants to use to deal with a problem quickly at me. But some of the information

online can be truthful and some of it can be very dangerous and could harm someone and make them go to the hospital or die. And during this type of things it would mostly be our fault if we tried something online and it does go so well. Just like the pink sauce a lot of people wanted to try it and bought it online some people got gave good reviews about it and some people gave bad reviews about it like it’s not the same color or it had thicken or it busted while shipping and some of the pink sauce caused a few people to go to the hospital because they ended up being sick. Those are a few examples of what I think about these suggestions.

Sources Evon, D. (2015, December 4). Was a homeless couple found living in a Walmart attic? Snopes. Retrieved January 12, 2023, from snopes/fact-check/walmart-attic- homeless-people/
