Title: The PLA in a Complex Security Environment: Preparing for High Winds and Choppy Waters

URL Source: https://www.nbr.org/wp-content/uploads/pdfs/publications/the-pla-in-a-complex-security-environment_may2025.pdf

Published Time: Mon, 12 May 2025 16:37:18 GMT

Markdown Content:
THE PLA IN A COMPLEX 

# SECURITY ENVIRONMENT 

# PREPARING FOR HIGH WINDS 

# AND CHOPPY WATERS 

# Edited by Benjamin Frohman and Jeremy Rausch the pla in a complex 

# security environment 

# Preparing for High Winds and Choppy Waters Preparing for High Winds and Choppy Waters With contributions from 

Dennis J. Blasko, Peter Connolly, Andrew S. Erickson, Kim Fassler, Rick Gunnell, 

Timothy R. Heath, Maryanne Kivlehan-Wise, Erin Richter, Tsun-Kai Tsai, 

Howard Wang, Joel Wuthnow, and Ketian Zhang 

Edited by Benjamin Frohman and Jeremy Rausch 

# the pla in a complex 

# security environment 

# Preparing for High Winds and Choppy Waters Preparing for High Winds and Choppy Waters the national bureau  of  asian research 

Published in the United States of America by 

The National Bureau of Asian Research, Seattle, WA, and Washington, D.C. 

www.nbr.org 

Copyright © 2025 by The National Bureau of Asian Research 

All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, 

or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or 

otherwise, without prior permission of the publisher. 

Cover design and illustration by Nate Christenson. 

ISBN (electronic): 978-1-939131-93-5 

NBR makes no warranties or representations regarding the accuracy of any map in this volume. 

Depicted boundaries are meant as guidelines only and do not represent the views of NBR or 

NBR’s funders. 

Design and publishing services by The National Bureau of Asian Research Contents 

Foreword  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . vii 

Samuel J. Paparo 

Introduction: China’s Military Strategy and Posture in an Increasingly 

Complex Security Environment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  1

Benjamin Frohman and Jeremy Rausch 

Chapter 1 – “Profound Changes Unseen in a Century”: 

China Assesses Its Security Environment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15 

Kim Fassler 

Chapter 2 – Stabilizing the Boat: Revisiting Party-Army Relations 

under Xi Jinping  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  41 

Joel Wuthnow 

Chapter 3 – China’s Transition to a War-Oriented National Defense 

Mobilization System  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  65 

Erin Richter and Howard Wang 

Chapter 4 – Lumbering toward the China Dream: The PLA’s Strategic 

Mission Through 2049 and Beyond  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  91 

Timothy R. Heath 

Chapter 5 – PRC Lessons Learned from Russia’s Invasion of Ukraine: 

Implications for a Taiwan Conflict  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 111 

Maryanne Kivlehan-Wise and Tsun-Kai Tsai 

Chapter 6 – Assessing the PLA’s Strengths and Weaknesses for 

Achieving the PRC’s Goals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 127 

Dennis J. Blasko and Rick Gunnell Chapter 7 – Imposing the Fate of Sisyphus? The PLA as an Instrument 

of National Power and Force Preparation toward Taiwan  . . . . . . . . . . . . 149 

Andrew S. Erickson 

Chapter 8 – The PLA as a Part of China’s Strategy in Southeast Asia  . . 175 

Ketian Zhang 

Chapter 9 – Competing for Access: China’s Growing Security Interest 

in the Pacific Islands  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 193 

Peter Connolly 

About the Contributors  227 FOREWORD 

I am honored to present  The PLA in a Complex Security Environment: 

Preparing for High Winds and Choppy Waters , the latest volume from an 

essential conference series on the Chinese People’s Liberation Army (PLA) 

convened by the National Bureau of Asian Research (NBR), the China 

Strategic Focus Group at United States Indo-Pacific Command, and the 

University of Virginia’s Miller Center of Public Affairs. This volume explores 

how the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) is thinking about the use of 

force in an increasingly complex security environment and assesses the 

CCP’s capability to employ the PLA to achieve its strategic objectives. The 

superb work of the authors provides a rigorous and insightful assessment of 

how CCP threat assessments are driving the PLA’s modernization efforts, 

strategy, and operational posture. 

China continues its aggressive military buildup through a rising defense 

budget, a rapidly modernizing conventional force, an exponential increase 

in space-based capabilities, and an alarming nuclear weapons expansion. 

Beijing also continues to wage increasingly aggressive gray-zone operations 

against U.S. allies and partners in the Indo-Pacific region, significantly 

raising the risk of an incident or miscalculation that could lead to loss of 

life or spark a wider conflict. In the Taiwan Strait, Beijing is employing 

all elements of comprehensive national power to coerce Taiwan and the 

international community to accept that unification is, in fact, inevitable. 

Although China claims it prefers to achieve unification through peaceful 

means, Xi Jinping will not renounce the use of force. These actions pose an 

important question for the U.S. Department of Defense, interagency, and 

broader China-watching community: to what extent is Xi preparing China 

for war? 

This PLA Conference volume contributes to the expanding global 

conversation on China strategic intentions by examining the CCP’s 

perceptions of China’s external security environment and tracing how 

these judgments direct whole-of-society preparations for intensifying 

strategic competition with the United States. It offers unique insights into 

the primary ideological lens through which Beijing assesses its security 

environment, as well as the impacts these assessments have on party-army 

relations. The volume then leverages this context to explore how the PLA’s 

missions, strategy, and operational posture are evolving along with whole-

of-society efforts to compete with the West. It also examines the lessons viii  • The PLA in a Complex Security Environment 

the PLA may be drawing from Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, including 

how the PLA may be applying these lessons to its assessments of its own 

strengths and weaknesses. Finally, the volume assesses three operational 

theaters—Taiwan, Southeast Asia, and Oceania—and the future role of the 

PLA in achieving its objectives in each. 

This work offers insights for understanding China’s strategic approach 

to military modernization for potential unification by force that planners, 

policymakers, and warfighters can leverage toward designing effective 

and achievable objectives. I am proud to sponsor this conference, and I 

commend the organizers and participants who contributed their collective 

discernment to make this volume possible. 

Samuel J. Paparo 

Commander, United States Indo-Pacific Command 

May 2025 Introduction China’s Military Strategy and Posture 

# in an Increasingly Complex 

# Security Environment 

## Benjamin Frohman and Jeremy Rausch 

The 2023 People’s Liberation Army (PLA) Conference, cohosted by the 

National Bureau of Asian Research (NBR) and the China Strategic Focus 

Group at U.S. Indo-Pacific Command, examined how the perception of the 

Chinese Communist Party (CCP) of its external security environment is 

shaping its use of the PLA as a tool of national power. Key questions the 

conference sought to address included the following: 

• How do top Chinese civilian and military leaders assess the security 

environment of the People’s Republic of China (PRC)? 

• What are the key risks and opportunities these leaders believe they face 

in achieving their goals? 

• How are the PLA’s missions, strategy, and operational posture changing 

against the backdrop of a more complex external security environment? 

• What role will the use of military force play in achieving the CCP’s 

goals? 

• How effectively is the CCP using the PLA in coordination with other 

tools of national power—diplomatic, economic, and informational—to 

achieve its goals? 

Key findings include the following: 

• The CCP is using military force and coercion with greater frequency 

in pursuit of the PRC’s territorial claims in the Indo-Pacific region and 

strategy to become a great global power. 

Benjamin Frohman  is Research Director for the People’s Liberation Army Conference and a Nonresident 

> Fellow at the National Bureau of Asian Research.

Jeremy Rausch  is Director of the Political and Security Affairs group at the National Bureau of Asian   

> Research. 2•The PLA in a Complex Security Environment

• The CCP’s more prominent use of the PLA is driven by its view that the 

PRC’s external security environment is worsening while simultaneously 

presenting it with historic opportunities to accomplish the “great 

rejuvenation of the Chinese nation.” 

• Chinese leaders more aggressively use military force and coercion 

against weaker countries but continue to exercise caution when 

confronted with the prospect of direct military intervention by the 

United States. 

• The CCP’s calculus surrounding the use of military force is informed 

by confidence that historical forces are propelling the PRC’s rise as a 

great power. As a result, Chinese leaders have been emboldened to 

act more forcefully in the region while awaiting opportunities to take 

bolder actions to seize or expand control over additional territory as 

the PRC increases its global power and influence. 

• Russia’s invasion of Ukraine has been instructive for Chinese leaders, 

both highlighting potential shortfalls in PLA capabilities and plans 

and offering important lessons for preparing for a potential future 

military conflict. 

Even though the PRC’s more forceful approach in the Indo-Pacific has 

yielded only mixed results to date, concern is growing in the United States 

and capitals around the world about Beijing’s more assertive use of the PLA 

to achieve its regional and global goals. From the China-India border to the 

Senkaku Islands in the East China Sea and the CCP’s sweeping sovereignty 

claims over Taiwan and the South China Sea, recent years have witnessed 

increasingly aggressive actions by the PLA to assert control over territory 

the CCP believes to be vital to the “great rejuvenation of the Chinese nation.” 

Flashpoints have included a fatal clash on the China-India border in 2020, 

which saw the PRC’s first use of lethal force against India in nearly half a 

century; the PLA’s aggressive efforts to prevent the Philippines’ resupply of 

Second Thomas Shoal, which continued into 2024; and what CIA director 

William Burns stated publicly to be CCP general secretary and chairman of 

the Central Military Commission (CMC) Xi Jinping’s instruction to the PLA 

to be ready to invade Taiwan by 2027. 1 Meanwhile, China’s security forces 

continue to expand their presence outside the PRC’s immediate periphery, 

including into the small island states of the Pacific.  

> 1Olivia Gazis, “CIA Director William Burns: ‘I Wouldn’t Underestimate,’ Xi’s Ambitions for Taiwan,”
> CBS News, February 3, 2023, https://www.cbsnews.com/news/cia-director-william-burns-i-wouldnt-
> underestimate-xis-ambitions-for-taiwan.

Frohman and Rausch  – Introduction  • 3

Amid these tensions, the United States must update its understanding 

of the drivers behind the PRC’s more aggressive military posture, including 

the CCP’s perception of its security environment and thinking regarding the 

use of military coercion and force to achieve its goals. This PLA Conference 

volume provides in-depth analysis of Chinese leaders’ assessments of the 

challenges and opportunities in their external security environment, the 

PRC’s military and economic preparations for a future conflict, and the 

PLA’s evolving posture and capabilities in key regions, including around 

Taiwan, in the South China Sea, and in Oceania. 

## Using Military Power in a Turbulent World 

The CCP’s increasing use of military power in the Indo-Pacific and 

beyond is informed by a darkening view of its external security environment. 

Chinese leaders have long perceived both challenges and opportunities 

for achieving their goals, but in recent years they have assessed that the 

challenges facing them have grown more severe. This view was articulated 

by General Secretary Xi Jinping at the CCP’s 20th National Congress in 

October 2022, where he declared: 

[China] has entered a period of development in which strategic opportunities, 

risks, and challenges are concurrent and uncertainties and unforeseen factors 

are rising. Various “black swan” and “gray rhino” events may occur at any time. 

We must therefore be more mindful of potential dangers, be prepared to deal 

with worst-case scenarios, and be ready to withstand high winds, choppy waters, 

and even dangerous storms. 2

The CCP’s growing sense of unease was captured as early as January 

2021, when a commentary in the  People’s Daily  expressed similar concern 

about the challenges the CCP faced heading into the centennial year of its 

founding. “The closer we get to national rejuvenation, the less likely smooth 

sailing will be, the more risks, challenges, and even stormy seas there will 

be,” the commentary warned. It continued: 

In the past we were able to take advantage of the trend and opportunities 

were relatively easy to grasp; now we have to go up against the wind.… In the 

past, the general environment was relatively stable, and risks and challenges 

were relatively easy to see clearly; now global circumstances are turbulent and  

> 2Xi Jinping, “Hold High the Great Banner of Socialism with Chinese Characteristics and Strive in
> Unity to Build a Modern Socialist Country in All Respects” (report to the 20th National Congress
> of the Communist Party of China, Beijing, October 16, 2022), http://my.china-embassy.gov.cn/eng/
> zgxw/202210/t20221026_10792358.htm.

4 • The PLA in a Complex Security Environment 

complex, geopolitical challenges are high and pressing, and there are many 

submerged reefs and undercurrents. 3

Shortly before the 20th Party Congress, General Secretary Xi repeated this 

assessment verbatim, confirming its authoritative encapsulation of views at 

the highest level of the party-state. 4

A central factor driving the CCP’s assessment of its growing risks is the 

increasingly fraught state of its relationship with the United States. In 2019 

the PRC’s vice minister of public security warned that “suppression” by the 

United States had become the most significant external factor affecting the 

CCP’s “political security.” 5 At the National People’s Congress in March 2023, 

General Secretary Xi took the unusual step of publicly identifying the United 

States as behind the PRC’s growing challenges, declaring that “Western 

countries led by the United States have implemented all-round containment, 

encirclement and suppression against us, bringing unprecedentedly severe 

challenges to our country’s development.” 6 That same month, the PRC 

Foreign Ministry highlighted the trilateral security pact between Australia, 

the United Kingdom, and the United States (AUKUS) as posing profound 

threats to the international nuclear nonproliferation regime and regional 

stability and peace. 7

Perhaps paradoxically, despite these challenges the CCP maintains that 

long-term trends are in its favor. In 2020, an official statement assessed that 

the PRC’s “period of strategic opportunity” would continue beyond the first 

two decades of the 21st century—the period initially envisioned by former 

CCP general secretary Jiang Zemin in 2002 for increasing the PRC’s power 

and influence in a relatively benign external environment. 8 What Chinese 

leaders believe to be a “profound adjustment in the international balance of             

> 3Ren Zhongping, “ 征途漫漫从头越 :论新征程上的孺子牛 拓荒牛老黄牛精神 ” [Long Journey
> from Scratch: Of the Spirit of a Willing Ox, Pioneering Ox, and Old Ox in the New Journey], People’s
> Daily , January 22, 2021.
> 4Xi Jinping, “In the New Development Stage, the Implementation of the New Development Concept
> Will Inevitably Require the Construction of a New Development Pattern,” Qiushi , August 31, 2022.
> 5Kanis Leung, “China’s Public Security Ministry Warns Its Bureaus to Be on Guard against ‘Political
> Risks’ Caused by Influence of Protest-Hit Hong Kong,” South China Morning Post , June 29, 2019.
> 6Chun Han Wong, Keith Zhai, and James T. Areddy, “China’s Xi Jinping Takes Rare Direct Aim at
> U.S. in Speech,” Wall Street Journal , March 6, 2023.
> 7“China Says AUKUS on ‘Dangerous Path’ with Nuclear Subs Deal,” Associated Press, March 14, 2023,
> https://apnews.com/article/china-aukus-nuclear-submarines-f6ecf854646e2dbddd6ebeaa2f2e971d.
> 8“Communiqué of the Fifth Plenary Session of the 19th Central Committee of the Communist Party
> of China,” trans. China Aerospace Studies Institute, November 2021, https://www.airuniversity.
> af.edu/Portals/10/CASI/documents/Translations/2021-11-17%20Communique%20of%20the%20
> Fifth%20Plenary%20Session%20of%20the%2019th%20Central%20Committee%20of%20the%20
> Communist%20Party%20of%20China.pdf?ver=YsJuJy8mBmqG_jIadpcHcA%3d%3d.

Frohman and Rausch  – Introduction  • 5

power” and “great changes unseen in a century” ( 百年未有之大变局 ) reflect 

their perception of significant opportunities in an era of relative U.S. decline 

vis-à-vis the PRC. Encapsulating this view, at the same time that Chinese 

leaders warned of increasing risks and challenges, they began publicly 

stating that “the East is rising while the West is in decline”—a judgment 

attributed to General Secretary Xi himself. 9 Put otherwise by the PRC’s top 

leader, “time and momentum are on China’s side” and the “rejuvenation of 

the Chinese nation is now on an irreversible historical course.” 10 

In the CCP’s view, taking advantage of these epochal opportunities is 

not a passive endeavor. Rather, the CCP believes that it must exert itself 

and actively “struggle” to achieve its goals, as Kim Fassler highlights in her 

chapter in this volume. “Military struggle” factors prominently among these 

efforts, which Chinese leaders believe is a particularly important tool for 

the PRC to achieve its goals while deterring challenges to its policies from 

the United States and U.S. regional allies and partners. This philosophy was 

prominently expressed by former defense minister Wei Fenghe in 2020, 

when he told delegates to that year’s National People’s Congress that the 

PRC should “use fighting to promote stability.” 11  Illustrating this approach, 

that year the PLA provoked a violent incident that resulted in the first 

military fatalities on the Sino-Indian border in 45 years. It also escalated 

its multiyear coercion campaigns around Japan’s Senkaku Islands, against 

Taiwan, and in the South China Sea. These campaigns continued into 2024 

as the PRC used the PLA and China Coast Guard to sail into waters around 

the Senkaku Islands and to prevent the Philippines from resupplying its 

outpost at Second Thomas Shoal. In December 2023 the PRC Foreign 

Ministry warned that “China-Philippines relations are at a crossroads” and 

that “the Philippines must act with caution.” 12  Meanwhile, more than 1,700 

PLA aircraft intruded into Taiwan’s air defense identification zone in 2023, 

further stoking regional tensions. 13           

> 9U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, “2021 Report to Congress of the U.S.-China
> Economic and Security Review Commission,” November 2021, chap. 1, https://www.uscc.gov/sites/
> default/files/2021-11/Chapter_1_Section_1--CCPs_Ambitions_and_Challenges_at_Its_Centennial.pdf.
> 10 Kinling Lo and Kristin Huang, “Xi Jinping Says ‘Time and Momentum on China’s Side’ as He Sets
> Out Communist Party Vision,” South China Morning Post , January 12, 2021; and Jinping, “Hold
> High the Great Banner of Socialism with Chinese Characteristics.”
> 11 Jun Mai, “Two Sessions 2020: China-U.S. Rivalry in ‘High-Risk Period,’ Chinese Defense Minister
> Says,” South China Morning Post , May 27, 2020.
> 12 “China Urges Philippines to ‘Act with Caution’ amid South China Sea Dispute,” Al Jazeera, December
> 21, 2023, https://www.aljazeera.com/news/2023/12/21/china-urges-philippines-to-act-with-caution-
> amid-south-china-sea-dispute
> 13 Micah McCartney, “China Deployed Over 1,700 Military Planes Around Taiwan in 2023,” Newsweek ,
> January 5, 2024, https://www.newsweek.com/china-military-aircraft-taiwan-strait-2023-1858106. 6•The PLA in a Complex Security Environment

These concerning trends require a better understanding of how the 

CCP is thinking about the use of military force to achieve its objectives in 

an increasingly complex security environment. To this end, this volume 

examines how CCP leaders assess the PRC’s external security environment, 

including both the opportunities and threats presented therein; how 

this assessment is driving changes to the PLA’s strategy, planning, and 

modernization efforts; and how the PLA’s posture and capabilities are 

evolving in key theaters of interest to the United States. The following 

sections survey the arguments of each chapter and summarize key findings. 

## Chinese Leaders Assess the PRC’s Challenges and 

## Opportunities 

The 20th Party Congress highlighted CCP leaders’ view of an 

increasingly uncertain and challenging external security environment. 

In his address to the assembly, General Secretary Xi Jinping reported 

that international developments posed a “series of immense risks and 

challenges” and that the world had “entered a new period of turbulence 

and change.” The opening section of this volume examines how growing 

diplomatic, economic, and military tensions with the United States and 

other countries are affecting Chinese leaders’ decision-making, party-

military relations, and whole-of-society mobilization efforts in the PRC for 

a potential military conflict. 

In the volume’s first chapter, Kim Fassler examines the concept of 

“profound changes unseen in a century” as distilling the CCP’s Marxist 

assessment of its opportunities to shape world events amid favorable 

historical trends. Identifying Xi’s address to the 2017 Ambassadorial Work 

Conference as being one of the first official uses of this phrase, Fassler 

concludes that the gathering marked an inflection point toward more 

assertive efforts by the CCP to achieve its goal of national rejuvenation. 

She argues that “changes unseen in a century” is the CCP’s assessment 

that strategic trends of multipolarity and economic globalization that it 

has observed since at least the 1980s are accelerating, driven by the rise of 

developing economies, technological advancement, and China’s growing 

national power. Under Xi, Beijing has responded to these “profound 

changes” with new strategies to advance China’s vision for global governance 

and doubled down on “struggle” to accelerate favorable strategic trends. At 

the same time, Fassler concludes that the apparent certainty of Chinese 

leaders regarding long-term favorable trends may make them more flexible Frohman and Rausch  – Introduction  • 7

in their tactics for engaging in protracted competition with the United States 

and more willing to tolerate near-term setbacks. 

In the second chapter, Joel Wuthnow contributes a fresh analysis of Xi’s 

long-running efforts to strengthen his control over the PLA. To this end, 

the chapter focuses on the ways in which Xi has catered to the interests of 

senior officers, politically influential subgroups like the PLA Army, and the 

PLA itself as a powerful interest group during a period otherwise marked 

by disruptive change caused by the historic reforms and reorganization of 

the PLA beginning in 2015. Wuthnow argues that many portrayals of Xi’s 

leadership of the PLA have myopically focused on purges of political rivals 

and a coercive anticorruption campaign while overlooking the broader 

political strategy that Xi used to consolidate power and push through 

ambitious reforms. According to Wuthnow, this strategy must also be 

recognized as respecting long-standing norms and practices in the PLA, 

including its prerogatives as a highly autonomous player in the Chinese 

government bureaucracy. Based on public data, including leadership 

biographies, budgets, and resource allocation, Wuthnow explains how Xi has 

galvanized support for his reorganization efforts at the individual, subgroup, 

and institutional levels. Nonetheless, the chapter concludes that Xi has also 

had to accept limits on his ability to pursue further reforms to the PLA and 

that the PLA’s continuing high degree of bureaucratic autonomy creates 

the conditions for additional diplomatic embarrassments like the 2023 spy 

balloon incident. 

The third chapter examines efforts by the CCP to transition its national 

defense mobilization system (NDMS) from a vehicle for emergency response 

and economic subsidization to a “war oriented” system capable of supporting 

national requirements during a protracted conflict. Erin Richter and Howard 

Wang review the evolution of the NDMS, identifying its initial objectives 

as geared toward leveraging resources across the whole of Chinese society 

to enable military operations supporting a “people’s war.” Subsequently 

in the mid to late 2000s, the NDMS priorities shifted away from wartime 

requirements toward economic development through subsidization and 

domestic emergency response. Richter and Wang identify the most recent 

transition as occurring in 2015 when the PRC initiated a series of reforms to 

prioritize the NDMS’s war mobilization capabilities—a trend that solidified 

after the 20th Party Congress in 2022 as PLA media increasingly emphasized 

the “war orientation” of national defense mobilization work. The chapter 

concludes that the greatest significance of the 2015 reforms may be in freeing 

the military to focus on national defense missions while the civilian National 8 • The PLA in a Complex Security Environment 

Development and Reform Commission picks up other functions supporting 

national defense mobilization previously handled by the PLA. 

## The PLA’s Mandate amid a Complex Security 

## Environment 

As Chinese leaders perceive an increasingly complex external security 

environment, they have directed the PLA to step up its preparations to 

overcome challenges confronting the PRC and take advantage of new 

opportunities. The second section of this volume explores how the PLA’s 

missions, strategy, and operational posture are evolving in the context of 

the PRC’s changing security environment, as well as what role the CCP 

expects the PLA to play in achieving national goals in the coming years. It 

also examines the strategic, operational, and doctrinal lessons the PLA has 

learned from Russia’s invasion of Ukraine and assesses the PLA’s continuing 

efforts to adequately prepare its personnel to fight and win against a well-

prepared opponent on the modern battlefield. 

In the second section’s first chapter, Timothy Heath challenges the view 

that Chinese leaders are preparing to initiate a conflict in the near term that 

could involve military intervention by the United States. Instead, he argues 

that the PLA has been tasked to focus on long-term military modernization, 

deterrence, and support of the government’s efforts to incrementally 

change the status quo in China’s favor through coercion and other non-war 

methods. Heath finds that the CCP assesses the primary challenges to its 

governing legitimacy to be domestic, relegating the PLA to a supporting 

role in achieving the party’s goals in the coming decades. As such, he argues 

that coercion and gray-zone tactics may constitute the principal Chinese 

military challenge to Taiwan and others in the region in the near term, while 

warning that the United States must also plan to deter the long-term threat 

of an outright attack by the PRC to compel Taiwan’s unification. 

The next chapter examines the impact of Russia’s large-scale invasion 

of Ukraine on Beijing’s calculus regarding the use of military force to most 

effectively achieve political goals. From their wide-ranging analysis of 

original Chinese sources, Maryanne Kivlehan-Wise and Tsun-Kai Tsai argue 

that Beijing is carefully studying the trajectory of Russia’s invasion—a conflict 

described by one authoritative source as “the most serious geopolitical event 

since the end of the Cold War”—and drawing lessons that inform its views 

on future warfare. The authors highlight several of these lessons as worthy 

of attention. First, authoritative Chinese observers judge that the risk of an Frohman and Rausch  – Introduction  • 9

extremely costly and protracted war between great powers is more likely 

than at any time since the world wars. Second, these sources clearly warn of 

the potentially game-changing impact of external assistance, especially from 

the United States and its allies, on a conflict between otherwise mismatched 

opponents. Among the most significant forms of external assistance they 

identify are intelligence support, material assistance, and training provided 

by the advanced industrial democracies. Finally, Chinese sources have 

carefully observed the nuclear dynamics of the conflict, concluding that 

Russia’s nuclear deterrent largely failed to force Ukraine’s capitulation and 

deter large-scale military assistance from outside powers once Ukraine 

proved itself resilient against Russia’s initial assault. 

In the next chapter, Dennis Blasko and Rick Gunnell argue that, despite 

major improvements in capabilities in recent years, senior PLA leaders still 

foresee decades of work before they will feel fully confident in the force’s 

ability to win a conflict against one of the world’s leading militaries. Xi 

Jinping himself has remarked on many of the PLA’s self-assessed weaknesses, 

which include “peacetime malpractices,” “ability panic,” and the “five 

incapables,” which refer to “some” commanders being incapable of judging 

the situation, understanding the intentions of higher echelons, making 

operational decisions, deploying troops, and dealing with unexpected 

situations. Highlighting the PLA’s perception of itself as lagging behind the 

world’s leading militaries in many technologies, the chapter concludes that 

while the PLA might be required to fight at any time, its leaders would prefer 

to achieve the nation’s goals through efforts short of war and build additional 

confidence before initiating large-scale combat operations. 

## Is China Preparing for the Use of Force? 

At the same time that its leaders express doubt over some aspects of 

the force’s ability to fight a large-scale modern conflict, the PLA is steadily 

increasing its presence and improving its readiness to carry out assigned 

missions around the PRC’s periphery and beyond. This volume’s final section 

explores the PLA’s changing force posture and capabilities around Taiwan, 

in Southeast Asia, and in the South Pacific and how Beijing is using the 

PLA as an instrument of power to deter challenges to its interests and seize 

opportunities in pursuit of its goals. 

In the section’s opening chapter, Andrew Erickson examines the PLA’s 

posture toward Taiwan and the force’s growing capabilities and options 

for conducting a cross-strait offensive campaign. Erickson argues that Xi 10  • The PLA in a Complex Security Environment 

Jinping is devoting tremendous national resources to improve the PLA’s 

options for an offensive operation against Taiwan and that his “centennial 

military building goal” of 2027 represents a major milestone for developing 

a full range of options to coerce or conquer the island. At the same time, 

Erickson finds that many Chinese writings suggest that Beijing does not 

yet believe the time is ripe to initiate a military conflict against Taiwan and 

that “peaceful reunification” remains the least costly way for resolving cross-

strait political differences. Others, however, express greater willingness to 

use military coercion and even force to bring Taiwan under Beijing’s control. 

Erickson suggests that this view may be manifested in the PLA’s increasing 

use of military exercises and other pressure tactics to demoralize Taiwan’s 

leaders and population and instill a sense of futility in resisting the PRC’s 

growing national power. 

In the next chapter, Ketian Zhang examines the role of the PLA in 

China’s strategy in Southeast Asia and makes four core arguments. The 

first is that China has preferred to use gray-zone coercion in lieu of direct 

military coercion in the South China Sea in recent years, while still using the 

PLA as an important backstop supporting the China Coast Guard. Second, 

Zhang finds that Beijing carefully calibrates its use of the PLA alongside 

its other tools of statecraft, such as gray-zone and economic coercion, in 

order to avoid direct military intervention by the United States. Third, 

China’s primary military goals in Southeast Asia are improving its combat 

capabilities, especially vis-à-vis the United States, and deterring other 

countries in the region from strengthening their own sovereignty claims. 

Fourth, Zhang argues that Beijing’s use of military and nonmilitary coercion 

often counteracts its economic “carrots” in the region, ultimately reducing 

the effectiveness of economic statecraft. 

In the volume’s final chapter, Peter Connolly examines the significant 

increase in China’s security engagement with the Pacific Islands since 

2017, noting that this engagement has been supported by and integrated 

with Beijing’s political and economic statecraft. He argues that China has 

executed its grand strategy in the Pacific Islands with comprehensive whole-

of-nation statecraft to build dual-use facilities, establish a police presence in 

Pacific Island countries, and ultimately gain access to formal military bases. 

Connolly concludes that Beijing’s intensifying outreach in the Pacific Islands 

demonstrates that the region is of higher strategic importance for China than 

was previously commonly understood. Ultimately, he encourages the United 

States and its allies to adapt their approach to better understand the interests 

and agency of the Pacific Island states and their peoples, recognize the 

growing role of China’s police forces as its weapon of choice for competing in Frohman and Rausch  – Introduction  • 11 

the South Pacific, and focus on and counter PRC efforts to achieve strategic 

access in the region. 

## Conclusion 

The nine chapters in this volume from NBR’s 2023 PLA Conference offer 

important insight into the PLA’s increasingly prominent role in advancing 

Beijing’s interests in the Indo-Pacific and beyond. The first three chapters 

explore the ways in which Chinese leaders perceive the PRC’s external 

security environment, as well as how their assessment is shaping party-

military dynamics and driving reforms to the national defense mobilization 

system. The next three chapters evaluate how an increasingly complex 

external security environment is shaping the PLA’s strategy and missions, 

what lessons the PLA has learned from the ongoing Russia-Ukraine conflict, 

and how senior Chinese leaders assess the abilities of the PLA’s personnel to 

execute their missions. The final three chapters examine the evolution of the 

PLA’s posture and presence in three key regional theaters—the Taiwan Strait, 

Southeast Asia, and the South Pacific—and consider how Beijing is using the 

military tool of power to achieve its goals in each region. 

Taken together, the chapters in this volume reveal that Chinese 

leaders view the PLA as playing an essential and in some cases increasingly 

prominent role in accomplishing national goals. At the same time, Beijing 

has also demonstrated caution in using the PLA in ways that could trigger 

military intervention or direct opposition from the United States. As Chinese 

leaders forecast long-term trends as being in the PRC’s favor, it is likely they 

will intensify their use of military and gray-zone coercion to pressure their 

neighbors and steadily change the status quo in a direction favorable to PRC 

interests. Meanwhile, the PRC may refrain, at least in the near term, from 

initiating a large-scale combat operation that could jeopardize its long-

term prospects until such time as it feels its national power has grown to 

the point that the United States and other powers will not dare challenge it. 

Through their careful research and analysis, the contributors to this volume 

have produced fresh and insightful arguments that will be key to shaping 

ongoing debates about the PLA’s role in achieving the PRC’s goals now and 

in the years ahead. 

NBR is grateful for its sponsors and partners at the China Strategic 

Focus Group at U.S. Indo-Pacific Command. We are also grateful for the 

Miller Center of Public Affairs at the University of Virginia for providing 

the venue in which the conference took place. Without their support, 12  • The PLA in a Complex Security Environment 

the research published in this volume would not have been possible. 

Conference discussants, panel chairs, attendees, and keynote speakers, as 

well as NBR staff, including Roy Kamphausen, Alison Szalwinski, Audrey 

Mossberger, Rachel Bernstein, Josh Nezam, Jerome Siangco, Jaymi McNabb, 

Joshua Ziemkowski, and Jessica Keough, also deserve special thanks 

and acknowledgment for their contributions to the 2023 conference and 

accompanying volume. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

This chapter examines how the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) analyzes 

its strategic environment through a case study of Xi Jinping’s message about 

“profound changes unseen in a century” and assesses the likely implications 

for the party’s calculus. 

> MAIN ARGUMENT

In 2017, China called its overseas envoys to Beijing for a rare event. The 

Ambassadorial Work Conference, attended by ambassadors, diplomats, and 

Beijing-based foreign policy officials, was a venue for Xi to share the CCP’s 

assessment of international trends and direct China’s foreign policy. He had 

a message for the hundreds of diplomats: the world was facing “profound 

changes unseen in a century.” “Changes unseen in a century” is the CCP’s 

official assessment that strategic trends of multipolarity and economic 

globalization are accelerating, driven by the rise of developing economies, 

technological advancement, and China’s growing national power. Under Xi, 

the CCP has responded to these “profound changes” with new strategies 

to advance China’s vision for global governance and has doubled down on 

“struggle” to accelerate favorable strategic trends, like multipolarity. 

> POLICY IMPLICATIONS

• U.S. policymakers aiming to shape the CCP’s choices should appreciate 

its significant and enduring focus on a consistent and relatively limited 

set of strategic trends: multipolarity, economic globalization, and 

competition in comprehensive national power. 

• The party places great value on comprehensive national power to 

predict the outcomes of future contests. This argues for greater U.S. 

attention to how its own comprehensive national power is publicly 

messaged or discussed with China’s leaders. 

• Beijing’s apparent certainty in an inevitable multipolar future may 

offer opportunities for short-term compromise because it reduces time 

pressure on China’s leaders, who, assured of future victory, may dwell 

less on temporary setbacks that do not impede long-term goals. Chapter 1 “Profound Changes Unseen 

# in a Century”: 

# China Assesses Its Security Environment 

## Kim Fassler 

In 2017, China called its overseas envoys to Beijing for a rare 

event. The Ambassadorial Work Conference, attended by ambassadors, 

diplomats, and Beijing-based foreign policy officials, was a venue for Xi 

Jinping to share the assessment of the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) 

on international trends and direct China’s foreign policy. He had a message 

for the hundreds of diplomats: the world was facing “profound changes 

unseen in a century.” 1 The term “changes unseen in a century” is the party’s 

official assessment that the strategic trends of multipolarity and economic 

globalization, observed at least since the 1980s, are accelerating, driven by 

the rise of developing economies, technological advancement, and China’s 

own growing national power. 

This chapter examines this message about “profound changes” as 

a case study of how the party analyzes its strategic environment and 

translates its understanding of these changes into policy. Under Xi, the 

CCP has responded with new strategies to advance China’s vision for global 

governance and doubled down on “struggle” to accelerate favorable strategic 

trends, like multipolarity. By exploring the drivers of the party’s assessment, 

this chapter shines light on China’s enduring goals and offers context for 

evaluating the likely impact of policy actions on the party’s calculus.  

> 1

The official phrase is “ 百年未有之大变局. ” As the concept has become widely promulgated in 

China, it is almost always abbreviated to “ 百年变局. ” In English, Chinese state media and official 

government documents most often use “profound changes unseen in a century,” though the phrase 

is sometimes translated as “great changes unseen in a century” or the clunkier “global changes of a 

magnitude not seen in a century.” 

Kim Fassler  is  a Foreign Affairs Officer at the U.S. Department of State’s Office of China Coordination. 

> This chapter represents only the views of the author and not those of the U.S. Department of State or
> the U.S. government.

16  • The PLA in a Complex Security Environment 

## The CCP’s Official Ideology and Decision Logic 

U.S. scholars have extensively analyzed Beijing’s decision-making 

through different lenses; however, the party’s official ideology—the 

foundational ideas the CCP uses to analyze China’s external environment, 

develop programs of action, and organize and mobilize around its central 

agenda—remains either understudied or sorely dated. 2 The official ideology 

connects top-level guidance to policy, both of which are observable to 

outside analysts, but it is often difficult to comprehend the complex 

connections between the two. Analysts generally detect changes in top-level 

guidance in the form of a new phrase or slogan, usually only when the party 

system has already digested the larger, more complex ideas they represent. 

Parsing the official ideology requires combing through CCP speeches, 

periodicals, books, and study materials for clues and connections that tell 

outsiders how the party promotes its ideology to its 98 million members as 

a basis for policy. 3

To translate ideology into action, the party employs a fundamentally 

different approach to assessing its strategic environment from the approach 

that is familiar to most U.S. strategists. The assessment starts with the CCP’s 

understanding of history, rooted in Marxism-Leninism, that human social 

development is not a series of accidental, unrelated events. Rather, history 

is governed by laws and processes that can be studied, discovered, and 

harnessed through scientific judgment. This notion is imbedded in CCP 

leaders’ thinking and their foundational documents. The CCP constitution 

asserts that the party possesses a unique ability to discern “the laws 

governing the development of the history of human society.” 4 This view 

of history, called historical materialism, has been described by Xi Jinping 

as “the fundamental way for us Communists to understand and grasp 

history.” 5 It is the reason why the CCP routinely emphasizes the importance            

> 2The last book-length analysis may be Franz Schurmann’s 1968 volume, which explored how the
> CCP’s “practical ideology” articulated in Mao Zedong’s speeches and writings translated into the
> first five-year plan and Great Leap Forward. See Franz Schurmann, Ideology and Organization in
> Communist China (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1968), 20–21.
> 3Schurmann, Ideology and Organization in Communist China , 20–21; and Davis B. Bobrow, Steve
> Chan, and John A. Kringen, Understanding Foreign Policy Decisions: The Chinese Case (New York:
> Free Press, 1979).
> 420th National Congress of the Communist Party of China, “Constitution of the Communist Party of
> China,” October 22, 2022, available at https://news.cgtn.com/news/files/Full-text-of-Constitution-
> of-Communist-Party-of-China.pdf.
> 5Zhang Yanguo, “ 认识把握历史的根本方法 (学术随笔 )” [Understanding the Fundamental Method
> of Grasping History (Academic Essay)], People’s Daily , November 8, 2021, http://theory.people.com.
> cn/n1/2021/1108/c40531-32276003.html.

Fassler  – Chapter 1  • 17 

of the “trend of the times.” 6 “The history of human social development 

proves that no matter what twists and turns it encounters, history always 

moves forward according to its own laws,” Xi said in a 2013 speech to the 

Moscow Institute of International Relations. He added that “no force can 

stop the wheel of history.” 7

Therefore, according to the party’s ideology, divining the “correct” 

assessment of any situation and the direction in which that situation is 

developing is the starting point for policy design. Goals can only be achieved 

by first diagnosing the “overall situation” ( 大局 ), a larger strategic or 

geopolitical field of play that involves national interests. The overall situation 

may include many specific, smaller configurations ( 格局 ) developing within 

the bigger picture. Instead of setting goals and paths to meet objectives— 

the “ends, ways, means” construct familiar to U.S. strategists—CCP 

decision-making emphasizes the discovery of “propensity,” “momentum,” 

or “potential” inherent in any situation. 8 This requires deep analysis and 

an understanding of trends ( 大势 ), their direction of movement ( 方向 ), 

and sources of initiative ( 动力 ). These terms are not easily translated into 

English, and their meanings can sometimes only be understood through 

their relationship to each other in context. 9 

> 6

Tanner Greer, “The Theory of History That Guides Xi Jinping,” Palladium, July 8, 2020, https://www. 

palladiummag.com/2020/07/08/the-theory-of-history-that-guides-xi-jinping.  

> 7

Xi Jinping, “ 顺应时代前进潮流促进世界和平发展 —— 在莫斯科国际关系学院的演讲 ”

[Conforming to the Trend of the Times and Promoting World Peace and Development: Speech at 

the Moscow Institute of International Relations], Embassy of the People’s Republic of China (PRC) 

in the Russian Federation, March 24, 2013, http://ru.china-embassy.gov.cn/ztbd/xjpfe/201305/ 

t20130511_3104797.htm.  

> 8

For more on “propensity” and its application to military strategy and other fields, please see Francois 

Jullien,  The Propensity of Things: Toward a History of Efficacy in China  (New York: Zone Books, 

1995); and Kyle Marcrum, “Propensity, Conditions, and Consequences: Effective Coercion through 

Understanding Chinese Thinking,” China Aerospace Studies Institute, July 18, 2022, https://www. 

airuniversity.af.edu/CASI/Display/Article/3093835/propensity-conditions-and-consequences-

effective-coercion-through-understanding.  

> 9

For example, an October 16, 2017, Xinhua article reviewing China’s diplomacy since the 2012 

Party Congress says: “[T]he party Central Committee with Comrade Xi Jinping as the core has 

deeply grasped the two overall situations [ 大局 ] in domestic and international affairs, observed the 

general trends [ 大势 ], planned major events, actively promoted innovation in diplomatic theory and 

practice, improved China’s diplomatic strategy and layout, created a new situation in foreign work, 

and led China to maintain strategic initiative [ 主动 ] in the complex and ever-changing international 

configuration [ 格局 ].” In this case, developments in international politics (configuration) are 

subordinate to the two overall situations, which the party has separately defined as (1) China’s 

national rejuvenation and (2) profound changes unseen in a century. The party is lauded for correctly 

diagnosing strategic trends, allowing China to favorably leverage the driving forces inherent in the 

overall situation (initiative). “ 大国外交新格局 —— 党的十八大以来历史性变革系列述评之八 ”

[New Pattern of Major Power Diplomacy: Eighth in a Series of Commentaries on Historic Changes 

since the 18th CCP National Congress], Xinhua, October 16, 2017, http://www.xinhuanet.com/ 

politics/2017-10/16/c_1121810785.htm. 18  • The PLA in a Complex Security Environment 

Once the overall situation and underlying trends are correctly 

diagnosed, skilled leaders must “struggle” to leverage them for progress 

toward political goals; or as Xi has advised the Politburo, leaders must “be 

good at understanding and resolving contradictions as a breakthrough to 

open up the work situation.” 10  Contradictions ( 矛盾 ) are opposing forces 

present in all relationships and are central to the party’s ideology. Xi has 

called contradictions “the fundamental driving force for the development of 

things.” 11  Party study materials teach that world development is “the result of 

the intertwining and interaction of various contradictions.” 12 

The prominence of contradictions in senior leader speeches sometimes 

causes analysts to conclude that China’s leaders have a permanent 

siege mentality, are reeling in reaction to recent events, or fear for their 

country’s future. Rather, the party sees danger and opportunity in every 

critical situation, stemming from its belief that progress occurs by seizing 

momentum and moving it in a favorable direction through struggle. 

Struggle ( 斗争 ) is especially necessary during periods of turbulence or 

major transition—one reason why it has appeared more frequently in Xi’s 

speeches in recent years. 

The People’s Liberation Army (PLA) is the source and subject of some 

of the best U.S. analysis of the CCP’s official ideology in practice because 

PLA academic institutions write extensively on military planning and 

decision-making, which reflects the process described above. 13  China’s 

military strategists stress that correct judgment of the overall situation is a 

prerequisite for operational planning. Without it, relationships and linkages  

> 10

Xi Jinping, “ 辩证唯物主义是中国共产党人的世界观和方法论 ” [Dialectical Materialism Is the 

World Outlook and Methodology of Chinese Communists],  Qiushi , December 31, 2018, http://www. 

qstheory.cn/dukan/qs/2018-12/31/c_1123923896.htm. One practical implication of this worldview is 

that party leaders are more inclined than their U.S. counterparts to expect competition, turbulence, 

and conflict as a feature of international relations. While U.S. decision-makers view crises as abrupt, 

irregular events demanding special coping measures, like task forces or emergency processes, for 

the CCP these incidents “are the inevitable result of long-term unresolved conflicts” and differ from 

peacetime only in level of intensity at a particular stage.  

> 11

Ibid.  

> 12

“世界正经历百年未有之大变局 , 变在何处 ?” [The World Is Undergoing Great Changes Not 

Seen in a Century, What Are These Changes?], in ‘ 习近平新时代中国特色社会主义思想学习 

问答 ’ [Questions and Answers for the Study of Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese 

Characteristics for a New Era], ed. Bian Ji and Ren Min (Beijing: Study Press and People’s Publishing 

House, 2021), 42–46. See the Center for Security and Emerging Technology’s translation of this 

chapter, available at https://cset.georgetown.edu/wp-content/uploads/t0336_Xi_reader_ch8_EN.pdf.  

> 13

For recent examples, see Alison Kaufman, “Planning for Escalation: PRC Views on Controlling 

Escalation in a Conflict,” in  Modernizing Deterrence: How China Coerces, Compels, and Deters , ed. 

Roy Kamphausen (Washington, D.C.: National Bureau of Asian Research, 2023), 141–57; and Daniel 

Shats, Thomas Corbett, and Peter Wood, “Chinese Views of the Spectrum of Conflict: Theory and 

Action,” China Aerospace Studies Institute, June 20, 2022, https://www.airuniversity.af.edu/CASI/ 

Display/Article/3052393/chinese-views-of-the-spectrum-of-conflict-theory-and-action. Fassler  – Chapter 1  • 19 

cannot be understood, and the resulting approaches are likely to fail. Military 

manuals advise that a commander’s ability to “take care of the relationship 

between the various parts in the overall situation” is “key to the success or 

failure of the military conflict.” 14  Correctly judging the strategic picture can 

give one an advantage over an adversary. Thus, commanders should “first 

seek to make better judgment of the situation than their opponents” and 

grasp “the main contradictions that play a decisive role in overall change.” 15 

Leaders must also recognize and leverage the unusual features of a crisis, 

including chaos or distraction, for political advantage. For example, the 

PLA points to the U.S. military’s stationing of troops in Central Asia and 

the Middle East during its war on terrorism after September 11 as a case 

of the United States successfully acting in extreme circumstances (terrorist 

attack) to increase its global military presence in a way that might normally 

be opposed by some countries. 16 

## Judging the Overall Situation 

## Evolution since the 1980s 

Since the mid-1980s, the CCP’s judgment of the overall situation has 

been based on an almost unwavering belief in a future multipolar world, 

characterized by economic interdependence, in which there is a low threat of 

major-power war. This worldview dates back to 1985, when Deng Xiaoping, 

in a speech to the Central Military Commission, reversed Mao Zedong’s 

assessment of a likely war with the Soviet Union or the United States. Deng 

declared that the party had changed “our understanding of the question of 

war and peace” and concluded that the threat of a great-power war was no 

longer imminent. 17  The new assessment entered the party’s lexicon as the 

mantra “peace and development are the theme of the times,” and, as Deng 

acknowledged, it allowed China to “concentrate without fear on the drive for         

> 14 In Their Own Words: 2020 Science of Military Strategy (Montgomery: China Aerospace Studies
> Institute, 2022), 94, https://www.airuniversity.af.edu/CASI/Display/Article/2913216/in-their-own-
> words-2020-science-of-military-strategy.
> 15 Peng Guangqian and Yao Youzhi, eds., The Science of Military Strategy 2001 (Beijing: Military
> Science Publishing House, 2005), 164; and In Their Own Words . The Science of Military Strategy is
> a periodically updated PRC professional military education manual.
> 16 In Their Own Words , 124.
> 17 I am grateful to David Finkelstein for referring me to Deng’s speech. Deng Xiaoping, “Speech at an
> Enlarged Meeting of the Military Commission of the Central Committee of the Communist Party
> of China,” Marxists Internet Archive, June 4, 1985, https://www.marxists.org/reference/archive/
> deng-xiaoping/1985/78.htm.

20  • The PLA in a Complex Security Environment 

modernization.” 18  Peace and development provided a strategic rationale for 

the party to focus on the economy, reduce the PLA by one million soldiers, 

and de-prioritize military spending previously used to prepare for conflict. 

The CCP never abandoned its faith in peace and development, despite 

turbulent geopolitical events at the turn of the century. The 1995–96 Taiwan 

Strait crisis, NATO’s military intervention in Kosovo, and the 1999 accidental 

bombing of China’s embassy in Belgrade led Chinese scholars to temporarily 

question whether the world did not face the prospect of a major-power 

war. The debate’s outcome appeared in  China’s National Defense in 2000 , a 

white paper that contained a much more pessimistic international security 

assessment than the last white paper published in 1998 and suggested China 

had previously been too optimistic about the pace at which any country 

would have the power to rival the United States. 19 

Party documents during this time suggested the CCP believed 

multipolarity was still many years away. 20  For example, General Secretary 

Jiang Zemin’s 2002 16th Party Congress work report reflected tempered 

optimism by stating that multipolarity and economic globalization were 

experiencing “twists and turns” and “the old international political and 

economic order, which is unfair and irrational, has yet to be changed 

fundamentally.” 21  Yet, according to Jiang, the situation did not fundamentally 

affect the enduring, long-term trends. Peace and development remained 

the dominant trend, and “a new world war cannot be fought within the 

foreseeable period.” 22  He thus reaffirmed Deng’s assessment. 

If multipolarity was a distant reality, then how could China gauge those 

“twists and turns,” the pace and intensity, of multipolarity and economic 

globalization? In the 1990s and early 2000s, government-affiliated think 

tanks and universities delved into studying and measuring comprehensive 

national power (CNP) ( 综合国力 )—a nation’s combined overall strength 

in economy, military, science and technology, education, resources, and        

> 18 Deng, “Speech at an Enlarged Meeting of the Military Commission of the Central Committee of the
> Communist Party of China.” For more on the history of this phrase, see “Peace and Development
> Are the Theme of the Times,” Center for Strategic Translation, https://www.strategictranslation.org/
> glossary/peace-and-development-are-the-theme-of-the-times.
> 19 David M. Finkelstein, “China Reconsiders Its National Security: ‘The Great Peace and Development
> Debate of 1999,’ ” CNA, December 2000, https://www.cna.org/reports/2000/PeaceAndDevelopment.
> pdf.
> 20 Rush Doshi, The Long Game: China’s Grand Strategy to Displace American Order (New York: Oxford
> University Press, 2021), 162.
> 21 Jiang Zemin, “Full Text of Jiang Zemin’s Report at 16th Party Congress: Build a Well-Off Society in
> an All-Round Way and Create a New Situation in Building Socialism with Chinese Characteristics,”
> People’s Daily , December 10, 2022, http://en.people.cn/200211/18/eng20021118_106983.shtml.
> 22 Ibid.

Fassler  – Chapter 1  • 21 

influence. 23  The studies offered guidance for where to focus China’s national 

development and predicted when shifts in its relative CNP would affect its 

external environment. In 2004, professors from China’s leading university, 

Hu Angang and Men Honghua, predicted significant changes through 2020 

in CNP among five countries that were “closely associated with China’s 

national interests and geopolitical strategy”: the United States, Russia, Japan, 

India, and China. 24  “International competition manifests itself mainly in the 

dynamic changes in the strategic resources of different countries and the 

open competition in comprehensive national power,” they wrote. Regarding 

the United States, Hu and Men predicted that in the next twenty years, the 

narrowing CNP gap between Washington and Beijing would make China “a 

world power with dominant ability.” 25 

Jiang and his successor Hu Jintao appeared to have this future forecast 

in mind when they referenced “increasingly fierce” competition in CNP in 

their 2002 and 2007 Party Congress work reports. 26  In 2002, Jiang declared 

“the first two decades of the 21st century” a “period of strategic opportunity” 

(战略机遇期 ) during which China could enhance its national strength by 

riding the wave of globalization in an era where major armed conflict was 

unlikely to occur. 27  Although the “period of strategic opportunity” can be 

read as optimism about a peaceful international environment through the 

2020s, its time-limited nature also reflects a serious and sober appraisal 

that changes in CNP would fundamentally alter international politics and 

challenge China’s national rejuvenation. Indeed, Hu’s 2007 Party Congress 

work report noted that “historic changes” in China’s relations with the 

world brought “unprecedented opportunities as well as unprecedented 

challenges.” 28          

> 23 For more on CNP and geopolitical power calculations, see Michael Pillsbury, China Debates the
> Future Security Environment (Washington, D.C.: National Defense University Press, 2000), 203–56.
> 24 Hu Angang and Men Honghua, “The Rising of Modern China: Comprehensive National Power and
> Grand Strategy” (paper presented at the Korea Institute for International Economic Policy’s “Rising
> China and the East Asian Economy International Conference,” Seoul, March 19–20, 2004), https://
> myweb.rollins.edu/tlairson/china/chigrandstrategy.pdf.
> 25 Ibid.
> 26 Jiang, “Full Text of Jiang Zemin’s Report at 16th Party Congress”; and Hu Jintao, “Full Text of Hu
> Jintao’s Report at 17th Party Congress: Hold High the Great Banner of Socialism with Chinese
> Characteristics and Strive for New Victories in Building a Moderately Prosperous Society in All
> Respects,” China Daily , October 15, 2007, https://www.chinadaily.com.cn/china/2007-10/24/
> content_6204564.htm.
> 27 Jiang, “Full Text of Jiang Zemin’s Report at 16th Party Congress”; and “Period of Strategic
> Opportunity,” Center for Strategic Translation, https://www.strategictranslation.org/glossary/period-
> of-strategic-opportunity.
> 28 Hu, “Full Text of Hu Jintao’s Report at 17th Party Congress.”

22  • The PLA in a Complex Security Environment 

If CNP gave Chinese scholars a quantitative method to analyze the 

international situation, the 2008 global financial crisis and its dramatic 

aftermath provided qualitative evidence of seismic shifts in the global 

order. In a 2009 essay titled “The Financial Crisis and American Economic 

Hegemony,” Yuan Peng, president of the Ministry of State Security’s think 

tank, the China Institute of Contemporary International Relations (CICIR), 

which is influential in the government, asserted: “The world’s power has 

shifted East and the rise of emerging powers has brought unprecedented 

changes in hundreds of years impacting the U.S.-led international political 

and economic order.” 29  Others, such as Justin Yifu Lin, chief economist at the 

World Bank, noted that the crisis catalyzed greater participation in global 

economic decision-making by the G-20 because the G-8, led by the United 

States, was unable to find solutions. 30  Lin said later in a speech to mid-level 

CCP cadres that “with their waning economic influence, the decision-

making authority of these eight nations in global affairs has lessened.” 31 

These sentiments echoed at the highest levels of party leadership. In 

2009, Hu, at a rare conference with China’s ambassadors, modified Deng’s 

core strategic guideline for China to “hide its capabilities and bide its time,” 

adding that China also must “actively accomplish something.” 32  This new 

guidance was based on CCP leaders’ assessment that major changes were 

taking place in the “overall situation” that China would have to proactively 

manage. At the 2012 Party Congress, during his last major speech as general 

secretary, Hu asserted China was experiencing “fierce competition in 

comprehensive national power unseen before in this new stage in the new 

century.” 33  This laid the foundation for Hu’s successor, Xi Jinping, to build on 

this assessment during his first term (2012–17).              

> 29 Yuan Peng, “ 金融危机与美国经济霸权 :历史与政治的解读 ” [The Financial Crisis and American
> Economic Hegemony: Interpretation of History and Politics], Contemporary International Relations ,
> no. 5 (2009): 1–6.
> 30 Siyan Nan et al., “Justin Yifu Lin on ‘Profound Changes Unseen in a Century,’ ” Pekingnology,
> November 18, 2023, https://www.pekingnology.com/p/justin-yifu-lin-on-profound-changes.
> 31 Ibid.
> 32 Doshi, The Long Game , 160.
> 33 Hu Jintao, “Report of Hu Jintao to the 18th CPC National Congress: Firmly March on the Path
> of Socialism with Chinese Characteristics and Strive to Complete the Building of a Moderately
> Prosperous Society in All Respects,” General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist
> Party of China, November 8, 2012, http://www.china.org.cn/china/18th_cpc_congress/2012-11/16/
> content_27137540.htm. Fassler –Chapter 1 •23

## Profound Changes Unseen in a Century 

“Changes unseen in a century” is the party’s assessment that its long-

predicted strategic trends of multipolarity and economic globalization are 

accelerating, driven by the rise of developing economies, technological 

advancement, and China’s growing national power. Xi’s predecessors, Jiang 

and Hu, spoke of “profound,” “complex,” and “extensive” changes, but Xi is 

credited with formally unveiling “profound changes unseen in a century” 

(百年未有之大变局 ) during a 2017 conference of China’s ambassadors 

in Beijing. 34  Between 2019 and 2021, scholars convened conferences to 

study the profound changes, books were published in Chinese and English, 

and China’s National Social Science Fund, which selects and promotes 

projects on issues relevant to China’s leaders, sponsored at least four 

research projects on the topic. Concurrently, the original, clunkier phrase 

“profound changes unseen in a century” ( 百年未有之大变局 ), which Xi 

used in his 2017 Diplomatic Work Conference speech, was shortened in 

official communications to its current four-character form ( 百年变局 ). This 

heralded its formal adoption as a  tifa  (提法 )—a government-articulated 

strategic guideline that has been sufficiently digested through internal study 

so that officials are expected to grasp it without additional context. 

The roots of the assessment are complex. A January 2013  Study Times 

article by a high-ranking PLA general, published months after Xi assumed 

power, offers insight into factors that initially shaped the formulation. 

The article, titled “Understanding and Considering the Impact of the 

Unprecedented Profound Changes on the Strategic Configuration of the 

World and Our National Security Environment,” was penned by then deputy 

chief of the PLA Joint Staff, Qi Jianguo. The center of global development 

had shifted from West to East, and the United States, Europe, and Japan 

faced financial and political issues, Qi asserted. Economic globalization 

meant countries increasingly relied on each other; problems affecting one 

country easily affected many others. Great powers were adjusting their 

foreign policies and security strategies; the United States had abandoned 

counterterrorism and was pursuing a “strategic adjustment” to Asia to 

sustain U.S. leadership and respond to “newly rising nations.” Military 

competition, especially among “great powers” ( 大国 ), was becoming 

more intense, as the United States strengthened its alliances and military    

> 34 Xi Jinping, The Governance of China III (Beijing: Foreign Languages Press, 2020), 489, available at
> https://subsites.chinadaily.com.cn/npc/2021-12/30/c_695142.htm.

24  • The PLA in a Complex Security Environment 

deployments in Asia, while Russia, Japan, and India oriented their military 

forces around China’s periphery. 35 

This assessment coincided with CCP leaders’ view that these 

international dynamics were converging with another consequential 

trend—China’s rise. Xi’s landmark speech at the October 2017 19th Party 

Congress proclaimed that China had entered a “new era” in which it had 

already stood up, had grown rich, and, going forward, would focus on 

“becoming strong.” 36  Soon after, Xi introduced a new high-level phrase— 

the “two overall situations” ( 两个大局 ). The first situation concerns China’s 

“national rejuvenation,” an overarching political objective pursued by 

generations of CCP leaders to raise China to a certain level of economic 

prosperity, national strength, and international influence by midcentury. The 

second situation, “profound changes unseen in a century,” reflects judgments 

on global developments that affect China, including foundational shifts in 

CNP, economic globalization, and the science and technology revolution. 

The party sees the two overall situations as mutually reinforcing and central 

to China’s national strategy. In 2019, during an inspection tour in central 

China, Xi said, “I have often said that leading officials should have two 

factors in mind: One is the strategic goal of achieving national rejuvenation, 

the other is the world experiencing a level of change unseen in a century. 

This is the prerequisite to planning our work.” 37 

## Policy Design: Leveraging Strategic Trends 

In response to the leadership’s assessment, the CCP has focused 

on using the new reality of China’s considerable national strength to 

accelerate favorable strategic trends in the international environment, 

such as multipolarity, that in turn reinforce and further China’s national 

rejuvenation. In 2018, at the Central Work Conference on Foreign Affairs, Xi 

Jinping translated the “profound changes” assessment into practical action 

in the form of four trends ( 大势 ) that officials must grasp: (1) accelerating       

> 35 I am grateful to Dan Peck for highlighting and sharing a copy of this article. Qi Jianguo, “ 前所未有
> 的大变局对世界战略形势和我国家安全环境的认识与思考 ” [Understanding and Considering
> the Impact of the Unprecedented Great Changes on the Strategic Configuration of the World and
> Our National Security Environment], Qiushi , January 21, 2013.
> 36 Xi Jinping, “Full Text of Xi Jinping’s Report at 19th CPC National Congress: Secure a Decisive
> Victory in Building a Moderately Prosperous Society in All Respects and Strive for the Great Success
> of Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era,” China Daily , October 18, 2017, https://
> www.chinadaily.com.cn/china/19thcpcnationalcongress/2017-11/04/content_34115212.htm.
> 37 Xi, The Governance of China III , 99.

Fassler  – Chapter 1  • 25 

multipolarity, along with in-depth adjustment of major-power relations, 

(2) sustained development of economic globalization, along with a 

profound evolution of the world economic pattern, (3) overall stability in 

the international environment, along with complex international security 

challenges, and (4) exchanges and mutual learning among civilizations, 

along with mutual stimulation of different ideologies and cultures. 38  Xi 

urged China’s diplomats to “open up new prospects” and “skillfully defuse 

potential crises and turn them into opportunities,” meaning they must work 

hard to influence these trends to China’s advantage. 39  This section explores 

select ways in which China’s foreign policy has responded to his guidance. 

## Build a Community of Shared Future for Mankind 

China sees the reform of global governance—the rules, norms, and 

institutions guiding international interactions—as a key part of accelerating 

the multipolarity aspect of changes unseen in a century. Xi has instructed 

China’s diplomats to “become more actively involved in global governance 

and multilateral affairs” and “promote the development of the global 

governance system in a more just and reasonable direction.” 40  Beijing is 

acutely aware of criticisms levied against international institutions and views 

global governance reform as key to balancing against the United States’ 

dominant influence. Governance is one of “the four deficits” 41 —a slogan Xi  

> 38

The CCP has convened only six Central Foreign Affairs Work Conferences since 1971. These events 

offer rare insight into leaders’ thinking about strategic trends. At the most recent conference on 

December 27–28, 2023, in Beijing, Xi affirmed China’s confidence in a “great transformation” of 

the global system and its commitment to “an equal and orderly multipolar world” and “inclusive 

economic globalization.” At the November 28, 2014, Central Conference on Foreign Affairs, he 

noted: (1) despite “complexities” in the international architecture, the trend toward a multipolar 

world will not change, (2) despite a difficult economic adjustment, economic globalization will not 

stop, (3) despite international tensions and conflict, peace and development is “still the underlying 

trend,” (4) despite protracted conflict over the international order, international system reform will 

not change, and (5) despite uncertainties in China’s neighborhood, Asia will remain prosperous 

and stable. Ministry of Foreign Affairs (PRC), “The Central Conference on Work Relating to 

Foreign Affairs Was Held in Beijing: Xi Jinping Delivered an Important Address at the Conference,” 

December 28, 2023, https://www.mfa.gov.cn/eng/zxxx_662805/202312/t20231228_11214416.html; 

“习近平出席中央外事工作会议并发表重要讲话 ” [Xi Jinping Attended the Central Foreign 

Affairs Work Conference and Delivered an Important Speech], Xinhua, November 29, 2014, http:// 

www.xinhuanet.com/politics/2014-11/29/c_1113457723.htm; and “ 习近平 : 努力开创中国特色 

大国外交新局面 ” [Xi Jinping: Strive to Create a New Situation in Major-Country Diplomacy 

with Chinese Characteristics], Xinhua, June 23, 2018, http://www.xinhuanet.com/politics/2018-

06/23/c_1123025806.htm.  

> 39

“习近平出席中央外事工作会议并发表重要讲话 ”; and “Xi Stresses Centralized, Unified 

Leadership of CPC Central Committee over Foreign Affairs,”  China Daily , May 15, 2018, https:// 

www.chinadaily.com.cn/a/201805/15/WS5afacfd2a3103f6866ee8868.html.  

> 40

Xi,  The Governance of China III , 489–94; and “ 习近平 : 努力开创中国特色大国外交新局面 .”  

> 41

The four deficits are governance, trust, peace, and development. They are often mentioned as the 

impetus for China’s Global Development Initiative and Global Security Initiative. 26  • The PLA in a Complex Security Environment 

frequently uses when speaking to international audiences about how China’s 

foreign policy will address its efforts to advance “a more just and equitable 

international political and economic order.” 42 

Xi’s answer to the “governance deficit” is his signature foreign policy 

concept, the “community of shared future for mankind” ( 人类命运共同 

体), which provides theoretical backing to China’s global governance reform 

program across at least five dimensions: politics, security, development 

(e.g., economic, social, and technological), culture, and the environment. 43 

Xi introduced the concept in 2013 at a speech in Moscow, and in 2018 it 

was written into the preamble of the CCP constitution. In 2018, China’s 

then top diplomat, Yang Jiechi, called the community of shared future “the 

overall goal of China’s foreign affairs work in the new era.” 44  Chinese media 

assert China’s agenda is “true multilateralism,” in contrast to the “pseudo-

multilateralism” pursued by the United States, which emphasizes alliances 

and “serves Washington’s hegemony.” 45 

Under Xi, China has actively deployed its governance reform efforts 

in international institutions where it has a leading role. The Shanghai 

Cooperation Organisation (SCO), formed in 2001 by China, Kazakhstan, 

Kyrgyzstan, Russia, Tajikistan, and Uzbekistan to focus on territorial 

boundaries, has evolved into a valuable regional security forum for Beijing to 

pursue diplomatic approaches and multilateral endorsement of its preferred 

version of governance. 46  The SCO’s 2018 Qingdao Declaration endorsed 

“building a community for the shared future of humankind,” as well as the 

core tenets of what became China’s Global Security Initiative. This happened 

four years before Xi publicly introduced the initiative to the world at the 

Boao Forum for Asia in 2022, suggesting that the SCO was a test bed for the 

concept. 47  The SCO has also adopted and advocated as a bloc at the United              

> 42 Xi, The Governance of China III , 503–9, 535–37; and Zhao Yinping, “ ‘一带一路 ’—— 习近平之
> 道” [“One Belt, One Road”: Xi Jinping’s Way], Xinhua, May 19, 2017, http://www.xinhuanet.com//
> politics/2017-05/19/c_129607528.htm.
> 43 Liza Tobin, “Xi’s Vision for Transforming Global Governance: A Strategic Challenge for Washington
> and Its Allies,” Texas National Security Review 1, no. 1 (2018): 154–66.
> 44 Yang Jiechi, “ 以习近平外交思想为指导 深入推进新时代对外工作 ” [Guided by Xi Jinping
> Thought on Diplomacy, We Will Further Advance Our Foreign Work in the New Era], Qiushi ,
> August 1, 2018, http://www.qstheory.cn/dukan/qs/2018-08/01/c_1123209510.htm.
> 45 Chen Qingqing, “China Sends Clear Signal at UNGA, Upholding True Multilateralism,” Global
> Times , September 22, 2023, https://www.globaltimes.cn/page/202309/1298731.shtml.
> 46 Abigail Grace, “The Lessons China Taught Itself: Why the Shanghai Cooperation Organization
> Matters,” Jamestown Foundation, China Brief, June 19, 2018, https://jamestown.org/program/the-
> lessons-china-taught-itself-why-the-shanghai-cooperation-organization-matters.
> 47 “Qingdao Declaration of the Council of Heads of State of Shanghai Cooperation Organisation,”
> China Daily , July 5, 2018, http://www.china.org.cn/chinese/2018-07/05/content_53968548.htm.

Fassler  – Chapter 1  • 27 

Nations for principles of internet content management that match China’s 

vision of “cyber sovereignty,” 48  which runs counter to U.S.-preferred models 

for freedom of expression in cyberspace. 

China has also called on BRICS countries (Brazil, Russia, India, China, 

and South Africa) to support its foreign policy ideas by building “a new 

model of international relations” and “a global community of shared future” 

and “resolutely reject[ing] unilateralism and protectionism”—a veiled 

reference to trade policies of the United States. 49  The BRICS countries, which 

represent close to half of the world’s population and 36% of the world’s GDP, 

are exploring alternative payment settlement mechanisms to the U.S. dollar, 

and China has stepped in as a lender of last resort for developing countries 

dissatisfied with Western financing models. 50 

In addition, China has approached the global South as a key 

constituency and geopolitical counterweight to the United States in 

advancing multilateralism. China desires to “continuously enhance the voice 

and influence of the global South in international affairs,” per the director 

of the Office of the Central Commission for Foreign Affairs and Foreign 

Minister Wang Yi. 51  Practically, the global South is an increasingly important 

voice on geopolitical issues, such as opposing U.S. and Western sanctions 

on Russia over Ukraine. 52  This group is a critical driver of global economic 

development: Chinese analysts cite data showing developing nations will 

account for as much as 60% of global economic activity by midcentury, with 

Western countries falling behind. 53 

Support from the global South also gives China tremendous influence 

within the UN General Assembly, whose 193 members are mostly 

developing countries. Beijing has tried to limit international criticism of           

> 48 Elliott Zaagman, “Cyber Sovereignty and the PRC’s Vision for Global Internet Governance,”
> Jamestown Foundation, China Brief, June 5, 2018, https://jamestown.org/program/cyber-
> sovereignty-and-the-prcs-vision-for-global-internet-governance.
> 49 Xi, The Governance of China III , 516–20.
> 50 Lucas Resende Carvalho, “BRICS: The Global South Challenging the Status Quo,” Bertelsmann
> Stiftung, September 21, 2023, https://globaleurope.eu/globalization/brics-the-global-south-
> challenging-the-status-quo.
> 51 Wang Yi, “ 坚持团结合作 ,共谋世界发展 —— 王毅在 2023 年全球智库大会上的视频致辞 ”
> [Adhere to Unity and Cooperation to Seek Common World Development: Wang Yi’s Video Speech
> at the 2023 Global Think Tank Conference], Ministry of Foreign Affairs (PRC), September 2, 2023,
> https://www.mfa.gov.cn/web/ziliao_674904/zyjh_674906/202309/t20230902_11137271.shtml.
> 52 Ma Xiaojun, “ 清晰亮明中国的 ‘全球南方 ’身份 ” [Clearly Clarify China’s “Global South” Identity],
> Global Times , August 28, 2023, https://opinion.huanqiu.com/article/4EJZLxbbRA9.
> 53 Zhang Yunling, “ 如何认识百年大变局之变 ” [How to Understand the Changes That Have Occurred
> over the Past Century], Asia Pacific Security and Maritime Affairs, March 3, 2019, trans. by Dylan
> Levi King as “How to Recognize the Great Changes to Come in This Century,” Center for Strategic
> Translation, November 2022, https://www.strategictranslation.org/articles/how-to-understand-the-
> great-changes-to-come-in-this-century.

28  • The PLA in a Complex Security Environment 

its human rights record and prevent expansion of Taiwan’s participation in 

international bodies. 54  Positioning itself as the “largest developing country” 

within the global South also bolsters the notion that China is a leader of 

the developing world in a historic struggle against rich, developed nations. 

This idea is probably not just an empty narrative. In March 2023, echoing 

ideas from Xi’s foreign policy speeches, then foreign minister Qin Gang 

asserted: “The principal contradiction in today’s world is not at all a so-called 

‘democracy vs. autocracy’ played up by a handful of countries, but a struggle 

between development and containment of development.” 55 

## Promote the Belt and Road 

The Belt and Road Initiative (BRI) is the most visible manifestation of 

China’s multipronged approach to leveraging international trends and its 

own strengths for political advantage. BRI’s stated aims and connection to 

overall strategic trends is clear. According to Xi, BRI was created to answer 

a “call for reforming the global governance system” and “integrate more 

countries and regions into economic globalization,” while the State Council’s 

2015 Action Plan on BRI describes the goal of the initiative as to promote 

“world peace and development.” 56  Launched by Xi in 2013 under the name 

“One Belt, One Road” and written into the CCP constitution in 2017, 

the massive initiative is expected to add more than $1 trillion of outward 

funding for global infrastructure from 2017 to 2027. 57 

BRI is more than an infrastructure and investment program. For China, 

it is a proving ground for a fundamentally different kind of international 

relations that Beijing portrays as superior to other models. Beijing says BRI 

is based on the principles of “extensive consultation, joint contribution, and 

shared benefits,” which it contrasts with other development assistance models 

that involve “majority decision-making by major powers,” treaty adoption,        

> 54 Carla Freeman and Lyndi Tsering, “As China Looks to Reform Global Governance, How Does
> It Approach the U.N.?” U.S. Institute of Peace, September 28, 2023, https://www.usip.org/
> publications/2023/09/china-looks-reform-global-governance-how-does-it-approach-un.
> 55 “Chinese FM Expounds on Xi’s State Visit to Russia,” State Council Information Office (PRC), Press
> Release, March 23, 2023, http://english.scio.gov.cn/pressroom/2023-03/23/content_85186237.htm.
> 56 State Council (PRC), “Full Text: Action Plan on the Belt and Road Initiative,” March 30, 2015, https://
> english.www.gov.cn/archive/publications/2015/03/30/content_281475080249035.htm; and Xi, The
> Governance of China III , 550, 562.
> 57 “The Belt and Road Initiative in the Global Trade, Investment and Finance Landscape,” in
> Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, OECD Business and Finance Outlook
> 2018 (Paris: OECD Publishing, 2018), https://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/finance-and-investment/oecd-
> business-and-finance-outlook-2018_9789264298828-en.

Fassler  – Chapter 1  • 29 

or “transfer of sovereignty.” 58  The notion that “extensive consultation” 

means BRI countries will negotiate with China on equal footing for their 

development needs belies the reality of Beijing’s considerable leverage 

in many of these relationships. China also portrays BRI as an enabler of 

world peace. An article written by a National Development and Reform 

Commission–affiliated research center credits BRI’s influence for restoring 

diplomatic relations between Saudi Arabia and Iran, which China helped 

broker in spring 2023. The deal, the author states, proves that “the spirit 

of peaceful cooperation under the ‘One Belt, One Road’ initiative complies 

with the requirements of the times and the will of the people, and provides 

a basis for resolving conflicts between countries through dialogue and 

consultation.” 59 

## Manage Relations with Major Countries Well 

Managing relations with major countries has been a long-standing 

goal of China’s foreign policy; however, there is new urgency in this area 

because of the potential for resistance as China catches up with other 

countries in national strength. Xi has asserted that the world is experiencing 

“the most revolutionary change in the international balance of power 

in modern times,” suggesting China is entering a period of heightened 

tension. 60  In a 2020 book on “profound changes,” four Renmin University 

professors compare the current transition to other violent, system-shaking 

shocks in international relations, such as the start of the Vienna system in 

the early nineteenth century, the post–World War I Versailles system, the 

post–World War II Yalta system, and the Soviet Union’s collapse. 61  China 

aims to facilitate this transition to a multipolar world with minimal negative 

impact on its own interests.              

> 58 Zhang Yesui, “ 共建 ‘一带一路 ’谋求合作共赢 ” [Jointly Build the “Belt and Road” and Seek
> Win-Win Cooperation], Qiushi , May 18, 2015, http://theory.people.com.cn/n/2015/0518/c83846-
> 27015019.html.
> 59 “紧跟习近平总书记思想足迹 奋力谱写共建 ‘一带一路 ’高质量发展新篇章 ” [Follow General
> Secretary Xi Jinping’s Ideological Footprints and Strive to Write a New Chapter of High-Quality
> Development in Jointly Building the “Belt and Road”], Xi Jinping Economic Thought Research
> Center, National Development and Reform Commission Belt and Road Construction Promotion
> Center, October 20, 2023.
> 60 “习近平 :推动全球治理体制更加公正更加合理 ” [Xi Jinping: Promote a Fairer and More
> Reasonable Global Governance System], Xinhua, October 13, 2015, http://www.xinhuanet.com//
> politics/2015-10/13/c_1116812159.htm.
> 61 Wen Wang et al., Profound Changes Unseen in Centuries: An Overview of China (New York: Springer,
> 2022).

30  • The PLA in a Complex Security Environment 

As the world’s leading power, the United States and its relative decline 

is a core part of China’s thinking on multipolarity. 62  Although the pace of 

U.S. decline is hotly debated by China’s experts, the CCP appears unified in 

its conclusion that Washington will not easily accept the multipolar world 

and other trends Beijing believes are inevitable. This is because Washington 

either cannot see or ignores these trends. China’s strategy is inherently 

superior to that of the United States because it is based on the party’s 

“correct” assessment of history and the “overall situation.” This belief appears 

deeply ingrained in Beijing’s thinking about relations with Washington. For 

example, the former president of the Shanghai Institutes for International 

Studies, Yang Jiemian, argues that the United States refuses to acknowledge 

the “historical trend” of multipolarity and pursues “unilateralism or gang-

style multilateralism.” 63  China, he writes, is pursuing construction of an 

international system based on multilateralism because it is “in line with the 

trend of the times.” 64 

The party therefore judges that, at least in the next five to ten years and 

maybe longer, U.S.-China relations will be fraught with tension that could 

derail China’s national agenda if it is not proactively managed. In a 2020 

speech to the CCP Central Committee, Xi noted that this new reality is 

because of China’s greater CNP: “In the past, our development level was low, 

and we were more complementary to others. Now that our development 

level has improved, we are more competitive with others.” 65  The way forward, 

he told the Central Committee in 2021, will demand a “great struggle,” since 

“hostile forces will not sit back and let us achieve national rejuvenation 

smoothly.” 66  This is why Xi, in high-level speeches, has called on cadres 

to “effectively manage major-country relations” and “build a healthy and 

stable framework for major-country relations,” adopting a more urgent and            

> 62 See Doshi, The Long Game , 261–71.
> 63 Yang Jiemian, “ 当代国际体系的渐变和嬗变 —— 基于两个三十年的比较与思考 ” [The Gradual
> Change and Evolution of the Contemporary International System: Based on the Comparison and
> Reflection of Two Thirty-Year Periods], Center for China and Globalization, March 9, 2022, http://
> www.ccg.org.cn/archives/68561.
> 64 “人间正道开新篇 (习近平新时代中国特色社会主义思想学习问答 )” [A New Chapter on the
> Right Path in the World (Q&A on Xi Jinping’s Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics
> for a New Era)], People’s Daily , July 22, 2021, http://politics.people.com.cn/n1/2021/0722/c1001-
> 32165548.html.
> 65 Xi Jinping, “ 新发展阶段贯彻新发展理念必然要求构建新发展格局 ” [In the New Development
> Stage, the Implementation of the New Development Concept Will Inevitably Require the
> Construction of a New Development Pattern], Qiushi , August 31, 2022, http://www.qstheory.cn/
> dukan/qs/2022-08/31/c_1128960034.htm.
> 66 Xi Jinping, The Governance of China IV (Beijing: Foreign Languages Press, 2022), 94.

Fassler  – Chapter 1  • 31 

proactive tone than Hu Jintao’s guidance in 2009 to simply “coordinate” 

relations between major countries. 67 

Xi’s great struggle with the United States involves proactively binding 

Washington to a set of ground rules for bilateral interactions in anticipation 

of heightened tensions during a protracted power struggle that could last 

decades. Moreover, Beijing believes that it alone has the wisdom to lead 

and manage this transition. According to Da Wei, director of the Center 

for International Security and Strategy at Tsinghua University, as China 

approaches power parity with other nations, it should try to “make the 

process of change smoother and the changes gentler” and seek major 

countries’ “consensus on the evolution of the international order.” 68  This 

explains why as early as February 2012 Xi, during his visit to the United 

States as Hu’s heir apparent, advocated for the United States to accept a “new 

model of major-country relations” based on the United States respecting 

China’s political system, not interfering in its internal affairs, and not openly 

challenging China. 69  Around this time, China’s scholars seized on the idea 

of the “Thucydides trap.” Chinese officials continue to use this term to argue 

that armed conflict between established and rising powers during a period 

of transition is not a foregone conclusion. Instead, China tries to persuade 

the United States that mutual accommodation is “responsible to history” and 

that the U.S. paradigm of competition, first highlighted in its 2017 National 

Security Strategy, “does not conform to the trend of the times” nor “solve… 

the challenges facing the world.” 70  Those who dismiss this as empty rhetoric 

overlook the serious analytic assessment about multipolarity that underpins 

China’s strategy toward the United States. 

Beyond the United States, Russia is another major country that must be 

managed. China saw Russia’s invasion of Ukraine in February 2022 as both 

evidence and a driver of changes unseen in a century, though scholars differ          

> 67 “习近平出席中央外事工作会议并发表重要讲话 .”
> 68 Da Wei, “ 现行国际秩序演变的方向与中国的选择 ” [The Evolution Direction of the Current
> International Order and China’s Choice], Center for International Security and Strategy, Tsinghua
> University, January 25, 2021, https://ciss.tsinghua.edu.cn/info/zmgx/3066.
> 69 “Vice President Xi Jinping Attends the Welcome Luncheon Hosted by the U.S. Friendly Groups and
> Delivers a Speech,” Embassy of the PRC in the United States of America, Press Release, February 16,
> 2012, http://us.china-embassy.gov.cn/eng/zmgxss/201202/t20120217_4367677.htm; and Wang Yi,
> “Toward a New Model of Major-Country Relations between China and the United States,” Brookings
> Institution, September 20, 2013, https://www.brookings.edu/articles/wang-yi-toward-a-new-model-
> of-major-country-relations-between-china-and-the-united-states.
> 70 “相向而行 ,共同努力 ,让中美关系稳下来 ,好起来 (钟声 )” [Let’s Meet Each Other Halfway and
> Work Together to Stabilize and Improve Sino-U.S. Relations (Zhong Sheng)], People’s Daily , June
> 21, 2023, http://opinion.people.com.cn/n1/2023/0621/c1003-40018261.html.

32  • The PLA in a Complex Security Environment 

on the scale of its impact. 71  According to a February 2023 analysis by the 

American Studies Program at CICIR, the war has accelerated multipolarity 

because the United States, NATO, and Russia have formed political blocs 

while many developing countries remain nonaligned. The CICIR authors 

assert the war is an “unprecedented countermeasure” by Russia against the 

“liberal hegemonic order dominated by the United States” and heralds a 

“ ‘post-Western’ world order.” 72  Others, like Feng Yujun, a prominent scholar 

at Fudan University, see the war as a “small divergence” that is disrupting 

global production and supply chains, reinvigorating the role of the United 

States in transatlantic affairs, and causing adjustments in the global security 

architecture, but it does not mean a return to Cold War–style confrontation 

between two hostile camps. 73 

China does not appear to view the Ukraine conflict as fundamentally 

altering the direction of the “profound changes”; rather, it sees 

opportunities to support trends in the conflict that are moving in a 

direction advantageous to its own interests. It has thus retained political 

and economic support for Russia because it views partnership with 

the country as useful for pushing toward greater multipolarity by 

balancing against the United States and Europe. Beijing is also leveraging 

international distress about the conflict to criticize the United States’ role 

in NATO’s eastern expansion and offer its own ideas for changing the 

existing international security architecture, which it says was ineffective 

at preventing the outbreak of violence. Since Russia’s invasion, China 

announced the Global Development Initiative and Global Security 

Initiative in 2021 and 2022, respectively. It claims that the initiatives 

will support economic globalization and combat “bloc confrontation,”           

> 71 “乌克兰危机的影响及启示 ” [The Impact and Implications of the Ukraine Crisis], Institute of
> American Studies, CICIR, February 28, 2023, trans. Center for Strategic and International Studies
> (CSIS), https://interpret.csis.org/translations/the-impact-and-implications-of-the-ukraine-crisis;
> Zhang Yuan, “ 热点透视 :乌克兰危机如何加速国际格局演进 ?” [Hot Insights: How Does the
> Ukrainian Crisis Accelerate the Evolution of the International Landscape?], Xinhua, December 22,
> 2022, http://www.news.cn/world/2022-12/22/c_1129226904.htm; and Zhang Hongzhi, “ 俄乌冲突
> 与世界变局 ” [Russia-Ukraine Conflict and World Change], Outlook , April 11, 2022, available at
> http://lw.news.cn/2022-04/11/c_1310551681.htm.
> 72 “乌克兰危机的影响及启示. ”
> 73 Feng Yujun, “ 俄乌冲突后的世界 :不是 ‘阵营化 ,’ 而是 ‘小分流 ’” [The Post-Russia-Ukraine Conflict
> World: Not a “Splitting into Camps,” but Rather a “Small Divergence”], China Foundation for
> International Studies, July 22, 2022, trans. CSIS, https://interpret.csis.org/translations/the-post-
> russia-ukraine-conflict-world-not-a-splitting-into-camps-but-rather-a-small-divergence.

Fassler  – Chapter 1  • 33 

in direct contrast with “Western international relations theory” that 

“emphasizes the inevitability of conflict and confrontation.” 74 

Looking to the future, China is monitoring whether the Ukraine 

conflict will force the United States to “look west” toward Europe, which 

could favorably alleviate U.S. strategic pressure on China, or whether the 

“return of great-power politics” and the failure of international institutions 

to prevent conflict mean that armed conflict will be a more prevalent 

feature of the future international order, including on China’s doorstep 

in Asia. 75  At least officially, Beijing rejects any connections between the 

Ukraine conflict and a Taiwan contingency. 76  Privately, it sees clear parallels 

between the “complex security game” of the United States, Russia, Ukraine, 

and NATO that it believes triggered the war and a strengthening of U.S. 

alliances and commitments in Asia that it believes may someday intensify 

into a U.S.-China conflict. 77  “No Cold War should be repeated in Asia, and 

no Ukraine-style crisis should be repeated in Asia,” Foreign Minister Qin 

Gang told international reporters at a press conference in March 2023. 78  The 

war has probably given China a greater appreciation for the complexities 

of 21st-century armed conflict, including the economic dimensions, such 

as disruption to global supply chains and the use of sanctions. These are 

areas where Beijing would be especially vulnerable in a conflict because of 

its great integration with the global economy. It thus has decried “unilateral 

sanctions” and “long-arm jurisdiction” for hurting developing countries. 79            

> 74 “Xi Jinping Delivers a Keynote Speech at the Opening Ceremony of the Boao Forum for Asia Annual
> Conference 2022,” Ministry of Foreign Affairs (PRC), Press Release, April 21, 2022, https://www.
> fmprc.gov.cn/eng/zxxx_662805/202204/t20220421_10671083.html; and Liu Zan and Zhang Yuan,
> “让平安的钟声响彻人间 ” [Let the Bells of Peace Ring Through the World], PLA Daily , April 21,
> 2023, http://www.81.cn/jfjbmap/content/2023-04/22/content_338153.htm.
> 75 Yao Lu, “ 场内秩序的破坏与重建 :乌克兰问题审思 ” [Destruction and Reconstruction of Order
> in the Field: Reflections on Ukraine], China Social Sciences Network, March 1, 2022, trans. CSIS,
> https://interpret.csis.org/translations/destruction-and-reconstruction-of-order-in-the-field-
> reflections-on-ukraine.
> 76 “Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Wang Wenbin’s Regular Press Conference on June 13, 2022,”
> Ministry of Foreign Affairs (PRC), Press Release, June 13, 2022, https://www.fmprc.gov.cn/mfa_eng/
> xwfw_665399/s2510_665401/2511_665403/202206/t20220613_10702460.html.
> 77 Yao, “ 场内秩序的破坏与重建 :乌克兰问题审思. ”
> 78 Nectar Gan, “China’s New Foreign Minister Warns of Conflict with U.S., Defends Russia Ties,” CNN,
> March 7, 2023, https://www.cnn.com/2023/03/07/china/china-two-sessions-new-foreign-minister-
> us-rebuke-intl-hnk.
> 79 Ministry of Foreign Affairs (PRC), “China’s Position on the Political Settlement of the Ukraine Crisis,”
> February 24, 2023, https://www.fmprc.gov.cn/eng/zxxx_662805/202302/t20230224_11030713.html. 34 •The PLA in a Complex Security Environment

## Firmly and Flexibly Carry Out Military Struggle 

For leaders in Beijing, the PLA is a critical enabler for both China’s 

accumulation of material power and the management of the transition to a 

more multipolar world by deterring or prevailing in any armed conflict that 

could arise during this dynamic period. In party parlance, the PLA is tasked 

with providing “strategic support” ( 战略支撑 ) for a range of goals and 

missions that will be important during this time, including consolidating 

the CCP’s leadership and authority; safeguarding national sovereignty, 

unity, and territorial integrity; protecting China’s overseas interests; and 

promoting world peace and development. A lengthy security assessment 

in China’s 2019 defense white paper identified the origins and nature of the 

threats brought by the “profound changes.” They range from rising military 

competition among the United States, NATO, Russia, and the European 

Union, to arms races and proliferation, to “major-country competition” in 

the Asia-Pacific, including growing military activism by the United States, 

Japan, and Australia. The PLA is responsible for controlling any “strategic 

risks” from these threats that could “delay or interrupt the process of the 

great rejuvenation of the Chinese nation.” 80 

For the PLA, the CCP’s overall emphasis on struggle, especially since 

the 2022 20th Party Congress, has translated into a focus on military 

readiness, crisis control, and the development of the capability to win local 

wars. In October 2022, during a meeting with military leaders after the 

Party Congress, Xi exhorted them to “firmly and flexibly carry out military 

struggle.” 81  Although the party is rarely clear about the precise target of 

struggle, a subsequent  PLA Daily  article explaining Xi’s guidance strongly 

implies that the target is the United States: “The more we develop and grow, 

the greater the pressure and resistance we face, and the fiercer the struggle 

against various hostile forces.” Giving a not-so-subtle hint as to the identity 

of the “hostile forces,” the article cited the Korean War, in which the PLA 

broke “the myth of the U.S. military’s invincibility.” The current reality, the 

author concluded, required the PLA to “focus on the overall situation,” have    

> 80 Wang Qiang, “ 如期实现建军一百年奋斗目标 ” [Achieving the Centenary Goal of the Founding
> of the Army as Scheduled], Study Times , January 6, 2023, http://cpc.people.com.cn/n1/2023/0106/
> c448544-32601036.html.
> 81 “习近平出席中央外事工作会议并发表重要讲话 .”

Fassler  – Chapter 1  • 35 

a “deep understanding of the political attributes of war,” and “carry forward 

the spirit of struggle.” 82 

China’s military strategy leverages another assessed trend of the 

“profound changes”—the science and technology revolution—to enhance 

the PLA’s ability to prevail in future conflicts. Xi’s top-level direction to 

the PLA to build a “world-class military” by midcentury demands that it 

take advantage of cutting-edge military technologies to shape the future of 

warfare. Seizing the science and technology revolution is a national priority. 

“Science and technology have never had such a profound impact on the 

future and destiny of a country as it does today,” noted a 2021 article in 

the  PLA Daily . It elaborated that “whoever masters cutting-edge military 

technology and has the military talents to control this technology will be 

able to grasp the strategic advantage in future military confrontations.” 83 

## Conclusion 

## A Post-Pandemic Assessment: Doubling Down on Struggle 

Major geopolitical events of the last few years, including the Covid-19 

pandemic and Russia’s war in Ukraine, have not altered China’s confidence in 

long-standing strategic trends. If anything, recent events have led the party 

to double down on its agenda with a greater emphasis on “struggle.” In an 

October 2020 Central Committee meeting where he affirmed Jiang Zemin’s 

assessment that China still faced “strategic opportunities,” Xi Jinping added 

a clause: “there are new developments and changes in both opportunities 

and challenges.” 84  “When the concept of the period of strategic opportunity 

was proposed, it referred to the first twenty years of this century,” Xi said, 

referencing Jiang’s declaration in 2002. “Today, twenty years later, how to 

judge the period of strategic opportunity is a major issue.” He continued: 

In the past, we followed the trend, and it was easier to grasp opportunities; now, 

we have to go against the wind, and the difficulty of grasping opportunities is 

different. In the past, the general environment was relatively stable, and risks and 

challenges were easier to see clearly; now the world situation is turbulent and      

> 82 “坚定灵活开展军事斗争 —— 认真学习宣传贯彻党的二十大精神系列谈 ” [Firm and Flexible
> Military Struggle: Seriously Study, Publicize, and Implement the Spirit of the 20th National Congress
> of the Communist Party of China], PLA Daily , November 24, 2022, http://cpc.people.com.cn/
> n1/2022/1124/c448544-32573422.html.
> 83 Qi Xiaoshan, “ 深入实施新时代人才强军战略 ” [Deeply Implement the Strategy of Strengthening
> the Army with Talents in the New Era], PLA Daily , December 13, 2021, http://www.81.cn/jfjbmap/
> content/2021-12/13/content_305100.htm.
> 84 Xi, “ 新发展阶段贯彻新发展理念必然要求构建新发展格局. ”

36  • The PLA in a Complex Security Environment 

complex, geopolitical challenges are high and the waves are high, and there are 

many hidden reefs and undercurrents, which put forward higher requirements 

for resilience. 85 

The idea that China faces unusual circumstances that required doubling 

down on struggle became a core leadership instruction and coincided with 

an increased focus on risk at the highest levels of the party. It was reflected in 

a phrase that appeared in late 2020 around the year-end Central Economic 

Work Conference and was included in the March 2021 release of the 14th 

Five-Year Plan for National Economic and Social Development at China’s 

annual legislative meetings: “Be good at taking advantage of crises and 

opening up new opportunities in changing situations.” 86  At the October 2022 

Party Congress, Xi’s speech included the modified “strategic opportunities” 

assessment—“strategic opportunities, risks, and challenges are concurrent 

and uncertainties and unforeseen factors are rising.” 87  Xi’s articulation of 

leadership consensus around a more urgent assessment of international 

developments than at any point in the last 30 years is likely to steer China’s 

entire political, economic, and national defense system to act and operate in 

new and different ways. These may include increased military posturing on 

China’s periphery, allocating resources to deal with domestic threats, and 

deploying economic countermeasures that Beijing has developed but only 

selectively used. 

## Implications 

This chapter has several implications for U.S. policy toward China. First, 

it describes how the party assesses its strategic environment and translates 

official ideology into policy choices, a theory of leadership decision-

making that supplements other explanations for China’s actions. While not 

incompatible with Rush Doshi’s important articulation of China’s grand 

strategy in  The Long Game , this chapter suggests that the country’s strategy is 

influenced by the CCP’s particular theory of history and attention to strategic           

> 85 Xi, “ 新发展阶段贯彻新发展理念必然要求构建新发展格局 .”
> 86 Zhang Laiming, “ 善于在危机中育先机 ,于变局中开新局 ” [Be Good at Raising Opportunities in
> Crises and Starting New Opportunities in Changing Situations], Qiushi , December 1, 2020, http://
> www.qstheory.cn/dukan/qs/2020-12/01/c_1126799010.htm; and “( 两会受权发布 )中华人民共和
> 国国民经济和社会发展第十四个五年规划和 2035 年远景目标纲要 ” [(Promulgated by the Two
> Sessions) The 14th Five-Year Plan for National Economic and Social Development of the People’s
> Republic of China and the Outline of the Vision Goals for 2035], Xinhua, March 13, 2021, http://
> www.xinhuanet.com/2021-03/13/c_1127205564_2.htm.
> 87 Xi Jinping, “Full Text of the Report to the 20th National Congress of the Communist Party of China:
> Hold High the Great Banner of Socialism with Chinese Characteristics and Strive in Unity to Build
> a Modern Socialist Country in All Respects,” Embassy of the PRC in Malaysia, October 16, 2022,
> http://my.china-embassy.gov.cn/eng/zgxw/202210/t20221026_10792358.htm. Fassler –Chapter 1 •37

trends that include, but go beyond, the perception of U.S. power and threat. 88 

This is important because policymakers seeking to influence China must 

understand the way the party assesses the world and the factors its leaders 

believe are most important. Despite highly dynamic international events 

over the last 40 years, it is notable that several generations of China’s leaders 

have each affirmed the core importance of a consistent and relatively limited 

set of strategic trends: multipolarity, economic globalization, competition in 

CNP, and the science and technology revolution. This is not to suggest that 

the United States should make the global South or international institutions 

a battleground for strategic competition with China, but only that it should 

appreciate that China’s leaders are likely to be especially attuned to dynamics 

in these areas. 

The value the party places on CNP to predict outcomes of future 

contests also argues for greater U.S. attention to its own CNP and how U.S. 

CNP is messaged or discussed with China’s leaders. Beyond the economy 

and military, Beijing also pays close attention to how the United States stacks 

up in science and technology, education, and influence. This is important 

because the party will assess China’s likelihood of success in future 

interactions or struggles with the United States and other countries based 

on its understanding of relative CNP in fields ranging from technology 

competition to military confrontation. 

At the same time, governments looking to shape the CCP’s choices must 

be sober about their ability to do so because of the remarkable consistency of 

China’s strategic assessments over time. A review of events since the 1980s 

suggests that only an event beyond anyone’s control, on the magnitude of 

a world war or financial crisis, is likely to shake China’s leaders from their 

trajectory. As far as predicting shifts in the party’s direction or action, it 

is helpful to understand that China’s leaders are most likely to adjust their 

approach if they perceive a foundational shift, acceleration, or reversal in 

one or more of the core trends, such as multilateralism, as was the case 

with the 2008 global financial crisis. They are more likely to act boldly and 

double down on “struggle” if they observe trends with the potential to move 

conditions in a favorable direction. 89  Indeed, China’s bold national campaign 

for global technology dominance in the Fourth Industrial Revolution is 

because Xi sees technological innovation as a core element of the “profound 

changes” and key to achieving China’s rejuvenation, or even accelerating the       

> 88 Doshi, The Long Game , 17.
> 89 Bobrow, Chan, and Kringen, Understanding Foreign Policy Decisions , 121–22, 127. 38 •The PLA in a Complex Security Environment

downfall of U.S. global leadership. 90  The party’s core belief in the antagonistic 

nature of international affairs also means it is unlikely to abandon efforts to 

deplete the resources and momentum of its primary strategic competitor. 

Thus, despite Beijing’s public opposition to competition as a framework 

for major-power relations, it expects competition, possibly even open 

confrontation, with the United States and is actively “struggling” to shift 

dynamics in its favor. 

Finally, because the arrival of the CCP’s optimal future could take 

decades, in the near term China remains flexible in the timing and mode 

of tactics used to manage the risks of what it expects will be a protracted 

competition. This apparent certainty in an inevitable multipolar future 

wherein China surpasses the United States may offer opportunities for 

short-term compromise because it reduces time pressure. Assured of future 

victory, China’s leaders may dwell less on temporary setbacks that do not 

impede long-term goals. 91  Xi’s pronouncement at the 20th Party Congress 

that China has entered “a period in which strategic opportunities, risks, 

and challenges coexist” suggests Beijing believes it faces a critical period 

in the next five to ten years during which it must meet ambitious national 

development targets on its path to national rejuvenation by midcentury. The 

CCP’s interest in stability during this period may open room for limited 

compromise with foreign governments in discreet areas, as long as China 

does not see such concessions as undermining long-term goals, providing a 

window of opportunity that others might leverage.    

> 90 Rush Doshi, “The United States, China, and the Contest for the Fourth Industrial Revolution,”
> Brookings Institution, July 31, 2020, https://www.brookings.edu/testimonies/the-united-states-
> china-and-the-contest-for-the-fourth-industrial-revolution.
> 91 Bobrow, Chan, and Kringen, Understanding Foreign Policy Decisions , 64.

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

This chapter analyzes Xi Jinping’s strategy for strengthening control over the 

People’s Liberation Army (PLA), focusing on the ways in which he catered 

to the interests of senior officers, politically influential subgroups, and the 

military writ large during a period of disruptive change. 

> MAIN ARGUMENT

Portrayals of Xi’s leadership of the PLA have focused on purges of political 

rivals and an anticorruption campaign to intimidate those who might oppose 

his plans. However, this focus on coercion overlooks the broader political 

strategy that Xi used to consolidate his power and push through ambitious 

reforms. That strategy included protecting the careers of senior officers who 

supported his agenda, allowing the ground forces to retain a high degree 

of influence despite losing manpower, and granting the military as a whole 

respect, resources, and autonomy rather than overturning basic patterns 

of civil-military relations in place since the 1980s. Public data, including 

leadership biographies, budgets, resource allocation, and Xi’s own activities, 

shows galvanized support at the individual, subgroup, and institutional levels, 

with significant ramifications for the party’s ability to control the military. 

> POLICY IMPLICATIONS

• Satisfying the interests of key constituencies in the PLA means that 

party-army relations are relatively stable; open military discontent with 

Xi’s leadership of the sort witnessed in other autocratic societies is 

unlikely. 

• Needing buy-in from individual and corporate interests in the PLA 

could restrict the scope for further reforms, especially in areas that 

would require deeper changes in organizational culture. 

• A political imperative to respect PLA autonomy means that corruption 

could continue to flourish and allow the military to operate without a 

high level of central supervision. 

• The PLA will likely receive continued budget increases despite growing 

economic headwinds, which is a result both of Xi’s views of a darker 

security environment and his need to protect military equities. Chapter 2 Stabilizing the Boat: 

# Revisiting Party-Army Relations 

# under Xi Jinping 

## Joel Wuthnow 

At the 20th Party Congress in 2022, Xi Jinping was reappointed for a 

third five-year term as general-secretary of the Chinese Communist Party 

and chairman of the Central Military Commission (CMC). At the same 

time, he selected a slate of senior officers for his CMC that some observers 

portrayed as a war cabinet for a future military operation against Taiwan. 1

A few months later, Xi warned of a darkening security environment when 

he stated that the United States was plotting “comprehensive containment, 

encirclement, and suppression against us, bringing unprecedented severe 

challenges to our country’s development.” 2 A visit by the U.S. Speaker of 

the House to Taiwan and a looming presidential election on the island also 

occupied attention from China’s leadership. These developments raised 

questions about how well Xi could lead the People’s Liberation Army (PLA) 

into an uncertain future. 

Western analyses of Xi’s control of the PLA have focused on his 

heavy-handed tactics and Mao-like cult of personality, but this has led to  

> 1

Greg Torode, “Xi’s New Generals Offer Cohesion over Possible Taiwan Plans,” Reuters, October 27, 

2022, https://www.reuters.com/world/china/need-speed-china-xis-new-generals-offer-cohesion-

over-possible-taiwan-plans-2022-10-27.  

> 2

John Ruwitch, “China Accuses U.S. of Containment and Warns of Potential Conflict,” NPR, March 

7, 2023, https://www.npr.org/2023/03/07/1161570798/china-accuses-u-s-of-containment-warns-

of-potential-conflict. 

Joel Wuthnow  is a Senior Research Fellow in the Center for the Study of Chinese Military Affairs 

within the Institute for National Strategic Studies at the National Defense University. He is also an 

Adjunct Professor in the Edmund A. Walsh School of Foreign Service at Georgetown University and a 

Nonresident Fellow at the National Bureau of Asian Research. 

This chapter represents only the views of the author and not those of the National Defense University, 

the Department of Defense, or the U.S. government. The author thanks Jeremy Rausch for invaluable 

research assistance and Brittney Farrar, Ben Frohman, Phillip Saunders, and Andrew Taffer for their 

useful feedback. 42  • The PLA in a Complex Security Environment 

skewed impressions of party-army relations during his tenure. 3 It is true that 

Xi leveraged the anticorruption campaign, propaganda work emphasizing 

his absolute control, and a new lineup of supervisory mechanisms within 

the PLA to consolidate his authority and reduce opposition to his agenda 

for massive structural changes. However, myopically focusing on these 

elements understates the degree to which Xi has respected long-standing 

norms and practices in the PLA, ignores his attempts to compensate losers 

of the reform process, and gives a false perception of resentment as Xi broke 

apart patronage networks and rewickered the bureaucracy. 

The most underappreciated element of Xi’s leadership is the extent to 

which he satisfied interest groups within the PLA—and the PLA itself as an 

interest group 4—to centralize power and cultivate support for his agenda. 

He did this by protecting the careers of those who performed diligently and 

waited their turn, respecting retirement norms (rather than keeping his 

cronies on active duty), approving large pay raises and other benefit reforms, 

compensating those forced out of the PLA before retirement, preserving 

“big army” influence in key leadership positions, minding the interests of 

the theater commands, approving larger military budgets despite mounting 

economic difficulties, and tolerating a high degree of PLA autonomy. As 

a manager, Xi has acted as if he realized that a more brutal approach to 

compliance would backfire and that what was needed at a time of great 

disruption was—in many respects—stability. 

The ways in which Xi has catered to PLA interests have four implications 

for party-army relations at present and into the future. First, civil-military 

relations are generally stable, and the chances of a coup are low. Second, 

Xi has needed to accept limits on deeper reforms to the PLA by retaining 

a top brass composed mostly of army officers. Third, the PLA continues to 

exercise a high degree of autonomy that insulates it from outside checks 

and balances, despite Xi’s vaunted consolidation of power under the “CMC 

chairman responsibility system.” Such autonomy was on display in the 

dismissal of Xi’s defense minister in 2023 and in the backdrop to the 2023 

spy balloon incident. Fourth, the party will continue to provide large budgets        

> 3For general assessments, see James Char, “Chinese Civil-Military Relations,” in Reshaping the Chinese
> Military: The PLA’s Roles and Missions in the Xi Jinping Era , ed. Richard A. Bitzinger and James
> Char (London: Routledge, 2018), 9–44; James Char, “Subjective Conditional Control: Return of
> the Strongman in China’s Party-Army Relations,” in Asian Military Evolutions , ed. Alan Chong and
> Nicole Jenne (Bristol: Bristol University Press, 2023), 197–228; and Chien-wen Kou, “Xi Jinping
> in Command: Solving the Principal-Agent Problem in CCP-PLA Relations?” China Quarterly 232
> (2017): 866–85.
> 4See Isaac B. Kardon and Phillip C. Saunders, “Reconsidering the PLA as an Interest Group,” in PLA
> Influence on China’s National Security Policymaking , ed. Phillip C. Saunders and Andrew Scobell
> (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 2015), 33–57.

Wuthnow  – Chapter 2  • 43 

to the PLA despite economic challenges at home, which will contribute to 

the military’s ability to meet its modernization timelines. 

This chapter develops these arguments in five sections. The first reviews 

the literature focusing on the coercive aspects of Xi’s control and explains the 

limits for Xi in moving too far in a punitive direction. The following three 

sections illustrate the ways in which Xi has respected norms or offered side 

payments to key interest groups at three levels: individual senior leaders as 

well as lower-ranking officers, the military services and theater commands as 

the major subgroups within the PLA, and the military as an institution with 

its own equities that need to be protected vis-à-vis the civilian sphere. The 

final section explains the implications for Xi’s control, further PLA reforms, 

bureaucratic autonomy, and military modernization. The chapter draws 

insights from publicly available data on career patterns, budgets, resource 

allocation, and Xi’s inspection visits. 

## The Limits of Xi’s Heavy Hand 

Coercion has been a distinctive feature of Xi Jinping’s political 

consolidation within the PLA but cannot by itself explain the PLA’s 

acquiescence to his agenda. Foreign scholars have focused on three coercive 

aspects of Xi’s leadership, starting with his political purges. A campaign to 

address corruption in the ranks predated Xi’s arrival as CMC chairman, 

having been launched by General Logistics Department deputy director 

Liu Yuan in early 2012. 5 Xi expanded this campaign and refocused it on 

his political adversaries, most notably former CMC vice chairmen Xu 

Caihou and Guo Boxiong, who had been appointed by Jiang Zemin and 

still exercised influence behind the scenes, as well as other senior officers 

connected to Xu or Guo. 6 Eliminating these officials created vacancies that 

Xi filled with those deemed to be politically reliable, some of whom he had 

known in his earlier provincial career. 7 At the 20th Party Congress in 2022,       

> 5James Mulvenon, “The Only Honest Man? General Liu Yuan Calls Out PLA Corruption,” China
> Leadership Monitor , 2012, 1–5. Liu’s most famous target was former General Logistics Department
> deputy director Gu Junshan.
> 6See “Visualizing China’s Anti-corruption Campaign,” ChinaFile, August 15, 2018, https://www.
> chinafile.com/infographics/visualizing-chinas-anti-corruption-campaign; and Zi Yang, “Character
> Assassination and the Contemporary Anti-corruption Campaign in the Chinese Military,” in
> Routledge Handbook of Character Assassination and Reputation Management , ed. Sergei A.
> Samoilenko et al. (London: Routledge, 2019), 117–30.
> 7Daniel C. Mattingly, “How the Party Commands the Gun: The Foreign-Domestic Threat Dilemma
> in China,” American Journal of Political Science (2022): 7–8.

44  • The PLA in a Complex Security Environment 

Xi continued this pattern by selecting a CMC composed of those regarded as 

close associates, including longtime acquaintance Zhang Youxia. 8

The anticorruption campaign complemented a propaganda effort to 

highlight Xi’s pivotal role in the military, appearing as a “cult of personality.” 

With Xu’s and Guo’s arrests in hindsight, Xi’s landmark speech on party 

discipline at the November 2014 Gutian Conference served as an implicit 

reminder to the officer corps that neither his leadership nor his agenda 

could be questioned. 9 At the same time, the PLA began to discuss the “CMC 

chairman responsibility system” ( 军委主席责任制 ), highlighting Xi’s 

authority and implicitly contrasting it with the situation under Jiang and Hu 

Jintao in which the CMC vice chairmen made key decisions. 10  Invocations of 

this concept accelerated in the following years, reaching a fever pitch prior to 

the 19th Party Congress in 2017. On the eve of that event, the CMC passed 

an opinion stating that the “CMC chairman responsibility system” must be 

implemented to “ensure that the entire armed forces…resolutely follow the 

command of and are responsible to Chairman Xi, enabling Chairman Xi 

to feel assured.” 11  Such messages reaffirmed Xi’s status, though as discussed 

below, in practice Xi continued to grant the PLA a level of autonomy that 

allowed it to operate in some ways without strict day-to-day supervision. 

A final part of Xi’s coercive strategy was modifying key organizations 

to improve his control of the bureaucracy. Specifically, at the outset of the 

reforms in late 2015, Xi disbanded the four general departments, replacing 

them with fifteen smaller departments, commissions, and offices that are 

in principle less powerful and easier to manage. Under the new system, 

three key supervisory organs, which had previously been housed within the 

General Political Department, including the discipline inspection system 

(key to the anticorruption campaign), the political commissar system, 

and the military courts, were separated from each other and placed under 

CMC control. 12  Facilitated by the CMC General Office, whose function is             

> 8Lyle J. Morris, “What China’s New Central Military Commission Tells Us about Xi’s Military Strategy,”
> Asia Society Policy Institute, October 27, 2022, https://asiasociety.org/policy-institute/what-chinas-
> new-central-military-commission-tells-us-about-xis-military-strategy. Other longtime colleagues
> included Miao Hua and He Weidong.
> 9James Mulvenon, “Hotel Gutian: We Haven’t Had That Spirit Here Since 1929,” China Leadership
> Monitor , 2015, 1–9.
> 10 James Mulvenon, “The Yuan Stops Here: Xi Jinping and the ‘CMC Chairman Responsibility System,’”
> China Leadership Monitor , 2015, 1–4.
> 11 James Mulvenon, “The Cult of Xi and the Rise of the CMC Chairman Responsibility System,” China
> Leadership Monitor , 2018, 4–5.
> 12 Phillip C. Saunders and Joel Wuthnow, “Large and In Charge: Civil-Military Relations under
> Xi Jinping,” in Chairman Xi Remakes the PLA: Assessing Chinese Military Reforms , ed. Phillip C.
> Saunders et al. (Washington, D.C.: NDU Press, 2019), 532–25. Wuthnow –Chapter 2 •45

to manage information flows between the CMC and its subordinate organs, 

this change meant that Xi had several independent channels to monitor 

political problems and threaten noncompliant officers. 13 

While these efforts were essential for Xi’s efforts to increase control over 

the PLA, they also faced limitations. The coercive strategy was enhanced 

by propaganda work and reformed supervisory mechanisms, but its “teeth” 

were in the use of anticorruption campaigns to remove or silence opponents. 

Nevertheless, Xi could not have overplayed this strategy and still expected 

to have a functioning military leadership. To retain a professional military 

and implement ambitious reforms, he could not have simply replaced a 

generation of experienced senior officers—most of whom were corrupt and 

many of whom owed their career progress to Xu, Guo, or their associates— 

with a younger cohort of officers not yet ready for command. 14  Overdoing 

such threats also could have bred debilitating paranoia within the ranks as 

officers turned on each other or used the campaign to settle scores. At the 

extreme, Xi himself could have been at risk if resentments spiraled out of 

control. In effect, this meant that he needed to match selective purges with 

reassurances and incentives if they demonstrated compliance. 

Ultimately, Xi did not overextend his coercive approach within the 

PLA. Instead, he adopted a more sophisticated political strategy that also 

relied on efforts to build support by satisfying the interests of those whose 

support he would need to gain control and execute his agenda. This meant 

respecting long-standing norms and traditions within the PLA that Xi could 

have overturned or offering side payments to those on the losing side of his 

reforms. The following sections analyze these features of his strategy on three 

levels: rewarding officers who performed well and offering a graceful exit to 

those who were laid off, finding ways to compensate the ground force for 

its sacrifice and parceling out opportunities among the theater commands, 

and maintaining a generally stable civil-military paradigm that continued to 

offer the PLA respect, resources, and autonomy. 

## Individual Interests 

Xi found several ways to satisfy the interests of individual PLA officers. 

While the anticorruption campaign made it clear that challenges to his   

> 13 Joel Wuthnow, “The CMC General Office: Recentralizing Power in the PLA,” Jamestown Foundation,
> China Brief, May 11, 2017, https://jamestown.org/program/cmc-general-office-recentralizing-power-pla.
> 14 “Visualizing China’s Anti-corruption Campaign.”

46  • The PLA in a Complex Security Environment 

authority would be punished, there was a complementary assurance that 

compliance and political obedience would be rewarded. At the pinnacle of 

the command structure, Xi mostly followed norms under which officers 

needed to meet time-in-grade requirements for promotion. 15  Figure 1 

demonstrates that there was no reduction in the average age or years of 

experience of senior officers across the four services between 2015 and 

2021. This practice kept faith with those who had waited their turn for 

promotion. Officers also typically retired on time, with longtime Xi associate 

Zhang Youxia’s reappointment as CMC vice chairman in 2022 being a rare 

exception. 16  It would have been more disruptive to PLA reforms for Xi to use 

his appointment power as CMC chairman to pick more junior officers for     

> 15 An exception was new CMC vice chairman He Weidong, who skipped a grade at the 20th Party
> Congress in 2022.
> 16 Zhang (72 years old) was also only one of two Central Committee members whose reappointments
> at the 20th Party Congress broke the age norms. The other was Wang Yi (68 years old).
> f i g u r e 1

Average age and experience of senior PLA officers by service (2015 

and 2021)  

> s o u r c e

: Joel Wuthnow,  Gray Dragons: Assessing China’s Senior Military Leadership , China 

Strategic Perspectives 16 (Washington, D.C.: NDU Press, 2022), 40–43.  

> n o t e

: SAF stands for Second Artillery Force. Senior officers are those at the theater deputy 

leader grade and above. Wuthnow  – Chapter 2  • 47 

idiosyncratic reasons (e.g., personal connections) or to allow cronies to stay 

on active duty past the age limit. 

Similarly, although several generals were caught up in the 

anticorruption campaign, Xi protected most senior officers from career 

setbacks due to massive organizational changes to the PLA under his 

leadership. After the seven military regions were consolidated into five 

theater commands, for instance, new roles at equivalent grades were found 

for all the former military region commanders and political commissars. 17 

Most of them subsequently retired on time with full benefits. 18  Even the 

2017 “below the neck” reforms to the ground forces did not harm the 

careers of the affected leaders. 19  Table 1  compares the career trajectories 

of the commanders and political commissars of the thirteen remaining 

group armies (white columns) to those in the five disbanded ones (shaded 

columns), showing no major difference in their ability to reach higher 

grades. Indeed, this cohort’s most successful member was Lin Xiangyang, 

the last commander of the now defunct 47th group army, who became the 

commander of the Eastern Theater. 

Officers who faithfully performed their duties during the tumult of 

the reforms were not only protected but also rewarded. Prior to Xi’s arrival, 

the PLA was already enhancing officer compensation, which was necessary 

to attract and retain talent as the military began emphasizing quality over 

quantity. 20  These trends continued under Xi.  Figure 2  documents rising 

overall personnel expenditures between 2008 and 2021 and a corresponding 

increase in per capita expenses amid a 300,000-person downsizing between 

2015 and 2018. Under benefits reform in 2017–18, officer salaries in          

> 17 Of the fourteen officers who served as the last military region commanders and political commissars,
> eight were appointed as theater commanders and political commissars, and six were given positions
> at the same grade in service headquarters (including the new army and Strategic Support Force)
> and CMC departments. This pattern extended to all senior officers at the theater command leader
> grade and above. See Saunders and Wuthnow, “Large and In Charge: Civil-Military Relations under
> Xi Jinping,” 540.
> 18 The exception was Cai Yingting, the last commander of the Nanjing Military Region (MR). Following
> later service as president of the Academy of Military Sciences, he was reportedly demoted and forced
> into early retirement. Minnie Chan, “Chinese Military’s Rising Star Falls Back to Earth ‘over Links
> to Disgraced Senior Commanders and Daughter’s Marriage to Frenchman,’ ”South China Morning
> Post , May 16, 2018, https://www.scmp.com/news/china/diplomacy-defence/article/2146274/chinese-
> militarys-rising-star-falls-back-earth-over.
> 19 For further discussion, see Dennis J. Blasko, “The Biggest Loser in Chinese Military Reforms: The
> PLA Army,” in Saunders et al., Chairman Xi Remakes the PLA , 358–61.
> 20 The formula to focus on quality over quantity was approved by Jiang Zemin in 1995. See David
> M. Finkelstein, “Thinking about the PLA’s ‘Revolution in Doctrinal Affairs,’ ” in China’s Revolution
> in Doctrinal Affairs , ed. James Mulvenon and David M. Finkelstein (Arlington: Center for Naval
> Analyses, 2005), 2–4.

48  • The PLA in a Complex Security Environment 

particular rose by roughly 40%, 21  followed by another reported 40% increase 

in late 2021 (when one Beijing-based colonel claimed that his monthly 

income soared from 15,000 to 22,000 yuan). 22  The PLA also created a new 

“holiday stipend.” All personnel would receive 1,000 yuan on five holidays, 

and officers in Beijing, Shanghai, Tianjin, and Chongqing would receive  

> 21

Marcus Clay,  Understanding the “People” of the People’s Liberation Army: A Study of Marriage, Family, 

Housing and Benefits  (Washington, D.C.: China Aerospace Studies Institute, 2018), 49.  

> 22

Minnie Chan, “China to Boost Pay for PLA Forces after Years of Sweeping Reforms,”  South China 

Morning Post , January 23, 2021, https://www.scmp.com/news/china/military/article/3118636/china-

boost-pay-pla-forces-after-years-sweeping-reforms.   

> t a b l e 1

Status of 2017 group army commanders and political commissars in 

2022 

Commander  Political commissar 

1 XXX  XXX 

12  XXX  –

13  XX  XX 

14  XX  XX 

16  X X

20  XX  X

21  X X

26  X X

27  X XX 

31  XX  XX 

38  XX  X

39  * X

40  X X

41  XX  X

42  X X

47  XXX  XXX 

54  XX  XX 

65  X X 

> s o u r c e

: PRC Directory of Military Personalities, 2017 and 2022.  

> n o t e

: Dash=resigned, *=died, X=corps leader, XX=theater deputy leader, XXX=theater 

command leader, white columns=surviving group armies, shaded columns=disbanded group 

armies. Wuthnow  – Chapter 2  • 49 

an additional 1,000 yuan. 23  Improvements to the welfare of rank-and-file 

officers after the reforms both incentivized good performance and likely 

mitigated discontent on the part of those required to change billets or adapt 

to a new system. 

Xi also took steps to compensate those who were required to leave the 

military before their normal retirement ages. The vast majority of these 

individuals (mostly midcareer army officers in noncombat roles) were 

not sidelined by anticorruption investigations. 24  Instead, they were given 

opportunities to move into civilian positions, with the party center coaxing 

local governments to provide former military members with positions 

of equivalent seniority, creating enormous frustration in the localities, 

which often lacked funding for those transfers. 25  Other former officers 

opted for a self-directed “career transition” ( 转业 ), which would entail        

> 23 Clay, Understanding the “People” of the People’s Liberation Army , 49.
> 24 One study found only 62 low-level “flies” investigated in the military at the outset of the reforms.
> Most likely the true number is significantly higher but still a very small percentage of the 300,000
> downsized. See “Visualizing China’s Anti-corruption Campaign.”
> 25 Ma Cheng-kun and John Chen, “System Overload? The 2015 PLA Force Reduction, Military-Locality
> Relations, and the Potential for Social Instability,” in Saunders et al., Chairman Xi Remakes the PLA ,
> 661–709.
> f i g u r e 2

Per capita and total personnel expenses (select years, 2008–21)  

> s o u r c e

: UN Military Expenditure Database; and International Institute for Strategic Studies 

(IISS), Military Balance Database. 50  • The PLA in a Complex Security Environment 

a large lump-sum payment—for instance, 413,000 yuan for a battalion-

grade officer in 2017—plus a continuing monthly stipend. 26  This system 

complemented the creation of the Ministry of Veterans’ Affairs in March 

2018 to strengthen the management of benefits such as pensions and 

healthcare. 27  Managing potential discontent by those forced to leave the 

PLA—which might have spilled over to their colleagues who remained— 

required financial compensation. 

## Service and Theater Interests 

A second level of analysis focuses on how Xi Jinping protected the 

interests of the PLA’s major constituencies: the services and theaters. Special 

attention should be given to the ground force, which experienced the most 

disruptive changes under Xi: it absorbed the bulk of the downsizing and lost 

five group armies, its remaining divisions were converted into smaller brigades 

(and regiments into battalions), and a new army “headquarters” put it on 

the same bureaucratic plane as the other services. 28  While the ground force 

remained the PLA’s largest service, its share of total end strength declined from 

nearly 70% in 2015 to slightly less than 50% two years later. 29  Nevertheless, 

Xi did not bludgeon the army into submission. In addition to protecting the 

careers of senior officers and softening the blow for downsized personnel, he 

also found ways to protect the influence of the service as an institution. 

One sign of Xi’s attention to the ground force was his frequent visits 

to army units during and after the reforms. As exhibited in  Figure 3 ,

between 2015 and 2022, Xi conducted ten such inspections—twice as many 

as his visits to naval or air force units. Given the intense demands on his 

time, visiting these units was a signal of his attention to army equities. 30 

He also offered encouraging words. At a ceremony conferring a flag on              

> 26 Clay, Understanding the “People” of the People’s Liberation Army , 51.
> 27 Kenneth W. Allen and Marcus Clay, “All Eyes on the Ministry of Veterans Affairs,” Jamestown
> Foundation, China Brief, March 11, 2022, https://jamestown.org/program/all-eyes-on-the-ministry-
> of-veterans-affairs. For background, see Neil J. Diamant and Kevin J. O’Brien, “Veterans’ Political
> Activism in China,” Modern China 41, no. 3 (2015): 278–312.
> 28 Prior to the reforms, the PLA Ground Force was managed by the general departments (at the
> national level) and the military regions (at the theater level), while other services were managed by
> lower-grade service headquarters and military region component commands.
> 29 The Military Balance (London: International Institute for Strategic Studies, 2015), 237; and The
> Military Balance (London: International Institute for Strategic Studies, 2017), 279.
> 30 Leadership travel has also been discussed as a signal of priorities in international relations. See Scott
> L. Kastner and Phillip C. Saunders, “Is China a Status Quo or Revisionist State? Leadership Travel
> as an Empirical Indicator,” International Studies Quarterly 56, no. 1 (2012): 163–77.

Wuthnow  – Chapter 2  • 51 

its new headquarters at the end of 2015, Xi stated that the army “plays 

an irreplaceable role in safeguarding national sovereignty, security, and 

development interests.” 31  This alluded to enduring ground force missions in 

areas such as border defense, Himalayan and Korean Peninsula scenarios, a 

Taiwan contingency (given that the main amphibious units would be drawn 

from the army), and overseas peacekeeping. 32  Xi’s comments appeared to 

legitimize maintaining a force of more than 900,000 personnel trained for 

diverse missions, even as the shares of the other services increased. 33 

A more concrete way in which Xi protected army interests was by 

preserving its influence in senior positions. As documented in  Table 2 , 

> 31

“习近平向中国人民解放军陆军火箭军战略支援部队授予军旗并致训词 ” [Xi Jinping Gives 

Remarks and Confers Flags to the PLA Army, Rocket Force, and Strategic Support Force],  People’s 

Daily , January 2, 2016, http://cpc.people.com.cn/n1/2016/0102/c64094-28003839.html.  

> 32

Joshua Arostegui, “PLA Army and Marine Corps Amphibious Brigades in a Post-Reform Military,” 

in  Crossing the Strait: China’s Military Prepares for War with Taiwan , ed. Joel Wuthnow et al. 

(Washington, D.C.: NDU Press, 2022), 161–93.  

> 33

John Chen, “Choosing the ‘Least Bad Option’: Organizational Interests and Change in the PLA 

Ground Forces,” in Saunders et al.,  Chairman Xi Remakes the PLA , 94.   

> f i g u r e 3

Xi Jinping’s PLA inspections by service (2015–22)  

> s o u r c e

: Academy of Military Sciences, “ 强军十年大事记 ” [A Record of the Strong Army’s 

Ten Years],  PLA Daily , October 10, 2022.  

> n o t e

: SSF stands for Strategic Support Force and JLSF stands for Joint Logistic Support Force. 52  • The PLA in a Complex Security Environment 

only 5 of the 33 individuals who served as theater commanders or political 

commissars between 2016 and 2023 were from the other services. The 

army held 85% of the most senior theater positions despite possessing only 

48% of total manpower, punching far above its weight. Moreover, while 

the appointment of naval and air force officers as theater commanders 

represented key “firsts” for those services, it is notable that by 2023 nine 

of the ten senior positions were held by the army. The army not only 

maintained its outsized influence but also gained authority since, unlike the   

> t a b l e 2

Service affiliation of theater commanders and political commissars 

(2016–23) 

Incumbent 

1

Incumbent 

2

Incumbent 

3

Incumbent 

4

Incumbent 

5

Eastern Theater 

commander  Army  Army  Army  – –

Eastern Theater 

political 

commissar 

Army  Army  Army  – –

Southern 

Theater 

commander 

Army  Navy  Army  – –

Southern 

Theater political 

commissar 

Army  Army  Air Force  – –

Northern 

Theater 

commander 

Army  Army  Navy  – –

Northern 

Theater political 

commissar 

Army  Air Force  – Army  –

Western 

Theater 

commander 

Army  Army  Army  Army  –

Western 

Theater political 

commissar 

Army  Army  Army  – –

Central Theater 

commander  Army  Air Force  Army  Army  Army 

Central Theater 

political 

commissar 

Army  Army  Army  – – 

> s o u r c e

: PRC Directories of Military Personalities, 2016–22. Wuthnow  – Chapter 2  • 53 

former military regions, they would now have peacetime control over air 

and naval forces in their respective theaters. 34 

A similar pattern can be found in the CMC. At the 20th Party Congress 

in 2022, all of Xi’s selections for the high command had started their 

careers in the army (though two subsequently transferred to other services 

as political commissars). There were no operational air force or navy 

selectees. 35  An army bias can also be found in the fifteen CMC departments, 

commissions, and offices. Of the 37 individuals who led these institutions 

at some point between 2016 to 2023, only seven (19%) came from outside 

the ground force (see  Table 3 ). Some organs, including the Joint Staff 

Department, Logistics Support Department, and Training Management 

Department, have only been led by army officers. As with the theaters, Xi 

handed a few opportunities to the other services, but he largely respected a 

tradition in which key joint positions are held by one service. Such patterns 

are not merely a vestige of the old system; they can also be interpreted as a 

form of compensation for the service required to sacrifice the most. 

Xi has adopted a different approach to the theaters. In the absence of 

a single bureaucratic “loser” that needed to be compensated, he has more 

evenly distributed attention, influence, and resources among the five 

theaters. One indicator concerns his travel patterns. Given his reported 

goal for the PLA to be fully prepared for a Taiwan contingency by 2027, Xi 

might have been expected to spend the most time in the southeast, but he 

has instead made it a point to regularly visit all the theaters (see  Figure 4 ). 36 

Similarly, Xi has parceled out opportunities for officers with prior service 

in every theater to be promoted to the PLA’s highest grades, avoiding the 

creation of a “cradle of generals” (e.g., in areas where he previously served 

in provincial roles) (see  Figure 5 ). 37  These opportunities extended to the 

new CMC in 2022. Despite widespread media attention on the elevation of         

> 34 Phillip C. Saunders and John Chen, “Is the Chinese Army the Real Winner in PLA Reforms?” Joint
> Force Quarterly 83, no. 4 (2016): 46.
> 35 Joel Wuthnow, “Xi’s New Central Military Commission: A War Council for Taiwan?” China
> Leadership Monitor , 2022, https://www.prcleader.org/wuthnow-december-2022.
> 36 Sam LaGrone, “Milley: China Wants Capability to Take Taiwan by 2027, Sees No Near-Term Intent to
> Invade,” USNI News, June 23, 2021, https://news.usni.org/2021/06/23/milley-china-wants-capability-
> to-take-taiwan-by-2027-sees-no-near-term-intent-to-invade.
> 37 Some have suggested preferential treatments for alumni of the Nanjing MR. See Cheng Li, “Xi
> Jinping’s Inner Circle (Part 1: The Shaanxi Gang),” China Leadership Monitor , 2016, available at
> https://www.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2016/06/Xi-Jinping-Inner-Circle.pdf.

54  • The PLA in a Complex Security Environment 

former Eastern Theater commander He Weidong, the PLA’s new top brass 

brought experience in multiple theaters. 38  

> 38

See, for example, Torode, “Xi’s New Generals Offer Cohesion over Possible Taiwan Plans.” Of note, 

He Weidong himself had also been a deputy commander of the Western Theater Command. No other 

CMC member had previously served in operational roles in the Nanjing MR or Eastern Theater. See 

Bonny Lin et al., “How Did the 20th Party Congress Impact China’s Military?” Center for Strategic 

and International Studies, China Power Project, https://chinapower.csis.org/20th-party-congress-

china-military-pla-cmc.   

> t a b l e 3

Service affiliation of CMC department, commission, and office heads 

(2016–23) 

Incumbent 

1

Incumbent 

2

Incumbent 

3

Incumbent 

4

General Office  Army  Army  – –

Joint Staff Department  Army  Army  Army  –

Political Work Department  Army  Navy  – –

Logistics Support 

Department  Army  Army  Army  Army 

Equipment Development 

Department  Army 

Strategic 

Support 

Force 

Air Force  –

Training Management 

Department  Army  Army  Army  –

National Defense 

Mobilization Department  Army  Army  – –

Discipline Inspection 

Commission  Army  Army  – –

Political and Legal Affairs 

Commission  Army  Army  Navy  –

Science and Technology 

Commission  Army  Navy  – –

Strategic Planning Office  Army  – – –

Reform and Organization 

Office  Army  Army  – –

Office of International 

Military Cooperation  Navy  Army  Army  –

Audit Office  Army  Army  Army  –

Offices Administration 

Agency  Army  Air Force  – – 

> s o u r c e

: PRC Directories of Military Personalities, 2016–22. Wuthnow  – Chapter 2  • 55  

> f i g u r e

4 Xi Jinping’s PLA inspections by theater (2015–22)  

> s o u r c e

: Academy of Military Sciences, “A Record of the Strong Army’s Ten Years” ( 强军十 

年大事记 ),  PLA Daily , October 10, 2022, 1–7.  

> f i g u r e

5 Senior PLA officers’ previous positions by military region and theater 

(%; 2015 and 2021)  

> s o u r c e

: Wuthnow,  Gray Dragons , 31.  

> n o t e

: Senior officers are defined as theater deputy leader grade or higher. Data is from the 

previous decade of an officer’s career. 

Jinan Military Region Western Theater Command or Lanzhou Military Region Central Theater Command or Beijing Military Region Northern Theater Command or Shenyang Military Region Southern Theater Command or Guangzhou Military Region Eastern Theater Command or Nanjing Military Region 56  • The PLA in a Complex Security Environment 

Xi has also ensured an equitable distribution of combat forces across 

the theaters. Despite its status as the primary theater, the Eastern Theater 

does not claim a disproportionate share of combined arms brigades, tactical 

aviation brigades, large surface combatants, or submarines (see  Figure 6 ). 

In addition, while some of the PLA’s most advanced assets have initially 

been deployed in the Eastern Theater, they have often become widely 

allocated across the country. Under Xi, for instance, the J-20 has been 

based in all five theaters. 39  Catering to the interests of the theaters in these 

respects served two mutually reinforcing purposes. The first is maintaining 

readiness across China’s broad periphery, which is consistent with Xi’s       

> 39 Liu Xuanzun, “J-20 Fighter Jet Active in All Five Theater Commands: Delegate,” Global Times ,
> October 20, 2022, https://www.globaltimes.cn/page/202210/1277527.shtml. Previously, the
> Nanjing MR was the first to receive the Su-27 in 1992, but the Su-27s (and subsequent Su-30s)
> proliferated across other military regions in the next decade. See Rick Kamer, “Flankers of the
> People’s Liberation Army,” Chinese Military Update 1, no. 7 (2004): 5–6. Similarly, all three fleets
> possess the latest (Type-052D) destroyer.
> f i g u r e 6

Number of major combat units by theater (2023)  

> s o u r c e

: The Military Balance  (London: IISS, 2023), 243–45.  

> n o t e

: The principal surface combatants include aircraft carriers, cruisers, destroyers, and 

frigates. The Western and Central Theaters do not have a naval component. Figures do not 

include the military districts in western China that do not report to the Western Theater. Wuthnow  – Chapter 2  • 57 

frequent admonition that the PLA needs to be able to respond to threats in 

“all strategic directions.” It also ensures that his senior advisers have broad 

experience. 40  The second purpose is satisfying the interests of key subgroups 

within the PLA when tough choices did not need to be made. 

## PLA Institutional Interests 

The final way that Xi Jinping pursued stability in a time of change was 

by preserving the broad parameters of civil-military relations. Since Deng 

Xiaoping, there has been an implicit bargain, which Western scholars 

have labeled “conditional compliance,” in which the PLA defers to the 

party’s leadership in return for the resources it needs for modernization 

and autonomy over its own affairs. 41  This has allowed the PLA to focus 

on becoming a professional warfighting force while avoiding challenges 

to the regime. Only when there was a split in the leadership in the early 

2000s—with Jiang Zemin remaining as CMC chairman and Hu Jintao being 

promoted to party general-secretary—were there serious questions about 

PLA compliance. 42  Xi preserved this bargain by limiting military influence 

in civilian decision-making while approving large budget increases and 

avoiding external intervention in PLA business. 

In contrast with Mao’s behavior during the Cultural Revolution, Xi did 

not provide the PLA a greater degree of influence in elite politics. At the 

highest level, he did not return a military officer to the Politburo Standing 

Committee (whose last military member, Liu Huaqing, retired in 1997). The 

two CMC vice chairmen remained as ex officio members of the 24-person 

Politburo, but no others were added. Xi kept a relatively consistent share 

of PLA representatives on the lower-level Central Committee—22% of the 

204-person body in 2022. There was also consistency in PLA discourse in 

elite politics: military representatives to the National People’s Congress under      

> 40 Joel Wuthnow, “System Overload: Can China’s Military Be Distracted in a War over Taiwan?”
> Institute for National Strategic Studies (INSS), China Strategic Perspectives, no. 15, 2020, 11.
> 41 James Mulvenon, “China: Conditional Compliance,” in Coercion and Governance: The Declining
> Political Role of the Military in Asia , ed. Muthiah Alagappa (Stanford: Stanford University Press,
> 2001), 317–35; Ellis Joffe, “Shaping China’s Next Generation of Military Leaders: For What Kind of
> Army?” in The “People” in the PLA: Recruitment, Training, and Education in China’s Military , ed. Roy
> Kamphausen, Andrew Scobell, and Travis Tanner (Carlisle: U.S. Army War College Press, 2008),
> 379–82; and You Ji, “Fragmented Party Control of the Gun: Civil-Military Relations in China,” in
> Chinese Politics as Fragmented Authoritarianism , ed. Kjeld Erik Brødsgaard (London: Routledge,
> 2016), 216–34.
> 42 Michael Kiselycznyk and Phillip C. Saunders, “Civil-Military Relations in China: Assessing the PLA’s
> Role in Elite Politics,” INSS, China Strategic Perspectives, no. 2, 2010, 26–27.

58  • The PLA in a Complex Security Environment 

Xi echoed their predecessors by focusing on political loyalty and military 

professionalism, avoiding encroachment into domestic policy issues. 43 

However, Xi offered the PLA many of the same benefits as his 

predecessors in return for political deference. One way he did this was by 

sustaining robust defense budgets despite declining real GDP growth and 

the economic slowdown caused by the pandemic. The official military 

budget grew from under $200 billion at the start of Xi’s tenure to nearly 

$300 billion in 2022, with annual growth of around 7% since 2016 (see 

Figure 7 ). This budget does not include categories such as defense research 

and development, paramilitary forces, and foreign weapons purchases, 

which collectively add an estimated $60 billion. 44  Nevertheless, military 

spending did not grow as a share of overall government expenditures. This 

is a sign that, due to increasing government revenue, the party saw no reason 

to make different choices between guns and butter and gave the military the 

resources it needed to modernize. 

Another part of the bargain was that the PLA continued to exercise a 

high degree of autonomy over its own affairs. 45  This did not mean that it 

could continue to conduct business as usual. The anticorruption campaign 

and a new lineup of supervisory organs not only enhanced Xi’s control 

but also reflected his expectation for the PLA to become cleaner and more 

professional. This obviously damaged the interests of those who profited from 

those schemes, even as Xi’s family continued to benefit and as some corrupt 

schemes apparently continued within the PLA itself. 46  The arrangement, 

however, was that tighter enforcement would be pursued internally. There is 

no evidence that civilian authorities were able to scrutinize activities within 

the PLA and mete out punishment to the offenders. 47  Neither did Xi bring              

> 43 Zhifan Luo, “Politicalization or Professionalism? A Case Study of the Military’s Discourse in China,”
> Armed Forces and Society 48, no. 1 (2020): 185–204.
> 44 Nan Tian and Fei Su, A New Estimate of China’s Military Expenditure (Stockholm: Stockholm
> International Peace Research Institute, 2021). For background, see Adam P. Liff and Andrew S.
> Erickson, “Demystifying China’s Defence Spending: Less Mysterious in the Aggregate,” China
> Quarterly 216 (2013): 805–30; and Phillip C. Saunders, testimony before the U.S.-China Economic
> and Security Review Commission, Washington D.C., June 20, 2019.
> 45 Andrew Scobell regards this as so critical that it is the “number one rule” of civil-miliary relations
> in China. Andrew Scobell, “Civil-Military ‘Rules of the Game’ on the Eve of China’s 19th Party
> Congress,” National Bureau of Asian Research, Brief, October 2017, 5, https://www.nbr.org/wp-
> content/uploads/pdfs/publications/PLA_brief_scobell_101117.pdf.
> 46 Desmond Shum, Red Roulette: An Insider’s Story of Wealth, Power, Corruption, and Vengeance in
> Today’s China (New York: Scribner, 2021).
> 47 Instead, CMC Discipline Inspection Commission secretary-general Zhang Shengmin, who was
> appointed to the CMC in 2017, served as the PLA’s representative on the Central Discipline
> Inspection Commission and was responsible for inspecting PLA party committees. For background,
> see Joel McFadden, Kim Fassler, and Justin Godby, “The New PLA Leadership: Xi Molds China’s
> Military to His Vision,” in Saunders et al., Chairman Xi Remakes the PLA , 571–73.

Wuthnow  – Chapter 2  • 59 

in civilian party cadres to enforce his dictates 48  or turn to civilian advisers 

to examine military spending. 49  As in the past, the PLA policed itself and 

decided how to implement the CMC chairman’s vision. 

Autonomy meant freedom not only from civilian scrutiny but also from 

forced cooperation with the Chinese government. 50  Military-civilian stove-

piping had long plagued the Chinese system, driven by the PLA’s desire not 

to share information or otherwise cooperate with bureaucratically junior  

> 48

Xi did bring in a single civilian aide, Zhong Shaojun, who was given a military rank of senior colonel 

and later elevated to director of the CMC General Office, but this was not surprising. Jiang and Hu 

also put their own civilian mishu into similar roles. Edward Wong, “The ‘Gatekeeper’ in Xi Jinping’s 

Inner Circle,”  New York Times , September 30, 2015, https://archive.nytimes.com/sinosphere.blogs. 

nytimes.com/2015/09/30/the-gatekeeper-in-xi-jinpings-inner-circle.  

> 49

The U.S. parallel to such a move would be Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara’s reliance on 

civilian accountants to scrutinize the military services’ budgets.  

> 50

An alternative path to reform would have been to place the PLA under government and National 

People’s Congress supervision; instead, the PLA remained a party-army.   

> f i g u r e 7

PRC defense budget growth (2013–22)  

> s o u r c e

: CSIS, China Power Project; and SIPRI, Military Expenditure Database.   

> $ billion 60 •The PLA in a Complex Security Environment

agencies such as the Foreign Ministry. 51  A notable change at the outset of 

Xi’s tenure was the creation of a Central National Security Commission. 

Its purpose, in the eyes of some Chinese observers, was to bridge the civil-

military divide by strengthening interagency strategic planning and crisis 

response. 52  Yet those expectations were dashed when the commission failed 

to adopt a strong external role, and crises continued to be handled by the 

individual bureaucracies. 53  In retrospect, that failure can be explained by 

Xi’s deference to the PLA’s institutional interest in autonomy, which was 

necessary to gain its acquiescence in his agenda to push through once-in-a-

generation reforms. 

## Conclusion 

Xi Jinping’s strategy to accumulate the authority and support within 

the PLA he would need to undertake major reforms was not only or even 

primarily the result of coercion. The anticorruption campaign, cult of 

personality, and increasing internal supervision were distinctive tools 

that were helpful in removing sources of opposition at the outset of the 

reform and deterring organized resistance to Xi’s leadership. Yet they are 

insufficient to explain the broad support Xi has enjoyed during his tenure. 

Of greater utility are the traditions that he did not break—such as respecting 

long-standing promotion and retirement norms, dividing his attention and 

material resources between the theaters, and upholding both sides of the 

civil-military bargain that had been in place since the 1980s—and the side 

payments that he offered to the “losers,” especially the outgoing officers and 

the army as an institution. In short, Xi needed buy-in from the PLA officer 

corps and the stability provided by these efforts to pursue the disruptive 

changes he sought for the PLA. 

Bringing these approaches into the picture has four implications for 

party-army relations in the remainder of Xi’s tenure and beyond. First, there 

is a greater level of stability between the civilian leadership and the military 

than would be suggested by a preoccupation with coercive instruments. 

There may be lingering resentment from those forced to abandon corrupt            

> 51 Thomas J. Christensen, “More Actors, Less Coordination? New Challenges for the Leaders of a Rising
> China,” in China’s Foreign Policy: Who Makes It and How Is It Made? ed. Gilbert Rozman (New York:
> Palgrave Macmillan, 2014), 21–38.
> 52 Joel Wuthnow, “China’s New ‘Black Box’: Problems and Prospects for the Central National Security
> Commission,” China Quarterly 232 (2017): 886–903.
> 53 Author’s discussions with a PLA interlocutor, May 2023. Wuthnow –Chapter 2 •61

schemes or give up personal privileges, but most officers have benefited 

from predictable career advancement as well as large pay raises and other 

benefits reforms. 54  The PLA as an institution has also been protected from 

invasive outside supervision while being granted ever-increasing budgets, 

despite an economic slowdown. These measures likely support contentment. 

Satisfaction with his leadership means that Xi is unlikely to face the same 

instability in military governance that leaders in other autocratic systems 

have faced, such as Romania’s Nicolae Ceausescu in 1989 or Mikhail 

Gorbachev in 1991. Stability is likely to continue if Xi’s successor similarly 

adheres to the interests of military subordinates. 

Second, Xi’s need to find a  modus vivendi  with the PLA could reduce 

the prospects for deeper reforms. Retaining senior PLA officers because they 

waited their turn deprives Xi of the opportunity to accelerate the promotion 

of a younger generation of officers more attuned to modern operations 

or “mavericks” known for their disruptive thinking rather than their 

conformity. Similarly, respecting a tradition in which the top positions are 

mostly held by the army reduces the prospects for a true joint staff equivalent 

involving equity among the services. There is also the question of whether Xi 

has reached the limit of his ability to reform the army. He probably expended 

political capital in asking the army to become the “biggest loser” of reforms 

and could face resistance if he seeks further cuts that are seen as favoring the 

interests of the other services. In these respects, it is questionable whether 

Xi will be able to take credit for breaking the “big army” mentality that runs 

deep in the PLA’s organizational culture. 55 

Third, preserving PLA autonomy comes at the expense of civilian 

oversight and interagency cooperation. Xi has regularly extolled the virtues 

of military professionalism, but maintaining the tenets of “conditional 

compliance” means that there are limits on the extent to which he can expose 

the military to external supervision. The reform of the CMC bureaucracy was 

a useful step in corralling the bureaucracy but left the PLA a self-policing 

organization with no significant external checks and balances. Those might 

have included supervision by the equivalent of civilian political appointees, 

the civilian discipline inspection system, outside legal authorities, or the 

National People’s Congress—that is, the tools that strengthen civilian       

> 54 On the personal privileges, see James Mulvenon, “ ‘Comrade, Where’s My Military Car?’ Xi Jinping’s
> Throwback Mass-Line Campaign to Curb Military Corruption,” China Leadership Monitor , 2013,
> 1–5.
> 55 “习近平 :构建中国特色现代军事力量体系 ” [Xi Jinping: Build a Modern Military Force System
> with Chinese Characteristics], People’s Daily , August 15, 2014, http://cpc.people.com.cn/n/2014/0815/
> c164113-25470901.html.

62  • The PLA in a Complex Security Environment 

oversight of Western militaries. 56  The PLA also reorganized its internal 

budgeting and financial supervision process but did not accept greater 

external oversight or increased transparency. 57 

One ramification is continued corruption. In July 2023, it came as a 

surprise to many observers that Xi was forced to fire the leadership of the 

Rocket Force and the defense minister under a cloud of corruption in the 

acquisition system. 58  A focus on his anticorruption campaign and control 

of appointments would have suggested that such incidents were unlikely a 

decade into his tenure. Yet from the perspective of institutional bargaining, 

in which Xi needed to cede some autonomy to the PLA in return for general 

support for his leadership and agenda, the persistence of these cases is 

more readily explainable. 59  Continuing to allow the PLA to function as 

a self-policing organization, with only intermittent intervention by Xi 

through the “CMC chairman responsibility system,” could breed similar 

cases of noncompliance with laws and party rules. It could also frustrate 

a successor (likely a civilian party cadre) who would need to respect these 

traditions to cement his own authority. 

Another result of excessive autonomy is poor civil-military coordination. 

Bureaucratic stove-piping can explain the repetition of cases in which the 

military did not appear to share information or deconflict its activities with 

the party center or civilian ministries, resulting in embarrassing situations 

for civilian leaders. These incidents include the inaugural test of the J-20 

fighter that clouded Secretary of Defense Robert Gates’s visit to Beijing in 

January 2011 and apparently took Hu by surprise, 60  the September 2014 

Sino-Indian border standoff that took place prior to Xi’s visit to New Delhi, 

the 2017 standoff involving Chinese troops in Doklam (which happened 

as China was trying to peel New Delhi away from a revived Quad), and 

the February 2023 spy balloon incursion prior to Secretary of State Antony            

> 56 Samuel P. Huntington, The Soldier and the State (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1957).
> 57 Wu Ti, “ 新军改进程中的国防预算决策研究 ” [Defense Expenditure Policy Research in the Process
> of New Military Reforms], Financial Management 29 (2018): 153–57.
> 58 Former defense minister Li Shangfu had previously served as director of the CMC Equipment
> Development Department. Christian Shepherd, “Chinese Defense Minister Removed after Just
> Seven Months in Latest Purge,” Washington Post , October 24, 2023, https://www.washingtonpost.
> com/world/2023/10/24/li-shangfu-china-defense-purge.
> 59 Joel Wuthnow, “Why Xi Jinping Doesn’t Trust His Own Military,” Foreign Affairs , September 26,
> 2023, https://www.foreignaffairs.com/china/why-xi-jinping-doesnt-trust-his-own-military.
> 60 Bob Davis, “Robert Gates on the Military’s Relationship with China,” Wire China, November 19,
> 2023, https://www.thewirechina.com/2023/11/19/robert-gates-on-the-militarys-relationship-with-
> china.

Wuthnow  – Chapter 2  • 63 

Blinken’s visit to Beijing. 61  The latter program may have been known to Xi, 

but the specifics not reported to civilian aides. Similar incidents are likely to 

reoccur if the party-army bargain is maintained. 

Finally, the PLA will likely be adequately resourced for its modernization 

milestones. China’s economic headwinds have raised questions about 

potential impacts on the PLA, yet a combination of Xi’s assessment of a 

worsening security environment and a political desire not to alienate the PLA 

by threatening its resources means that cuts are unlikely. Recent evidence 

suggests that in most respects the PLA continues on an accelerated path 

toward the modernization of its conventional forces, including larger shares 

of advanced naval and air force capabilities, as well as its nuclear buildup. 62 

Both are essential in meeting Xi’s goal of improving the PLA’s capability to 

conduct major operations against Taiwan by 2027. 63  Nevertheless, while 

modernization will continue apace, Xi will have to wrestle with other aspects 

of party-army relations, such as corruption and resistance to deeper reforms, 

that could limit the PLA’s ability to “fight and win wars” and thus influence 

his confidence in the armed forces.       

> 61 Tyler Jost, “The Bad Advice Plaguing Beijing’s Foreign Policy,” Foreign Affairs , April 27, 2023, https://
> www.foreignaffairs.com/china/bad-advice-plaguing-beijings-foreign-policy.
> 62 U.S. Department of Defense, Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of
> China 2023 (Washington, D.C., October 2023), https://media.defense.gov/2023/Oct/19/2003323409/-
> 1/-1/1/2023-MILITARY-AND-SECURITY-DEVELOPMENTS-INVOLVING-THEPEOPLES-
> REPUBLIC-OF-CHINA.PDF.
> 63 Brian Hart, Bonnie S. Glaser, and Matthew P. Funaiole, “China’s 2027 Goal Marks the PLA’s
> Centennial, Not an Expedited Military Modernization,” Jamestown Foundation, China Brief, March
> 26, 2021, https://jamestown.org/program/chinas-2027-goal-marks-the-plas-centennial-not-an-
> expedited-military-modernization; and LaGrone, “Milley: China Wants Capability to Take Taiwan
> by 2027.”

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

This chapter examines efforts by the People’s Republic of China (PRC) to 

transition its national defense mobilization system (NDMS) from a vehicle 

for emergency response and economic subsidization to a war-oriented system. 

> MAIN ARGUMENT

PRC leaders have twice reoriented the NDMS toward different strategic 

ends. The system initially embodied the “people’s war,” leveraging resources 

across the whole of Chinese society to enable military operations. In the mid 

to late 2000s, its priorities shifted toward economic development through 

subsidization and domestic emergency response. Yet the preponderance 

of these efforts had limited value for wartime mobilization. In 2015 the 

PRC initiated a series of reforms to prioritize war mobilization capabilities. 

Key among these reforms is the assumption by the National Development 

and Reform Commission (NDRC) of control over PRC government 

mobilization planning and support for the military. Reforms further 

standardized mobilization structures at all levels of government, potentially 

streamlining mobilization coordination between the government and 

military. While actual capability improvements remain to be seen, these 

reforms could effectively free the military from many traditional mobilization 

responsibilities to enable greater focus on war preparedness. 

> POLICY IMPLICATIONS

• NDRC leadership is likely to encounter significant challenges in 

posturing China’s resources to support PLA requirements for large-

scale combat operations, given the competing requirements to recover 

and develop the nation’s economy. 

• The PRC could seek to portray its NDMS as comprehensive, efficient, 

and effectively oriented to support wartime operations—regardless of 

the system’s true readiness—as a deterrent against the U.S. 

• PLA leaders’ requirement that the system become war-oriented 

suggests that mobilization activities will be a key indicator of Chinese 

Communist Party leaders’ intent or willingness to fight a costly war. Chapter 3 China’s Transition to a War-Oriented 

# National Defense Mobilization System 

## Erin Richter and Howard Wang 

The national defense mobilization system (NDMS) of the People’s 

Republic of China (PRC) is currently undergoing its second reform in 

two decades as Chinese Communist Party (CCP) leaders reconceptualize 

a system oriented toward supporting People’s Liberation Army (PLA) 

operations in a major war. This transition toward a war-oriented system 

faces significant challenges from a legacy of prior NDMS reforms— 

undertaken in the heyday of China’s economic growth—that made the 

NDMS a vehicle for subsidizing civilian construction projects in pursuit of 

economic growth. Ongoing NDMS reforms continue to struggle against this 

legacy, particularly given the local economic conditions from lockdowns 

during the Covid-19 pandemic. The measures outlined by CCP leaders to 

achieve a war-oriented NDMS draw on the same resources necessary for 

local economic recovery. 

This chapter proceeds in six sections. The first section introduces the 

NDMS and its legacy from Mao Zedong’s way of war. The second section 

details the system’s first transition toward focusing on economic construction 

and its resultant mission to emphasize subsidizing civilian economic 

construction at the expense of warfighting. The third section then highlights 

CCP leaders’ efforts to reorient the NDMS to warfighting missions as part of 

the 2016 PLA reforms, while the fourth section discusses its long-standing 

deficiencies, and the fifth section outlines specific actions taken since 2016 

to strengthen national defense mobilization mechanisms. The sixth and 

final section forecasts additional reforms and their prospects for improving 

wartime capabilities, given competing demands for economic development.     

> Erin Richter is a Senior Analyst within the U.S. Department of Defense.
> Howard Wang is a Political Scientist at the RAND Corporation.
> The views expressed in this chapter are those of the authors and do not reflect the views of the U.S.
> government, the RAND Corporation, or its research sponsors, clients, or grantors.

66  • The PLA in a Complex Security Environment 

## The “People’s War” Orientation of National Defense 

## Mobilization 

The CCP has historically employed the concept of national defense 

mobilization ( 国防动员 ) to supplement its armed forces with civilian 

manpower and materiel. National defense mobilization is a sweeping 

concept that attempts to commit whole-of-society efforts to supporting the 

PLA and its operations. To facilitate this, CCP officials created the National 

Defense Mobilization Commission (NDMC), a coordinating organization 

jointly managed by the State Council and Central Military Commission 

(CMC), with most operations being conducted in provincial and municipal 

offices through local NDMC offices. 1

From its inception through the early 2000s, the NDMS was oriented 

toward the Maoist legacy of war. National defense mobilization was an 

expression of “people’s war” ( 人民战争 ), leveraging resources across the 

whole of Chinese society to enable and sustain the CCP’s defense policy 

and military operations, particularly in wartime. 2 In 2005, then CMC 

vice chairman and minister of national defense General Cao Gangchuan 

appealed to this legacy and the NDMS’s warfighting orientation in a 

Qiushi  article, writing that “it is necessary to strengthen national defense 

mobilization construction…[and] further improve the national defense 

mobilization system” to strengthen China’s ability to prosecute a people’s 

war. 3 Cao was explicit about the CMC’s expectation that the NDMS 

enhance the PLA’s warfighting capabilities. In a 2003 speech at a meeting 

of the Beijing Military Region’s NDMC, Cao explained that “a successful 

NDMS” will “enhance the PLA’s operational capabilities, transform war 

potential into war power, and enhance the PLA’s overall deterrence and 

combat capabilities.” 4          

> 1For more on the NDMS, see Erin Richter and Benjamin Rosen, “China’s National Defense
> Mobilization System: Foundation for Military Logistics,” in PLA Logistics and Sustainment: PLA
> Conference 2022 , ed. George R. Shatzer and Roger D. Cliff (Carlisle: U.S. Army War College Press,
> 2023), 33–74.
> 2Mao Zedong, “On Protracted War,” in Selected Works of Mao Tse-Tung , vol. 2 (Beijing: People’s
> Publishing House, 1965); and Ren Min, 国防动员学 [The Science of National Defense Mobilization]
> (Beijing: Military Science Publishing House, 2008).
> 3Cao Gangchuan, “ 伟大的历史壮举 不朽的爱国篇章 ” [Great Historic Feat, an Immortal Patriotic
> Chapter], Embassy of the People’s Republic of China (PRC) in the Republic of India, August 3, 2005,
> http://in.china-embassy.gov.cn/ssygd/jnkrzz/200508/t20050803_2359138.htm.
> 4“曹刚川强调: 把国防动员各项建设提高到新水平 ” [Cao Gangchuan Emphasizes: Raise the
> Construction of National Defense Mobilization to a New Level], Sina, August 7, 2003, https://news.
> sina.com.cn/c/2003-08-07/0758520237s.shtml.

Richter and Wang  – Chapter 3  • 67 

## Reorienting the NDMS to Domestic Emergency 

## Response and Economic Construction 

## Shifting from Preparing for War to Economic Development 

In the mid to late 2000s, PLA and CCP discourse around the NDMS 

clearly indicated a shift in priorities away from warfighting toward economic 

development and emergency response. 5 In 2007, the deputy director of the 

PLA National Defense University National Defense Mobilization Teaching 

and Research Section, Xu Kui, and a researcher at the PLA Academy of 

Military Science (AMS), Cao Yanzhong, published an article explaining that 

the NDMS’s “focus had shifted from preparations for war to instead combine 

long-term development with emergency preparedness.” They suggested 

that the key driver of this shift was the growing prioritization of economic 

growth, stating that over the mid to late 2000s, laws and regulations 

governing the NDMS had shifted “from simply serving for war needs to 

serving both national defense and economic construction.” 6

CCP leaders likely directed this shift to align NDMS work with 

peacetime conditions. Party leaders continued to assess that China enjoyed 

a “period of strategic opportunity” to grow its economy and, by extension, 

its comprehensive national power. 7 CCP leaders likely viewed the NDMS’s 

economic construction work as an opportunity to align military and civilian 

efforts to advance China’s overall development during a period of permissive 

security environments. 

Provincial implementation revealed nonstandard approaches to the 

NDMS’s shift to prioritize economic construction, and several provincial 

and municipal leaders responsible for implementing changes in mobilization 

work wrote openly about their new responsibilities. Both Chengde mayor 

Zhang Gujiang and Xuhou mayor Cao Xinping, the leaders of their 

respective municipal NDMCs, publicly announced that their cities must       

> 5CCP leader discussion over this reorientation likely began as early as 2000, when drafting of the
> 2010 National Defense Mobilization Law began. Li Yun and Yang Lei, “ 国家国防动员委员会有
> 关负责人就国防动员法答问 ” [Relevant Person in Charge of the National Defense Mobilization
> Commission Answers Questions about the National Defense Mobilization Law], Xinhua, February
> 27, 2010, https://web.archive.org/web/20100305101333/http://www.gov.cn/jrzg/2010-02/27/
> content_1543167.htm.
> 6Xu Kui and Cao Yanzhong, “ 新中国国防动员体制的历史演变 ” [The Historical Evolution of New
> China’s National Defense Mobilization System], Military History , no. 2, 2007.
> 7Jiang Zemin, “ 全面建设小康社会 ,开创中国特色社会主义事业新局面 —— 在中国共产党第十
> 六次全国代表大会上的报告 ” [Build a Well-Off Society in an All-Round Way and Create a New
> Situation in Building Socialism with Chinese Characteristics—Report to the 16th National Congress
> of the Communist Party of China], Xinhua, November 8, 2002; and Hu Jintao, “ 继续抓住和用
> 好重要战略机遇期 ” [Continue to Hold Fast to and Use Well the Important Period of Strategic
> Opportunity], in Selected Works of Hu Jintao , vol. 3 (Beijing: People’s Publishing House, 2016), 436.

68  • The PLA in a Complex Security Environment 

“incorporate national defense construction into their plans for economic 

and social development.” 8 Yet this guidance was not yet standardized at 

the provincial levels, and the leaders led different resulting programs. Cao 

emphasized employing civilian talent in the militia and reserve forces, 

leading the municipal military subdistrict to establish talent reserve 

databases and leverage them to create units for specialized disaster response 

functions such as chemical defense and firefighting reconnaissance. 9 Zhang 

emphasized city design for “peacetime-wartime integration, military-civil 

fusion, and residing the military within the civilian.” 10  Under his policy, 

this entailed building civilian stockpiles of critical materials, considering 

troop mobility when designing traffic networks, and ensuring connectivity 

between military and civilian crisis management centers. 

CCP leadership standardized guidance for NDMS reorientation with 

the passage of the 2010 National Defense Mobilization Law (NDML) 

and other national-level regulations, which collectively demonstrated 

the party’s perceptions that NDMS activities were subordinate to China’s 

broader economic policies. The NDML heavily emphasized the process for 

incorporating national defense requirements into economic construction 

projects, in which the PLA proposed requirements for civilian government 

review. 11  Officials from the National People’s Congress (NPC) and NDMC 

General Office similarly reiterated that civilian governments held approval 

authority over PLA requests, in line with a State Council directive to 

“subordinate national defense and military building in service of the 

big picture of economic construction.” 12  Preparation for war became a 

diminishing priority subordinated to economic growth.             

> 8“张古江 :努力推进我市国防动员建设创新发展 ” [Zhang Gujiang: Strive to Promote the
> Innovative Development of National Defense Mobilization Construction in Our City], Chengde
> Daily , September 24, 2008, https://www.chengde.gov.cn/art/2008/9/24/art_360_79734.html; and
> Hu Jiayou, Niu Qinghuai, and Liu Peisheng, “ 谱写尚武拥军新乐章 ” [Compose a New Symphony
> to Promote Martial Spirit and Embrace the Military], People’s Frontline, May 21, 2009, http://www.
> fqyjw.com/News_View.asp?NewsID=99.
> 9Hu, Niu, and Liu, “ 谱写尚武拥军新乐章. ”
> 10 “张古江 :努力推进我市国防动员建设创新发展 .”
> 11 “中华人民共和国国防动员法 (全文 )” [PRC National Defense Mobilization Law (Full Text)],
> Xinhua, February 26, 2010, https://www.chinanews.com.cn/gn/news/2010/02-26/2141911.shtml.
> 12 State Council Research Office (PRC), “ 如何在新的历史起点上推进国防和军队现代化建设 ?”
> [How to Promote the Modernization of National Defense and the Armed Forces at a New Historical
> Starting Point?], March 19, 2008, http://www.gov.cn/2008gzbg/content_924089.htm; Liang Guanglie,
> “关于 ‘中华人民共和国国防动员法 (草案 )’ 的说明 ” [Explaining the “PRC National Defense
> Mobilization Law (Draft)”], National People’s Congress (PRC), May 7, 2010, http://www.npc.gov.
> cn/zgrdw/huiyi/lfzt/gfdyf/2010-05/07/content_1867628.htm; and Li and Yang, “ 国家国防动员委
> 员会有关负责人就国防动员法答问. ”

Richter and Wang  – Chapter 3  • 69 

## National Defense Mobilization as Subsidization 

Shifting language in China’s defense white papers revealed that in the 

early 2000s the missions of the NDMS increasingly emphasized subsidizing 

economic construction as national defense and warfighting declined in 

priority. Each defense white paper published between 2002 and 2008 

described an evolving vision of mobilizing the national economy, trending 

toward a policy of subsidizing civilian ventures with military resources 

under the auspices of peacetime mobilization work advancing national 

defense. According to the 2002 and 2004 white papers, mobilizing the 

national economy primarily entailed systematically aligning work such that 

China’s economic growth would also enhance its national defense. 13  Neither 

white paper specified discrete tasks to advance these objectives; the relevant 

discussions instead emphasized the overarching logic of China’s NDMS to 

meet the needs of national security. 

The language of the 2006 defense white paper shifted toward 

subsidizing civil construction as a component of national defense 

mobilization. It explains that one of the “basic policies for the mobilization 

of the national economy” includes recasting economic mobilization as a 

“bridge between China’s economic development and available national 

defense capacities, striking a balance between military and civilian needs 

and between peacetime and wartime needs in economic restructuring.” 14 

It also argues that, under the guidance of national defense mobilization, 

China’s economic growth increases the national defense capacity. As such, 

economic construction is mobilization work: “in building information and 

communications systems, highways, railways, bridges, tunnels, airports, 

ports, docks and major urban infrastructures, China pays close attention 

to the requirements of national defense, and ensures that peacetime needs 

and wartime needs are properly balanced.” 15  The described projects are all 

fixed asset investments, a traditional driver of China’s economic growth and 

a compelling financial opportunity for provincial mobilization departments 

and PLA servicemembers alike. 16  These financial incentives likely captured               

> 13 State Council Information Office (PRC), China’s National Defense in 2002 (Beijing, December
> 2002), http://www.china.org.cn/e-white/20021209/index.htm; and State Council Information Office
> (PRC), China’s National Defense in 2004 (Beijing, December 2004), http://www.china.org.cn/e-
> white/20041227/index.htm.
> 14 State Council Information Office (PRC), China’s National Defense in 2006 (Beijing, December 2006),
> http://www.china.org.cn/english/features/book/194421.htm.
> 15 Ibid.
> 16 World Bank Group, Innovative China: New Drivers of Growth (World Bank: Washington, D.C., 2019), 4–6,
> https://documents.worldbank.org/en/publication/documents-reports/documentdetail/833871568732137448/
> innovative-china-new-drivers-of-growth. 70 •The PLA in a Complex Security Environment

significant aspects of the NDMS and motivated the use of mobilization as a 

vehicle for subsidizing investment-led growth in China’s provinces in lieu of 

enhancing national defense. 

The growing role of the NDMS in civilian construction was part 

of a broader transition throughout the PLA. The 2008 defense white 

paper includes a section on “Participating In and Supporting National 

Construction,” trumpeting that the PLA and People’s Armed Police 

had committed 14 million workdays since 2006 to support over 200 

key construction projects in energy, transportation, hydropower, and 

communications. 17  This iteration notably does not include the extensive 

discussion of national defense mobilization missions found in the 2002, 

2004, and 2006 white papers. Instead, it notes China’s efforts to establish an 

efficient national defense mobilization mechanism before stipulating that 

the PLA “subordinates its development to overall national construction” and 

“supports local economic and social development.” 18 

Such shifting language in China’s defense white papers reveals what 

Xu and Cao meant in their explanation that the focus of the NDMS had 

“shifted from preparations for war to instead combine long-term [economic] 

development with emergency preparedness.” 19  Between 2002 and 2008, 

Chinese policy and objectives for mobilizing the national economy 

transitioned away from the initial goal of planning economic construction 

in a way that serves national defense. Warfighting and its necessary 

preparations held a diminishing role in NDMS missions. By the end of the 

decade, the NDMS embraced a policy of subsidizing civilian growth as a 

subordinate to China’s investment-led growth model. 

## Toward a War-Oriented NDMS 

## Reorienting the NDMS toward Warfighting 

In 2013, CCP leadership discourse regarding the PRC’s security 

environment shifted from strategic opportunity to strategic competition 

among powerful nations, most importantly the United States, as well as a 

clash between opposing ideological systems. 20  Recognizing that this shift         

> 17 State Council Information Office (PRC), China’s National Defense in 2008 (Beijing, January 2009),
> http://www.china.org.cn/government/whitepaper/node_7060059.htm.
> 18 Ibid.
> 19 Xu and Cao “ 新中国国防动员体制的历史演变 ,” 19.
> 20 U.S. Department of Defense, Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of
> China 2023 (Washington, D.C., October 2023), 6.

Richter and Wang  – Chapter 3  • 71 

in the security environment could pit China against the United States and 

other regional states in a military confrontation, CCP leaders reevaluated 

NDMS priorities. In a 2015 speech, Xi Jinping indicated that planned NDMS 

reforms were in part motivated by what he assessed to be an “increasingly 

profound and complex international situation.” 21  Though economic 

construction remained an important part of the NDMS through its reform 

process, CCP leaders likely concluded that their security environment was 

no longer permissive enough for the NDMS to emphasize economic growth 

at the expense of warfighting support. 

Speaking at the first conference on CMC reforms in 2015, Xi flagged 

NDMS reform as part of the PLA “above the neck” leadership command 

system reforms, which officially launched the following year. 22  CCP and 

PLA leaders likely had not yet decided on the totality of reforms to the 

NDMS at that time. On March 25, 2016, the CMC National Defense 

Mobilization Department (NDMD) Party Committee assembled and noted 

that the new requirements posed by the PLA’s 2016 reform goals required 

that the NDMS reorient itself toward “a new system, new functions, and a 

new long-term mission.” The committee emphasized the need to “renew 

lines of thinking and conscientiously transform ideas to fit a transforming 

[national defense mobilization] system” without presenting a vision for that 

transformation. 23 

The party clarified its intent for such reforms in a joint Xinhua– PLA 

Daily  article published in October 2017. The piece appeals to the NDMS’s 

warfighting legacy, writing that the “light of people’s war glows in the light 

of a new era, and the construction of national defense mobilization has 

entered a new historical stage.” It explains what sort of NDMS should be 

the object of PLA construction work in this new era: a successful reform 

will “take enhancing the ability to win wars as the goal, closely focus on the     

> 21 Cao Zhi, Li Xuanliang, and Wang Shibin, “ 习近平 :全面实施改革强军战略 坚定不移走中国特色强
> 军之路 ” [Xi Jinping: Comprehensively Implement the Strategy of Reforming and Strengthening the
> Military, Unswervingly Follow the Road of Strengthening the Military with Chinese Characteristics],
> Xinhua, November 26, 2015, https://web.archive.org/web/20180612225338/http:/www.xinhuanet.
> com/politics/2015-11/26/c_1117274869.htm.
> 22 Ibid.
> 23 Fei Shiting, Ou Can, and Liu Guoshun, “ 军委国防动员部下设民兵预备役局边防局等单位 ”
> [CMC National Defense Mobilization Department Has Subordinate Militia Reserve Bureau,
> Border Defense Bureau, and Others], Xinhua, April 13, 2016, http://www.xinhuanet.com/mil/2016-
> 04/13/c_128890214.htm.

72  • The PLA in a Complex Security Environment 

requirements of winning information warfare, and make solid preparations 

for military mobilization to ensure rapid and effective mobilization.” 24 

In the following years, PLA media and officials responsible for national 

defense mobilization emphasized reorienting toward warfighting, often 

while also acknowledging the system’s importance to China’s economic 

activities. In 2018, the deputy director of the Central Military-Civil Fusion 

Development Committee, Jin Zhuanglong, wrote in  Qiushi  that the goal of 

building the NDMS takes “economic and social development as the basis 

and ensuring victory in informationized local wars as the core” to ultimately 

“enhance peacetime-wartime integration.” 25  In 2021, the secretary of the 

Guiyang Provincial Party Committee, Chen Yiqin, noted in a speech that, 

pursuant to requirements from the CMC, NDMD, and Southern Theater 

Command Party Committee, the NDMS’s “war preparation mission has 

been strengthened,” and achievements in the system have been made 

contributing to the province’s social and economic development. 26  In 2022, 

National Defense  ran a full-page advertisement celebrating the contribution 

of ten Chinese individuals to the NDMS and explained that “national 

defense mobilization is born of war, it marches toward war, and the master it 

serves is war. Ensuring victory in war is the mission the NDMS has chosen 

for itself.” 27  Without abandoning their continued obligations in economic 

construction, NDMS implementors were clearly signaling that the longtime 

policy of prioritizing economic construction over warfighting had come to 

an end. 

After the 20th Party Congress in late 2022, PLA media began coalescing 

around the line of needing a “war-oriented national defense mobilization” 

system. The  Chinese Militia  editorial board wrote, “from beginning to end, 

the NDMS in the new era never lost sight of preparing for war, the strong 

enemy, or victory in battle; it has assumed the responsibility for war-oriented        

> 24 Li Xuanliang et al., “ 谱写国防动员建设新篇章 —— 以习近平同志为核心的党中央领导和推
> 进强军兴军纪实之九 ” [Writing a New Chapter in National Defense Mobilization Construction:
> Nine Documents on the Leadership of the Party Central Committee with Xi Jinping at the Core
> on Promoting a Strong and Prosperous Military], Xinhua, October 7, 2017, http://www.xinhuanet.
> com//politics/2017-10/07/c_1121767974.htm.
> 25 Jin Zhuanglong, “ 开创新时代军民融合深度发展新局面 ” [Create a New Situation for In-Depth
> Development of Military-Civil Fusion in the New Era], Xinhua, July 16, 2018, http://www.xinhuanet.
> com/politics/2018-07/16/c_1123133733.htm.
> 26 Xu Shaoting, “ 谌贻琴 :奋力推进贵州国防动员工作高质量发展 ” [Chen Yiqin: Strive to Promote
> the High-Quality Development of National Defense Mobilization in Guizhou], Xinhua, January 8,
> 2021, http://m.xinhuanet.com/gz/2021-01/08/c_1126959685.htm.
> 27 Mo Fuchun and Wang Lingshuo, “ 动员大舞台 奋斗天地宽 ” [Mobilizing on the Grand Stage,
> Struggling across the Breadth of Heaven and Earth], PLA Daily , September 29, 2022, http://www.81.
> cn/gfbmap/content/2022-09/29/content_325024.htm.

Richter and Wang  – Chapter 3  • 73 

national defense mobilization construction.” 28  In an NDMD meeting to 

study the lessons of the 20th Party Congress, NDMD director and NDMC 

secretary general Lieutenant General Liu Faqing delivered a speech urging 

the importance of “strengthening the alignment of warfighting organs with 

war preparations and returning the main part of [our] work to the correct 

path of mobilization preparation” for war or emergency. 29  Following these 

documents, PLA media has repeatedly emphasized the “war orientation” of 

national defense mobilization work. 30 

## An Emerging War-Oriented Mission Set 

PLA discussions regarding the specific missions that a war-oriented 

NDMS should be able to perform remain ongoing. While no single source is 

authoritative, some recent academic research and media articles offer insights. 

Proposed missions range from a continuous deepening of the NDMS into 

civilian economic development—albeit after rebalancing priorities between 

security and development—to a list of tasks that would support, sustain, and 

enable PLA operations in a prospective great-power war. 

One of the most conservative proposals was offered in 2017 when 

AMS researcher Xu Peng argued that the NDMS should synthesize the 

contradiction between “the new requirements for national defense and 

military construction” resulting from an ongoing revolution in military 

affairs and the “relatively limited resource support that will exist for a certain 

period of time.” According to Xu, China should “accelerate construction of 

a modern NDMS with Chinese characteristics” that takes “mobilization as 

the traction, economic and social development as support, and ensuring 

victory in modern war as the core—taking emergency response and                

> 28 “奏响建设打仗型国防动员最强音 ” [A Clarion Call for War-Oriented National Defense Mobilization
> Construction], Chinese Militia 8 (2022), http://www.81.cn/rmjz_203219/zgmb/2022nd8q/
> jsy_242650/10196251.html .
> 29 Han Dezhong and Liu Dechao, “ 军委国防动员部组织部机关和直附属单位 2022 年度总结表
> 彰和学习贯彻 党的二十大精神体会汇报交流 ” [Organs of the Organization Department of
> the National Defense Mobilization Department of the Central Military Commission and Units
> Directly Subordinate to It: 2022 Annual Summary Recognition and Learning Implementation,
> Report and Exchange on the Spirit of the 20th National Congress of the Communist Party of China],
> Chinese Militia , 2023, http://www.81.cn/rmjz_203219/zgmb/2023nd2q/bkyw_244656/16207848.
> html. “Mobilization preparation” [ 动员准备 ] as defined in the 2011 Junyu refers to peacetime
> preparations for rapid and effective implementation of national defense mobilization as precaution
> against war or disaster. Academy of Military Science All-Military Military Terminology Committee,
> 军语 [Junyu] (Beijing: Academy of Military Science Publishing House, 2011), 36–37.
> 30 See, for example, Mo and Wang, “ 动员大舞台 奋斗天地宽 ”; and Chen Lixin, “ 构建打仗型国防动
> 员新格局 ” [Build a New Layout of a War-Oriented National Defense Mobilization System], People’s
> Daily , January 31, 2023, http://www.81.cn/jfjbmap/content/1/2023-01/31/07/2023013107_pdf.pdf. 74 •The PLA in a Complex Security Environment

stability maintenance and service construction as supplemental tasks.” 31 

This proposed direction is purely additive, accepting no trade-offs between 

subsidization and warfighting. It maintained that future NDMS missions 

should not abandon the emergency response or civilian development tasks 

it accepted under the policy of subsidization but should additionally restore 

warfighting support as the system’s main task. Xu’s long-term vision for the 

NDMS requires that by 2050 the system be fully capable of “ensuring victory 

in informationized wars, responding to emergencies, and serving economic 

and social development.” 32 

Major General An Weiping, then Northern Theater Command 

deputy chief of staff and former director of the Shenyang Military Region 

Headquarters Mobilization Department, offered a more war-oriented 

mission set in 2019. He proposed his mission set in the AMS-published 

journal  National Defense , arguing that the NDMS should focus on three 

major tasks: (1) mobilize civilian transportation to meet temporary surges 

in demand, (2) supplement PLA information operations, and (3) stopgap 

PLA maintenance personnel shortages. 33  “Mobilizing civilian transport” 

entails imposing military capacity standards on civilian trucks and roll-on/ 

roll-off ships in peacetime, pre-positioning transportation assets in advance 

of a conflict, and deploying rapid response teams to conduct emergency 

repairs in transit during a conflict. Immediately following the outbreak of 

war, the NDMS may mobilize civilian transportation capacity to rapidly 

deploy and continue flowing forces to the front lines. “Supplementing PLA 

information operations” primarily entails integrating civilian reconnaissance 

assets (e.g., civil maritime domain awareness and emergency rescue) into 

military systems to fill gaps as PLA assets become degraded in a conflict. 

“Stopgapping PLA maintenance personnel shortages” acknowledges the 

PLA’s current “maintenance support capability for high-tech equipment is 

relatively weak,” requiring wartime mobilization of civilian professionals to 

maintain combat platforms and their digitized systems. 

Another leading PLA officer suggested that deterrence should be 

a central mission for the NDMS. In March 2023, the deputy political 

commissar of the Shanghai Garrison organized directly under the CMC 

NDMD, Major General Wei Changjin, insisted that national defense 

mobilization would “have the function of strategic deterrence” in “great-      

> 31 Xu Peng, “ 加强国防动员战略管理 ” [Strengthen the Strategic Management of National Defense
> Mobilization], Chinese Public Administration 386, no. 8 (2017): 119–20.
> 32 Ibid.
> 33 An Weiping, “ 联合作战国防动员问题研究 ” [A Study on the National Defense Mobilization for
> Joint Operations], National Defense , no. 11 (2019): 38–41.

Richter and Wang  – Chapter 3  • 75 

power games.” 34  He also insisted it was necessary for the PLA to “use various 

strategic means, including national defense mobilization and reserve forces, 

to build a strategic system that effectively deters and defeats the enemy.” 35  A

January 2023  PLA Daily  article made a similar case, arguing mobilization 

can deter the United States. The authors asserted that national defense 

mobilization “naturally has a strong deterrent function” and that it is a key 

component of China’s response to “the threat of ‘hybrid war’ launched by 

some hegemonic forces,” clearly indicating the United States and its allies. 36 

Other PLA research further developed the linkage between the NDMS, 

a strategic system, and deterrence. According to researchers from the 

AMS War Studies Institute, constructing an integrated national strategic 

system would change the NDMS by “breaking the segmentation and ‘go 

it alone’ pattern between military and civilian,” integrating the currently 

scattered institutional setup, and producing an NDMS more responsive to 

central management. Moreover, the authors argued that national defense 

mobilization exhibited at sufficient scale could delay or deter enemy 

actions—including deterring the “strong enemy” of the United States—by 

demonstrating power and a will to fight. 37 

## Addressing Enduring Deficiencies in the NDMS 

PLA and government officials have long noted deficiencies in the NDMS 

that restrict its effectiveness for wartime mobilization. Officials oft note that 

the existing legal framework does not establish a clear chain of command 

between military leaders and local authorities and that the system remains 

hampered by unclear definitions of powers and responsibilities for wartime       

> 34 Wang Lingshuo and Wang Fei, “ 共绘高质量发展新图景 —— 军队代表委员热议加强国防
> 动员和后备力量建设 ” [Collectively Drawing a New Picture of High-Quality Development:
> Military Representatives Passionately Discuss Strengthening National Defense Mobilization
> and Reserve Force Building], National Defense , March 10, 2023, http://www.81.cn/gfbmap/
> content/21/2023-03/10/01/2023031001_pdf.pdf.
> 35 Wang and Wang, “ 共绘高质量发展新图景 —— 军队代表委员热议加强国防动员和后备力量建
> 设”; and Chai Hua et al., “ 八一勋章获得者、战斗英雄韦昌进 —— 坚守阵地岂止在战场 ” [Wei
> Changjin, Recipient of the Bayi Medal and a War Hero—Standing His Ground Not Only on the
> Battlefield], Ministry of National Defense (PRC), August 22, 2021, http://www.mod.gov.cn/gfbw/
> gfjy_index/xjdx/4892553.html.
> 36 Yu Yunxian and Zhang Pengxuan, “ 奋力实现建军一百年奋斗目标系列谈丨加强国防动员和后
> 备力量建设 ” [A Discussion Series on Striving to Reach the Goal of the Military’s 100-Year Struggle
> | Strengthen National Defense Mobilization and Reserve Force Building], Ministry of National
> Defense (PRC), January 3, 2023, http://www.mod.gov.cn/gfbw/gfdy/zzdy/4929797.html.
> 37 Yu Sen, Wang Xiongchun, and Rao Kan, “ 依托一体化目家战略体系和能力提升国防动员能力 ”
> [Relying on Integrated National Strategic Systems and Capabilities to Enhance National Defense
> Mobilization Capabilities], China Military Science , no. 3 (2022): 72–73.

76  • The PLA in a Complex Security Environment 

mobilization, inefficient operational support linkages, and insufficient 

connections between theater command and mobilization offices. 38  The 2010 

National Defense Mobilization Law delegates the “organization, direction, 

and coordination” of national defense mobilization activities to military 

districts and national defense mobilization commissions, but the provincial 

and local governments manage the mobilization work. In practice, uncertain 

chains of command have resulted in bureaucratic infighting and inhibited 

the development of organizational experience. 

PLA authors noted that mobilization offices throughout the system 

consisted primarily of personnel working mobilization duties as a collateral 

assignment. A small number of full-time cadres struggle to carry out 

mobilization tasks in competition with other government priorities. 39  In 

2015, authors affiliated with the National Defense Mobilization Research 

and Development Center of the National Development and Reform 

Commission (NDRC) complained that the scope of responsibilities for 

military commands and government organizations at every level was 

unclear, as was an understanding of how those responsibilities are altered 

in war or emergencies, resulting in both overlaps and gaps in mobilization 

actions. 40  In 2016 the CCP Central Committee, State Council, and CMC 

issued “Opinions on the Integrated Development of Economic Construction 

and National Defense Construction,” which serves as a programmatic 

document for integrated economic and national defense construction in 

the Xi Jinping era.  It signaled the implementation of reforms to improve 

institutional mechanisms, policies and regulations, and development models 

so that “economic construction can provide stronger material foundation 

for national defense construction, and national defense construction will 

provide a stronger security guarantee for economic construction.” 41 

Between 2016 and 2020, the majority of NDMS reforms focused on 

the PLA’s internal mobilization structure, severing government control of          

> 38 Zheng Weibo, “ 探索构建融入联合作战指挥体系的省级国防动员指挥机构 ” [Explore the
> Construction of Provincial Defense Mobilization Command Structures That Are Integrated into
> the Joint Operational Command System], National Defense , July 1, 2018.
> 39 Guo Zhonghou, Lu Chun, and Hu Yue, “ 国民经济动员球体报机制研究 ” [A Study of the Reporting
> Mechanisms for Submitting National Economic Mobilization Demands], China Military Science,
> October 20, 2019.
> 40 “国民经济动员机制的深化路径研究 ” [Research on the Deepening Path of the National Economic
> Mobilization Mechanism], Civil Service Journals Network, April 16, 2023, https://www.21ks.net/
> lunwen/guominjingjilunwen/29726.html.
> 41 “中共中央 国务院 中央军委印发 ‘关于经济建设和国防建设融合发展的意见 ’” [The
> Chinese Communist Party Central Committee, State Council, and Central Military Commission
> Publish “Opinions on the Integrated Development of Economic Construction and National
> Defense Construction”], State Council (PRC), Press Release, July 21, 2016, http://www.gov.cn/
> zhengce/2016-07/21/content_5093488.htm.

Richter and Wang  – Chapter 3  • 77 

military units and associated resources at the provincial level and below and 

establishing new institutions tasked with strengthening the PRC’s defense 

industrial base. However, through 2021, significant deficiencies within the 

NDMS restrained the confidence of NDMD officials tasked with planning 

and effectively implementing war mobilization actions. At the 31st meeting 

of the Standing Committee of the 13th NPC in October 2021, the director 

of the NDMD at the time, Sheng Bin, proposed reforms to the NDMS to 

optimize the institutional framework, adjust the NDMC office structure, 

improve military-civilian connections for command and operation, and 

make overall improvements to the national defense policy system. 42 

NDMS reforms accelerated shortly after the 20th NPC in October 

2021. Xi’s work report for the 20th NPC included the statement that “we will 

improve our national defense mobilization capacity and the development 

of our reserve forces, and we will modernize  our border, coastal, and air 

defense.... We will consolidate and boost unity between the military and the 

government and between the military and the people.” 43  These comments did 

not dramatically differ from those made by Hu Jintao in his 17th and 18th 

NPC work reports or even by Xi in his 19th NPC work report. 44  However, 

it appears that this time signaled changes would soon be implemented 

to streamline national defense mobilization mechanisms and establish a 

legislative mechanism to identify, prepare, and rapidly mobilize resources 

when required. 

## NDMS Reforms for a New Era 

Since 2016, the PRC has created institutions and passed legislation 

intended to strengthen and clarify national defense mobilization authorities,     

> 42 Standing Committee of the National People’s Congress (PRC), “Decision of the Standing Committee
> of the National People’s Congress to Provisionally Adjust the Application of the Provisions of Relevant
> Laws during the Period of Deepening the Reform of National Defense Mobilization Systems,”
> October 23, 2021, available at https://www.lawinfochina.com/display.aspx?lib=law&id=36703.
> 43 Xi Jinping, “Full Text of the Report to the 20th National Congress of the Communist Party of China:
> Hold High the Great Banner of Socialism with Chinese Characteristics and Strive in Unity to Build
> a Modern Socialist Country in All Respects,” Embassy of the PRC in Malaysia, October 26, 2022,
> http://my.china-embassy.gov.cn/eng/zgxw/202210/t20221026_10792358.htm.
> 44 Hu Jintao, “Full Text of Hu Jintao’s Report at 17th Party Congress: Hold High the Great Banner
> of Socialism with Chinese Characteristics and Strive for New Victories in Building a Moderately
> Prosperous Society in All Respects,” China Daily , October 24, 2007, https://www.chinadaily.com.
> cn/china/2007-10/24/content_6204564.htm; Hu Jintao, “Full Text of Hu Jintao’s Report at 18th
> Party Congress,” available from Embassy of the PRC in Nepal, November 18, 2012, http://np.china-
> embassy.gov.cn/eng/Diplomacy/201211/t20121118_1586373.htm; and “Xi Jinping’s Work Report at
> the 19th Party Congress,” Xinhua, October 18, 2017, http://www.xinhuanet.com/politics/19cpcnc/
> zb/kms/index.htm.

78  • The PLA in a Complex Security Environment 

streamline coordination mechanisms, and leverage the potential of China’s 

professional and technical base to bolster the PLA with the necessary 

capabilities for future warfare. 

## National Defense Mobilization Department 

In January 2016 the PLA publicly announced the establishment of the 

NDMD, which is responsible for national defense mobilization planning, 

coordination, reserve and militia force management, civil air defense and 

border defense operations, and command of provincial military districts. 45 

The NDMD subsequently led the transformation of the military district 

system throughout China, standardizing structures, and implemented 

systems to manage national defense education, recruit and organize reserve 

and militia forces, and draw on the resource potential of China’s provinces 

to support the operational requirements of the CMC and the theater 

commands. 46 

The NDMD also assumed the role of leading the day-to-day activities 

of the national-level NDMC. The commission is a deliberative and planning 

body jointly led by the State Council and CMC and comprising senior party, 

military, and government officials responsible for developing and organizing 

national resources to support the PRC’s national defense requirements. 47  In 

this role, the NDMD led initiatives to improve coordination across military 

and government institutions to develop manpower, infrastructure, material, 

and technological capacity necessary to support national defense. In order 

to support the planning and execution of national defense mobilization, 

the NDMD also led efforts to systematize and informatize government 

collection, aggregation, and reporting of data on mobilization potential. 48 

While its efforts crossed a myriad of institutions, the NDMD worked most 

closely with the NDRC Economic and Defense Coordinated Development 

Department, which was the lead institution for economic mobilization 

within the NDMS, and the Ministry of Industry and Information Technology.       

> 45 “China Releases Guideline on Military Reform,” Xinhua, January 2, 2016, http://www.china.org.cn/
> china/2016-01/02/content_37439478.htm.
> 46 Zheng, “ 探索构建融入联合作战指挥体系的省级国防动员指挥机构 .”
> 47 Hua Hao, “ 改革开放以来我国国防动员法规建设的实践与启示 ” [Practice and Enlightenment of
> China’s National Defense Mobilization Law Construction since Reform and Opening Up], National
> Defense , May 2019.
> 48 See, for example, Ding Wenyuan, Wu Yong, and Jia Yong, “2021 年全国国防动员潜力数据资料集
> 中会 ” [The 2021 National Defense Mobilization Potential Data Collection Meeting], China National
> Defense News , July 9, 2021, https://www.81.cn/dy/2021-07/09/content_10060054.htm.

Richter and Wang  – Chapter 3  • 79 

## Military-Civilian Fusion Development Committee 

In an effort to enhance military-civilian coordination in science 

and technology to improve not only overall economic development and 

military capabilities but also national defense mobilization potential, the 

PRC established the Military-Civilian Fusion Development Committee 

in 2017. 49  Notably, then vice premier Zhang Gaoli was designated to lead 

the committee’s subordinate Military-Civilian Fusion Office, which is 

responsible for the day-to-day coordination of economic and national 

defense construction related to science and technology. This role is usually 

reserved for a lower-ranking official. 50  Zhang’s appointment was almost 

certainly meant to emphasize the importance of military-civilian fusion to 

Xi Jinping’s overall national social and economic development strategy and 

recognize the vast challenges associated with implementation. 

The concept of military-civilian fusion is not new. Dating back to at 

least the 1950s, it embodies the efforts of PRC leaders to find synergies 

between economic development and military modernization and balance 

investment across each system. The establishment of the 2017 variant of the 

military-civilian fusion system is a revitalization of this enduring struggle to 

solve problems in China’s defense industry, such as bureaucratic inertia and 

poor efficiency. 51 

Between 2017 and 2019, Military-Civilian Fusion Committees and 

Offices were established within governments at the provincial level and 

below across the PRC to lead integration of military-civilian institutions 

focused on science and technology and coordinate joint military-civilian 

research, development, and production. However, the institutionalization 

of the offices varied, with some aligned under local Development and 

Reform Commissions and others subordinated to the local Office of 

Science, Technology, and Industry for National Defense. In general, the 

functions of these offices are distinct from those responsible for national 

defense mobilization, though in some localities the Military-Civilian Fusion 

Committees also manage some national defense mobilization functions, 

suggesting variation in the interpretation of roles.     

> 49 “习近平主持军民融合委员会全体会议 ” [Xi Jinping Presided over the Plenary Meeting of the
> Commission on Civil-Military Integration], Phoenix Television, June 17, 2017, https://news.ifeng.
> com/a/20170620/51287296_0.shtml.
> 50 Choi Chi-yuk , “In Unusual Move, Xi Appoints Top Party Leader to Lead Daily Affairs of Key
> Committee,” South China Morning Post , June 21, 2017, https://www.scmp.com/news/china/policies-
> politics/article/2099248/xi-jinping-further-consolidates-power-commission.
> 51 Elsa B. Kania and Lorand Laskai, “Myths and Realities of China’s Military-Civil Fusion Strategy,”
> Center for a New American Security, January 28, 2021, https://www.cnas.org/publications/reports/
> myths-and-realities-of-chinas-military-civil-fusion-strategy.

80  • The PLA in a Complex Security Environment 

In 2019, the functions of the Military-Civilian Fusion Development 

Committee were transferred to the NDRC. 52  This transition was part of 

broader 2018 State Council institutional reforms and may have been initiated 

to centralize management of all economic mobilization mechanisms under 

a single organization. 53 

## Joint Office of the National Defense Mobilization Commission 

In late 2022, the National Defense Mobilization Commission ( 国家 

国防动员委员会 ) transitioned to the Joint Office of the National Defense 

Mobilization Commission ( 国家国防动员委员会联合办公 ), also known 

as the Joint Office. 54  While little information is available on the specific 

functions of the Joint Office, one source reports that it was established to 

strengthen the CCP’s centralized and unified leadership and coordination of 

national emergency management and mobilization work. 55  The leadership 

structure remains unclear but likely continues to include senior CCP 

leaders, including the premier of the State Council, secretary general of the 

State Council, and director of the CMC NDMD. However, the national-level 

General Office of the NDMC might have transitioned from the NDMD to the 

NDRC, suggesting a significant transition of mobilization coordination from 

the military to the government. According to a media report, in November 

2022, Guo Lanfeng, a member of the leading party group of the NDRC 

and full-time deputy director of the Joint Office of the NDMC, led a team 

to Beijing to investigate the construction of civil air defense projects. An 

NDRC website asserts that, as of 2022, Guo served concurrently as the head 

of the NDRC National Defense Office (NDO) and the head of the NDMC 

General Office, a role formally assigned to the CMC NDMD director. 56        

> 52 National Development and Reform Commission (PRC), “ 职能配置与内设机构 ” [Functional
> Configuration and Internal Organizations], https://www.ndrc.gov.cn/fzggw/bnpz/?code=&state=123.
> 53 “( 两会受权发布 )国务院机构改革方案 ” [(The Two Sessions Are Authorized to Issue) the State
> Council’s Institutional Reform Plan)], Xinhua, March 17, 2018, http://www.xinhuanet.com/
> politics/2018lh/2018-03/17/c_1122552185.htm.
> 54 Li Hang, “ 在国防动员实践中巩固提高一体化国家战略体系和能力 ” [In the Practice of National
> Defense Mobilization, We Should Consolidate and Improve the Integrated National Strategic System
> and Capabilities], People’s Daily , October 18 2023, http://www.rmlt.com.cn/2023/1018/685342.shtml.
> According to the article, Li Hang serves as secretary of the Party Leadership Group and director of
> the Jiangsu Provincial National Defense Mobilization Office.
> 55 “国家国动委联合办公室 ” [Joint Office of the National Mobilization Commission], Estrong, May
> 25, 2023, http://www.hivpaper.cn/zxzx/10440.html.
> 56 “国家国防动员委员会联合办公室领导来京调研人民防空工作 ” [Leaders of the Joint Office of the
> National Defense Mobilization Committee Came to Beijing to Investigate Civil Air Defense Work],
> People’s Government of Beijing Municipality, Press Release, November 4, 2022, http://www.beijing.
> gov.cn/ywdt/gzdt/202211/t20221104_2852101.html.

Richter and Wang  – Chapter 3  • 81 

These changes indicate that the role of the NDRC system has been 

elevated to manage the day-to-day work of both military-civilian fusion and 

national defense mobilization. While the NDRC NDO has long managed 

economic mobilization, its planning responsibilities appear to have 

expanded to serve as the predominant working office for national defense 

mobilization, potentially freeing the NDMD to focus on war planning and 

requirements generation. 

Within governments at the provincial level and below, NDMCs were 

likewise redesignated Joint Offices of the NDMC under the overall leadership 

of the party committee. 57  Development and Reform Commissions across 

China were appointed as responsible for national defense mobilization 

administration and assumed control of local Civil Air Defense Offices, 

which were designated to serve as National Defense Mobilization Offices 

(NDMOs). 58 

## National Defense Mobilization Offices 

In December 2022, ceremonies to establish NDMOs began taking place 

across China. By March 2023, most provincial-level governments in the 

eastern half of the country had performed similar ceremonies. According to 

official government media reports associated with these events, NDMOs are 

established on the basis of local Civil Air Defense Offices. They coordinate 

mobilization activities across government organizations, conduct surveys 

about mobilization potential, maintain mobilization databases, draft 

mobilization plans, assume mobilization command, and manage the 

execution of mobilization in emergencies and wartime. 59  As an extension 

of their Civil Air Defense Office responsibilities, NDMOs also continue 

to manage military facilities protection, civil air defense construction 

management, disaster prevention, education, and response, in addition to 

wartime air defense responsibilities.        

> 57 Liu Juan, Wen Xiao, and Jia Yong, “ 多地国防动员办公室挂牌后 ,地方党委、政府 —— 把国防动
> 员摆上位主动抓 ” [After the National Defense Mobilization Offices in Many Places Were Put on
> the Spot, Local Party Committees and Governments Took the Initiative to Grasp National Defense
> Mobilization], Ministry of National Defense (PRC), April 14, 2023, http://www.mod.gov.cn/gfbw/
> gfdy/zzdy/16216922.html.
> 58 “Shanghai Putuo District National Defense Mobilization Office Was Officially Established,” iNews,
> March 16, 2023, https://inf.news/en/world/7113a80acbe16a6bbbdb0afc9bd4693e.html.
> 59 Xue Zhiliang and Hou Zhengzhou, “ 合力唱好国防动员 ‘一台戏 ’” [Unite to Sing the “One Play” of
> National Defense Mobilization], PLA Daily , February 24, 2023, http://www.81.cn/szb_223187/gfbszbxq/
> index.html?paperName=zggfb&paperDate=2023-02-24&paperNumber=03&articleid=716378u.; and
> “Shanghai Putuo District National Defense Mobilization Office Is Officially Listed,” Shanghai Putuo
> Media Center, March 16, 2023, https://inf.news/en/world/7113a80acbe16a6bbbdb0afc9bd4693e.html.

82  • The PLA in a Complex Security Environment 

While the functions of NDMOs are not new to governments at the 

provincial level and below, their establishment is being portrayed as a major 

reform to the NDMS. According to PLA authors, there has long existed 

a misunderstanding that national defense construction is a matter for 

the armed forces—that is, that “the military runs national defense.” This 

reform has adjusted national defense mobilization “from the provincial MD 

system to the local government at the same level.” 60  PLA authors report 

that under the new system the provincial military district is the leading 

organ of local military work, serving as the military work department of 

the local party committee at the same level, to guide mobilization work as 

the “chief of staff ” based on military requirements. The military districts 

should partner with NDMOs to ensure mobilization and the provision of 

required resources; NDMOs are designated to work across government 

organizations at their level. 61 

## Legislative and Regulatory Reforms 

In 2020 the PRC began making changes to the legislative and regulatory 

mechanisms necessary for national defense. The aggregate of the new laws 

and regulations establishes the foundation for broader reforms partly 

intended to improve national defense mobilization capabilities, capacity, 

and support. In November 2020 the PRC adopted its first-ever Veterans 

Protection Law, followed by the adoption of a revised National Defense Law 

in December 2020. 62  In August 2021, it released a new Military Service Law, 

and in December 2022 the Reserve Personnel Law was adopted. 63  In March 

2023 the PRC’s first legislation specific to overall reserve manpower issues,           

> 60 Xue and Hou, “ 合力唱好国防动员 ‘一台戏 ’”; and “ 济南国防动员 :建设 ‘准军事化 ’机关 ,锻
> 造全 过硬国防动员铁军队伍 ” [Jinan National Defense Mobilization: Build a “Quasi-Military”
> Organ and Forge an All-Round and Excellent National Defense Mobilization Iron Army], Jinan
> National Defense Mobilization Office, March 14, 2023, http://jnrf.jinan.gov.cn/art/2023/3/14/
> art_11611_4771755.html.
> 61 Ibid.
> 62 National People’s Congress (PRC), “Veterans Law of the People’s Republic of China,” November
> 11, 2020, http://www.npc.gov.cn/englishnpc/c2759/c23934/202112/t20211209_384819.html; and
> National People’s Congress (PRC), “Law of the People’s Republic of China on National Defense,”
> December 26, 2020, http://www.npc.gov.cn/englishnpc/c2759/c23934/202109/t20210914_384857.
> html.
> 63 “China Updates Military Service Law,” National People’s Congress (PRC), Press Release, August
> 23, 2021, http://en.npc.gov.cn.cdurl.cn/2021-08/23/c_678200.htm; and National People’s Congress
> (PRC), “ 中华共和国预备役员法 ” [Law of the People’s Republic of China on Reserve Personnel],
> December 30, 2022, available at http://lawdb.cncourt.org/show.php?fid=153938.

Richter and Wang  – Chapter 3  • 83 

the Reserve Personnel Law, went into effect. 64  In April 2023 the PLA adopted 

a revised Regulation on Conscription, the first revision since 2001. 65 

Common themes across the newly promulgated laws include the 

clarification of military and civilian roles and responsibilities for national 

defense, the rights and protections of military personnel, wartime 

mobilization requirements, and adjustments to the recruiting and 

conscription criteria to prioritize the accession and retention of educated 

and skilled soldiers. Notably, veterans and reservists are now viewed as 

critical sources of skill and experience that quickly bolster the PLA’s combat 

capabilities, particularly in wartime. Further, the laws and regulations raise 

the age of recruitment-eligible personnel and institute protections for female 

soldiers. These changes expand mobilization potential and remove some 

social constraints to access a broader segment of society. 

Laws enacted since 2021 may also signal future changes in the 

management of militias. Since the PLA’s 2016 reforms, China has actively 

sought to create a “new-type militia force system” ( 新型民兵力量体系 ) to 

support the needs of future informatized warfare and domestic emergency 

response operations. These new-type militias seek to absorb personnel 

with specialized and professional skills into formations to support national 

defense requirements. 66  The organization and training of such militias appear 

to be a major focus for the new NDMOs at the provincial level and below. 

However, the 2021 Military Service Law makes no mention of militia forces. 

This is a significant shift from previous versions of the law, which specified 

that the PRC military service system “combines conscripts with volunteers 

and a militia with a reserve service.” Chapter 6 of the 1984, 1998, and 2011 

Military Service Law was dedicated to the militia and stated that “the militia      

> 64 Previous legislation provided regulations for reserve officers and military manpower in general, but
> not for the overall reserve force. National People’s Congress (PRC), “Reserve Officers Law of the
> People’s Republic of China,” May 10, 1995, http://www.npc.gov.cn/zgrdw/englishnpc/Law/2007-
> 12/12/content_1383717.htm; National People’s Congress (PRC), “Military Service Law of the People’s
> Republic of China,” December 29, 1998, http://www.npc.gov.cn/zgrdw/englishnpc/Law/2007-12/13/
> content_1383961.htm; and National People’s Congress (PRC), “Law of the People’s Republic of China
> on Reserve Personnel,” December 30, 2022, http://www.npc.gov.cn/npc/c30834/202212/675bfdf57
> 2d1440d89e29080e7310b6f.shtml.
> 65 State Council (PRC), “ 征兵工作条例 ” [Regulations on Conscription], April 1, 2023, http://www.
> gov.cn/zhengce/content/2023-04/12/content_5750986.htm.
> 66 Li Shenghua and Bi Shengyi, “ 加快构建新型民兵力量体系 ” [Accelerate Construction of the New-
> Type Militia Force System], China Military Online, August 31, 2017, http://www.81.cn/mb/2017-
> 08/31/content_7071618.htm; and “ 重点编建 ,打造新型民兵应急力量 ” [Focus on the Establishment
> and Building of a New Type of Militia Emergency Response Force], PLA Daily , July 28, 2021, http://
> www.81.cn/gfbmap/content/2021-07/28/content_295152.htm.

84  • The PLA in a Complex Security Environment 

is an armed organization of the masses not divorced from production and is 

an assisting and reserve force for the PLA.” 67 

The elimination of all mention of reserves from the Military Service 

Law was likely done to clearly differentiate reserve and militia forces and 

continue the transition of all reserve forces to the CMC. These reforms 

institutionalized the inseparable role of active and reserve forces in wartime 

missions. Militia forces, however, remain loosely defined and managed by 

various People’s Armed Forces departments under the control of provincial 

military districts and military subdistricts. It is possible that additional 

legislation is forthcoming regarding militia service, pending reforms to the 

NDMS. 

Over the next two years, China will likely amend additional laws specific 

to the NDMS to clarify the roles, missions, rights, and responsibilities of the 

military, local governments, commercial enterprises, and society to support 

national defense mobilization based on institutional adjustments carried 

out since 2020. On October 24, 2021, the Standing Committee of the NPC 

announced that it planned to amend and improve the NDML, the Civil Air 

Defense Law, the National Defense Transportation Law, and the National 

Defense Education Law. 68  Based on the national defense mobilization 

reforms carried out thus far, their date of promulgation, and their order of 

precedence, it is likely that the NDML, last amended in 2010, and the Civil 

Air Defense Law, last amended in 2009, will be released prior to any other 

law specific to the mobilization sector. 69  

> 67

Ministry of National Defense (PRC), “Military Service Law of the People’s Republic of China,” June 

29, 2021, http://eng.mod.gov.cn/xb/Publications/LR/4888367.html; National People’s Congress 

(PRC), “Military Service Law of the People’s Republic of China,” August 20, 2021, http://en.npc. 

gov.cn.cdurl.cn/2021-08/20/c_815291.htm; National People’s Congress (PRC), “Military Service 

Law of the People’s Republic of China,” May 31, 1984, available at https://www.refworld.org/ 

docid/4c31f5cd2.html; National People’s Congress (PRC), “Military Service Law of the People’s 

Republic of China,” December 13, 2007, http://www.npc.gov.cn/englishnpc/Law/2007-12/13/ 

content_1383961.htm; and National People’s Congress (PRC), “Military Service Law of the People’s 

Republic of China (2011 Amendment) [Effective],” December 11, 2018, available at https://govt. 

chinadaily.com.cn/s/201812/11/WS5c0f1ba9498eefb3fe46e8cc/military-service-law-of-the-peoples-

republic-of-china-2011-amendment-effective.html.  

> 68

Standing Committee of the National People’s Congress (PRC), “Decision of the Standing Committee 

of the National People’s Congress to Provisionally Adjust the Application of the Provisions of Relevant 

Laws during the Period of Deepening the Reform of National Defense Mobilization Systems.”  

> 69

General Office of the People’s Government of Guangdong Province (PRC), “ 中华人民共和国人民防 

空法 ” [Civil Air Defense Law of the People’s Republic of China], August 8, 2009, http://www.gd.gov. 

cn/zwgk/wjk/zcfgk/content/post_2524017.html; and “ 中华人民共和国国防动员法（全文） ” [Law 

of the People’s Republic of China on National Defense Mobilization (Full Text)], February 2, 2010, 

available at http://www.chinanews.com.cn/gn/news/2010/02-26/2141911.shtml. Richter and Wang  – Chapter 3  • 85 

## Prospects for an Improved and More War-Oriented NDMS 

The NDMS remains in an ongoing transition toward a new war-oriented 

objective after a decade-long focus on subsidizing domestic economic 

construction. In response to the CCP’s 2015 assessment of an increasingly 

complex security environment, the broader national defense mobilization 

apparatus has begun a wholesale effort to better understand mobilization 

requirements for modern war and emergency response. While the outcome 

of these ongoing reforms remains to be seen, CCP leaders clearly believe that 

the NDMS requires large structural and institutional adjustments. 

Over the last three years, changes to the NDMS have focused on structural 

readjustments, alignment and clarification of responsibilities, and definition 

of authorities to improve the efficiency of national defense mobilization 

work and tailor it to war mobilization requirements. Within the PLA, the 

CMC NDMD has assumed control over the planning and organization of 

defense mobilization, including recruitment and conscription of personnel 

and the formation of reserve and militia units—firmly establishing these as 

within the purview of the military. If early pronouncements are accurate, 

the NDRC has assumed control over the state’s planning and support of the 

military. Its responsibilities include approving national defense construction, 

detailing national resource potential for mobilization, leading military-

civilian fusion to build national defense capacity, and directing government 

support at all echelons to mobilize and organize mobilization activities— 

establishing these as the role of the government—in collaboration with the 

military and based on its specified requirements. 

This restructuring establishes the NDMD and NDRC NDO as partners 

in national defense mobilization, with clear responsibilities and authorities. 

These partnerships carry down through the echelons of government. At 

the provincial level and below, reform measures standardize organizations 

responsible for the day-to-day work of planning, organizing, and preparing 

for mobilization activities based on the guidance of government and 

military leadership, embodied under the local NDMC. On the surface, 

this standardization of responsibilities has the potential to streamline 

coordination mechanisms between the government and military based on 

a predictable organizational framework established throughout the country. 

NDMD, theater command, and military district planners would have clear 

interlocutors for all mobilization-related issues, without the historical 

variation across localities. Further, legislative reforms enacted thus far are 

intended to smooth the path for the military to tap into the most limited 86  • The PLA in a Complex Security Environment 

national resources during wars and emergencies—technically educated and 

trained human capital. 

However, whether these reforms will actually improve defense 

mobilization capabilities and capacity to support wartime requirements 

remains a question. While the apparent transition of responsibilities from 

the national-level NDMC General Office to the NDRC NDO appears 

significant, it should be noted that the NDRC has been charged with 

leading economic mobilization since the 1990s. Thus, the preponderance 

of mobilization work throughout the government has long been under the 

purview of the NDRC. 70  The reforms appear to free the military to focus 

on planning and preparing for national defense missions rather than on 

instituting revolutionary change to the NDMS, thus leading to questions 

of how the government institutions responsible for supporting military 

mobilization requirements are actually becoming more war-oriented. 

Whether greater civilian government responsibility for national defense 

mobilization work will in fact lead to a more war-oriented NDMS will also 

depend on the nature and degree of national-level oversight of provincial 

NDMOs and coordination with their PLA counterparts. Although civilian 

mobilization leaders are adopting the charge to embrace war-oriented work, 

clear national standards and continuous oversight will almost certainly be 

necessary to ensure a nationwide transition toward a warfighting focus. 

Moreover, while shifting mobilization work out of the PLA portfolio enables 

the military to focus on its warfighting missions, the separation likely creates 

additional coordination requirements with heavier burdens to coordinate 

between civilian mobilization activities in peacetime and military needs in 

wartime. Whether the NDRC and NDMD will coordinate efficiently during 

and after the NDMS’s war-oriented transition remains to be seen. 

The numerous leadership and organizational relationships that could 

hinder or facilitate national defense mobilization also remain unclear. 

Membership in the national-level NDMC in the wake of the 2023 PRC 

Institutional Reform Plan has yet to be publicly reported. 71  Given Xi Jinping’s 

predisposition to serve as the head of national security–related institutions, 

it raises the question of whether adjustments will be made to the NDMC 

leadership structure, which may necessitate changes to the NDML. Further,       

> 70 State Council and Central Military Commission (PRC), “ 国务院、中央军委关于成立国家国防
> 动员委员会的通知 ” [The State Council and the Central Military Commission on Notice on the
> Establishment of the National Defense Mobilization Committee], November 29, 1994, http://www.
> gov.cn/zhengce/content/2011-08/12/content_7081.htm.
> 71 “A Guide to China’s 2023 State Council Restructuring,” NPC Observer, https://npcobserver.
> com/2023/03/07/china-npc-2023-state-council-reorganization/#update, accessed 13 May 2023. Richter and Wang –Chapter 3 •87

as ongoing State Council reforms adjust the roles and authorities across 

the State Council ministries, it is plausible that the organizations actively 

participating in national defense mobilization planning and coordination at 

the ministerial level will be significantly reduced. 72 

Restraints to the NDMS’s war orientation also include the broad roles 

with which it is tasked—to support wartime and emergency response 

requirements. The designation of Civil Air Defense Offices as NDMOs and 

the establishment of specialized militias do not necessarily enhance wartime 

capabilities. Civil Air Defense Offices have long served as the organizational 

establishment for standing and predesignated but ad hoc emergency 

response units. 73  The majority of NDMO activities publicly discussed since 

December 2022 remain focused on the mobilization and training of units 

for disaster response and recovery tasks as well as on the preparation of 

civil air defense facilities, though some limited tactical air defense training 

is included. Certainly, many of these requirements are transferable to 

supporting wartime needs (e.g., assisting in recovery from enemy airstrikes 

in urban areas), but they have limited value for improving PLA combat 

service support and sustainment capabilities. 

In the near term, the real value of NDMOs to the NDMS may be 

threefold: (1) to serve as an instrument of political mobilization, (2) to 

enhance limited transportation and information mobilization capacity 

for PLA requirements, and (3) to provide an instrument of deterrence. 

In particular, the widespread announcement of NDMO establishment 

and the publication of national defense mobilization work meetings at 

provincial-level governments and below increase public awareness of 

defense mobilization, clarify the power and responsibilities of the NDMS, 

and outline the party’s expectations for how the government and private 

institutions should support national defense mobilization. Further, the 

numerous government media releases discussing NDMO and NDMC 

activities to improve the readiness of civil air defense shelters and recovery 

mechanisms for use during wartime signal to domestic audiences their 

association with national defense issues. These media releases may also 

be intended to signal to global audiences the willingness of the PRC to go   

> 72 From 2017 to 2018, approximately 26 State Council, party, and military organizations participated
> in national-level NDMC meetings. See Richter and Rosen, “China’s National Defense Mobilization
> System,” 37.
> 73 National People’s Congress (PRC), “Civil Air Defense Law of the People’s Republic of China,” January
> 1, 1997, http://www.china.org.cn/english/China/218752.htm.

88  • The PLA in a Complex Security Environment 

to war in defense of its sovereignty and territorial integrity, regardless of 

potential domestic restraints. 74 

For these signals to have a deterrent effect, however, Chinese leaders 

would need to demonstrate widespread, successful implementation 

of national defense mobilization efforts. It is not yet clear that the 

government has adopted Major General An Wenping’s recommendations 

for the wholesale integration of military requirements into civilian 

infrastructure maintenance plans or transportation platform production 

and pre-positioning for war. Additional research into municipal 

civil infrastructure plans and the degree of their coordination with 

mobilization exercises would be needed to monitor the actual effects of 

the NDMS transition and its ability to sustain the PLA during wartime. If 

implementation of war-oriented mobilization work lags behind CCP leader 

expectations or remains uneven in key theaters, the deterrent effect of the 

NDMS could be undermined, and the war-oriented objective could remain 

aspirational rather than implemented policy.  

> 74 See, for example, “2023 年全市国防动员（人民防空）工作暨全面从严治党工作会议召开 ” [In
> 2023, the City’s National Defense Mobilization (Civil Air Defense) Work and Comprehensive Strict
> Party Management Work Conference Was Held], Xuchang Municipal People’s Government Office
> (PRC), May 4, 2023, http://www.xuchang.gov.cn/ywdt/001005/20230430/4ca4bbb0-89fc-43f8-bc30-
> 416a559687da.html; and “ 鄂州市国动办调研小组赴浙江省宁波市学习考察 ” [The Research
> Team of Ezhou State Mobilization Office Went to Ningbo City, Zhejiang Province for Study and
> Inspection], Ezhou National Defense Mobilization Office (PRC), April 18, 2023, http://rfb.hubei.
> gov.cn/bmdt/dtyw/szrfbdt/202304/t20230427_4643728.shtml.

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

This chapter assesses the primary threats to the “China dream,” considers 

Chinese leaders’ plans to manage these threats, and concludes that the role of 

the People’s Liberation Army (PLA) will center on modernization, deterrence, 

and non-war missions. 

> MAIN ARGUMENT

The period from now through midcentury will be a critical one for Chinese 

leaders eager to ensure that the People’s Republic of China reaches its centenary 

in 2049. They have directed the PLA to focus on military modernization, 

deterrence, and support of the government’s efforts to incrementally change 

the status quo in China’s favor through non-war methods. Paradoxically, 

despite expanding security concerns, the military’s role in the coming decades 

will likely be fairly limited. Eager to minimize risks to the China dream, 

Chinese leaders have shown no interest in chancing a war with the U.S. 

over Taiwan. Knowing this, U.S. planners and decision-makers will need to 

consider coercion and gray-zone tactics as the principal Chinese military 

challenge in the near term and the deterrence of an attack on Taiwan as a 

long-term challenge. 

> POLICY IMPLICATIONS

• Taiwan will face an ongoing threat of Chinese coercion and gray-zone 

tactics through 2049. U.S. planners and decision-makers will need to 

focus on these challenges in the near term to midterm and find ways 

to reduce tensions between Taiwan and China. 

• Although unlikely, a Chinese attack to compel Taiwan’s unification 

remains a long-term threat. U.S. planners might need to consider 

options to maintain a credible, sustainable deterrence posture near 

Taiwan that lasts decades. A smaller, lighter posture could prove more 

sustainable but run a higher risk of battlefield failure in the event of 

hostilities. 

• China’s reluctance to risk war with the U.S. over Taiwan opens 

opportunities for crisis management. If the U.S. and China can 

strengthen crisis-management mechanisms and reduce tensions, the 

risk of war could stay low. Chapter 4 Lumbering toward the China Dream: 

# The PLA’s Strategic Mission 

# Through 2049 and Beyond 

## Timothy R. Heath 

The period from now through midcentury will be a critical one for 

Chinese leaders eager to realize the centenary of the People’s Republic 

of China (PRC) in 2049. The coming years will be difficult, owing to 

decelerating growth rates and an increasingly uncertain domestic and 

international environment. The military’s role in the coming decades will 

likely be fairly limited. Eager to reduce risks to the “China dream,” Chinese 

leaders have shown no interest in risking a war with the United States 

over Taiwan. Instead, they have directed the People’s Liberation Army 

(PLA) to focus on military modernization, deterrence, and support of the 

government’s efforts to incrementally change the status quo in China’s favor 

through coercion and non-war methods. U.S. planners and decision-makers 

might need to focus on the gray-zone challenges in the near term to midterm 

and consider deterrence near the Taiwan Strait a long-term issue that could 

span many more decades. 

This chapter is organized in the following fashion. The first section 

discusses the importance of the China dream in guiding the work of all 

elements of state power, including the military. Having largely achieved the 

country’s modernization, many of the remaining Chinese Communist Party 

(CCP) goals require at most incremental changes. However, some goals, 

such as unification with Taiwan, remain unfulfilled. The second section 

reviews the primary threats to the China dream in the coming years, many of 

which could intensify. The largest perils are domestic and include discontent 

over yawning inequality, corruption, diminishing opportunities, and poor 

governance. Economic-related interests abroad are expanding, and threats 

to them may grow more severe as well. Worsening tensions with the United  

> Timothy R. Heath is a Senior International Defense Researcher at the RAND Corporation.

92  • The PLA in a Complex Security Environment 

States also pose a danger, but Chinese leaders judge war as unlikely. The 

third section outlines how Chinese leaders intend to manage these myriad 

dangers. Paradoxically, even as they elevate the importance of security, 

Beijing envisions a limited, but important, role for the military. Chinese 

leaders, led by Xi Jinping, have outlined principles to guide decision-

making in the coming decades that will prioritize national development, the 

consolidation of CCP rule, security, risk reduction, and favorable changes 

to the international environment. The PLA’s role will accordingly center on 

modernization, deterrence, and non-war missions, including coercion and 

gray-zone tactics. 1

## The Importance of the China Dream and the Period of 

## Strategic Opportunity 

As is well known, the CCP aims to realize the nation’s revitalization 

(i.e., the China dream) by midcentury. According to Xi Jinping, this dream 

is “the goal of completing the building of a wealthy, powerful, democratic, 

civilized, and harmonious socialist modernized nation” by the centenary 

of the PRC’s founding. 2 To this end, the CCP has outlined ambitious, albeit 

vague, goals. Through 2035, the party hopes to “significantly increase” the 

country’s comprehensive national power, achieve a per capita GDP “on par 

with that of a mid-level developed country,” and become “one of the world’s 

most innovative countries.” Chinese leaders have also outlined goals to 

modernize the economy, the system of governance, and the armed forces. 3

These goals are so vaguely defined that they may be interpreted as having 

been largely achieved already. China’s economy is the second-largest in the 

world, and its per capita income reached $11,312 in 2020, placing it just 

shy of high-income status according to standards used by the World Bank. 4          

> 1For this study, I analyzed official Chinese documents, such as the 20th Party Congress report, the
> CCP’s Proposal for the 14th Year Program, and various speeches by CCP general secretary Xi Jinping.
> I also examined analysis and commentary provided in Chinese media sources, such as Xinhua, the
> People’s Daily , and the PLA Daily , as well as academic publications in both Western and Chinese
> sources.
> 2“习近平在参观《复兴之路》展览时强调 ” [Xi Jinping Addresses Exhibition on China’s
> Renaissance], Xinhua, November 29, 2012, http://news.xinhuanet.com/politics/2012-
> 11/29/c_113852724.htm.
> 3State Council Information Office of the People’s Republic of China (PRC), “Full Text of the Report
> to the 20th National Congress of the Communist Party of China,” October 25, 2022, https://english.
> www.gov.cn/news/topnews/202210/25/content_WS6357df20c6d0a757729e1bfc.html.
> 4Huo Li, “China’s GDP per Capita Just Passed $10,000, but What Does This Mean?” CGTN, January
> 17, 2020, https://news.cgtn.com/news/2020-01-17/China-s-GDP-per-capita-just-passed-10-000-
> but-what-does-this-mean--NkvMWAMYNO/index.html.

Heath  – Chapter 4  • 93 

The country has overseen a remarkable modernization of its military as well 

as improvements in its government capacity and technological innovation. 5

It has initiated the Belt and Road Initiative (BRI), an ambitious transnational 

geoeconomic infrastructure project. China has already become wealthy and 

powerful, with a comprehensive national power second only to that of the 

United States. 6 Not all goals have been achieved, of course. Most notably, 

China has failed to unify with Taiwan. But this failure did not prevent 

Beijing from judging its own performance as an unqualified success at the 

centenary of the CCP’s founding in 2021, a symbolic date arguably equal in 

importance to that of the anticipated centenary of the PRC’s establishment. 

In a speech commemorating the event, Xi expressed no bitterness, regret, 

or humiliation over the goals left unfulfilled. Rather, he judged the party’s 

achievements as “great and glorious.” 7

Whether Chinese leaders will take such a sanguine view of a failure 

to ensure Taiwan’s unification by midcentury is difficult to say. At the 20th 

Party Congress, Xi called unification a “natural requirement for realizing the 

rejuvenation of the Chinese nation.” 8 Some Western commentators claimed 

the statement implied a 2049 deadline. 9 However, Chinese media has made 

no such claim, nor has any Chinese official followed Xi’s statements with 

clarifying remarks about unification deadlines. In the past, Chinese leaders 

have expressed aspirations to achieve unification by key dates but have done 

nothing when the dates passed. In 2002, for example, Jiang Zemin expressed 

the hope of realizing Taiwan’s unification “at an early date,” which suggested 

the CCP’s 2021 centenary as a potential deadline. He added that the “Taiwan 

question must not be allowed to drag on indefinitely.” 10  Yet the date passed 

without apparent consequences for the leadership. Moreover, the year 2049 

is several decades away, which provides a politically convenient way for Xi 

to punt the Taiwan ball to his successors as Jiang Zemin did.          

> 5U.S. Department of Defense, Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of
> China 2022 (Washington, D.C., November 2022), https://www.defense.gov/Spotlights/2022-China-
> Military-Power-Report.
> 6Laura Silver, Kat Devlin, and Christine Huang, “Views of the Balance of Power between U.S. and
> China,” Pew Research Center, December 5, 2019, https://www.pewresearch.org/global/2019/12/05/
> views-of-the-balance-of-power-between-u-s-and-china-2019.
> 7“Full Text: Speech by Xi Jinping at a Ceremony Marking the Centenary of the CPC,” Xinhua, July
> 1, 2021, http://www.xinhuanet.com/english/special/2021-07/01/c_1310038244.htm.
> 8State Council Information Office (PRC), “Full Text of the Report to the 20th National Congress of
> the Communist Party of China.”
> 9Kevin Rudd, “The Return of Red China: Xi Jinping Brings Back Marxism,” Foreign Affairs , November
> 9, 2022, https://www.foreignaffairs.com/china/return-red-china.
> 10 “Full Text of Jiang Zemin Report to the 16th Party Congress,” Xinhua, November 17, 2002, available
> at http://www.china.org.cn/english/2002/Nov/49107.htm.

94  • The PLA in a Complex Security Environment 

In sum, the China dream has been largely, although not completely, 

achieved, which is why Xi has expressed such confidence that its realization 

is “now on an irreversible historical course.” 11  As long as these gains are 

preserved, the CCP’s judgment about its successful performance will 

probably hold. Its main task in the coming decades, then, will be to hold 

onto and not squander these achievements. How the CCP manages that task 

will determine the PLA’s roles and missions. 

## Challenges to Achieving the China Dream 

Success is hardly assured because the easy part of China’s rise is over. 

With its high growth rates and political stability, the Hu Jintao era (2002–12) 

may well stand as the “golden age” of CCP rule. 12  From 2001 to 2008, China’s 

growth outpaced credit, resulting in relatively healthy national finances. But 

rapid credit expansion in the wake of the global financial crisis deepened 

the country’s dependence on debt to maintain growth, with diminishing 

returns. 13  Furthermore, a declining population will exert additional 

downward pressure on the country’s prospects. 14  As the Chinese economy 

cools, its growth rate may slow to 2%–3% annually through midcentury. 15 

Severe domestic and international security challenges also loom. The 

period of strategic opportunity upheld during the Jiang Zemin era (1989– 

2004), characterized by a benign domestic and international situation, 

is largely over. Although Chinese leaders have judged that strategic 

opportunities persist, they regard risks and dangers as equally, if not more, 

prominent. Regarding security concerns through 2035, Xi Jinping has stated 

that the “current and coming period will be a period prone to all kinds of 

contradictions and risks in our country, with a marked increase in risk        

> 11 State Council Information Office (PRC), “Full Text of the Report to the 20th National Congress of
> the Communist Party of China.”
> 12 David Dollar, Yiping Huang, and Yang Yao, “Global Clout, Domestic Fragility,” International
> Monetary Fund, June 2021, https://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/fandd/2021/06/the-future-of-
> china-dollar-huang-yao.htm.
> 13 Jude Howell and Jane Duckett, “Reassessing the Hu-Wen Era: A Golden Age or Lost Decade for
> Social Policy in China?” China Quarterly 237 (2018): 1–14.
> 14 Michael E. O’Hanlon, “China’s Shrinking Population and Constraints on Its Future Power,” Brookings
> Institution, April 24, 2023, https://www.brookings.edu/blog/order-from-chaos/2023/04/24/chinas-
> shrinking-population-and-constraints-on-its-future-power.
> 15 Roland Rajah and Alyssa Leng, “Revising Down the Rise of China,” Lowy Institute, March 14, 2022,
> https://www.lowyinstitute.org/publications/revising-down-rise-china.

Heath  – Chapter 4  • 95 

factors, both foreseeable and difficult to foresee.” 16  According to Beijing, the 

main dangers stem from domestic sources. When Xi described the threats 

to national security at the 20th Party Congress, he began by listing issues of 

“social governance,” likely referring to popular discontent over corruption, 

inequality, and local malfeasance. He then mentioned “ethnic separatists, 

religious extremists, and violent terrorists,” as well as organized crime 

and natural disasters, before moving on to discuss other perils, including 

pressure from the United States. 17  The strong emphasis on domestic dangers 

should not be surprising. International polls similarly show that domestic 

issues such as crime, unemployment, and corruption are top concerns in 

many developing countries, including China. 18 

Similarly, in a 2019 speech Xi outlined the seven most prominent risks 

to the China dream: politics, ideology, the economy, science and technology, 

society, the external environment, and party building. 19  Only the dangers 

posed by the “external environment” implied a potential military threat. Xi 

characterized the international situation as “complex and grim” and urged 

officials to “guard against various risks acting in conjunction with one 

another like a chain.” In particular, he directed action to protect overseas 

interests and safeguard China’s “core interests,” which include Taiwan and 

other disputed territory. Chinese leaders have also described an increasingly 

unstable and uncertain international environment, featuring tensions with 

the United States, Japan, India, and others. 20 

Chinese leaders have escalated their criticisms of the United States, 

though this likely in part reflects the overall worsening of U.S.-China 

relations. In 2020, Defense Minister Wei Fenghe stated that U.S.-China 

relations had entered a period of “high risk” and blamed the United States 

for “interfering in our internal affairs.” To a PLA delegation to the National 

People’s Congress, he called for China to adopt a “fighting spirit” and use          

> 16 “习近平 :关于 ‘中共中央关于制定国民经济和社会发展第十四个五年规划和二〇三五年远景
> 目标的建议 ’的说明 ” [Xi Jinping: Explanation on “CCP Central Committee Recommendation on
> Formulating the 14th Five-Year Plan on Developing the National Economy and Society and 2035
> Long-Term Goals”], Xinhua, November 3, 2020.
> 17 State Council Information Office (PRC), “Full Text of the Report to the 20th National Congress of
> the Communist Party of China.”
> 18 “Crime and Corruption Top Problems in Emerging and Developing Countries,” Pew Research Center,
> November 6, 2014, https://www.pewresearch.org/global/2014/11/06/crime-and-corruption-top-
> problems-in-emerging-and-developing-countries.
> 19 “习近平在省部级主要领导干部坚持底线思维着力防范化解重大风险专题研讨班开班式上
> 发表重要讲话 ” [Xi Jinping Makes Important Speech at Opening Ceremony of Provincial and
> Ministerial-Level Major Leading Cadres’ Thematic Workshop on Persisting in Bottom-Line Thinking
> and Concentrating Efforts on Guarding Against, Resolving Major Risks], Xinhua, January 21, 2019.
> 20 State Council Information Office (PRC), China’s National Defense in the New Era (Beijing, July 2019).

96  • The PLA in a Complex Security Environment 

“fighting to promote stability.” 21  Such acrimonious language reflects, in 

part, the poor state of relations. In the same period, for example, senior 

U.S. officials lambasted China in harsh terms and, in some cases, openly 

advocated the overthrow of the CCP. 22 

Despite a worsening security environment, Chinese leaders continue 

to regard the possibility of war with the United States as unlikely. The 2019 

defense white paper, for example, stated that “forces for peace predominate 

over elements of war” and considered the Asia-Pacific region as “generally 

stable.” 23  Similarly, Xi has stated that the “historical trends of peace” 

are “unstoppable.” 24  His judgment that “strategic opportunities” persist 

underscores the CCP leadership’s assessment of the low likelihood of a major 

war. 

Although the danger of war may be low, other perils loom. Accordingly, 

China’s leaders have elevated the priority of national security and expanded 

its scope. In 2013, Xi established the country’s first National Security 

Commission, and in 2015 the legislature passed the first National Security 

Law. Around this time, Xi also invoked the notion of a “comprehensive 

security concept” to justify the expansion of security policies into virtually 

all policy domains. Security spending remained high, not only for internal 

security but for the military as well. Defense budget increases remained 

above the national economic growth rate even as the economy decelerated. 25 

Paradoxically, national security has become increasingly vital for China, 

and the military continues to grow more powerful, even though its role 

remains limited. At most, China’s military power has provided a strategic 

deterrent or coercive backup to gray-zone operations in the first island chain 

and on the Indian border. But even in these disputes, the PLA’s role may 

be overstated. China has not carried out any military aggression or even 

limited combat operations. Its growing counter-intervention capabilities 

have not brought about concessions from Taipei toward unification, nor 

have neighbors such as Japan, Vietnam, or India felt compelled to yield              

> 21 Jun Mai, “Two Sessions 2020: China-U.S. Rivalry in ‘High-Risk Period,’ Chinese Defense Minister
> Says,” South China Morning Post , May 27, 2020, https://www.scmp.com/news/china/military/
> article/3086308/two-sessions-china-us-rivalry-high-risk-period-chinese-defence.
> 22 Kate O’Keeffe, “Mike Pompeo Urges Chinese People to Change Communist Party,” Wall Street
> Journal , July 23, 2020, https://www.wsj.com/articles/secretary-of-state-pompeo-to-urge-chinese-
> people-to-change-the-communist-party-11595517729.
> 23 State Council Information Office (PRC), China’s National Defense in the New Era .
> 24 State Council Information Office (PRC), “Full Text of the Report to the 20th National Congress of
> the Communist Party of China.”
> 25 U.S. Department of Defense, Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of
> China 2022 .Heath –Chapter 4 •97

in their disputes with China. The U.S. military has similarly improved its 

lethality and survivability in the face of a stronger PLA. 

In short, the PLA’s combat capabilities have made a modest contribution 

at best to resolving long-standing territorial disputes. This reflects in part the 

persistently high risks that a military conflict might pose, especially with the 

United States. But the limited contribution of military power also reflects the 

real source of Beijing’s anxieties. The most dangerous threats to CCP rule 

rest in the public’s dissatisfaction with the government’s performance, not in 

the claims of rival states over desolate islands and barren borders. 

## How Chinese Leaders Aim to Achieve the China Dream 

Given the ominous security situation, the coming decades will 

unsurprisingly weigh heavily on the minds of China’s top leaders. 

Documents such as the 19th and 20th Party Congress reports, the proposal 

for the 14th Five-Year Plan, speeches by Xi Jinping at high-profile events 

such as the CCP’s 100th-anniversary celebrations in 2021, and the 2019 

seminar for provincial and ministerial leaders reveal considerable anxiety 

about what might happen in the 2030s and 2040s. 

In these sources, Chinese leaders frequently and consistently 

acknowledge the possibility of unexpected, shocking developments. 

At the 20th Party Congress, for example, Xi warned of potential “black 

swans” (unexpected developments with major impacts) and “gray rhinos” 

(highly probable high-impact events that are often neglected) and stated 

that “uncertainties and unforeseen factors are rising.” 26  In a speech to 

students at the Central Party School in 2019, Xi warned that on the road 

to rejuvenation, “the risks and challenges that we face will only become 

increasingly complicated, and we may even encounter raging torrents and 

storms beyond our imagination.” 27  At the same time, however, Chinese 

leaders have insisted that decision-making in any crisis be grounded in key 

principles consistent with the China dream. This approach is usually cast 

as a series of “major principles” to which decision-making should adhere 

in the years leading up to 2049. This suggests a generally cautious outlook 

that accepts disputes and confrontations with others as inevitable but   

> 26 State Council Information Office (PRC), “Full Text of the Report to the 20th National Congress of
> the Communist Party of China.”
> 27 “习近平在中央党校（国家行政学院）中青年干部培训班开班仪式上发表重要讲话 ” [Xi
> Jinping Gives Important Speech at Opening Ceremony of Central Party School’s (National School of
> Administration) Training Course for Young and Middle-Aged Cadres], Xinhua, September 3, 2019.

98  • The PLA in a Complex Security Environment 

prioritizes non-war methods to address them. Collectively, the sources listed 

above call on officials to adhere to the following major principles in their 

decision-making through midcentury: prioritize national development, 

consolidate CCP rule, maintain comprehensive security, manage risks, and 

incrementally shape the international environment. Although a subsequent 

section will explore the role of the military in more detail, this section will 

touch on the role the PLA plays in such guidance. 

## Prioritize National Development 

Xi has consistently stated that national development will remain a top 

priority over the next few decades. At the 20th Party Congress, he stated 

that the CCP’s “central task” in the coming years will be to lead the people 

to “build a powerful, modern socialist country in a comprehensive way.” 28 

Similarly, in explaining the party’s plans through 2035, he upheld the main 

theme of promoting “high-quality economic and social development.” 29 

Xi explained that this required a focus on high-quality development, 

strengthening technological innovation, improving governance, enhancing 

the country’s cultural appeal, and advancing the country’s ecological 

condition. 30 

The military plays an important role in ensuring security for overseas 

personnel and assets. The PLA has established one military base in Djibouti 

and may add other facilities. PLA Navy ships have maintained a presence 

in the Gulf of Aden since 2009 to protect vital shipping lanes. 31  The PLA 

also supports the nation’s interests in space and cyberspace through the 

deployment of relevant capabilities. 32  Yet another way the PLA could 

aid development is through dual-use efforts. Military investments in 

technological innovation could have commercial applications, just as 

civilian efforts to develop advanced technologies could result in military 

improvements. 33  Similarly, the construction of facilities and infrastructure        

> 28 State Council Information Office (PRC), “Full Text of the Report to the 20th National Congress of
> the Communist Party of China.”
> 29 “习近平 :关于《中共中央关于制定国民经济和社会发展第十四个五年规划和二〇三五年远
> 景目标的建议》的说明 .”
> 30 “Full Text: Speech by Xi Jinping at a Ceremony Marking the Centenary of the CPC.”
> 31 John Fei, “China’s Overseas Military Base in Djibouti: Features, Motivations, and Policy Implications,”
> Jamestown Foundation, China Brief, December 22, 2017.
> 32 Timothy R. Heath, “China’s Pursuit of Overseas Security,” RAND Corporation, 2018, https://www.
> rand.org/pubs/research_reports/RR2271.html.
> 33 Meia Nouwens and Helena Legarda, “China’s Pursuit of Advanced Dual-Use Technologies,”
> International Institute for Strategic Studies, Research Paper, December 2018.

Heath  – Chapter 4  • 99 

in China and abroad could benefit both commercial and military 

development. 34 

## Consolidate CCP Rule 

Xi has emphasized the consolidation of CCP rule as a second major 

principle. This includes measures to both strengthen the party internally 

and bolster its popular base of support. In terms of party-strengthening, 

Xi has on numerous occasions reiterated the importance of enhancing the 

CCP’s capacity to govern, tightening discipline, and improving ideological 

commitments. He stated in the 20th Party Congress report and the 2021 

centenary speech that the CCP will adhere to a “centralized, unified 

leadership” as a guiding principle even as it tries to “unite and lead the 

Chinese people” to a better life by “resolving imbalances and inadequacies 

in development.” 35  Supporting commentaries also emphasize the importance 

of tackling major popular grievances, such as crime, corruption, and social 

inequality, as complementary to party-strengthening efforts and the best 

way to ensure the CCP’s grip on power. 36 

The armed forces support the party’s rule by serving as the ultimate 

guarantor of power. In particular, the People’s Armed Police, which answers 

to the Central Military Commission, augments law enforcement as a 

paramilitary enforcer of domestic order. 37  In addition, the Strategic Support 

Force supports civilian authorities in countering threats to CCP rule in the 

information domain. It is responsible for psychological and information 

operations in the cyber domain that target enemies of the CCP and counter 

efforts to undermine the party’s legitimacy. 38  The PLA also bolsters popular 

support for the CCP through high-profile demonstrations of military 

prowess, such as exercises and parades.          

> 34 Alexander E. Farrow, “Modernization and the Military-Civil Fusion Strategy,” Journal of Indo-Pacific
> Affairs 6, no. 6 (2023): 102–14.
> 35 “Full Text: Speech by Xi Jinping at a Ceremony Marking the Centenary of the CPC.”
> 36 Zhong Guo’an, “ 以习近平总书记总体国家安全观为引领谱写国家安全新篇章 ” [Take General
> Secretary Xi Jinping’s Overall National Security Concept as Guidance and Write a New Chapter of
> National Security], Seeking Truth, April 15, 2017.
> 37 Joel Wuthnow, “China’s Other Army: The People’s Armed Police in an Era of Reform,” National
> Defense University, China Strategic Perspectives, no. 14, April 2019.
> 38 Elsa B. Kania and John K. Costello, “The Strategic Support Force and the Future of Chinese
> Information Operations,” Cyber Defense Review 3, no. 1 (2018): 105–21.

100  • The PLA in a Complex Security Environment 

## Maintain Comprehensive Security 

Xi has directed the maintenance of comprehensive security as another 

major principle, directly linking it to the nation’s focus on development. 39 

Similarly, at the CCP’s centenary, he emphasized the importance of adhering 

to the “comprehensive security concept” in responding to myriad challenges 

in the “coming years.” 40  The National Security Law’s broad definition of 

national security includes the “relative absence of international or domestic 

threats to the state’s power to govern, sovereignty, unity, and territorial 

integrity, the welfare of the people, sustainable economic and social 

development, and other major national interests, and the ability to ensure 

a continued state of security.” 41  Likewise, the 13th and 14th Five-Year Plans 

introduced national security requirements as part of their development 

plans. 42 

The PLA’s role in comprehensive national security is manifold. First, 

it provides a critical deterrent to foreign aggression or threats in the form 

of a robust nuclear arsenal and strong conventional combat capabilities. 

Chinese officials routinely invoke strategic deterrence and the safeguarding 

of national security as fundamental responsibilities of the PLA in the “new 

era.” 43  In territorial disputes and regarding Taiwan, the PLA backstops 

paramilitary and nonmilitary forces that take the lead in incrementally 

changing the status quo or deterring separatism. Gray-zone tactics have 

become a favored instrument for China to advance its interests in a manner 

that minimizes the risk of war. China has demonstrated a willingness to 

use such tactics in its territorial dispute with India on its border in 2020, in 

harassment of rival South China Sea claimants, in the standoff with Japan 

near the Senkaku Islands, and in military exercises near Taiwan. 44  The 

military plays a more limited role in supporting civilian authorities in the 

economic, financial, societal, cultural, and ecological domains of national 

security, all of which have gained prominence under Xi.          

> 39 State Council Information Office (PRC), “Full Text of the Report to the 20th National Congress of
> the Communist Party of China.”
> 40 “Full Text: Speech by Xi Jinping at a Ceremony Marking the Centenary of the CPC.”
> 41 National People’s Congress (PRC), “ 中华人民共和国国家安全法 ” [PRC National Security Law],
> July 1, 2015, http://www.gov.cn/zhengce/2015-07/01/content_2893902.htm.
> 42 “习近平 :关于 ‘中共中央关于制定国民经济和社会发展第十四个五年规划和二〇三五年远景
> 目标的建议 ’的说明 .”
> 43 State Council Information Office (PRC), China’s National Defense in the New Era .
> 44 Bonny Lin et al., “A New Framework for Understanding and Countering China’s Gray Zone Tactics,”
> RAND Corporation, 2022, https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_briefs/RBA594-1.html.

Heath  – Chapter 4  • 101 

## Manage Risks 

Reflecting the generally cautious outlook adopted by Chinese leaders 

regarding the coming decades, Xi has consistently emphasized the 

importance of managing and reducing risks. In a 2019 speech, he stated 

that “guarding against and resolving major risks is a political duty of party 

committees, governments, and leading cadres at all levels.” 45  At the 20th 

Party Congress, he similarly highlighted the importance of “preventing 

and mitigating major risks” in a number of areas. 46  For example, when 

addressing “economic security,” he decreed that officials should “properly 

deal with major risks” that might arise in real estate, in financial markets, 

and from unemployment. 47  The focus on managing risk and exercising 

caution does not imply that China should become conciliatory or passive 

in disputes. Chinese officials regard confrontation and disputes with rival 

states as inevitable owing to the country’s rise and anticipated resistance 

from Western countries led by the United States. 48  Xi has thus ordered 

all government officials to manage a careful balancing act to protect the 

country’s interests while maintaining stability—a pair of contradictory 

directives captured in his oft-repeated dictum to “protect rights, protect 

stability” [ 维权维稳 ]. 49 

To protect the country’s interests in a manner that does not threaten 

stability, Chinese officials have generally favored gray-zone and non-war 

methods, including coercion. In 2021, for example, Chinese troops brawled 

with Indian soldiers in disputed territory along the Sino-Indian border. 

Following the deaths of twenty Indians, Beijing sought to de-escalate 

the situation. China also endured criticism from the United States after 

establishing artificial islands in the South China Sea and carrying out 

coercive gray-zone actions against rival claimants in the maritime domain 

as well as near Taiwan. 50          

> 45 “习近平在省部级主要领导干部坚持底线思维着力防范化解重大风险专题研讨班开班式上发
> 表重要讲话 .”
> 46 State Council Information Office (PRC), “Full Text of the Report to the 20th National Congress of
> the Communist Party of China.”
> 47 “习近平在省部级主要领导干部坚持底线思维着力防范化解重大风险专题研讨班开班式上发
> 表重要讲话 .”
> 48 Minghao Zhao, “Is a New Cold War Inevitable? Chinese Perspectives on U.S.-China Strategic
> Competition,” Chinese Journal of International Politics 12, no. 3 (2019): 371–94.
> 49 State Council Information Office (PRC), “Full Text of the Report to the 20th National Congress of
> the Communist Party of China.”
> 50 U.S. Department of Defense, Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of
> China 2022 .

102  • The PLA in a Complex Security Environment 

The PLA can help reduce risks through deterrence. China has in recent 

years overseen a major increase in its nuclear arsenal. Although some 

observers fear that this could enhance its coercion against neighboring 

powers, nuclear weapons have proved to have limited value in low-stakes 

bargaining situations because they lack credibility. 51  Nuclear weapons are 

also of doubtful utility in most Taiwan scenarios, as annihilating the island 

would undermine the whole point of conquest. At most, a larger nuclear 

arsenal could be used to deter the United States from launching preemptive 

strikes against China. 52 

## Incrementally Shape the International Environment 

Xi has called for gradually shaping the international environment in 

pursuit of long-standing goals in a low-risk manner. He has emphasized 

the importance of expanding diplomatic relations and interactions through 

BRI and has directed non-war methods to achieve unresolved goals, such 

as over Taiwan’s status or disputed maritime regions. 53  Xi also appears to 

view the Chinese diaspora as a potential basis of international support. As a 

principle for coming years, he called for strengthening the “great unity of the 

Chinese people,” highlighting the importance of the united front both within 

China and around the world. The directive called for officials to “build broad 

consensus” to further the goal of national revival. 54 

To support this foreign policy imperative, the PLA has since the 2000s 

increased its diplomatic activities, including leadership visits, personnel 

exchanges, multilateral exercises and training, port calls, and humanitarian 

assistance and disaster relief. 55  Through these interactions, military officials 

support the foreign ministry’s goals of building partnerships, expanding 

China’s influence, and shaping international institutions in China’s favor. 56            

> 51 Todd S. Sechser and Matthew Fuhrmann, “Crisis Bargaining and Nuclear Blackmail,” International
> Organization 67, no. 1 (2013): 173–95.
> 52 Minnie Chan, “PLA Adopts Nuclear Deterrence to Stop Foreign Intervention on Taiwan: Analysts,”
> South China Morning Post , August 21, 2022, https://www.scmp.com/news/china/military/
> article/3189597/pla-adopts-nuclear-deterrence-stop-foreign-intervention-taiwan.
> 53 “习近平 :关于 ‘中共中央关于制定国民经济和社会发展第十四个五年规划和二〇三五年远
> 景目标的建议 ’的说明. ”
> 54 “Full Text: Speech by Xi Jinping at a Ceremony Marking the Centenary of the CPC.”
> 55 Philip C. Saunders and Jiunwei Shyy, “China’s Military Diplomacy,” in China’s Global Influence:
> Perspectives and Recommendations , ed. Scott McDonald and Michael C. Burgoyne (Honolulu: Daniel
> K. Inouye Asia-Pacific Center for Security Studies, 2019).
> 56 Timothy R. Heath, “Winning Friends and Influencing People: Naval Diplomacy with Chinese
> Characteristics,” China Maritime Studies Institute, China Maritime Report, no. 8, September 2020.

Heath  – Chapter 4  • 103 

## Not Mentioned: Preparation for War 

Equally important to the major principles outlined by Xi are those he 

has not mentioned. Xi has not directed the country to prepare for war with 

the United States, Taiwan, or anyone else. He also has not adopted language 

that could justify massive risk-taking or catastrophic casualties in pursuit 

of yet-to-be-achieved party objectives. Nor has he said that the resolution 

of Taiwan’s status should take priority over national development or other 

goals, such as the preservation of stability. 

To be clear, Xi has frequently criticized the United States directly or 

indirectly in many speeches and has on several occasions called on the PLA 

to improve its readiness to fight a “strong enemy.” This veiled reference to 

the United States, however, reflects restraint more than enthusiasm for war. 

Despite ongoing tensions and frequent criticisms by U.S. officials, Chinese 

leaders have been reluctant to openly discuss the possibility of war with the 

United States. Their indirect references to the United States contrast sharply 

with the furious rhetoric typical of previous Chinese leaders who mobilized 

the population for conflict. 57  In the lead-up to China’s intervention in the 

Korean War, for example, Mao Zedong routinely denounced Americans as 

“imperialists” determined to “strangle China’s revolution in its infancy.” 58 

Similarly, Zhou Enlai stated at a CCP leadership meeting prior to the war that 

the U.S. government was “the most dangerous foe of the People’s Republic 

of China.” 59  Leaders of other countries also routinely marshal public support 

through inflammatory accusations and the demonization of an enemy. Years 

before launching the 2022 invasion of Ukraine, Vladimir Putin routinely 

gave speeches in which he railed against the United States and NATO as 

enemies, denounced Ukraine’s rulers as “neo-Nazis,” and threatened war. 60 

Chinese leaders have refrained from such escalatory rhetoric. Xi has on 

occasion directed the military to ensure its “combat readiness,” but this is 

not significantly different from his predecessors’ demands that the military 

be ready for a “military struggle.” 61               

> 57 Steve Thorne, The Language of War (London: Routledge, 2006).
> 58 Hao Yufan and Zhai Zhihai, “China’s Decision to Enter the Korean War: History Revisited,” China
> Quarterly 121 (1990): 94–115.
> 59 Zhou Enlai, The Selected Works of Zhou Enlai (Beijing: Foreign Language Press, 1981).
> 60 “From Accepting NATO Aspirations to ‘Denazifying’: 20+ Years of Putin’s Changing Views on
> Ukraine,” Russia Matters, June 16, 2022, https://www.russiamatters.org/analysis/accepting-nato-
> aspirations-denazifying-20-years-putins-changing-views-ukraine.
> 61 For one example, see “Perform Vital Mission, Hu Tells Military,” China Daily , March 14, 2005, https://
> www.chinadaily.com.cn/english/doc/2005-03/14/content_424515.htm. 104 •The PLA in a Complex Security Environment

In sum, Chinese leaders appear concerned about the many potential 

hazards in the decades leading up to the PRC’s centenary. To manage 

these threats, Xi and his colleagues have prioritized the preservation of 

the country’s gains and mitigation of potential dangers. His guidance has 

consistently emphasized maintaining a focus on development, consolidating 

CCP rule, maintaining security in all domains, managing risk, and 

incrementally changing the status quo in China’s favor. Chinese leaders 

have balanced contrasting imperatives to defend the nation’s interests and 

minimize risk by favoring coercive and non-war tactics over the initiation of 

combat operations. Indeed, Beijing has given no indication that it intends to 

initiate a hot war of any kind or launch an invasion, attack, or kinetic strike 

on a neighbor to seize territory or compel their subjugation. 

## The Role of the PLA through 2049 

The PLA’s role and missions in the coming decades will be largely 

determined by the guiding principles and priorities outlined by the central 

leadership. In particular, Xi Jinping has directed the military to carry 

out a robust modernization, for which he demands progress by certain 

benchmark dates. In terms of missions, Chinese leaders have called on the 

PLA to adopt a largely supporting role to the government’s policies. The 

military’s guiding principles for the use of force also continue to emphasize 

crisis prevention, management, and deterrence, as well as preparation for 

combat contingencies. 

## PLA Modernization 

In the 20th Party Congress report and other documents, Xi has 

outlined modernization goals for the military for 2035 and 2049. The 

14th Five-Year Plan also includes modernization goals: “strengthening the 

armed forces through reform, science and technology, talent development, 

and administration according to the law” and “accelerating the integrated 

development of mechanization, informatization, and intelligentization.” 62 

Some observers have reported directions to the PLA for contingencies 

by key dates. CIA director William Burns stated, “We do know, as has been 

made public, that President Xi has instructed the PLA, the Chinese military 

leadership, to be ready by 2027 to invade Taiwan, but that doesn’t mean that  

> 62 “习近平 :关于 ‘中共中央关于制定国民经济和社会发展第十四个五年规划和二〇三五年远景
> 目标的建议 ’的说明 .”

Heath  – Chapter 4  • 105 

he’s decided to invade in 2027 or any other year as well.” However, other 

U.S. officials clarified that there was no evidence that the leadership had 

made a political decision to compel unification. 63  The dates only appear to 

reference to modernization deadlines. Chinese leaders have routinely tied 

modernization goals to commemorative dates. 64  Doing so helps bolster 

the CCP’s prestige. For example, in the early 2000s, reports surfaced that 

suggested that China had “secret plans” to invade Taiwan by 2020. 65  Yet the 

reports proved inaccurate because Western experts had misunderstood the 

significance of the goals. The 2020 date for military modernization was tied 

to broader development goals that coincided with the centenary of the CCP’s 

founding in 2021. Underscoring this point, China held a lavish ceremony 

that year to whip up patriotic enthusiasm. 66 

In sum, preparations for contingencies remain an important driver 

of the military’s modernization, but modernization is also driven by other 

considerations. Preparation for a contingency does not imply any intent to 

carry out military aggression. Instead, analysis of the senior leadership’s 

guidance suggests that modernization is likely driven by a range of political 

goals that have nothing to do with starting a war. 

## Revised Historic Missions 

Since 2004, central leaders have invoked the “historic missions of 

the armed forces in the new period of the new century,” often referred to 

as “new historic missions,” to describe the military’s role in ensuring the 

nation’s security. 67  The concept outlines four responsibilities. First, it 

provides an important guarantee of strength for the party to consolidate 

its ruling position by directing the PLA to defend the CCP’s rule from 

domestic and external threats, such as those posed by cyberattacks designed 

to discredit its authority. The second mission directs the military to protect 

the nation’s sovereignty, national unity, and territorial interests and prepare 

for contingencies related to Taiwan and disputed maritime and land areas.           

> 63 Timothy R. Heath, “Is China Planning to Attack Taiwan? A Careful Consideration of Available
> Evidence Says No,” War on the Rocks, December 14, 2022, https://warontherocks.com/2022/12/
> is-china-planning-to-attack-taiwan-a-careful-consideration-of-available-evidence-says-no.
> 64 Barry Naughton, Growing Out of the Plan: Chinese Economic Reform, 1978–1993 (Cambridge:
> Cambridge University Press, 1995).
> 65 Kyle Mizokami, “Report: China Has Secret Plans to Invade Taiwan by 2020,” Popular Mechanics ,
> October 4, 2017, https://www.popularmechanics.com/military/news/a28510/china-secret-plan-
> invade-taiwan.
> 66 “Ceremony Marking CPC Centenary Held in Beijing,” Xinhua, July 1, 2021, http://www.xinhuanet.
> com/english/2021-07/01/c_1310037722.htm.
> 67 State Council Information Office (PRC), China’s National Defense in 2006 (Beijing, December 2006).

106  • The PLA in a Complex Security Environment 

The third mission directs the military to protect overseas interests, such as 

BRI investments and citizens abroad, primarily through non-war missions. 

A fourth task directs the PLA to promote world peace and common 

development, as China requires a stable international environment to 

further its development. 68 

For the coming decades, the central leadership has directed the PLA 

to maintain its historic missions but in a constrained manner. The PLA is 

expected to provide “strategic support” [ 战略支撑 ] to whole-of-government 

efforts to maintain favorable conditions for the China dream. 69  This 

represents a downgrade in the role of the military from leading to supporting 

the government’s effort to ensure national security. This point is underscored 

by the creation of the civilian-led National Security Commission, which 

takes the lead on security policy—a responsibility previously held by the 

Central Military Committee. As explained in a 2019 article in the  PLA Daily ,

the modification reflects the perspective that China’s security challenges have 

exceeded what the military alone can manage and that closer coordination 

is required between the military and civilian authorities. 70  It also reflects 

the ongoing desire to minimize risks by ensuring a tight civilian grip on 

the military and by relying on nonmilitary assets to lead on many security 

missions. As the 2019 defense white paper stated, in the “new era” the PLA 

will “strive to keep in alignment with and contribute to the general strategies 

of the CCP.” 71 

## Guidance on Employment of Military Power 

The emphasis on managing crises and reducing risk while ensuring 

adequate military readiness for contingencies can also be seen in revisions to 

the PLA’s guidelines for building and operating military power. The essence 

of PLA military strategy is captured in the “military strategic guidelines,” 

which contain the “principles and plans for preparing for and guiding the 

overall situation of war.” 72  Under Xi, the PLA revised its military strategic 

guidelines in 2014. It upheld its long-standing emphasis on crisis prevention,               

> 68 “Full Text of Hu Jintao’s report at 17th Party Congress,” China Daily , October 24, 2007, https://www.
> chinadaily.com.cn/china/2007-10/24/content_6204564.htm.
> 69 State Council Information Office (PRC), China’s National Defense in the New Era .
> 70 Yan Wenhu, “ 正确理解新时代军队使命任务 ” [Correctly Understand the Military’s Missions in
> the New Era], China Military Online, July 26, 2019.
> 71 State Council Information Office (PRC), China’s National Defense in the New Era .
> 72 Academy of Military Science All-Army Military Terminology Management Committee, 中国人民
> 解放军军语 [Military Terminology of the People’s Liberation Army] (Beijing: Academy of Military
> Science Press, 2011), 50. Heath –Chapter 4 •107

crisis management, and escalation control while prioritizing the information 

and maritime domains for war preparations. In sum, China’s military 

continues to prioritize crisis prevention and management even as it refines 

its preparations for war based on an evolving understanding of the modern 

battlefield. 73 

Given the current guidance, what might the PLA do in a crisis? 

Consider a Taiwan election with a surprising outcome and a U.S. policy 

change regarding Taiwan. If Taiwan were to elect a government that openly 

advocated for independence, the result would likely be a severe crisis. China 

could be expected to order the PLA to be on high alert and to posture for 

an attack. However, the PLA’s deterrence and intimidation operations would 

take a back seat to diplomacy. Chinese leaders would probably seek U.S. 

help to manage the situation. If the United States were to refuse to cooperate 

and instead were to recognize Taiwan as an independent state, this would 

probably rupture U.S.-China relations and provoke Chinese leaders to 

re-examine their entire strategy. U.S. intentions could only be read as 

implacably hostile and result in what could well be the abandonment of the 

current national strategy in favor of a state of hostility that regarded a war of 

some kind with the United States as unavoidable. 74 

Indeed, an escalation of tensions with the United States to a point of 

overt hostility is probably the only scenario in which China would abandon 

its current strategy and pursue more militarily aggressive actions. As 

happened from the 1950s to the 1970s, the designation of a world power 

as a primary threat to China’s survival would render its current peacetime 

strategy unviable. In the face of a clear U.S. intention to destroy the nation, 

China may choose a new wartime strategy to seek the defeat of U.S. power. 

The result would be a potentially catastrophic global war between China and 

the United States. 75 

Could Xi or a successor adopt a preemptive strategy of military 

aggression against Taiwan or the United States? Could they do so in a 

manner that evaded detection and thus permitted China to launch some sort 

of surprise attack? Xi has consolidated power, having placed himself at the 

center of the small leadership groups responsible for virtually all policy. He 

has also promoted loyalists to senior positions of power. However, repeated 

purges of top-tier leaders, including Qin Gang and Li Shangfu, suggest          

> 73 Joel Wuthnow and M. Taylor Fravel, “China’s Military Strategy for a ‘New Era’: Some Change, More
> Continuity, and Tantalizing Hints,” Journal of Strategic Studies (2022): 1–36.
> 74 Timothy R. Heath, Kristen Gunness, and Tristan Finazzo, The Return of Great Power War: Scenarios
> of Systemic Conflict between the United States and China (Santa Monica: RAND Corporation, 2022).
> 75 Ibid. 108 •The PLA in a Complex Security Environment

that these individuals may be less than reliable. 76  Although the country’s 

diplomacy has shown greater assertiveness, important continuities remain 

between Xi and his predecessors Hu Jintao and Jiang Zemin. In all cases, 

Beijing has prioritized national development, rejected military aggression, 

and favored a stable order, albeit on terms that reflect China’s interests. There 

may yet be some in the military with divergent views regarding appropriate 

strategies to secure the nation’s interests. For example, some military leaders 

may well hold a more bellicose view of the United States. However, there 

is no evidence that the military as an institution has in any way sought to 

overturn or otherwise derail the political leadership’s strategy to realize the 

China dream. 

Any successor to Xi who sought a radically different strategy would need 

to demolish and discredit the existing strategy. The first step would be to 

clearly articulate a radical agenda and strategy that praised war and violence 

and argued in favor of a reprioritization of goals. The new leader would need 

to purge elites and suppress citizens who opposed such a change. Thus, a turn 

toward military aggression would likely be accompanied by considerable 

intra-elite conflict and extensive political repression. China would also need 

to manage intense international criticism and punitive measures. All of this 

would provide the United States with ample opportunities to exacerbate 

China’s strategic difficulties and could provide time to mobilize its military 

and other assets to counter Chinese aggression. 

## Conclusion and Implications 

China’s challenge through midcentury will be to manage its relative 

decline amid a perilous domestic and international environment. With 

economic growth slowing and the domestic and international situation 

worsening, the CCP faces strong incentives to maintain a cautious attitude. 

China’s best prospects for enduring into the next century lie in avoiding war, 

concentrating on national development, shoring up the foundations of CCP 

rule, and mitigating risks where possible. This summarizes the approach that 

Chinese leaders intend to take over the next few decades. 

The military’s role in achieving the China dream appears limited. The 

PLA is carrying out a range of coercive and other non-war activities to 

defend the nation’s interests in a manner that minimizes the risk of war.       

> 76 Chad de Guzman, “Disappearance of Ministers Underscores China’s Unpredictability as Xi Tightens
> Grip,” Time , September 18, 2023, https://time.com/6315253/china-missing-ministers-qin-gang-li-
> shangfu. Heath –Chapter 4 •109

Moreover, China has made it clear that it is dissatisfied with U.S. power and 

intends to challenge it in some way. All rising powers have sought to change 

elements of the status quo, and China is no different in this regard. However, 

its methods have to date proved to be far less bellicose than the methods 

used by past rising powers. 

In 2049, the PRC will be 100 years old, an impressive achievement 

compared with the average duration of Communist regimes. But a PRC 

that reached its first centenary would still be considerably younger than 

major modern nation-states such as the United States, which reached its 

second centenary in 1976. Moreover, by the measure of Chinese imperial 

history, a 100-year-old PRC would rank as a modest achievement. The two 

immediately preceding dynasties, the Ming and Qing, each lasted roughly 

300 years. In light of the CCP’s disparagement of imperial dynasties as 

backwards and inferior, it would be humiliating in the extreme if CCP 

rule failed to endure beyond its first century. The PRC’s first century will 

be an important milestone, but only that—a milestone. Chinese leaders 

are already thinking about the second century. Chinese media explain that 

the sixth plenary session of the 19th Party Congress, held in 2021, began 

initial guidance for “the second century of the CCP.” 77  Xi Jinping similarly 

emphasized the CCP’s “responsibility to our descendants.” 78 

China’s disinterest in risking a war over Taiwan should provide the 

United States some breathing room to rebuild its own military and attend 

to its own pressing domestic demands. However, it also means that the 

United States will need to consider competition and gray-zone tactics as 

the principal challenges from China for the foreseeable future. There may 

be opportunities to build stronger crisis management mechanisms to 

reduce risks further. Moreover, Washington may need to adopt a broader 

perspective if it is to maintain deterrence near Taiwan over the long term. If 

China is willing to wait another century to resolve Taiwan’s status, the United 

States may need to match Beijing’s patience in what could prove to be an 

exceptionally long-lasting rivalry.   

> 77 Zhu Zheng, “Sixth Plenary Session Will Hold Great Significance in China’s History,” CGTN,
> November 8, 2021, https://news.cgtn.com/news/2021-11-08/Sixth-plenary-session-will-hold-great-
> significance-in-China-s-history-14ZPqjFr8Y0/index.html.
> 78 Zhong, “ 以习近平总书记总体国家安全观为引领谱写国家安全新篇章. ”

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

This chapter examines how the conflict in Ukraine has influenced the calculus 

of the People’s Republic of China (PRC) for determining both whether to use 

military force in pursuit of political aims and how to use force most effectively. 

> MAIN ARGUMENT

Beijing is carefully studying Russia’s faltering invasion of Ukraine and drawing 

lessons that inform its views on future warfare. PRC scholars assess that 

the risk of a protracted, costly, potentially disastrous great-power conflict 

has increased. To address this, they urge leaders to (1) improve deterrence 

capabilities, (2) avoid unnecessary conflict, and (3) prepare alternative means 

to resolving conflict to include the use of proxy wars and irregular warfare. 

PRC international security scholars are developing a renewed appreciation 

for the wide range of nonkinetic options available to sympathetic nations 

to support a nation resisting aggression, including economic sanctions and 

rapid provision of arms, material information, and intelligence support. 

PRC scholars portray the current conflict in Ukraine as deadlocked and 

treat the use of nuclear weapons as a real possibility. They also predict that 

many countries will observe the fate of Ukraine and decide to develop their 

own nuclear weapons programs. Some PRC observers portray U.S. efforts 

coordinating international support to Ukraine as a guide for predicting U.S. 

actions in the event of a Taiwan contingency. 

> POLICY IMPLICATIONS

• The U.S. and the West’s demonstrated capacity to rapidly field an 

integrated slate of economic sanctions, material aid, weapons, and 

intelligence support in the face of Russian aggression has the potential 

to serve as a deterrence multiplier against the PRC. 

• Uncertainty surrounding continued support to Ukraine may weaken 

U.S. deterrence in a Taiwan contingency, given that PRC analysts 

portray U.S. support to Ukraine as a useful proxy for assessing U.S. 

capacity to sustain persistent support in a protracted conflict. Chapter 5 PRC Lessons Learned from Russia’s 

# Invasion of Ukraine: Implications 

# for a Taiwan Conflict 

## Maryanne Kivlehan-Wise and Tsun-Kai Tsai 

When historians write the story of the 21st century, there is no doubt 

that Russia’s 2022 invasion of Ukraine will mark a critical inflection point 

in worldwide perceptions about the use of military force. The lessons that 

the People’s Republic of China (PRC) is learning from Russia’s invasion and 

the implications that such thinking might have on Beijing’s assessments 

regarding the potential for armed conflict over Taiwan are of high interest 

to nations around the globe. International security scholars have written 

hundreds of articles dissecting Beijing’s response to the war since the onset 

of hostilities. 

In Beijing, the conflict is also receiving tremendous attention. Referred 

to in the official newspaper of the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) as “the 

most serious geopolitical event since the end of the Cold War,” Russia’s 

invasion of Ukraine has been widely studied in PRC military and civilian 

research institutions. 1 As one interlocutor described the situation, the war 

is a true “research hot spot”; just about every university, think tank, and 

military research institution in the PRC has an effort underway to analyze 

some component of this conflict. 

This level of interest is not surprising. During the initial months 

following Russia’s invasion, PRC international security analysts were 

grappling with four shocks. The first was the invasion itself. Given the   

> 1Ye Heng, “International Observation: ‘Proxy War’ Overdrafts U.S. Strategic Credibility,” People’s
> Daily , April 22, 2022.

Maryanne Kivlehan-Wise  is  Director of the China Studies Program at CNA. 

Tsun-Kai Tsai  is  a Senior Research Specialist in the China Studies Program at CNA. 

> This chapter represents only the views of the authors and not those of CNA or any of its sponsors,
> including the U.S. Navy, or the U.S. government.

112  • The PLA in a Complex Security Environment 

public way in which Russia’s invasion unfolded, the initiation of Russian 

hostilities was not exactly a surprise, but it was still a shock. The PRC, like 

most countries, saw the potential for a Russian invasion of Ukraine and took 

steps to prepare. Its diplomatic posturing in the lead-up to the invasion was 

carefully orchestrated, balancing implicit support for Moscow with closely 

held principles of peaceful coexistence—especially the principle of mutual 

respect for sovereignty and territorial integrity. 2 At the onset of hostilities, 

Beijing did not have talking points ready to address Russian aggression and 

did not articulate a clear position for almost 24 hours. Moreover, Beijing 

conducted a confused and halting evacuation of PRC nationals from its 

mission in Kyiv. 3 For these reasons, many Western observers assess that— 

although it is impossible to know what China’s top leaders did or did not 

know about Vladimir Putin’s plans—the PRC governing apparatus was not 

prepared for Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. 4 The second shock was the swift 

and decisive response to the invasion by sympathetic nations around the 

globe. This response was widely criticized by the PRC government as well 

as its civilian and military-affiliated scholars. 5 The third shock was Russia’s 

failure to bring the conflict to a rapid conclusion. Last, the fourth shock 

was the potential for nuclear escalation. PRC observers were struck by the 

fact that the potential for crossing the nuclear threshold was greater than it  

> 2

Gu Ziyi, “ 德美法英外交官员就乌克兰局势等举行会谈 ” [German, American, French, and 

British Diplomats Hold Talks on Ukraine Situation], Xinhua, January 21, 2022, http://www.81. 

cn/w-j/2022-01/21/content_10125517.htm; “What Are Related Parties Calculating amid Massive 

Military Buildup Regarding Ukraine?” Xinhua, January 27, 2022, https://english.news.cn/20220126/ 

ca86d758bf8249c89c4989dfb3b2c8fa/c.html; and Fang Xiaozhi, “ 北约出动战略航空兵并使用实 

战武器 ,对俄挑衅 ‘加码 ’ ” [NATO Dispatches Strategic Aviation and Uses Actual Combat Weapons 

“to Raise the Stakes” of Russia’s Provocation],  PLA Daily , November 25, 2021, http://www.81.cn/ 

w-j/2021-11/25/content_10110527.htm.  

> 3

Steve Holland, “China Asked Russia to Delay Ukraine Invasion until after Olympics—NYT,” Reuters, 

March 2, 2022, https://www.reuters.com/world/us-officials-say-china-asked-russia-delay-ukraine-

war-until-after-beijing-2022-03-02; Gu, “ 德美法英外交官员就乌克兰局势等举行会谈 ”; “What 

Are Related Parties Calculating amid Massive Military Buildup Regarding Ukraine?”; and Fang, “ 

北约出动战略航空兵并使用实战武器 ,对俄挑衅 ‘加码 ’ ” 

> 4

Holland, “China Asked Russia to Delay Ukraine Invasion until after Olympics—NYT”; Gu, “ 德美 

法英外交官员就乌克兰局势等举行会谈 ”; “What Are Related Parties Calculating amid Massive 

Military Buildup Regarding Ukraine?”; and Fang, “ 北约出动战略航空兵并使用实战武器 ,对俄 

挑衅 ‘加码 ’ ” 

> 5

“Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Hua Chunying’s Regular Press Conference on February 24, 2022,” 

Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the People’s Republic of China (PRC), Press Release, February 24, 

2022, https://www.fmprc.gov.cn/mfa_eng/xwfw_665399/s2510_665401/2511_665403/202202/ 

t20220224_10645282.html; “Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Wang Wenbin’s Regular Press 

Conference on March 1, 2022,” Ministry of Foreign Affairs (PRC), March 1, 2022, https://www.fmprc. 

gov.cn/mfa_eng/xwfw_665399/s2510_665401/2511_665403/202203/t20220301_10646858.html; 

Zhang Yunbi, “Experts: NATO’s Role Worsens Ukraine Crisis,”  China Daily , March 29, 2022, https:// 

www.chinadaily.com.cn/a/202203/29/WS62425b33a310fd2b29e53d06.html; and “Self-Created 

Problems Nothing for Biden to Brag Of,”  China Daily , March 2, 2022, https://www.chinadaily.com. 

cn/a/202203/02/WS621f5d22a310cdd39bc89dbd.html. Kivlehan-Wise and Tsai  – Chapter 5  • 113 

had been at any time since World War II and struggled to find language to 

describe the nature of this threat. 

The conflict in Ukraine has undoubtedly influenced Beijing’s 

understanding of the changing nature of warfare as well as its calculus for 

determining  whether  to use military force in pursuit of political aims and 

how  to use it most effectively, both in general and in the context of a Taiwan 

conflict. 

This chapter explores this thinking by considering PRC lessons from 

the conflict tied to escalation control, external assistance, and multidomain 

warfare. Next it describes key PRC views on the nuclear dimensions of the 

conflict. Finally, it discusses the implications of these lessons for the PRC’s 

thinking about a potential Taiwan contingency. 

## PRC Lessons from Russia’s War in Ukraine 

## Escalation Control Is Essential 

One of the most significant PRC takeaways from Russia’s prolonged 

military misadventure in Ukraine is the realization that, in the current 

geopolitical environment, controlling conflict escalation between major 

powers is extremely complex and that failing to do so can have disastrous 

consequences. Some PRC analysts argue that protracted conflict between 

major powers is more likely than it has been at any time since the two world 

wars: comparisons between the fight for the Donbas region and the Battle 

of Verdun are a common trope in this community. 6 In a modern, protracted 

conflict between major powers, occasionally referred to as a “symmetric 

major-power war” ( 大国之间的对称战争 ), the ability to control escalation 

is perceived as essential to success. 7

People’s Liberation Army (PLA) authors have argued that most major-

power wars since the end of the Cold War can be categorized as asymmetric, 

suggesting that some within the PRC had seen symmetric conflict as 

relegated to history. These authors counter that the Ukraine conflict 

demonstrates that symmetric conflict between great powers is still possible. 

They point to several key differences between the symmetric war currently 

being fought in Ukraine and the symmetric wars of the past—such as World     

> 6See, for example, “ 鏖战 224 天,巴赫穆特 ‘绞肉机 ’之战终于结束 ,接下来是哪里 ?” [After 224 Days
> of Fierce Fighting, the Battle of Bachmut’s “Meat Grinder” Finally Ended. Where to Go Next?],
> Xinhua, May 22, 2023, http://www.news.cn/mil/2023-05/22/c_1212190204.htm.
> 7Wu Qiang, “Analysis of the Complexity of Symmetrical War between Great Powers,” Military Digest ,
> no. 7 (2023).

114  • The PLA in a Complex Security Environment 

War I—and argue that key differences make symmetric major-power wars 

now more dangerous and difficult to control. 8

The first difference is that today’s major-power wars occur under the 

shadow of nuclear escalation. 9 PLA scholars argue that this potential for 

escalation complicates risk assessments and decisions about both target 

selection and the intensity of force used. 10  The second difference is that 

a symmetric war between major powers inherently complicates efforts 

to limit the scale or types of forces used. As one representative passage 

suggests, “Once the fighting begins, the fighting force will be quite large…. 

If warring powers still have allies in a war zone, the war is likely to affect 

these countries and create a spillover effect.” 11  The third difference is in the 

types of weapons available. In addition to increasingly precise and lethal 

traditional weapons, these authors argue that major powers have more 

nonmilitary means available than ever before. For these reasons, they assert 

that it is extremely difficult to control the timing, scale, or costs associated 

with this type of war. 12 

One author describes three imperatives for actors seeking to mitigate 

the challenges of a symmetric major-power war: (1) improve deterrence 

capabilities by building and demonstrating a capacity to successfully 

prosecute this type of protracted war, (2) remember that the “strategic 

endurance of any great power is limited” and that it is therefore important 

to control war objectives and avoid entering conflict unnecessarily, and 

(3) prepare alternatives to resolve conflict, including with such tools 

as political, diplomatic, and economic actions, as well as proxy wars or 

irregular wars if necessary. 13              

> 8Wu, “Analysis of the Complexity of Symmetrical War between Great Powers”; Wu Daihui, “Large-
> Scale Regional Conventional War under Conditions of Quasi-Nuclear Deterrence,” World Knowledge ,
> no. 1 (2023); Wang Lin and Shi Yunfeng, “Research on Cognitive Confrontation of Nuclear
> Deterrence in the Russia-Ukraine Conflict,” China Aerospace , no. 1 (2023); and Wu Chunsi, “The
> Impact of the Russia-Ukraine Conflict on International Nuclear Arms Control and Disarmament,”
> International Outlook 14, no. 3 (2022).
> 9Wu, “Analysis of the Complexity of Symmetrical War between Great Powers.”
> 10 Wu, “Analysis of the Complexity of Symmetrical War between Great Powers”; Wu, “Large-Scale
> Regional Conventional War”; Wang and Shi, “Research on Cognitive Confrontation of Nuclear
> Deterrence in the Russia-Ukraine Conflict”; and Wu, “The Impact of the Russia-Ukraine Conflict
> on International Nuclear Arms Control and Disarmament.”
> 11 Wu, “Analysis of the Complexity of Symmetrical War between Great Powers.” Of note, although the
> term is not specifically used in these articles, the authors do appear to be discussing the potential
> for horizontal escalation.
> 12 Ibid.
> 13 Ibid. Kivlehan-Wise and Tsai –Chapter 5 •115

## External Assistance Can Be a Game-Changer 

Another high-level takeaway that PRC and PLA analysts appear to be 

drawing from the Russia-Ukraine conflict is a renewed appreciation for 

the wide range of nonkinetic options sympathetic nations have available 

for providing support to a nation resisting aggression. External assistance 

to Ukraine has had a profound impact on the conflict’s trajectory and has 

been a critical element of virtually every Ukrainian military success. Many 

PRC writings on external aid have focused on criticizing the United States 

and NATO for interfering and prolonging the conflict. At times, external 

military assistance to Ukraine has been framed as a U.S.- and NATO-led 

plot to prolong the suffering of the Ukrainian people while attempting 

to defeat Russia in a proxy war. 14  While direct criticism of Russia is more 

difficult to find in PRC publications, as the war continues, some reporting 

by PRC military enthusiasts contains interesting discussions on Russia’s lack 

of foresight. One particularly direct comment posted on the social media 

account for the Chinese Institute of Command and Control took this issue 

head-on. 15  The authors challenged any effort to explain away the Russian 

military’s performance by blaming Western intervention: “Did they [the 

Russian planners] not take into account the support of the Western countries 

when drawing up the war plan? How could the biggest variable that could 

shape the course of the war be ignored?” 16 

PRC civilian academics have noted two aspects of support that suggest 

lessons for the PRC. First, they have discussed the speed at which an external 

supporter’s decision to provide aid can translate to new weapons and 

equipment being fielded on the ground in Ukraine. One piece portrayed this 

as “a wake-up call that the logistical, transportation, and training capabilities 

of these old imperialist countries are still very strong.” The author urged 

careful study of the pace of external assistance in the Ukraine war as well as 

a re-evaluation of confrontation with any of China’s neighbors, such as India, 

based on this information. 17 

Second, PRC authors have argued that Ukraine’s military has benefited 

as much from foreign intelligence support as it has from the provision of      

> 14 “俄乌冲突暴露美新版代理人战略 ” [Russia-Ukraine Conflict Exposes New U.S. Proxy Strategy],
> Xinhua, April 7, 2022, http://www.news.cn/mil/2022-04/07/c_1211633995.htm; and Zhang, “Experts:
> NATO’s Role Worsens Ukraine Crisis.”
> 15 For more on the Chinese Institute of Command and Control, see http://www.c2.org.cn.
> 16 “‘俄乌冲突 ’给中国军队的 10 大启示 ” [Ten Lessons for the Chinese Military from the “Russia-
> Ukraine Conflict”], Chinese Institute of Command and Control, June 6, 2022.
> 17 Ibid.

116  • The PLA in a Complex Security Environment 

material goods. 18  In particular, PRC authors have noted the importance 

of tactical air reconnaissance platforms, communications systems such as 

Starlink, and the use of facial recognition software.  They have also noted 

that foreign intelligence support has played a critical role in some of the 

Ukrainian military’s more high-profile successes, such as the April 2022 

sinking of the Russian warship  Moskva .19 

It is uncertain to what extent the role of external intelligence support 

is featured in PRC leaders’ thinking about future warfare; however, civilian 

academics are clearly drawing lessons about the PRC’s future defense needs. 

One civilian academic opined: 

U.S. support for the entire intelligence system of Ukraine has formed an 

asymmetric and transparent advantage over Russia. Russia’s strategy, tactics, 

communications, logistics, and military mobilization are transparent to 

Ukraine, while Ukraine’s military operations are half-blind to Russia. Our 

country urgently needs to summarize the advantages of the U.S. intelligence 

system, establish a Chinese version of the Starlink system, strengthen wartime 

communication system security and battlefield situation awareness capabilities, 

and optimize intelligence and counterintelligence system capabilities. 20 

## All Domains Matter, and There Are No Magic Weapons 

PLA writings have long described future warfare as “multidomain” in 

nature and emphasized the importance of new warfighting domains such as 

cyber, space, and cognitive. 21  In writings on the conflict in Ukraine, there is 

little to suggest that the PLA’s core concept of multidomain precision warfare 

has changed. However, an emerging theme is that all domains are important, 

that none can be neglected, and that several of Russia’s battlefield failures 

can be linked to a lack of appreciation for this reality. In the early weeks of 

the war, it was common to find articles calling out specific aspects of the 

conflict—such as the use of cognitive warfare or certain types of weapons            

> 18 Zhang Gaoyuan, “The Intelligence Support Practices of the United States and the West in the
> Russia-Ukraine Conflict,” Journal of Intelligence 42, no. 1 (2023); and Zhou Songqing, “A Study on
> the Asymmetry and Transparency of U.S. Intelligence Support for Ukraine in the Russia-Ukraine
> Conflict,” Journal of Intelligence (2023).
> 19 See, for example, “ 讲武谈兵｜新 ‘非对称作战 ’? 从俄乌军事冲突看当代游击战 ” [Talking about
> War and Discussing Soldiers—New “Asymmetric Warfare?” Looking at Contemporary Guerrilla
> Warfare from the Perspective of the Russia-Ukraine Military Conflict], Paper , April 19, 2022,
> https://m.thepaper.cn/kuaibao_detail.jsp?contid=17687358&from=kuaibao.
> 20 Zhou, “A Study on the Asymmetry and Transparency of U.S. Intelligence Support.”
> 21 U.S. Department of Defense, Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic
> of China 2023 (Washington, D.C., October 2023), 41, https://media.defense.gov/2023/
> Oct/19/2003323409/-1/-1/1/2023-MILITARY-AND-SECURITY-DEVELOPMENTS-INVOLVING-
> THE-PEOPLES-REPUBLIC-OF-CHINA.PDF.

Kivlehan-Wise and Tsai  – Chapter 5  • 117 

like man-portable air-defense systems—and portraying them as decisive. 

However, as the conflict reached the one-year mark, this narrative began to 

shift to a gradual recognition that, while the war had brought to light many 

important developments, no single weapon or tactic would alone decisively 

affect the war or its conclusion. 

Hybrid, information, and cognitive warfare are critical but have limits .

Early in the war, there was much discussion—both in PRC and global 

media—about the role information, and especially social media, would play 

in garnering international support, sowing confusion among adversaries, 

gaining tactical advantage, and collecting battlefield intelligence. Some 

portrayed information as a game-changer that would determine the course 

of the war. However, this discourse now reflects a recognition that, while 

information and intelligence remain critical wartime assets, in order to 

defeat an adversary, operations in the physical and nonphysical domains 

must be coordinated and combined. 22 

As one author noted: “The development of ‘joint war’ has given it 

significant technological characteristics of the times. In this Ukrainian crisis, 

information warfare and cyber warfare coordinate with traditional military 

operations and joint military deployments to dominate conflicts.” 23  Another 

author provided the following assessment: 

On the one hand, online news has become an important source of battlefield 

intelligence, such as the creation of official apps that encourages the Ukrainian 

public to post discovered Russian actions online to help Ukrainian forces judge 

Russian tactical deployments. On the other hand, this has greatly increased the 

difficulty of hybrid and information warfare. Disinformation spread by both 

sides is endless, making the battlefield foggy…. In the end, the battlefield is still 

about logistics and supplies and the country’s overall strength. 24 

To be clear, understanding how to make better use of technology and 

more effectively leverage unmanned systems, information, space, and cyber 

capabilities in war continues to be a focus for PRC and especially PLA 

authors. Intense research is undoubtedly underway to dissect and intensify 

lessons from operations taking place in every warfighting domain. Starting     

> 22 A piece on this issue written by Japanese analyst Koichiro Takagi was translated into Chinese
> and seemed to gain some traction. See Koichiro Takagi, “ 乌克兰战争中的认知战给了中
> 国人民解放军哪些启示 ?” [What Did the Cognitive Warfare in the Ukraine War Teach the
> Chinese People’s Liberation Army?], Guancha, August 6, 2022, https://www.guancha.cn/
> KoichiroTakagi/2022_08_06_652581_2.shtml.
> 23 Xu Shuyue and Gao Fei, “A Theoretical and Practical Analysis of ‘Hybrid Warfare’ in the Context of
> the Ukraine,” Peace and Development , no. 4 (2023).
> 24 “俄乌打了一年 ,这些战争经验被改写 ” [Russia and Ukraine Have Been Fighting for a Year and
> These War Experiences Have Been Rewritten], Xinhua, February 24, 2023, http://www.news.cn/
> mil/2023-02/24/c_1211732542.htm.

118  • The PLA in a Complex Security Environment 

about a year after the invasion, however, PRC writings suggest a gradual 

recognition that, in a protracted war, these tools are most effective when 

used in coordination with physical attacks. 

Russian hypersonic missiles can be countered . PRC observers were also 

struck by reports in May 2023 that Ukrainian forces were able to intercept a 

hypersonic Russian Kh-47 Kinzhal missile—a weapon that some in the PRC 

had referred to as an anti-NATO “assassin’s mace” ( 杀手锏 ). 25  As reports 

filtered in, many in the PRC expressed doubt that such an intercept was 

theoretically possible, while others pointed to weaknesses in the Russian 

missile and suggested that it was of inferior quality and could be countered. 26 

It is unclear what PRC observers ultimately concluded; however, the incident 

did cause at least one PRC observer to comment that “there is no such thing 

as a weapon that cannot be intercepted.” 27 

The low-altitude battlefield cannot be ignored . While no specific weapons 

system has been viewed as a singular game-changer, PRC and PLA observers 

of the conflict have developed renewed appreciation for the importance of 

the low-altitude battlefield in establishing air supremacy. Sometimes referred 

to as “the ‘junction’ connecting airspace and the land area,” 28  low altitude 

is defined by the PLA as 100 to 1,000 meters. 29  PRC civilian and military 

analysts have noted that Ukraine has been successful in using the low-

altitude domain to mount an effective defense against Russian military forces 

and are likely considering the implications of this development for potential 

future conflicts. One article in the  PLA Daily  described the importance of 

the low-altitude battlefield as follows: “With the rapid development and 

large-scale application of low-altitude combat equipment such as helicopters, 

small and medium-sized micro-UAVs, and loitering bombs, low-altitude                   

> 25 “乌克兰声称击落匕首高超音速导弹 ,难道是神话破灭了吗 ?” [Ukraine Claims to Shoot
> Down Dagger Hypersonic Missile, Is It a Myth?], Sohu, May 12, 2023, https://news.sohu.
> com/a/680554795_121687414.
> 26 “乌称 ‘爱国者 ’拦截俄 ‘匕首 ’组建无人机部队乌欲大反攻 ?” [Ukraine Claims That
> “Patriot” Intercepted Russia’s “Dagger” and Formed a Drone Force. Is Ukraine Planning a
> Major Counterattack?], CCTV, Focus Today , May 8, 2023, https://tv.cctv.com/2023/05/08/
> VIDEgLM3fTuRBFQXSwPJZBv2230508.shtml?spm=C45305.PmBKBQYn4ReN.E2dBMI2VdbgJ.34.
> 27 “‘匕首 ’深陷 ‘被拦截 ’迷雾英国援乌远程巡航导弹俄乌冲突恐陷入 ‘风暴阴影 ’” [“Dagger” Is Mired
> in the Fog of “Being Intercepted,” Britain Aids Ukraine with Long-Range Cruise Missiles, and the
> Conflict between Russia and Ukraine May Fall into a “Storm Shadow”], CCTV, Military Commanding
> Heights , May 14, 2023, https://tv.cctv.com/2023/05/14/VIDELY2WcZdd1MYpMOICJPgp230514.
> shtml?spm=C52346.Pbpcex3GiZw4.EAppepud582n.23.
> 28 Zhang Peng, “ 夺取未来陆战低空制权 ” [Seize the Low-Altitude Dominance of Future Land
> Warfare], PLA Daily , May 23, 2023, http://www.81.cn/szb_223187/szbxq/index.html?paperNam
> e=jfjb&paperDate=2023-05-23&paperNumber=07&articleid=906414.
> 29 Zhu Rongchang, ed. 空军大辞典 [Air Force Dictionary] (Shanghai: Shanghai Dictionary Press,
> 1996); and Yao Wei, ed. 中国空军百科全书 [China Air Force Encyclopedia], vol. 2 (Beijing: Aviation
> Industry Press, 2005), 800.

Kivlehan-Wise and Tsai  – Chapter 5  • 119 

battlefields have become more and more important, and low-altitude control 

has become one of the comprehensive controls that must be captured in 

future land warfare.” 30 

PLA authors have also reflected on the various means of establishing air 

dominance. As one PLA author notes: 

The traditional way to seize air dominance is to use air to control the air, that is, 

to use fighter jets to clear air threats, cover bombers to bomb enemy airports, 

and destroy enemy aircraft. With the gradual improvement of the combat 

performance of the ground air defense system, ground-to-air control has also 

become an important means of seizing control of the air…the method of “air 

combat + ground combat” is often adopted, and air-ground joint control of air 

power has become the norm. 31 

PRC military enthusiasts note that Russia has suffered significant losses 

due to its failure to establish low-altitude air dominance ( 低空制空权 ). In 

particular, they note the disproportionate costs associated with the low-

altitude battlefield. 32  While the Russian military can establish high-altitude 

air dominance, its inability to control the junction between land and air 

has made it vulnerable to Ukrainian attacks and placed its high-altitude air 

dominance at risk. 33  This risk has manifested in a loss of helicopters, fighter 

aircraft, and, most significantly, pilots. Reports that Russia lost ten warplanes 

in a single day in March 2022 left a particularly deep impression. 34 

PRC authors credit external support for much of the Ukrainian 

military’s success at low altitudes. They argue that Ukrainian forces have 

been able to challenge Russia in this battlespace because of access to both 

superior drones that assist in targeting and portable anti-aircraft missiles. 35 

When discussing whether the PLA would fare better in such a conflict, one 

article noted the sizeable PLA inventory of helicopters with insufficient             

> 30 Zhang, “ 夺取未来陆战低空制权. ”
> 31 Wu Mingqi, “ 回望世纪空战风云 ,制空权有何新变化 ” [Looking Back at the Air Combat Situation
> of the Century, What Are the New Changes in Air Dominance], PLA Daily , May 12, 2022, http://
> www.mod.gov.cn/gfbw/jmsd/4910704.html.
> 32 Tiege Feima, “Why Does Russia, Which Has Air Supremacy, Still Allow Advanced Western Weapons
> to Be Transported into Ukraine?” Sina, August 21, 2022.
> 33 Ibid.
> 34 “俄空天军表现不佳 ?专家提醒避免两个 ‘错觉 ’” [“Russian Air and Space Forces Underperforming?
> Experts Warn to Avoid Two “Illusions”], Xinhua, March 7, 2022, http://www.xinhuanet.com/
> mil/2022-03/07/c_1211598519.htm.
> 35 “俄空天军表现不佳 ?专家提醒避免两个 ‘错觉 ’”; and Tang Jun, “ 低空杀手 :从俄乌冲突看便携式
> 防空导弹 ” [Low-Altitude Killer: Looking at Portable Air Defense Missiles from the Conflict between
> Russia and Ukraine], Paper , March 18, 2022, https://m.thepaper.cn/newsDetail_forward_17180475.

120  • The PLA in a Complex Security Environment 

electronic countermeasures to counter shoulder-fired anti-aircraft missiles 

and called for an upgrade. 36 

Future warfare is drone-centric . While they are not presented as decisive 

weapons that could alone change the course of a war, discussion of drones 

is ubiquitous in PRC writings about the Ukrainian battlefield. The conflict 

has provided professional militaries around the world an opportunity to 

see drones as both enablers of military operations and important weapons 

in their own right. Russia’s and Ukraine’s successes and failures in their 

respective uses of drones are often discussed. 37 

PRC military observers note that integrating drones into low-altitude 

warfare has provided added value in terms of intelligence collection and 

targeting and enabled Ukraine to make critical gains. 38  Others have observed 

the value of drones as swarming weapons for use during “suicide” attacks. 39 

The attack on the Russian Navy’s Black Sea Fleet in the port of Sevastopol, 

where Ukraine conducted a joint air and sea attack using swarming drones and 

unmanned boats, is often cited as an example. 40  One PRC author portrayed 

this battle as a preview of a “new model of maritime warfare.” 41  An assessment 

of how such technology could be applied to operations in and around the 

Taiwan Strait contended with these capabilities. It argued that drones could be 

used for (1) air reconnaissance and early warning, (2) battlefield surveillance 

and reconnaissance, including long-term, real-time monitoring of key sea 

areas around the island of Taiwan and the skies above Taiwan’s outer islands, 

and (3) electronic jamming, with an eye toward both blinding the enemy’s air-

defense radar and paralyzing the command communication system. 42                       

> 36 “‘俄乌冲突 ’给中国军队的 10 大启示 .”
> 37 Liu Yunhua, Yang Jian, and Kang Jing, “ 聚焦俄特别军事行动中无人机的突破与困境 ” [Focus on
> Breakthroughs and Difficulties of UAVs in Russian Special Military Operations], China.com, July
> 4, 2022, https://military.china.com/news/13004177/20220704/42714899.html; and “ 谁在提供情
> 报?从哪里发动攻击 ?乌军无人艇偷袭事件谜团重重 ” [Who Is Providing Intelligence? Where to
> Attack From? The Sneak Attack on the Unmanned Boat of the Ukrainian Army Is Full of Mysteries],
> Xinhua, May 26, 2023, http://www.news.cn/mil/2023-05/26/c_1212192403.htm.
> 38 Feima, “Why Does Russia.”
> 39 Lan Shunzheng, “ 小船搏大舰 —— 自杀式小艇袭击与防御问题漫谈 ” [Small Ships Fight Big
> Ships—a Discussion on the Attack and Defense of Suicide Boats], Shipboard Weapons , April 20,
> 2023, available at https://user.guancha.cn/main/content?id=980397.
> 40 Chen Yang, “ 无人艇凌晨突袭 ” [Unmanned Boat Raid in the Early Morning], Paper , November 3,
> 2022, https://m.thepaper.cn/newsDetail_forward_20577383; and “ ‘苏联海军最后的余晖落幕 !’ 巨
> 舰沉没 ,无人作战时代来临 ” [“The Last Glimmer of the Soviet Navy Has Ended!” The Giant Ship
> Sank, and the Era of Unmanned Combat Has Arrived], Xinhua, February 17, 2023, http://www.
> news.cn/mil/2023-02/17/c_1211729787.htm.
> 41 “‘苏联海军最后的余晖落幕 !’ 舰沉没 ,无人作战时代来临 .”
> 42 Yang Jiahui, Zhu Chaolei, and Xu Jia, “The Use of Drones in the Russia-Ukraine Conflict,” Tactical
> Missile Technology , no. 3 (2022); and Zhang Yuanhua, “Research on the Combat Use of Drone
> Technology in the Russia-Ukraine Conflict,” Science, Technology and Innovation , no. 9 (2023). Kivlehan-Wise and Tsai –Chapter 5 •121

## PRC Thinking on the Nuclear Dimensions of the Conflict 

As noted at the beginning of this chapter, PRC scholars and military 

analysts observing the war in Ukraine believe that it shares similarities with 

protracted campaigns throughout history. However, because this conflict is 

occurring in the shadow of nuclear escalation, it is fundamentally different 

from what has preceded it and possibly the start of a new type of conflict. 

PRC authors often discuss the seemingly unique deterrence dynamics 

reflected in the conduct of the war. The most frequently cited event in this 

discussion is Russia’s announcement on the third day of the crisis that its 

nuclear forces had been placed on their highest alert. This move is portrayed 

as an effort by Russia to deter the United States, NATO, or others from 

intervening in the conflict. That the warring parties were only partially 

deterred and international support continued to flow into Ukraine appears 

to have been something of a surprise for PRC analysts. One academic 

referred to the resulting conflict as a “large-scale regional conventional war 

under conditions of quasi-nuclear deterrence,” noting that “large-scale” 

referred to not only the geographic scope of the war but also the ranges 

of weapons used and the costs associated with the conflict. 43  PRC analysts 

have observed with interest which actions Russia’s nuclear saber-rattling has 

deterred and appear to be struggling to determine whether there are any 

generalizable lessons on the nature of nuclear deterrence. These academics 

portray the conflict as deadlocked and treat the use of nuclear weapons by 

either side as a very real possibility. 44  As one author wrote: “Although Russia 

has issued vague nuclear threats many times, it has not caused Ukraine to 

give up its resistance, nor has it stopped the Western aggression led by the 

United States…. In other words, the credibility of Russia’s nuclear deterrent 

has eroded. This is obviously an ominous sign for a nuclear power.” 45  Other 

aspects of the conflict discussed include the risks to nuclear power facilities 

and the potential for damage to Chernobyl. 

Beyond the immediate conflict in Ukraine, PRC academics appear 

to see implications for proliferation in Asia. One author voiced concerns 

about the increased potential for non–nuclear weapons countries to cross 

the nuclear threshold. Suggesting that many nations were comparing the       

> 43 Wu, “Large-Scale Regional Conventional War.”
> 44 Wu, “Large-Scale Regional Conventional War”; Wu, “Analysis of the Complexity of Symmetrical
> War between Great Powers”; and Wang and Shi, “Research on Cognitive Confrontation of Nuclear
> Deterrence in the Russia-Ukraine Conflict.”
> 45 He Liu and Wang Weinan, “The U.S. Strategy to Intervene in the Russo-Ukrainian War and Its
> Impact on U.S. Taiwan Strait Policy,” Cross-Taiwan Strait Studies , no. 3 (2022). 122 •The PLA in a Complex Security Environment

fate of Ukraine to the fate of North Korea, the scholar asserted that Japan 

and South Korea both had the potential to develop nuclear weapons in the 

not-too-distant future and suggested that other nations in the Indo-Pacific 

could soon follow. 46  This was portrayed as a worrying risk to be mitigated. 

To address these challenges, the author urged the PRC to pursue a policy 

of “self-restraint” by providing “positive energy” for nuclear arms control 

and disarmament and seeking opportunities to promote nuclear safety. The 

author also encouraged the PRC to more carefully track attitudes toward 

nuclear proliferation in countries around its periphery—especially in Japan 

and South Korea. 47 

## Implications for the PRC’s Thinking about a Potential 

## Taiwan Contingency 

It is difficult to assess the extent to which observations of the conflict 

in Ukraine, the performance of Russian and Ukrainian forces, and the 

international community might influence PRC thinking about the potential 

for the use of force in a Taiwan contingency. There can be no doubt that 

PRC leaders are assessing the United States’ actions during the war and 

determining whether its support for Ukraine provides lessons for predicting 

similar actions in the event of a conflict over Taiwan. One especially detailed 

article published in a journal run by the Shanghai-based Taiwan Institute 

makes several predictions—some of which are clearly at odds with how the 

United States would view a conflict in Taiwan: 48 

• The United States would be prepared to launch a special military 

operation in Taiwan similar to the one Russia is currently carrying 

out in Ukraine. 

• The United States would provide military assistance to Taiwan before 

the war broke out. This assistance would include not only weapons, 

equipment, and intelligence support but also the design of flexible 

combat models tailored to local conditions and field training for the 

Taiwanese military.        

> 46 Wu, “The Impact of the Russia-Ukraine Conflict.”
> 47 Ibid.
> 48 He and Wang, “The U.S. Strategy to Intervene in the Russo-Ukrainian War.” Kivlehan-Wise and Tsai –Chapter 5 •123

• The United States would attempt to mobilize the international 

community and impose sanctions designed to weaken the PRC’s access 

to strategic resources. The United States would also use information 

warfare and public opinion to damage the PRC’s international image. 

• The United States would be wary of China’s status as a nuclear power 

and would not want to trigger a nuclear war; it thus would maintain 

some degree of restraint in aiding Taiwan. If China achieved rapid 

success—unlike Russia’s experience with Ukraine—then U.S. aid to 

Taiwan would likely consist only of political and moral support. 

• If China failed to win quickly, the United States would likely directly 

or openly send troops to participate in the war. 

• U.S. allies closer to Taiwan, such as Japan, South Korea, the Philippines, 

Australia, and New Zealand, would play the role of Poland and the 

Baltic countries in the Russia-Ukraine conflict. 

• The United States would promote ideological differences and frame 

support for Taiwan as support for democracy. 49 

Although it is unclear how widely these assessments are believed, the fact 

that such a specific and detailed discussion of how U.S. actions in support of 

Ukraine can be applied to a Taiwan contingency exists and has been printed 

in the PRC shows that some in China are making these comparisons. At the 

very least, U.S. and NATO responses to Russian aggression, and the staying 

power of U.S. and NATO support, are being carefully analyzed. 

With regard to Russia’s shortcomings, PRC writings suggest some level 

of confidence in diagnosing the cause of Russian missteps and ensuring 

that Chinese political and military systems would not make similar 

errors. However, given Beijing’s controlled information environment, this 

confidence should be viewed with a level of skepticism. It is difficult to 

imagine that true introspection is permissible in the public domain. There 

is little room for public discussion in the PRC of the possibility that Chinese 

political and military leaders could be susceptible to the same errors made 

by Russian leaders. There is even less room for public discussion about 

whether Beijing is capable of making accurate assessments of the resolve of 

the international community on an issue as emotionally charged as Taiwan. 

Nonetheless, it is clear that Russia’s invasion of Ukraine provides an object 

lesson in errors that militaries should avoid.    

> 49 He and Wang, “The U.S. Strategy to Intervene in the Russo-Ukrainian War.” 124 •The PLA in a Complex Security Environment

There is evidence that Beijing sees the war in Ukraine as an indicator 

that the current geopolitical climate has made protracted conventional war 

among great powers more likely. While PRC military theorists may still be 

struggling to develop the language to describe these changes, it is clear that 

they recognize the new costs and risks associated with this type of conflict. If 

nothing else, PRC leaders are developing a greater appreciation for the types 

of costs the PRC might expect to pay (across all the elements of national 

power) in a protracted conflict and are seeking mechanisms to mitigate 

them. Areas where it is most logical to expect that PRC thinking has shifted 

include the role of nuclear weapons, international support for Taiwan below 

the threshold of active military participation, the wartime uses of drones in 

both reconnaissance and combat, the critical role of intelligence support, 

and the expanding role of the information domain in modern warfare. 

Finally, it is worth noting that the conflict’s ultimate resolution may 

have an outsized impact on Beijing’s calculus and actions. As the conflict 

continues, the PRC will no doubt carefully assess U.S. and European staying 

power—especially in light of debates over foreign military aid budgets. 

Beijing will also continue carefully monitoring the long-term costs of 

economic warfare for all parties and the impact of these costs on the global 

economy. PRC leaders will surely make their own assessment about the 

ultimate fate of Russia and its comprehensive national power. Whether they 

will view the war as a strategic failure for Russia, and whether such lessons 

will discourage the PRC’s use of military force across the Taiwan Strait, 

remain to be seen. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

This chapter examines the perceived strengths and weaknesses of the People’s 

Liberation Army (PLA) within the context of its modernization process and 

argues that the persistence of shortcomings may undercut the confidence 

senior leaders would prefer to have before deciding to initiate major combat. 

> MAIN ARGUMENT

Over the past decade, the PLA has significantly increased the capabilities 

of its services in all domains of war, providing China’s leaders with new 

military options to defend the country’s national interests. However, based on 

problems in its combined arms and joint warfighting capabilities, leadership, 

and political loyalty, senior PLA leaders foresee decades of work before the 

PLA considers itself a modern, world-class military confident in its ability 

to conduct advanced, system-of-systems warfare. Despite the numerous 

improvements in equipment and organization, the PLA perceives itself as 

trailing the world leaders in many aspects of military technology, racing 

against time while its opponents are not slowing down. Even though the PLA 

may be required to fight at any moment, its leaders would prefer to stick to 

their modernization schedule ending in 2049 and achieve the nation’s goals 

through efforts short of war. 

> POLICY IMPLICATIONS

• Evaluating Chinese reports of the PLA’s weaknesses is difficult because 

they are subjective rather than objective and measurable. 

• Underestimating PLA capabilities is dangerous, but overestimating the 

pace and effectiveness of PLA modernization could lead to policies that 

cause China to increase the speed and scope of its efforts, resulting in 

an escalatory spiral or arms race. 

• The PLA’s self-assessments of its capabilities should be compared with 

both the actions it undertakes and the potential options it refrains from 

taking. 

• When interacting publicly with foreigners, Chinese leaders will not 

display doubts about PLA capabilities to “fight and win.” Chapter 6 Assessing the PLA’s Strengths 

# and Weaknesses for 

# Achieving the PRC’s Goals 

## Dennis J. Blasko and Rick Gunnell 

Since Xi Jinping became chairman of the Central Military Commission 

(CMC) in 2012, the People’s Liberation Army (PLA) has significantly 

increased the capabilities of its services and forces in all domains of war 

(land, sea, air, space, cyber, electromagnetic, and cognitive), providing 

China’s leaders with unprecedented military options to protect the country’s 

sovereignty and national interests. Yet, despite undertaking its most 

extensive organizational military reforms in years from 2015 to 2020, the 

PLA continues to identify many significant weaknesses in its combined arms 

and joint warfighting capabilities, combat leadership, and political loyalty, 

some of which have plagued the forces for years. 

Using generalized slogans and specific criticisms, Chairman Xi, his 

senior generals, and the official military media routinely acknowledge that 

the PLA still has decades to go before it considers itself a modern, world-class 

military and is confident in its ability to conduct modern system-of-systems 

warfare. Therefore, if possible, the PLA would prefer to follow the multi-

generation military modernization strategy it began 25 years ago and is 

scheduled to conclude in 2049. Yet, if external circumstances dictate that the 

Chinese Communist Party (CCP) orders the use of military force, the PLA 

leadership will obey and seek to accomplish its assigned missions with the 

forces at hand despite their shortcomings. 

Dennis J. Blasko  is a retired Lieutenant Colonel, U.S. Army, with 23 years of service as a Military 

> Intelligence Officer and Foreign Area Officer specializing in China.

Rick Gunnell  is the Research Professor of China Military Studies in the U.S. Army War College’s China 

> Landpower Studies Center.
> This chapter represents only the views of the authors and not those of the U.S. Army War College, the U.S.
> Department of Defense, or the U.S. government. The authors thank Jordan Shaw for research assistance
> and Brian Waidelich for comments.

128  • The PLA in a Complex Security Environment 

This chapter first briefly describes PLA strengths identified mostly by 

the U.S. government and analysts outside the People’s Republic of China 

(PRC). It then discusses what 2027, 2035, and 2049 mean in the process 

of PLA modernization. Subsequently, the chapter examines general PLA 

slogans that urge its personnel and units to improve their combat capabilities 

and provides recent examples of specific PLA-identified weaknesses. Within 

this context, it speculates about how the Russian and Ukrainian militaries’ 

battlefield performance might have influenced the PLA’s internal assessments 

of its own capabilities. 

## The PLA’s Strengths 

Generally, senior PLA leadership and official military media do not 

publicly boast about the PLA’s strengths compared to other militaries. 

Instead, they praise the progress it is making in its military modernization 

process, including the wide array of modern weapons and equipment that 

have entered the force over the past two decades. For example, the  PLA Daily 

stated that the new Type 055 destroyer, compared to its predecessor, features 

several improvements, but the paper does not go so far as to call it a world-

class ship. 1 PLA media frequently uses the term “assassin’s mace” ( 撒手锏 )

to describe the many weapons and capabilities that can provide a battlefield 

advantage, such as aircraft carriers, Dongfeng (DF) missiles, and J-20 stealth 

fighters. 2 Technological improvements in equipment are noted officially, 

such as in the report from the 2021 All-PLA Equipment Work Conference: 

“The PLA no longer uses first-generation equipment, and second-generation 

equipment is minimized. The PLA has established an equipment system-

of-systems with third-generation equipment as the main equipment and 

fourth-generation equipment as the backbone.” 3

In August 2023, the  PLA Daily  published a series of posters depicting 

recent PLA technological accomplishments and listed the following systems 

by date (mostly by their introduction into the active force): 

• 2016: Y-20 heavy-lift transport aircraft          

> 1“The Eighth Type 055 Destroyer Officially Commissioned to PLA Navy,” China Military Online,
> April 23, 2023, http://eng.chinamil.com.cn/CHINA_209163/TopStories_209189/16219372.html.
> 2Yu Shiyong, “ 能力更强大 手段更可靠 ” [Stronger Capabilities, More Reliable Means], PLA Daily ,
> August 9, 2021, http://www.81.cn/pl_208541/jdt_208542/10073231.html.
> 3Wu Qian, “2021 年11 月国防部例行记者会文字实录 ” [Transcript of the Ministry of National
> Defense’s Regular Press Conference, November 2021], Ministry of National Defense of the People’s
> Republic of China (PRC), November 25, 2021, http://www.mod.gov.cn/shouye/2021-11/25/
> content_4899682.htm. Blasko and Gunnell –Chapter 6 •129

• 2018: Type 15 light tank and the Z-20 helicopter 

• 2019: DF-17 hypersonic medium-range ballistic missile, DF-41 

intercontinental ballistic missile, and  Shandong , the first domestically 

produced aircraft carrier 

• 2020:  Nanchang , a Type 055 destroyer 

• 2021:  Changzhen g-18 , a nuclear-powered ballistic missile submarine; 

Dalian , a Type 055 destroyer;  Hainan , a Type 075 amphibious assault 

ship; and three echelons of J-20 stealth fighters (which flew over 

Tiananmen Square and first entered the force in 2017) 

• 2022:  Fujian , the second domestically produced but first domestically 

designed aircraft carrier, and the YY-20 aerial refueler 

The text of the accompanying article described these accomplishments 

as “significant progress…in the construction of national defense science and 

technology and weapons and equipment.” These accomplishments are the 

result of Chinese “initiative through independent innovation” in contrast 

to “frequent reports of great powers’ heavy weapons.” 4 Still, with none of 

its modern weapons systems or personnel tested in combat, the PLA itself 

appears to be hesitant to assume the mantle of “best in the world.” Highly 

choreographed parades on land or sea for anniversaries and important 

events are used to display advanced weapons and support equipment. 

However, official Chinese media is less effusive about the PLA’s ability to 

employ its new weapons according to its evolving doctrine in advanced, 

system-of-systems joint and combined arms operations. 

On the other hand, outside China, advances in PLA weapons often 

are portrayed as having reached state-of-the-art or nearly state-of-the-art 

levels. In 2020 the U.S. Department of Defense’s China Military Power 

Report declared that the PRC is already ahead of the United States in 

shipbuilding, land-based conventional ballistic and cruise missiles, and 

integrated air defense systems. The report further asserted that the “PRC 

continues to place a high priority on modernizing the PLA’s capability to 

command complex joint operations in near and distant battlefields. The 

PRC is seeking to enhance the PLA’s joint command and control systems, 

joint logistics systems, and command, control, communications, computers,   

> 4“科技是核心战斗力 —— 八论全面深入学习贯彻习近平强军思想 ” [Science and Technology
> Are the Core of Combat Effectiveness—Eight Essays Comprehensively and Thoroughly Study and
> Implement Xi Jinping’s Thought on Strengthening the Military], PLA Daily , August 9, 2023, http://
> www.81.cn/tj_208608/16243763.html.

130  • The PLA in a Complex Security Environment 

intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance (C4ISR) systems.” 5 At the 

same time, the PLA is modernizing and expanding the size and capabilities 

of its nuclear triad. These strategic assets are enhanced by Chinese space 

operations, which, according to the U.S. Office of the Director of National 

Intelligence, are “steadily progressing toward [the PRC’s] goal of becoming 

a world-class space leader, with the intent to match or surpass the United 

States by 2045.” 6

In 2023 the Australian Strategic Policy Institute concluded that China 

leads the world in 37 of 44 critical technologies, especially in advanced data 

analytics, artificial intelligence (AI) algorithms, and hardware accelerators. 7

The PLA’s strengths in intelligence gathering, processing, and exploitation 

systems enhance its ability to comprehensively assess the United States’ and 

other militaries’ capabilities. The use of terms and phrases such as “strong 

enemy” ( 强敌 ), “formidable opponent” ( 强敌对手 ), and “use the enemy to 

train the troops” ( 拿敌练兵 ) are explicit calls to learn from adversaries and 

develop realistic training. 8

As early as August 2018, the PLA began procuring a new (or likely 

enhancing an existing) open-source intelligence database on foreign 

militaries. 9 As the PRC reduces foreign access to its own data, it is applying 

AI to leverage open-source intelligence to better understand foreign 

militaries and defense industries, including those from the United States, 

Russia, the United Kingdom, Japan, and India. The PLA is also increasing 

its use of virtual reality and training simulators to increase soldier and unit  

> 5

U.S. Department of Defense,  Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic 

of China 2020  (Washington, D.C., September 2020), 38, https://media.defense.gov/2020/ 

Sep/01/2002488689/-1/-1/1/2020-DOD-CHINA-MILITARY-POWER-REPORT-FINAL.PDF.  

> 6

U.S. Office of the Director of National Intelligence,  Annual Threat Assessment of the U.S. Intelligence 

Community  (Washington, D.C., February 2023), 8, https://www.dni.gov/files/ODNI/documents/ 

assessments/ATA-2023-Unclassified-Report.pdf.  

> 7

Jamie Gaida et al., “ASPI’s Critical Technology Tracker—Sensors and Biotech Updates,” Australian 

Strategic Policy Institute, September 22, 2023, https://www.aspi.org.au/report/critical-technology-

tracker.  

> 8

Ryan D. Martinson and Conor Kennedy, “Using the Enemy to Train the Troops—Beijing’s New 

Approach to Prepare Its Navy for War,” Jamestown Foundation, China Brief, March 25, 2022, https:// 

jamestown.org/program/using-the-enemy-to-train-the-troops-beijings-new-approach-to-prepare-

its-navy-for-war; and “ 深入推进实战化军事训练 ” [Deepen Combat-Oriented Military Training], 

PLA Daily , February 16, 2023, http://www.81.cn/szb_223187/szbxq/index.html?paperName=jfjb& 

paperDate=2023-02-16&paperNumber=07&articleid=662882.  

> 9

“外军防务开源情报数据库建设 ” [Building an Open-Source Intelligence Database on Foreign 

Militaries], All-Military Weapons Procurement Information, August 27, 2018; and Julian E. Barnes, 

“China Investing in Open-Source Intelligence Collection on the U.S.,”  New York Times , June 1, 2023, 

https://www.nytimes.com/2023/06/01/us/politics/china-us-open-source-intelligence.html. Blasko and Gunnell  – Chapter 6  • 131 

capabilities, especially for pilots and staff in all services. 10  The PLA is likely 

pursuing these efforts to develop both capabilities and countermeasures 

against potential adversaries. 

The divergence between the PLA’s reporting on its progress and 

Western assessments of its capabilities can likely be attributed to the PLA 

wanting to position itself as a world leader (but not necessarily the leader) 

in the future. The PLA recognizes that technology and future warfare will 

evolve in ways that can only be imagined today; thus, its current opacity 

probably has less to do with masking true progress and more to do with 

being realistic that warfare and equipment can evolve in many ways over 

the coming decades, with the lead shifting back and forth among countries 

over time in various domains and technologies. The U.S. military is not 

always the PLA’s measuring rod for world-class standards because the PRC 

accepts that one country cannot be the leader in every aspect of warfare. 

Instead, it looks at military modernization holistically, taking inspiration 

from whichever country is leading and working toward being competitive 

in all domains. 

Recent changes in the PLA Rocket Force’s senior leadership 

notwithstanding, the PLA is likely most confident in its ability to execute 

a large-scale, conventional short- and medium-range ballistic and 

cruise missile punishment attack against Taiwan. “Soft kill methods” 

against Taiwan, such as cyberattacks, infrastructure “kill switches,” 

and psychological warfare, are more feasible, as well as less disruptive 

internationally, and are an option that is already being employed. 11  The 

Taiwan situation is one example of how the PLA’s strengths are formidable 

due to its geographic advantage within the first island chain and increasingly 

out to the second island chain. As the PLA operates farther from the 

Chinese mainland, these strengths decrease. 

Lastly, the PLA regards its “military-political dual leadership system” 

(军政双首长制 ) as a strength and “magic weapon” ( 法宝 ). 12  At the company        

> 10 Chen Dianhong, “ 模拟飞行 ,虚拟空间磨砺打仗本领 ” [Simulated Flight, Virtual Space to Sharpen
> Combat Skills], PLA Daily , May 14, 2023, http://www.81.cn/szb_223187/szbxq/index.html?paperN
> ame=jfjb&paperDate=2023-05-14&paperNumber=02&articleid=905740; and “ 东部战区陆军 科技
> 练兵 仿真技术助推飞行员战力提升 ” [Eastern Theater Command Army’s Training Simulation
> Technology Boosts Pilot Combat Strength], China Central Television, April 28, 2022, https://
> tv.cctv.com/2022/04/28/VIDEz1wZjKnvtArv2EmeFJyI220428.shtml?spm=C28340.P3GbPoIN6ktz.
> EYNivD0SyIDR.3.
> 11 Elisabeth Braw, “China Is Practicing How to Sever Taiwan’s Internet,” Foreign Policy , February 21,
> 2023, https://foreignpolicy.com/2023/02/21/matsu-islands-internet-cables-china-taiwan.
> 12 Dang Jian, “ 在党的旗帜下奋斗强军 ” [Strive to Strengthen the Army under the Banner of the Party],
> PLA Daily , July 20, 2023, http://www.81.cn/szb_223187/szbxq/index.html?paperName=jfjb&paper
> Date=2023-07-20&paperNumber=01&articleid=910913.

132  • The PLA in a Complex Security Environment 

level and higher, a commander and political commissar (or political 

instructor) share responsibility for everything the unit does. Despite flaws 

in some officers and questions about party loyalty, the system has survived 

multiple restructurings over many decades and is designed to ensure that all 

participants clearly understand and are prepared to execute their assigned 

missions. 

## The PLA’s Modernization Timeline 

The PLA is halfway through a five-decade, multifaceted military 

modernization process. Over time, the milestones and specific goals 

have been modified, but the end date has remained the same. Due to the 

complexity of this process and the PLA’s lack of recent combat experience, 

the senior leadership would prefer to take the time necessary to train its 

personnel and units for the rigors of high-intensity, multidomain conflict 

rather than committing the PLA to battle when it is not fully prepared. 

In 1997, under the leadership of Jiang Zemin, the CCP’s 15th National 

Congress issued a strategic plan to modernize the PLA in three stages 

over the next 50 years. Jiang noted that “there are still some prominent 

contradictions and problems in the PLA’s development [that] affect and 

restrict PLA building.” 13  However, the CCP did not announce this plan to 

the world until its 2006 white paper on national defense, which stated: 

China pursues a three-step development strategy in modernizing its national 

defense and armed forces.… The first step is to lay a solid foundation by 2010, 

the second is to make major progress around 2020, and the third is to basically 

reach the strategic goal of building informatized armed forces and being capable 

of winning informatized wars by the mid-21st century [i.e., 2049]. 14 

The milestones for 2010 and 2020 were so vague that nearly any 

progress would suffice. Two years later, the end goal was modified to “by and 

large reach the goal of modernization of national defense and armed forces 

by the mid-21st century,” 15  dropping the reference to informatized armed 

forces and wars probably because the senior PLA leadership realized that by        

> 13 Jiang Zemin, “ 江泽民 :实现国防和军队现代化建设跨世纪发展的战略目标 ” [Jiang Zemin: Realize
> the Strategic Goal of Cross-Century Development of National Defense and Military Modernization],
> China Reform, December 7, 1997, http://www.reformdata.org/1997/1207/5729.shtml.
> 14 “China Issues White Paper on National Defense,” China Daily , December 29, 2006, http://www.
> chinadaily.com.cn/china/2006-12/29/content_770831.htm.
> 15 State Council Information Office (PRC), China’s National Defense in 2008 (Beijing, January 2009),
> available at https://www.files.ethz.ch/isn/156833/China_English2008.pdf.

Blasko and Gunnell  – Chapter 6  • 133 

2049 some new form of war would require capabilities unknown in 2008. 

“Modernization” was a safer, yet nebulous, term, allowing the flexibility to 

make further adjustments as conditions changed. 

In 2017, Chairman Xi Jinping established 2035 as a new intermediate 

goal to “modernize military theory, organization, personnel, and equipment, 

and basically achieve national defense and PLA modernization.” He also 

revised the ultimate objective to “build the people’s army into a world-

class military [ 世界一流军队 ] by mid-century.” 16  The intermediate goal 

likely includes completing doctrinal, structural, and personnel reforms 

and replacing nearly all Soviet-era equipment. By 2035, initial batches of 

the PLA’s new equipment will be two to three decades old and approaching 

retirement in the coming decade as military leaders continue to tweak their 

modernized forces over the next fifteen years. A “world-class military” 

was not defined, but it suggests that the PLA will continue to adjust and 

integrate new capabilities so that it can routinely undertake multidomain, 

global operations that are supported by overseas bases. PLA capabilities will 

be “commensurate with the country’s international standing and its security 

and development interests.” 17 

After the 2020 milestone passed, Chairman Xi added a new third 

step: “achieving the military’s centennial goal ( 百年奋斗目标 ) by 2027,” 

the PLA’s 100th anniversary. 18  Numerous senior U.S. military officers and 

others have predicted that this means the PLA will go to war by 2027, 

resulting in multiple refutations of such speculation. 19  In fact, the PLA has 

publicly pronounced the years leading to this date as an acceleration of the 

modernization process. 20                   

> 16 “Xi Calls for Building a Strong Army,” Xinhua, October 26, 2017, http://www.xinhuanet.com/
> english/2017-10/26/c_136708142.htm.
> 17 State Council Information Office (PRC), China’s National Defense in the New Era
> (Beijing, July 2019), https://english.www.gov.cn/archive/whitepaper/201907/24/content_
> WS5d3941ddc6d08408f502283d.html.
> 18 Zhong Xin, “ 确保实现建军百年奋斗目标 (深入学习贯彻党的十九届五中全会精神 )” [Ensure
> the Realization of the Military’s Centenary Goal (In-depth Study and Implementation of the Spirit
> of the Fifth Plenary Session of the 19th CCP Central Committee)], PLA Daily , January 25, 2021,
> http://www.81.cn/2021zt/2021-01/25/content_9973944.htm; and Brian Hart, Bonnie S. Glaser, and
> Matthew P. Funaiole, “China’s 2027 Goal Marks the PLA’s Centennial, Not an Expedited Military
> Modernization,” Jamestown Foundation, China Brief, March 26, 2021, https://jamestown.org/
> program/chinas-2027-goal-marks-the-plas-centennial-not-an-expedited-military-modernization.
> 19 For example, see Kevin Baron, “ ‘Lower the Rhetoric’ on China, Says Milley,” Defense One, March
> 31, 2023, https://www.defenseone.com/threats/2023/03/lower-rhetoric-china-says-milley/384693.
> 20 “Efforts Must Be Made to Accelerate Modernization of National Defense and Armed Forces,”
> China Military Online, July 13, 2021, http://eng.chinamil.com.cn/2021special/2021-07/13/
> content_10061116.htm.

134  • The PLA in a Complex Security Environment 

Recent public statements by U.S. intelligence officials suggest an internal 

debate within the U.S. government about China’s specific, unspoken goals 

for 2027. For example, the CIA director is quoted as saying: “We know as 

a matter of intelligence that [Xi has] instructed the PLA to be ready by 

2027 to conduct a successful invasion. Now, that does not mean that he’s 

decided to conduct an invasion in 2027 or any other year, but it’s a reminder 

of the seriousness of his focus and his ambition.” 21  A few days later, the 

U.S. director of national intelligence described a more limited objective: 

“Beijing is working to meet its goal of fielding a military by 2027 designed 

to deter U.S. intervention in a future cross-strait crisis.” 22  Contrary to the 

CIA assessment, deterring U.S. intervention is one element of an invasion of 

Taiwan that focuses on the maritime and aerospace domains but does not 

include the massive land domain element of a cross-strait assault. 

Despite the dissonance in U.S. government analysis, senior Chinese 

leadership in 2022 and 2023 consistently repeated its modernization timeline. 23 

In late 2022, outgoing CMC vice chair Xu Qiliang called 2027, 2035, and 2049 

near-, medium-, and long-term goals, respectively, for strengthening the 

military. 24  Identifying and solving problems or challenges in the force remains 

the core focus for the PLA’s long-term modernization process. 

## The PLA’s Self-Identified Weaknesses 

Although the PLA’s visible strengths cause understandable regional and 

global concern, official Chinese media organizations report almost daily 

on a litany of major and minor shortcomings throughout the PLA. Even 

though these assessments often are only a small part of articles, they identify 

problems that inhibit the PLA’s ability to conduct modern war. The CCP 

and PLA’s propaganda system uses slogans and phrases to remind everyone, 

from senior leaders to the newest recruits, that building a world-class force        

> 21 Olivia Gazis, “CIA Director William Burns: ‘I Wouldn’t Underestimate’ Xi’s Ambitions for Taiwan,”
> CBS News, February 3, 2023, https://www.cbsnews.com/news/cia-director-william-burns-i-wouldnt-
> underestimate-xis-ambitions-for-taiwan.
> 22 U.S. Office of the Director of National Intelligence, Annual Threat Assessment of the U.S. Intelligence
> Community , 7.
> 23 Dong Yongzai, “ 朝着实现党在新时代的强军目标奋勇前进 ” [Forge Ahead toward the Party’s
> Goal of Strengthening the Army in the New Era], PLA Daily , March 10, 2023, available at http://
> www.mod.gov.cn/gfbw/jmsd/16207985.html.
> 24 Xu Qiliang, “ 如期实现建军一百年奋斗目标 (认真学习宣传贯彻党的二十大精神 )” [Achieve the
> Goal of 100 Years of Building the Army as Scheduled (Carefully Study, Publicize, and Implement
> the Spirit of the 20th Party Congress)], People’s Daily , November 7, 2022, http://paper.people.com.
> cn/rmrb/html/2022-11/07/nw.D110000renmrb_20221107_1-06.htm.

Blasko and Gunnell  – Chapter 6  • 135 

takes significant time, hard work, and a daily commitment to excellence. 

Because these self-criticisms appear in domestic Chinese-language media, 

they likely are not deception operations, as the primary audience is domestic 

rather than international. 

## General Self-Assessment Slogans and Formulas 

The CCP and PLA frequently use blunt slogans about continuing 

problems such as (1) a lack of warfighting capabilities, (2) combat leadership 

issues, and (3) doubts about political reliability. The most prominent slogans 

created or re-emphasized by Chairman Xi Jinping are the following: 

• “Two inabilities” ( 两个能力不够  or  两个不够 ): (1) The PLA is unable 

to fight a modern war, and (2) its cadres (officers) at all levels are unable 

to command modern war. 

• “Two big gaps” ( 两个差距很大 ): There are big gaps between the PLA’s 

military modernization level and (1) the requirements for national 

security and (2) the level of the world’s advanced militaries. 

• “Three whethers” ( 三个能不能 ): These ask whether the PLA can 

(1) constantly maintain the party’s absolute leadership, (2) fight 

victoriously, and (3) rely on its commanders at all levels to competently 

lead forces and command in war when needed by the CCP. 

• “Five incapables [cannots]” ( 五个不会 ): Some commanders cannot (1) 

judge the situation, (2) understand the intention of higher authorities, 

(3) make operational decisions, (4) deploy troops, or (5) deal with 

unexpected situations. 25 

• “Five weaknesses” ( 五弱 ): These include (1) adaptation to the 

environment, (2) management and coordination, (3) equipment 

operations, (4) combat command, and (5) training organization. 26 

Of note, over the past two years, the frequency with which these slogans 

have appeared in the Chinese-language version of the  PLA Daily  seems 

to have decreased. This is likely due to the Chinese counterintelligence 

apparatus observing that they have attracted foreign attention. Nonetheless, 

the “five incapables,” “two inabilities,” and “two big gaps” have appeared   

> 25 Dennis J. Blasko, “PLA Weaknesses and Xi’s Concerns about PLA Capabilities,” testimony before
> the U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, Washington, D.C., February 7, 2019,
> https://www.uscc.gov/sites/default/files/Blasko_USCC%20Testimony_FINAL.pdf.
> 26 Kenneth W. Allen et al., “Personnel of the People’s Liberation Army,” BluePath Labs, November
> 3, 2022, 11, available at https://www.uscc.gov/sites/default/files/2022-11/Personnel_Peoples_
> Liberation_Army.pdf.

136  • The PLA in a Complex Security Environment 

multiple times in 2023, while the “three whethers” was last observed 

in 2022. 27  The “five weaknesses” is one of the less frequently used slogans— 

perhaps because it is so harsh and the PLA has made some progress in 

addressing these issues. It was also last seen in 2022. 28 

Additional terms, such as “peace disease” ( 和平病 ), “peacetime habits” 

(和平积习 ), and “peacetime malpractices/accumulated disadvantages” ( 和平 

积弊 ), have been used to refer to the PLA’s lack of recent combat experience 

and bad habits developed as the result of long periods of peace. A 2022 

PLA Daily  article warned that “peacetime officers” are training “peacetime 

soldiers” to do “peacetime things” (e.g., taking shortcuts, lowering standards, 

and falsifying scores). 29  The term “peacetime habits” has not appeared 

since 2021, and “peace disease” was only observed once in July 2023. 30  The 

currently preferred terminology (cited on many occasions in 2023) appears 

to be “peacetime malpractices,” with some progress noted. 31  Another term, 

“accumulated malpractices” ( 沉疴积弊 ), is being used to represent long-

standing problems even as “peacetime malpractices” are being rectified. 32 

Additional terminology for issues in “grassroots” ( 基层 ) units (battalion 

and below) includes the following: 

• The “four winds” ( 四风 ), which represent persistent problems caused 

by formalism, bureaucratism, hedonism, and extravagance; 33  

> 27

Tian Hongming, “ 真抓实干 , 向难攻坚砺刀锋 ” [Work Hard, Attack Hard, and Sharpen the Blade], 

PLA Daily , May 21, 2023, http://www.81.cn/szb_223187/szbxq/index.html?paperName=jfjb&pap 

erDate=2023-05-21&paperNumber=01&articleid=906287; Su Liangbo, “ 加快推进军事教育高质 

量发展 ” [Accelerate High-Quality Development of Military Education],  PLA Daily , June 22, 2023, 

http://www.81.cn/szb_223187/szbxq/index.html?paperName=jfjb&paperDate=2023-06-22&pape 

rNumber=03&articleid=908658; and Zhang Yi, Xu Jun, and Li Longyi, “ 把人民军队建设成为世 

界一流军队  (领航中国 )” [Build the People’s Army into a World-Class Army (Leading China)], 

People’s Daily , September 24, 2022, http://www.81.cn/yw_208727/10186986.html.  

> 28

“治军 , 当以严为要 ” [Strictness Is Key in Administering the Military], People’s Navy, August 9, 2022, 3.  

> 29

Chen Guohai, He Quanda, and Wang Yumei, “ 旗语呼救，老的本领丢不得 ” [The Flag Calls 

for Help, Don’t Lose Old Capabilities],  PLA Daily , June 1, 2022, http://www.81.cn/jfjbmap/ 

content/2022-06/01/content_316839.htm.  

> 30

Dang, “ 在党的旗帜下奋斗强军 ”; and Shi Ming, “ 以担当尽责践行初心使命 ” [Carry Out 

the Original Mission with Responsibility],  PLA Daily , June 9, 2021, http://www.81.cn/gfbmap/ 

content/2021-06/09/content_291272.htm.  

> 31

Chen Feihu, “ 透过连队这扇窗，我看到了什么 ” [What Did I See through the Company’s 

Window?],  PLA Daily , March 27, 2023, http://www.81.cn/szb_223187/szbxq/index.html?paperN 

ame=jfjb&paperDate=2023-03-27&paperNumber=08&articleid=901890.  

> 32

Xia Wenxiang, Feng Pihu, and Gu Chaojie, “ 抓住科学推进军事治理的枢纽 ” [Seize the Hub of 

Scientific Promotion of Military Governance],  PLA Daily , September 12, 2023, http://www.81.cn/ 

szb_223187/szbxq/index.html?paperName=jfjb&paperDate=2023-09-12&paperNumber=07&arti 

cleid=915074.  

> 33

Li Jiyuan, “ 廉洁奉公树立新风 —— 牢牢把握主题教育的目标要求 ” [Establish a New Style of 

Honesty and Integrity—Firmly Grasp the Goals and Requirements of Thematic Education],  PLA 

Daily , April 24, 2023, http://www.81.cn/szb_223187/szbxq/index.html?paperName=jfjb&paperDa 

te=2023-04-24&paperNumber=06&articleid=903991. Blasko and Gunnell  – Chapter 6  • 137 

• The “five excesses” ( 五多 ), which include excessive meetings, official 

documents, time staying in the office, miscellaneous affairs, and general 

appeals and slogans; 34  and 

• “Micro-corruption” ( 微腐败 ), such as small bribes and gifts to low-level 

officials, especially those responsible for recruitment and conscription. 35 

Furthermore, China perceives itself as being “strangled” or “choked” 

(卡脖子 ) by foreign countries preventing it from acquiring core technologies 

needed by the military and civilian sectors. This common theme intensifies 

Beijing’s push for domestic innovation and self-reliance. 36  Though China 

has had some success in breaking this grip, its technology development goal 

is to transition from “following, to running side-by-side, to taking the lead” 

(从跟跑、并跑到领跑 ), 37  which is the Chinese analogue to the U.S. “pacing 

challenge.” However, China sees itself as currently trailing the world leaders 

in most aspects of military technology. It perceives itself as racing against 

time while its opponents are not slowing down and, in fact, sharpening 

their knives against China. 38  While they acknowledge that the military 

modernization process is accelerating in many areas, Chinese officials have 

provided no public timeline to take the lead in any given technology. 

When the PLA speaks about its inability to fight a modern war, it 

frequently refers to problems in the integration of capabilities and systems 

employed by the individual services to fight a multidomain joint conflict 

employing system-of-systems operations. A 2023 RAND report summarized 

this view: 

The PLA sees itself as the weaker side in the overall military balance, largely 

because it has made only limited progress in those key areas that will define 

future warfare, most importantly informatization and system-of-systems-based 

operations. China’s political and military leaders do recognize the qualitative 

and quantitative improvements in the PLA’s weapon systems and technology;              

> 34 Xu Jun, “ 锻造新时代打仗型党委班子 ” [Forge a Battle-Oriented Party Committee Group for the
> New Era], PLA Daily , November 1, 2023, http://www.81.cn/yw_208727/16263576.html.
> 35 Wang Lujun, “ 科学把握加强基层治理的路径 ” [Scientifically Grasp the Path to Strengthening
> Grassroots Governance], PLA Daily , October 31, 2023, http://www.81.cn/yw_208727/16263279.
> html.
> 36 Wang Heng, “ 依靠新的伟大斗争创造新的历史伟业 ” [Rely on New Great Struggles to Create
> New Historical Achievements], PLA Daily , February 27, 2023, http://www.81.cn/xxqj_207719/xxjt/
> ll/16204415.html.
> 37 Lei Bin, Hu Danqing, and Yu Junwei, “ 大国巨舰从这里驶向深蓝 ” [Great-Power Giant Ship Sails to
> the Deep Blue from Here], PLA Daily , June 17, 2022, http://www.81.cn/jfjbmap/content/2022-06/17/
> content_317961.htm.
> 38 Zhang Xicheng, “ 掌握打胜仗的主动权 ,需要在练兵备战中强化 ‘读秒 ’意识 ” [Master Initiative to
> Win Battles Requires Strengthening the Awareness of “Counting Seconds” in Training and Preparing
> for War], PLA Daily , June 29, 2022, http://www.81.cn/yw/2022-06/29/content_10167242.htm.

138  • The PLA in a Complex Security Environment 

however,  in many areas that are essential to conducting systems confrontation and 

systems destruction warfare, there remain significant gaps  that have received the 

attention of Xi Jinping himself [italics added]. 39 

These concerns have roots across multiple areas, including personnel, 

leadership, training, logistics, and equipment. Common terms that the 

PLA uses to signify problems include “shortcomings” ( 短板 ), “weaknesses” 

(弱项 ), “bottlenecks” ( 瓶颈 ), and “skill/ability panic” ( 本领恐慌 ) among 

personnel that are uncomfortable with their abilities to perform their 

assigned responsibilities. These terms are used nearly on a daily basis and 

justify the generalizations found in PLA slogans. 

A representative example of how PLA shortcomings are reported 

is found in a 2023  PLA Daily  article that used ten paragraphs to describe 

technological progress at a PLA Navy comprehensive support base. However, 

in the penultimate paragraph, a warehouse commander observed: “Despite 

these achievements, we see that there still is a gap in the construction of a 

modern military logistics system. There are many difficulties to overcome; 

we must strive to catch up.” 40 

## Personnel Weaknesses 

Senior leaders, from Xi on down, understand that cultivating high-

quality, well-educated, and professional personnel is the key to developing 

a world-class military. 41  To fill its ranks, PLA entry standards were relaxed, 

while pay and benefits increased. As the defense budget has grown, the PLA 

is committing tremendous resources to improving its soldiers’ uniforms, 

food, living conditions, and medical and psychological care. Yet, personnel 

problems continue to challenge officers, noncommissioned officers (NCOs), 

conscripts, and civilians in every service. 

The percentage of college students and graduates in the force has 

increased but is still considered inadequate. 42  Some recruits from colleges 

are assigned to units that do not utilize their skills, while other units           

> 39 Mark Cozad et al., Gaining Victory in Systems Warfare: China’s Perspective on the U.S.-China Military
> Balance (Santa Monica: RAND Corporation, 2023), vii–viii.
> 40 “确保手中武器装备始终 ‘在状态 ’” [Make Sure That Weapons and Equipment in Hand Are Always
> “in Condition”], PLA Daily , May 15, 2023, http://www.81.cn/szb_223187/szbxq/index.html?paper
> Name=jfjb&paperDate=2023-05-13&paperNumber=02&articleid=905722 .
> 41 “Xi: Build World-Class Military,” China Military Online, July 30, 2022, http://eng.chinamil.com.cn/
> CHINA_209163/TopStories_209189/10174715.html.
> 42 Xu Tian and Zhou Yaoqiang, “ 用法治保障征兵工作高质量发展 ” [Use the Rule of Law to Ensure
> High-Quality Development of Conscription], PLA Daily , April 24, 2023, http://www.81.cn/
> szb_223187/szbxq/index.html?paperName=jfjb&paperDate=2023-04-24&paperNumber=06&arti
> cleid=903990.

Blasko and Gunnell  – Chapter 6  • 139 

that require specific qualifications cannot fill those billets, resulting in 

retention problems. 43  Some directly recruited NCOs, who have not served 

as conscripts, have problems acclimating to the military. 44  Some “leading 

cadres slip into the abyss of violating discipline” because they lack integrity 

and self-control. 45  A “small number” of CCP members and cadres in the 

PLA have political problems that affect their judgment and performance. 46 

The expanding contingent of non–active duty contract civilians faces its own 

challenges in recruiting and retaining qualified personnel. 47 

Xi and others have acknowledged that additional reform to the military 

academy system is required to overcome the “five incapables” and other 

leadership problems like peacetime malpractice. 48  The PLA believes that 

its military education system is not effectively educating personnel for 

combat. 49  Some units lament a shortage of talent due to the PLA improperly 

employing personnel according to their skills. Other units protect (i.e., 

hoard) highly educated personnel, refusing to let them transfer to other 

units for professional growth and development out of fear that it will make 

the unit less capable. 50 

The  PLA Daily  is filled with articles providing educational examples of 

how officers, NCOs, and conscripts need to communicate better and help 

each other. Many articles are dedicated to teaching officers and NCOs how  

> 43

Zhu Yongjun et al., “ 为战选才 : 特长兵加速奔向战位 ” [Selecting Talents for War: Specialized 

Soldiers Go Quickly to Battle Positions],  PLA Daily , June 13, 2022, http://www.81.cn/jfjbmap/ 

content/2022-06/13/content_317609.htm.  

> 44

Liu Zhuo, “ 定向培养军士崭露头角 ” [Targeted Training of Sergeants Emerges],  PLA Daily , May 9, 

2023, http://www.81.cn/szb_223187/szbxq/index.html?paperName=jfjb&paperDate=2023-05-09&pa 

perNumber=04&articleid=905230.  

> 45

Zhang Fangjun, “ 涵养廉洁自律的道德修为 ” [Maintain the Moral Practice of Integrity and 

Self-Discipline],  PLA Daily , June 14, 2022, http://www.81.cn/jfjbmap/content/2022-06/14/ 

content_317666.htm.  

> 46

Jin Zexing, “ 增强讲政治的内在主动 ” [Strengthen Internal Political Initiatives],  PLA Daily , May 9, 

2023, http://www.81.cn/szb_223187/szbxq/index.html?paperName=jfjb&paperDate=2023-05-09&pa 

perNumber=06&articleid=905234.  

> 47

“加强新时代文职人员队伍建设的重要制度保障 ” [Strengthen the Important Institutional Support 

for the Construction of Civilian Personnel in the New Era],  PLA Daily , January 30, 2023, http:// 

www.81.cn/yw/2023-01/30/content_10215250.htm.  

> 48

“Xi: Build World-Class Military”; Su, “ 加快推进军事教育高质量发展 ”; and Zhou Shibin and Chen 

Baihong, “ 建强新型军事人才培养体系 ” [Building a Strong New Military Talent Training System], 

PLA Daily , December 21, 2022, http://www.81.cn/yw/2022-12/21/content_10206891.htm.  

> 49

Wu Jihong, Wang Hao, and Zhang Chuanguo, “ 以战领教 , 战教一体育英才 ” [Learn through Battles, 

and Use Battles to Teach Talented Persons],  PLA Daily , June 27, 2023, http://www.81.cn/szb_223187/ 

szbxq/index.html?paperName=jfjb&paperDate=2023-06-27&paperNumber=01&articleid=908910.  

> 50

Lu Tailai and He Guancheng, “ 让尖子成为种子 ” [Let the Best Soldiers Be the Seed],  PLA Daily ,

May 10, 2023, http://www.81.cn/szb_223187/szbxq/index.html?paperName=jfjb&paperDate=2023-

05-10&paperNumber=06&articleid=905397; and Ren Jingzhi, “ 使用是最好的培养 ” [Application 

Is the Best Training],  PLA Daily , June 15, 2023, http://www.81.cn/szb_223187/szbxq/index.html?p 

aperName=jfjb&paperDate=2023-06-15&paperNumber=04&articleid=908194. 140  • The PLA in a Complex Security Environment 

to properly interact with each other and the importance of listening to and 

acting on the problems of subordinates. 51  The PLA seeks for units to be like 

families ( 部队大家庭 ) in which the officers are respected and the soldiers 

loved. 52  Creating such an environment supports recruiting and retaining 

educated and technically savvy personnel born after the turn of the century. 

Grassroots leaders are encouraged to be the “most aware of shortcomings” 

and produce “golden ideas,” yet a general “ability panic” exists among them. 53 

Similar problems are found in the People’s Armed Forces Department cadre 

responsible for PLA recruitment and the command of militia units. 54 

Leadership development is a constant challenge for any military, 

and it is further complicated in the PLA by the requirement to maintain 

absolute political loyalty to the CCP. Traditional Chinese hierarchical social 

relationships can impair this effort, as many officers, NCOs, and conscripts 

must learn how to interact effectively with each other. The PLA seeks to 

enhance tactical proficiency, initiative, and flexibility among its junior 

personnel, especially political officers. 55 

## Training Weaknesses 

The PLA undertakes individual and unit training to prepare its 

personnel and units to execute its evolving doctrine. The PLA is developing 

tactics, techniques, and procedures for many operations that other militaries 

have executed for decades, often in war. Structural changes since 2015 have 

required that units focus on establishing operational proficiency at the 

battalion level and below before moving on to larger, more complex exercises. 

Every training event, no matter the size, is intended to identify problems that                  

> 51 Zhang Huiqing, Ren Tianle, and Yan Qizhao, “ 让‘带走的难题 ’个个有答案 ” [Let Every “Takeaway
> Problem” Have Answers], PLA Daily , November 10, 2023, http://www.81.cn/szb_223187/szbxq/
> index.html?paperName=jfjb&paperDate=2023-11-10&paperNumber=06&articleid=918978.
> 52 Wang Dan, Wang Feng, and Huang Xing, “ ‘连队就是家 ,战友如亲人 ’” [“The Company Is Home,
> and Comrades Are Like Relatives”], PLA Daily , October 12, 2023, http://www.81.cn/szb_223187/
> szbxq/index.html?paperName=jfjb&paperDate=2023-10-12&paperNumber=03&articleid=916876.
> 53 Zhang Fan, “ 励创新，跑出建设发展加速度 ” [Encourage Innovation, Accelerate Construction and
> Development], PLA Daily , May 8, 2023, http://www.81.cn/szb_223187/szbxq/index.html?paperNa
> me=jfjb&paperDate=2023-05-08&paperNumber=06&articleid=905134; and Hu Pu, “ 当一名会 ‘领
> 读’的基层带兵人 ” [Be a Grassroots Leader Who Can “Lead the Study”], PLA Daily , May 9, 2023,
> http://www.81.cn/szb_223187/szbxq/index.html?paperName=jfjb&paperDate=2023-05-09&paper
> Number=08&articleid=905241.
> 54 Zhang Leifeng, “ 学以致用 ,真抓实帮促发展 ” [Use What You Have Learned to Help Promote
> Development], PLA Daily , May 10, 2023, http://www.81.cn/szb_223187/szbxq/index.html?paperN
> ame=jfjb&paperDate=2023-05-10&paperNumber=01&articleid=905415.
> 55 Liu Cheng and Huang Xinzhou, “ 南疆军区某合成团着力提升政治干部军事素质锤炼打仗本领 ”
> [South Xinjiang Military Region Focuses on Improving the Military Quality of Political Cadres and
> Tempering Their Combat Skills], PLA Daily , May 17, 2023, http://www.81.cn/yw_208727/16224703.html.

Blasko and Gunnell  – Chapter 6  • 141 

need to be rectified immediately or addressed during subsequent training. 

As an officer at the PLA National Defense University summarized, “military 

training quality has hovered at a low level and stayed low for a long time.” 56 

In June 2023, CMC vice chair Zhang Youxia delivered a speech about 

this issue at a meeting concerning basic training, citing the need to improve 

training content, introduce better management, and optimize training 

support. 57  Some junior officers responsible for training feel like they are 

experiencing “groundhog day”—shortly after they finish one training 

cycle, they must repeat the same basic tasks day after day, year after year. 

As a result, some PLA Army units can only achieve first-level proficiency, 

suggesting that they are not fully trained for larger combined arms or joint 

exercises. 58  Small naval units report that they encounter numerous problems 

when they are assigned to larger exercises with different units at various 

stages of combat readiness. Further, they are just learning how to “achieve 

the effect of ‘1+1>2’  ” (a common formula indicating the increased combat 

effects of joint and combined arms operations). 59 

The PLA Strategic Support Force has reported bottlenecks in system-

of-systems capabilities, causing commanders to concentrate on building 

systems rather than employing them. But building systems is recognized 

as being only half the battle. 60  This results in “contradictory problems 

restricting system operations, with some weaknesses remaining.” 61  Because 

of inadequate networking, informatization, and integration, one PLA Army 

brigade commander declared that “second-rate units focus on performance, 

and first-rate units focus on gaps.” 62  Some units avoid risks, scale back 

winter training, conduct highly scripted training, engage in “nanny-style”                

> 56 “深入推进实战化军事训练 .”
> 57 “全军基础训练现场会在天津召开 ,张又侠出席并讲话 ” [On-Site Military Basic Training Meeting
> Held in Tianjin. Zhang Youxia Attended and Delivered a Speech], PLA Daily , June 21, 2023, http://
> www.81.cn/szb_223187/szbxq/index.html?paperName=jfjb&paperDate=2023-06-21&paperNumb
> er=01&articleid=908624.
> 58 Yao Lanxiang, “ 战斗力标准任何时候都不能降低 ” [The Standard of Combat Effectiveness Cannot
> Be Lowered at Any Time], PLA Daily , May 27, 2023, http://www.81.cn/szb_223187/szbxq/index.ht
> ml?paperName=jfjb&paperDate=2023-05-27&paperNumber=04&articleid=906743.
> 59 Liu Jianwei and Qian Xiaohu, “ 勇敢的突围 —— 来自海军某基地的观察报告 ” [Brave Breakout—
> Observation Report from a Naval Base], PLA Daily , September 21, 2023, http://www.81.cn/
> szb_223187/szbxq/index.html?paperName=jfjb&paperDate=2023-09-21&paperNumber=01&arti
> cleid=915820.
> 60 Liu Ruifeng and Liu Baoxu, “ 体系强才能打胜仗 ” [We Can Only Win Wars with Strong Systems],
> PLA Daily , April 19, 2023, http://www.81.cn/jfjbmap/content/2023-04/19/content_337918.htm.
> 61 Jiang You, “ 在体系中练就制胜 ‘铁拳 ’” [Practice the “Winning Fist” in Integrated Operations], PLA
> Daily , March 21, 2023, http://www.81.cn/szb_223187/szbxq/index.html?paperName=jfjb&paperD
> ate=2023-03-21&paperNumber=05&articleid=901469.
> 62 Yang Xihai, “ 精准施策破解瓶颈问题 ” [Precise Policy to Solve Bottleneck Problems], PLA Daily ,
> March 18, 2023, http://www.81.cn/yw_208727/16210267.html.

142  • The PLA in a Complex Security Environment 

drills, and do not correct existing issues. 63  An article about PLA Rocket 

Force training concluded that “avoiding ‘small risks’ in peacetime leaves ‘big 

hidden dangers’ in war.” 64 

## Equipment Weaknesses 

For the past two decades, the PLA has received innumerable new 

weapons and equipment, but not all units in the force have been fully 

modernized. New weapons have greater capabilities but are more 

complicated and expensive to operate and maintain than the armaments 

they replace. Many personnel have not been trained in schools to use new 

weapons, and sometimes the equipment they were trained on is not the type 

used in the units to which they are assigned. 65  Standardized procedures (e.g., 

lesson plans and operations and maintenance manuals) are unavailable for 

some weapons, causing leaders to improvise instead of following centrally 

prepared guidance. 66 

Some officers and NCOs are uncomfortable using new equipment in 

training. Instead, they prefer to continue old practices, illustrated by the 

phrase “wearing new shoes, but traveling the old road” ( 穿新鞋走老路 ). 67 

PLA doctrine emphasizes that the force must be able to fight with both old 

and new generations of equipment. 68  However, some officers and NCOs have 

become overly dependent on automated features and have lost proficiency 

in manual operations. 69  As one reconnaissance company commander 

commented after a 2023 training event where soldiers were not prepared  

> 63

Wei Shanghai, “ 冰雪也是磨  ‘刀石 ’ ” [Ice and Snow Are Also “Whetstones”],  PLA Daily , January 1, 

2023, http://www.81.cn/jfjbmap/content/2023-01/01/content_330997.htm; Wang Xiaoqiang, “ 在 ‘

变’ 与 ‘活’ 中寻求制胜之法 ” [Seeking a Winning Method in “Change” and “Live”],  PLA Daily , April 

19, 2023, http://www.81.cn/jfjbmap/content/2023-04/19/content_337933.htm; and Feng Huahua 

and Liu Yu, “ 第七十二集团军某旅 : 着眼  ‘问题台账 ’ 筹划新年工作 ” [72nd Group Army Brigade: 

Focus on “Problem Ledger” to Plan Work in New Year],  PLA Daily , January 8, 2023, http://www.81. 

cn/yw/2023-01/08/content_10210475.htm . 

> 64

Xing Guoqing and Huang Wuxing, “ 一道排障题  考问应急策 ” [A Troubleshooting Question 

Examines Emergency Policies],  PLA Daily , August 17, 2021, http://www.81.cn/jfjbmap/ 

content/2021-08/17/content_296690.htm.  

> 65

“确保手中武器装备始终  ‘在状态 .’  ” 

> 66

Han Zhen and Chen Shanfeng, “ 科学组训贵在精细 ” [Scientific Group Training Is Precious],  PLA 

Daily , June 1, 2022, http://www.81.cn/jfjbmap/content/2022-06/01/content_316832.htm.  

> 67

Zhang Haotian and Mao Rui, “ 让新型弹药打出最佳效能 ” [Allow New Munitions to Shoot for 

Optimal Performance],  PLA Daily , April 28, 2022, http://www.81.cn/jfjbmap/content/2022-04/28/ 

content_314561.htm.  

> 68

Gong Xueli, “ 穿现有  ‘鞋’ 走胜战  ‘路’ ” [Wear Existing “Shoes” and Take the “Road” of Victory], 

PLA Daily , June 16, 2022, http://www.81.cn/jfjbmap/content/2022-06/16/content_317848.htm.  

> 69

“大抓实战化军事训练热新闻冷思考 ” [Pay Attention to the Hot News and Cold Thinking of Actual 

Combat Military Training], Political Work Department of the Central Military Commission (PRC), 

March 27, 2023, available at http://www.81.cn/zt/2023nzt/gsym/zgxwjxwzltjzp/16212443_2.html. Blasko and Gunnell  – Chapter 6  • 143 

to use new equipment, “If this were a real battlefield, I’m afraid that we 

wouldn’t have a chance to reflect [on our failures].” 70 

## “Problem Show” 

Exacerbating training difficulties, once leaders know what is necessary 

for success, some cut corners, cheat, or falsify records—actions official 

Chinese media calls a “problem show” ( 问题秀 ). The PLA understands 

that these methods undermine the hard work of developing unit leaders 

and combat readiness. Knowing that discovering problems is a primary 

training objective and the way to please their superiors, some leaders and 

units develop long lists of weaknesses at the beginning of training but do not 

expend similar efforts to correct them. 71  Others “train for show” or “train for 

the test.” 72  The PLA calls such activity a “chronic illness” ( 沉疴顽疾 ). 73 

Collectively, PLA personnel, leadership, training, and equipment 

weaknesses reduce readiness for conventional joint operations targeted at 

Taiwan. The PLA’s primary effort to address these weaknesses is through 

thematic training. Yet shortcomings persist in its joint combat systems 

capabilities, and the force is still developing procedures for joint training 

at the strategic, operational, and tactical levels. Accordingly, the PLA 

recognizes and routinely states that solutions will only come with time and 

dedication. 

## PLA Intangibles: Implications of Russia’s War in Ukraine 

The PLA probably has interpreted the performance of the Russian 

Armed Forces during their invasion of Ukraine through several lenses 

that reflect both internal strengths and weaknesses. The PLA likely sees 

itself as a different system from the Russian Armed Forces, recognizes 

that Ukraine’s military and geographic situation are fundamentally             

> 70 Qian Hao, “ 一个侦察连的跨越之旅 ” [A Reconnaissance Company’s Long-Distance Journey], PLA
> Daily , July 18, 2023, http://www.81.cn/szb_223187/szbxq/index.html?paperName=jfjb&paperDa
> te=2023-07-18&paperNumber=05&articleid=910799.
> 71 Zhang Guangxuan and Tie Yannan, “ 调查研究不设 ‘问题指标 ’” [Survey Research Does Not Set
> “Problem Indicators”], PLA Daily , May 19, 2023, http://www.81.cn/szb_223187/szbxq/index.html
> ?paperName=jfjb&paperDate=2023-05-19&paperNumber=06&articleid=906158.
> 72 Wu Zhiyuan, Liu Jianchuang, and Wei Qihang, “ 关键训练步骤岂能 ‘一语带过 ’” [How Key Training
> Steps Are Skipped by “Training through One Sentence”], PLA Daily , April 19, 2023, http://www.81.
> cn/jfjbmap/content/2023-04/19/content_337931.htm.
> 73 Zhang Leifeng, “ 讲认真 ·动真格 ” [Be Serious and Real], PLA Daily , March 29, 2023, http://www.81.
> cn/szb_223187/szbxq/index.html?paperName=jfjb&paperDate=2023-03-29&paperNumber=08&a
> rticleid=902042 .

144  • The PLA in a Complex Security Environment 

different from Taiwan’s, and, as evidenced by his repeated decisions to 

send Russian forces into combat, believes that President Vladimir Putin is 

more impulsive than Chairman Xi Jinping. As Jude Blanchette and Bonnie 

Glaser wisely commented in November 2023, “autocrats can and do take 

risky and even reckless actions, as Vladimir Putin’s invasion of Ukraine 

clearly demonstrates...[but] there are no signs that Xi has pivoted away from 

Beijing’s long-term strategy of isolating and strangulating Taipei in order to 

deter Taiwanese independence and force its government to enter into formal 

‘reunification’ negotiations.” 74 

Further, the Russian military is notorious for its harsh treatment of 

conscripts, and disregard for their training and well-being in combat is a 

common theme in foreign reporting. 75  The PLA has a completely different 

attitude toward its conscripts, seeking to treat them like family, and no 

longer allows corporal punishment of its soldiers. 76  As a result, Chinese 

leaders probably consider that the PLA’s enlisted personnel system will be 

more effective than the Russian model has been in preparing its soldiers 

for battle. This perception is rooted in the PLA’s military-political dual 

leadership system, which is responsible for both tactical training and 

ideological indoctrination. 

The PLA could compare Russia’s logistical failures in Ukraine with its 

prolonged operations in Aksai Chin, along China’s contested border with 

India. The PLA has been relatively successful in sustaining a large force 

(albeit much smaller than Russian numbers) in a remote border area, 

mostly by land transport. On the other hand, the CCP and PLA understand 

that Russia’s problems in supplying its forces overland pale in scope to 

the logistical challenges of a full-scale attack on Taiwan, which would be 

dependent on air and sea lanes for sustainment.           

> 74 Jude Blanchette and Bonnie Glaser, “Taiwan’s Most Pressing Challenge Is Strangulation, Not
> Invasion,” War on the Rocks, November 9, 2023, https://warontherocks.com/2023/11/taiwans-
> most-pressing-challenge-is-strangulation-not-invasion.
> 75 “The Wrongs of Passage: Inhuman and Degrading Treatment of New Recruits in the Russian
> Armed Forces,” Human Rights Watch, October 14, 2004, https://www.hrw.org/report/2004/10/19/
> wrongs-passage/inhuman-and-degrading-treatment-new-recruits-russian-armed-forces; and
> Robyn Dixon and Natalia Abbakumova, “Angry Families Say Russian Conscripts Thrown to
> Front Line Unprepared,” Washington Post , November 20, 2022, https://www.washingtonpost.com/
> world/2022/11/20/russia-military-families-conscripts-ukraine.
> 76 Yuan Ziliang, “ 用共同的理想凝聚兵心 ” [Use Common Ideals to Unite Soldiers’ Hearts], PLA Daily ,
> July 6, 2023, http://www.81.cn/szb_223187/szbxq/index.html?paperName=jfjb&paperDate=2023-
> 07-06&paperNumber=01&articleid=909722; and Tian Long and Liu Shaoping, “ 带兵干部骨干应
> 做到 ‘三多三禁 ,’ 拒绝 ‘冷暴力 ’” [The Backbone of Cadres Leading Soldiers Should Implement the
> “Three Mores and Three Prohibits” and Refuse “Cold Violence”], PLA Daily , September 22, 2023,
> http://www.81.cn/zt/2023nzt/zyzyqrxdmqxsdgbgx/jyzf_246327/16254391.html.

Blasko and Gunnell  – Chapter 6  • 145 

Both Russian and Ukrainian combat experiences reinforce the reality 

that multidomain joint and combined arms operations, especially at the 

battalion level, are extremely difficult to execute under fire and are further 

complicated by urban terrain. 77  Sheer numbers do not guarantee success, 

and battlefield leadership is the key to tactical victory. The PLA likely sees 

itself on the right path by emphasizing drones for intelligence collection 

and attack, long-range missiles for precision strikes, and tactical air defense 

against both missiles and drones. 

The front-line performance of Russian units, which were previously 

regarded as battle-tested and hardened, underscores the PLA’s need (and 

preference) for sufficient time to prepare its own forces before being thrust 

into the cauldron of high-intensity warfare. While the PLA emphasizes Mao 

Zedong’s guidance to “fight no battle unprepared” ( 不打无准备之仗 ), it 

has added the caveat that it is rare to fight when fully ready. 78  Accordingly, 

it must improve its ability to “fight tonight” ( 今夜准备打仗 ) with the forces 

available, reflecting the PLA’s constant emphasis on the need to improve and 

make training more realistic. 79 

Furthermore, the element that follows “fight no battle unprepared” is 

“fight no battle you are not sure of winning” ( 不打无把握之仗 ). This refers 

to the level of confidence a leader must have prior to initiating combat. 80  The 

body of evidence concerning the PLA’s acknowledged shortcomings must 

affect national-level decisions about undertaking major military action. 

From Beijing’s perspective, unless faced with a direct, imminent threat to 

China’s sovereignty or strategic goals that requires major combat, it is best to 

follow the established military modernization timeline and employ the PLA 

in operations short of war, including aggressive deterrence operations in 

disputed regions on its periphery, to achieve its national objectives.         

> 77 “Xi Jinping Worries That China’s Troops Are Not Ready to Fight,” Economist , November 6, 2023,
> https://www.economist.com/special-report/2023/11/06/xi-jinping-worries-that-chinas-troops-are-
> not-ready-to-fight.
> 78 Shen Hailiang, “ 提高指挥员战场决策能力 ” [Improve Commanders’ Battlefield Decision-Making
> Ability], PLA Daily , April 18, 2023, http://www.81.cn/szb_223187/szbxq/index.html?paperName=j
> fjb&paperDate=2023-04-18&paperNumber=07&articleid=903541.
> 79 Yang Xihai, “ 精准施策破解瓶颈问题 ” [Precise Policy to Solve Bottleneck Problems], PLA Daily ,
> March 18, 2023, http://www.81.cn/yw_208727/16210267.html.
> 80 Li Hongfeng, “ 战略家毛泽东的道路 ” [The Path of Strategist Mao Zedong], People’s Daily , August
> 30, 2022, http://cpc.people.com.cn/n1/2022/0830/c443712-32515125.html.

146  • The PLA in a Complex Security Environment 

## Conclusion 

The PLA’s dialectical process of continuously identifying and rectifying 

problems to make progress in all elements of military modernization is both 

rational for its situation and rooted in its Marxist heritage. 81  Unfortunately 

for outside observers, most of the PLA’s self-assessments are subjective in 

nature and difficult to measure objectively or confirm. 

Not every unit in the PLA faces the same types and quantity of 

problems, nor does every problem exist at all times. However, the self-

reported shortcomings likely are pervasive and persistent enough among 

some personnel and units to adversely affect the senior PLA leadership’s 

evaluation of the force’s overall combat effectiveness and readiness. Because 

the PLA is so large, it takes months or even years to distribute new weapons 

and equipment throughout the entire force and for units to assimilate the 

new gear. As a result, the PLA will continue to be equipped with multiple 

generations of weaponry, resulting in units of the same type having different 

capabilities depending on the type of tank, ship, aircraft, or missile assigned. 

Moreover, as new weapons and technologies are introduced to the force, 

doctrinal, training, and logistical changes frequently are required. The 

persistence of many of these problems suggests that the PLA educational 

and training systems are not meeting this challenge in preparing personnel 

for combat. 

Whenever possible, Chinese leaders will seek to achieve their national 

objectives short of going to war (i.e., to win without fighting). The problems 

inhibiting combat capabilities that are identified in multiple formulas and 

slogans likely undermine the confidence senior CCP and PLA leaders 

would prefer to have before deciding to initiate major combat operations 

against Taiwan or another foreign enemy. As former CIA senior intelligence 

officer John Culver stated, “Taiwan remains for Xi a crisis to be avoided, 

not an opportunity he should seize.” 82  Yet, if deterrence fails and if ordered 

by the CCP, the PLA will pursue a quick victory using all elements of its 

armed forces, supported by a variety of civilian capabilities mobilized for 

the occasion.       

> 81 Li Lei, “ 真刀真枪 ,解决实际问题 ” [Real Knives and Guns, Solve Practical Problems], PLA Daily ,
> October 29, 2023, http://www.81.cn/szb_223187/szbxq/index.html?paperName=jfjb&paperDa
> te=2023-10-29&paperNumber=02&articleid=918076; and Zhu Hangcheng, “ 善用调研成果把问
> 题解决好 ” [Make Good Use of Research Results to Solve Problems], PLA Daily , June 2, 2023, http://
> www.81.cn/yw_208727/16228088.html.
> 82 John Culver, John Pomfret, and Matt Pottinger, “How to Read Xi Jinping,” Foreign Affairs , June 6,
> 2023, https://www.foreignaffairs.com/responses/how-read-xi-jinping.

Blasko and Gunnell  – Chapter 6  • 147 

The analysis presented above supports the conclusions the  Economist 

reached in a 2023 special report on PLA vulnerabilities: “Underestimating 

the PLA would be dangerous. But overestimating it would be too. As in the 

cold war, that can breed mutual insecurity and unnecessary confrontation…. 

A ruthlessly balanced view of the PLA is essential both to avoid war and, if 

necessary, to win one.” 83  Implying an institutional preference to avoid near-

to medium-term conflict, Lieutenant General He Lei (former Academy of 

Military Sciences deputy commandant) told the  Economist  that “we can’t go 

to war to increase our combat experience, right?” 84    

> 83 “The People’s Liberation Army Is Not Yet as Formidable as the West Fears,” Economist , November 6,
> 2023, https://www.economist.com/special-report/2023/11/06/the-peoples-liberation-army-is-not-
> yet-as-formidable-as-the-west-fears.
> 84 “Xi Jinping Worries That China’s Troops Are Not Ready to Fight.”

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

This chapter examines the goals of the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) and 

People’s Republic of China (PRC) regarding Taiwan under Xi Jinping, how 

they are pursued through the development and use of the People’s Liberation 

Army (PLA) in extant and potential campaigns, and PRC perceptions of 

effectiveness and trends. 

> MAIN ARGUMENT

Asserting control over Taiwan has been a CCP objective since 1943. The 

PLA’s posture and employment have strengthened, with capabilities increasing 

dramatically since the 1995–96 Taiwan Strait crisis. Through his “centennial 

military building goal” of 2027, Xi seeks a full range of options to coerce 

or conquer Taiwan. PLA forces, training, and operations are burgeoning 

accordingly. China currently pursues an all-domain pressure campaign and 

preparatory exercises, with some timed opportunistically to punish actions 

by Taiwan or its supporters. Future campaign scenarios include—individually 

and in combination—coercion or limited force, blockade, bombardment, or 

invasion. PRC perceptions regarding the effectiveness of Beijing’s actions 

and cross-strait trends vary but tend toward pessimism, thereby motivating 

potential use of force. 

> POLICY IMPLICATIONS

• Xi is rapidly prioritizing tremendous national resources in pursuit of 

military options regarding Taiwan that his predecessors lacked, with 

rapid and concerning results. 

• New patterns of activity, including pressure operations and preparatory 

exercises, increasingly threaten, stress, and risk demoralizing Taiwan. 

• Military-informed PRC sources insinuate that Washington’s and 

Taipei’s cross-strait policies and actions are trending in an unacceptable 

direction, reflecting a failure thus far by Beijing and the PLA to curb 

them completely; however, the PLA is on track to be able to offer 

the necessary deterrence or compellence, potentially through CCP 

authorization to take harsher, more coercive approaches and even 

credibly threaten war. 

• Taiwan and the U.S. must urgently deploy asymmetric capabilities to 

deter PRC aggression. Chapter 7 Imposing the Fate of Sisyphus? The PLA 

# as an Instrument of National Power 

# and Force Preparation toward Taiwan 

## Andrew S. Erickson 

This chapter examines Xi Jinping’s strategic objectives vis-à-vis Taiwan 

and the pursuit of those objectives through the People’s Liberation Army 

(PLA), assesses key trends, and considers whether the People’s Republic 

of China (PRC) perceives these efforts as effective. Its main argument is 

that Xi’s policies have increased military funding and capabilities, aiming 

to impose a Sisyphean sense of futility on Taiwan to compel unification 

without direct conflict. The ambition of the Chinese Communist Party 

(CCP) to control Taiwan has been steadfast for decades, significantly 

bolstered by enhanced PLA capabilities following the 1995–96 Taiwan 

Strait crisis. Xi’s 2027 “centennial military building goal” calls for 

comprehensive options to coerce or conquer Taiwan. China’s military has 

achieved substantial growth in forces and training, aligning with Beijing’s 

all-domain pressure campaign and strategic exercises aimed at preparing 

for scenarios including coercion, blockade, bombardment, and invasion. 

Policy implications are profound: Xi is directing tremendous resources 

toward military options regarding Taiwan, gravely threatening Taiwan’s 

security and morale. CCP leaders perceive current Taiwanese and U.S. 

policies as adverse, necessitating harsher measures and potentially credible 

threats of war. To counter PRC aggression, Taiwan and the United States 

must urgently deploy asymmetric capabilities. 

This chapter first surveys the historical context and PLA development. 

Following the PRC’s establishment in 1949, Mao Zedong intended to invade 

Andrew S. Erickson  is a Professor of Strategy in the China Maritime Studies Institute at the U.S.   

> Naval War College.
> The views expressed here are the author’s alone. He thanks Joshua Arostegui, Brian Davis, Ian Easton, Rob
> Englehardt, Julia Famularo, David Finkelstein, Conor Kennedy, Dan Kostecka, Ryan Martinson, James
> Mulvenon, William Murray, Adam Pace, Jeremy Rausch, and Christopher Sharman for their invaluable inputs. 150 •The PLA in a Complex Security Environment

Taiwan to conclude the Chinese Civil War on Beijing’s terms. However, 

plans were canceled due to intelligence failures and the Korean War. Over 

subsequent decades, the PLA’s capabilities were insufficient to challenge the 

U.S.-patrolled Taiwan Strait. This changed after the Cold War, with missile 

strikes becoming a feasible cross-strait option. Under Xi, Taiwan faces 

increasing danger. China’s military focus has been on achieving jointness 

and technological sophistication to prevail in potential U.S. intervention 

contingencies. Xi’s 2027 military goal emphasizes a toolbox of capabilities 

to coerce or conquer Taiwan, driven by perceived time constraints and a 

closing window of opportunity. Second, the chapter reviews operational 

posture and training. China’s military posture toward Taiwan has evolved 

significantly, marked by the most extensive buildup since World War 

II, largely focused on Taiwan. Xi’s military reforms from 2015 to 2016, 

including the strengthening of existing forces and creation of new ones, have 

enhanced the PLA’s readiness for high-end Taiwan contingencies. Third, 

the chapter weighs Xi’s peacetime and wartime options. Beijing employs a 

multifaceted strategy, leveraging military, diplomatic, informational, and 

economic pressure. China’s military engages in frequent exercises to prepare 

while stressing Taiwan’s defenses. Beijing’s approach includes coercive 

activities short of full-scale war, ranging from political and disinformation 

operations to limited (para)military use. These efforts aim to compel Taiwan 

to capitulate without major combat, but more aggressive measures (e.g., 

blockade or bombardment) are increasingly robust options. An outright 

amphibious invasion, the most complex and risky, would likely be a last 

resort. Fourth, the chapter assesses trends of increasingly pessimistic PRC 

perceptions. It concludes that Xi’s rapid military buildup, emphasizing 

coercion and potential force, increases the risk of conflict with Taiwan, the 

United States, and allies and makes deterrence of utmost urgency. 

## Taking Taiwan: CCP Goals, Preparations, and Approaches 

Ensuring the capability to impose transformative coercive pressure or 

force on Taiwan to assert control over its political status and future has long 

been the CCP’s leading military goal. After expelling the Chinese Nationalist 

Party from the mainland in 1949 and establishing the PRC, Mao envisioned 

an invasion of Taiwan in 1950 to end the Chinese Civil War with complete 

CCP domination. However, he postponed, and ultimately canceled, these 

plans following an overwhelming fifth column intelligence rollup and the Erickson  – Chapter 7  • 151 

outbreak of the Korean War in 1950. 1 Throughout the crises in the strait that 

erupted in 1954–55, 1958, and 1962, Mao opted not to expend the blood 

and treasure and risk U.S. intervention, including potential nuclear weapons 

use, 2 to attempt to wrest the heavily fortified offshore islands of Quemoy 

and Matsu from Chinese Nationalist Party control. Instead, he shelled them 

intermittently for two decades, in part because he, like Chiang Kai-shek, 

wanted to keep a physical link between Taiwan and the PRC—something 

most Taiwanese are far less interested in today. For the rest of the Cold 

War, and even during the 1995–96 Taiwan Strait crisis, the strait was a 

U.S.-patrolled moat that the PLA could not hope to cross. From the end of 

the Cold War through the turn of the century, crude missile strikes were the 

only PLA option for attacking Taiwan on a significant scale. 

Today, Taiwan faces great, growing danger from the PRC under Xi 

Jinping. For decades, a Taiwan contingency has been the PLA’s lead planning 

scenario. China’s military strategies of 1993, 2004, and 2014 focused 

geographically on Taiwan and its surrounding waters and emphasized 

achieving the jointness and technological sophistication necessary to 

prevail in contingencies there, potentially involving the U.S. military. 3

Having concertedly invested in, developed, and deployed manifold military 

capabilities focused first on targeting Taiwan and second on countering U.S. 

and allied intervention thereto since the 1995–96 Taiwan Strait crisis and 

1999 Belgrade embassy bombing, the PLA now has a variety of potential 

military options vis-à-vis Taiwan. Soberingly, the Pentagon assesses that 

China’s official defense budget of around $230 billion (as of 2022) is “about 

12 times larger than Taiwan’s defense budget” and largely “focused on 

developing the capability to unify Taiwan with the PRC by force.” 4 How 

these capabilities develop over the course of this critical decade and what Xi 

attempts to do with them loom as momentous questions of our time. 

In describing Beijing’s three centenaries—the CCP’s in 2021, the 

PLA’s in 2027, and the PRC’s in 2049—Andrew Scobell emphasizes that 

“each of these commemorations serves not only as a celebration of regime           

> 1Ian Easton, The Chinese Invasion Threat: Taiwan’s Defense and American Strategy in Asia (Manchester:
> Camphor Press, 2017), 35, 48–52.
> 2U.S. Office of the Historian, “The Taiwan Straits Crises: 1954–55 and 1958,” https://history.state.gov/
> milestones/1953-1960/taiwan-strait-crises.
> 3M. Taylor Fravel, Active Defense: China’s Military Strategy since 1949 (Princeton: Princeton University
> Press, 2019).
> 4U.S. Department of Defense, Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic
> of China 2023 (Washington, D.C., October 2023), 147, https://www.defense.gov/Spotlights/2023-
> China-Military-Power-Report.

152  • The PLA in a Complex Security Environment 

accomplishments but also as a reminder of unfinished business.” 5 On 

October 26–29, 2020, the 19th CCP Central Committee’s fifth plenary 

session promulgated the “centennial military building goal” ( 建军一百 

年奋斗目标 ). 6 As part of his efforts to build a world-class military, Xi 

established this goal to ensure the achievement of important aspects of 

that modernization by 2027, which appear geared toward providing a 

full toolbox of capabilities to coerce or conquer Taiwan. This is part of a 

growing acceptance of risk and friction and may reflect a growing urgency 

and impatience on Xi’s part to achieve key objectives, perhaps spurred by 

perceptions of a closing window of opportunity to do so and actuarial limits 

on his time in power. The year 2027 also marks the 21st Party Congress, 

which will be the beginning of Xi’s fourth term as general secretary. “All 

indications point to the PLA meeting [Xi’s] directive to be ready to invade 

Taiwan by 2027,” Admiral John Aquilino stated in his final testimony as 

commander of U.S. Indo-Pacific Command. “Furthermore, the PLA’s 

actions indicate their ability to meet Xi’s preferred timeline to unify Taiwan 

with mainland China by force if directed.” 7

Alexander Huang argues cogently that “it is crucial to assess whether 

there is a CCP timetable for national unification,” which “has important 

implications for how much time Taiwan has for” defensive preparations. 8

Much may depend on whose side Xi and other decision-makers believe 

time is on. Wang Wen, a researcher at the Financial Research Center for 

the Counsellors’ Office of the State Council, maintains that “Chinese 

Communists have always had rich experience and great practice in 

identifying and seizing strategic opportunities.” He believes that time 

remains on Beijing’s side overall but acknowledges that there are growing 

perceptions and concerns that China’s “period of strategic opportunity” is       

> 5Andrew Scobell, “China’s Calculus on the Use of Force: Futures, Costs, Benefits, Risks, and Goals,”
> in Crossing the Strait: China’s Military Prepares for War with Taiwan , ed. Joel Wuthnow et al.
> (Washington, D.C.: National Defense University Press, 2022), 80.
> 6Andrew S. Erickson, “PRC Pursuit of Xi’s 2027 ‘Centennial Military Building Goal’ ( 建军一百年奋
> 斗目标 ): Sources & Analysis,” China Analysis from Original Sources, December 19, 2021, https://
> www.andrewerickson.com/2021/12/prc-pursuit-of-2027-centennial-military-building-goal-sources-
> analysis.
> 7John C. Aquilino, “U.S. Indo-Pacific Command Posture,” statement to the U.S. House Armed
> Services Committee, March 21, 2024, 2, https://www.armed-services.senate.gov/imo/media/doc/
> aquilino_statement.pdf.
> 8Alexander Chieh-cheng Huang, “A Net Assessment of Taiwan’s Overall Defense Concept,” in
> Wuthnow et al., Crossing the Strait , 313.

Erickson  – Chapter 7  • 153 

already over. 9 A PRC scholar-official contends that Beijing’s 2022 military 

exercises following House Speaker Nancy Pelosi’s visit to Taipei and the 

subsequent issuance of the white paper entitled  The Taiwan Question and 

China’s Reunification in the New Era  have transformed Beijing’s “strategic 

ambiguity” into “strategic clarity”: 

Beijing has deliberately and unequivocally declared that it will not wait 

indefinitely for Taiwan’s return to China.… Instead, it has officially launched a 

national reunification plan, in the hope of accelerating the national reunification 

process through political negotiations between the two sides on the details of 

the “one country, two systems” policy. Beijing has emphatically stated that, if 

peaceful reunification fails, non-peaceful reunification will occur. At the same 

time, Beijing has left it an open question whether the favorable conditions of the 

“one country, two systems” policy that the mainland has previously offered to 

Taiwan will still apply if national reunification is achieved primarily by force. 10 

While Xi’s intentions and plans are impossible for foreign analysts to 

discern conclusively, a historical review of the CCP and the PLA suggests 

revealing patterns. Perhaps the foremost pattern is relentless determination 

to achieve top-priority objectives, coupled with concerted attempts to do 

so with the least kinetic military escalation possible. More concerningly, 

however, the CCP and PLA have a history of proactively using what they 

perceive as demonstrative limited force to reset baseline conditions and 

thereby avert larger, longer-term negative outcomes. This is closely linked 

to an arguably exaggerated sense of being able to finely calibrate escalation 

both upward and downward while retaining first-mover advantage in doing 

so. Mao’s striking first move in the 1969 Zhenbao Island crisis is perhaps the 

principal example of both elements. Partial examples involving weaker, then 

non-nuclear powers include the 1962 Sino-Indian War and the 1979 Sino-

Vietnamese War. As Kim Fassler explains in her chapter for this volume, the 

CCP believes it has a superior system for diagnosing, measuring precisely, 

and calibrating policy responses to major international trends. The party 

assesses that trends regarding Taiwan are unfavorable and is urgently seeking 

to shift them in a favorable direction. 

The CCP typically situates the ultimate threat of employing top-end 

kinetic military force within a comprehensive whole-of-government 

approach designed to achieve objectives via, ideally, primarily political        

> 9Wang Wen, “ 论新时代的战略机遇期 :源起、现状与未来 ” [On the Strategic Opportunity Period
> in the New Era: Origin, Status Quo, and Future], Journal of the Central Institute of Socialism (2022),
> trans. Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS), https://interpret.csis.org/translations/
> on-the-strategic-opportunity-period-in-the-new-era-origin-status-quo-and-future.
> 10 Liu Zhaojia, “ 中国倒逼美国对台政策走向 ‘战略清晰 ?’ ” [Is China Forcing the U.S. toward
> “Strategic Clarity” in Its Taiwan Policy?], Aisixiang, August 15, 2022, trans. CSIS, https://interpret.
> csis.org/translations/is-china-forcing-the-u-s-toward-strategic-clarity-in-its-taiwan-policy.

154  • The PLA in a Complex Security Environment 

means by expeditiously using the “three warfares”—public opinion warfare, 

psychological warfare, and legal warfare. 11  At least in theoretical potential, 

it can do so more seamlessly, thoroughly, and formidably than any other 

government is capable. 12  Here, the PLA has an important political role, 

which is often insufficiently understood in the United States as well as by 

U.S. allies and partners. A pathbreaking study by Mark Stokes and Russell 

Hsiao on PLA political warfare details the history, roles, missions, and 

organizational structure of PLA “liaison work” units—a massive force 

multiplier for the PLA that is all too often overlooked and understudied. 13 

The PLA continuously conducts political work vis-à-vis Taiwan and the 

surrounding region. By its nature, the PLA’s liaison work is often covert, 

but in a future Taiwan scenario, it would probably prove every bit as much 

a threat as the PLA’s special operations, airborne, and amphibious brigades. 

Indeed, they are closely intertwined. 

If “three warfare” activities prove insufficient to achieve China’s purposes 

over time, or if it perceives sufficiently adverse developments and trends, 

Beijing may shift its approach to more persistent, lower-intensity coercion. 

Such coercion could be dialed up and otherwise tailored as necessary to 

achieve the desired effects and channel adversaries into courses of action 

that PRC officials perceive as advantageous, such as bringing Taiwanese 

representatives to the negotiating table. Ultimately, PRC decision-makers 

may consider a full range of military options, most likely starting with 

limited conventional capabilities. These could be backstopped by the world’s 

largest conventional missile force and a rapidly growing nuclear arsenal and 

supported throughout by world-class enablers in every domain, including 

space and cyber. To operationalize in practice doctrine that reifies finely 

tailored escalation dominance for this king of all external PLA objectives, the 

PRC is striving to be able to preempt or answer equivalently all conceivable 

U.S. and allied military capabilities and options, in addition to possessing 

capabilities and options for which there is no adversary equivalent.     

> 11 Yu-Jie Chen, “The CCP’s Violation of International Laws and Norms,” testimony before the U.S.-
> China Economic and Security Review Commission, Washington, D.C., May 4, 2023, https://www.
> uscc.gov/sites/default/files/2023-05/Yu-Jie_Chen_Testimony.pdf.
> 12 For a hierarchy of CCP-preferred approaches applied directly to Taiwan, see the following by a
> prominent diplomat who was director of the Taiwan Affairs Office of the State Council (2018–22)
> after serving as China’s permanent representative to the United Nations (2013–17): Liu Jieyi, “ 坚持
> 贯彻新时代党解决台湾问题的总体方略 ” [Adhere to the Party’s Overall Strategy for Resolving
> the Taiwan Issue in the New Era], Qiushi , December 1, 2022, trans. CSIS, https://interpret.csis.org/
> translations/adhere-to-the-partys-overall-strategy-for-resolving-the-taiwan-issue-in-the-new-era.
> 13 Mark Stokes and Russell Hsiao, “The People’s Liberation Army General Political Department:
> Political Warfare with Chinese Characteristics,” Project 2049 Institute, October 14, 2013, https://
> project2049.net/2013/10/14/the-peoples-liberation-army-general-political-department-political-
> warfare-with-chinese-characteristics.

Erickson  – Chapter 7  • 155 

Major questions remain concerning where Xi himself believes Taiwan 

contingencies to lie on this spectrum of possible operational options, to 

what extent he is driven by a near-term timeline, to what degree he may 

be abandoning his post-Mao predecessors’ relative restraint, and how 

and in what ways he may be deterred. Overall, however, Xi appears to 

be concertedly pursuing PLA development that, in one way or another, 

overwhelms both Taiwan’s attempts to resist his assertion of influence over 

the island and U.S. and allied efforts to help Taiwan resist. The sense of 

futility that Xi seeks to impose is symbolized in Greek mythology by King 

Sisyphus, condemned for eternity to roll a gigantic boulder up a hill, only 

to see it roll back down. Such expenditure of great resources and energy 

to no good purpose amid mounting threats that increasingly polarize and 

demoralize Taiwanese society while heightening U.S. and allied uncertainty 

and perceptions of risk is precisely the dynamic that Xi hopes can enable him 

to realize his political objectives vis-à-vis Taiwan without actually launching 

major combat operations. That said, he has ordered the PLA to prepare a 

full range of options to employ as necessary—in a worst-case scenario, to 

“fight and win.” 

## Relentless Ramp-Up: Forces, Training, and Operations 

In recent years, the PLA’s operational posture toward Taiwan has changed 

dramatically, to the detriment of both the island’s security and the risks 

associated with the United States and allies coming to its aid across the full 

range of potential contingencies. 14  Since the late 1990s, the PRC has engaged 

in “the most extensive and rapid buildup since World War II,” 15  much of it 

focused on imposing credible force capabilities against Taiwan and foreign 

forces that might attempt to intervene to assist. Xi Jinping has significantly 

broadened and accelerated this buildup. In 2015–16, he promulgated sweeping 

military reforms designed to comprehensively enhance the PLA’s ability to 

achieve the missions that he might order it to execute, including high-end 

Taiwan contingencies. 16  Reforms included reorganization of the Central          

> 14 For a dramatic documentation of this sobering sea change, see Eric Heginbotham et al., The U.S.-
> China Military Scorecard: Forces, Geography, and the Evolving Balance of Power, 1996–201 7 (Santa
> Monica: RAND Corporation, 2015).
> 15 Aquilino, “U.S. Indo-Pacific Command Posture,” 24.
> 16 Phillip C. Saunders and Joel Wuthnow, “Crossing the Strait: PLA Modernization and Taiwan,” in
> Wuthnow et al., Crossing the Strait , 17. For unparalleled coverage of this subject, see Phillip Saunders
> et al., eds., Chairman Xi Remakes the PLA: Assessing Chinese Military Reforms (Washington, D.C.:
> National Defense University Press, 2019). 156 •The PLA in a Complex Security Environment

Military Commission and its departments, offices, and bureaus; the Joint Staff 

Department; the theater commands; and services and support arms. 

As part of the organizational dimension of Xi’s reforms, to develop 

and employ its components more effectively, the PLA in 2015 (1) upgraded 

the Second Artillery Corps to the PLA Rocket Force, becoming the fourth 

service (after the army, navy, and air force) and (2) added two additional 

forces: the Strategic Support Force (SSF) and Joint Logistic Support Force 

(JLSF). Established in 2015, the SSF was charged with enabling PRC 

dominance across space, cyberspace, and the electromagnetic spectrum 

by integrating PLA cyber, electronic warfare, and space units. On April 19, 

2024, the SSF was disbanded and divided into three independent arms—the 

PLA Aerospace Force, Cyberspace Force, and Information Support Force— 

supporting the four services. As the PLA’s fourth support arm, established 

in 2016, the JLSF is the backbone facilitating relationships between joint 

logistics units and other PLA service logistics elements while integrating 

civilian logistics into military operations (e.g., by “conducting C2 [command 

and control] of joint logistics, delivering materiel, and overseeing various 

support mechanisms” in a conflict against Taiwan). 17  The Pentagon judges: 

> PLA writings suggest that the SSF would be responsible for EW [electronic
> warfare] and cyberspace operations during a Taiwan contingency, as one of the
> missions of the force is to seize and maintain information dominance…. The
> SSF 311 Base would be responsible for political and psychological warfare, such
> as disseminating propaganda against Taiwan to influence public opinion and
> promote the PRC’s interests. The SSF would also play a strategic information and
> communications support role, centralizing technical intelligence collection and
> management and providing strategic intelligence support to theater commands
> involved in a Taiwan contingency. 18

Among long-established PLA services, arguably the most dramatic 

threats to Taiwan come from the PLA Rocket Force, which has both the 

world’s largest, most capable conventional missile forces and a rapidly 

growing nuclear triad that is third only to those of the United States and 

Russia. According to the Pentagon, China’s strategic rocket force “is prepared 

to conduct missile attacks against high-value targets, including Taiwan’s 

C2 facilities, air bases, and radar sites, in an attempt to degrade Taiwan’s 

defenses, neutralize Taiwan’s leadership, or break the public’s will to fight,” 

and as of 2023, the PLA Rocket Force “is increasing its presence along the    

> 17 U.S. Department of Defense, Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of
> China 2023 , 146.
> 18 Ibid.

Erickson  – Chapter 7  • 157 

Taiwan Strait with new missile brigades, possibly indicating an increasing 

number of deployed missiles.” 19 

Other PLA services field potent missiles as well. The PLA Army’s 

PCH191 close-range ballistic missile is deployed in large numbers, can 

range all of Taiwan, and is directly relevant to numerous Taiwan scenarios. 20 

Likewise, the PLA Air Force manages an extensive, formidable integrated 

air defense system. Its other capabilities relevant to a Taiwan contingency 

include large numbers of fourth- and fifth-generation fighter aircraft whose 

unrefueled radius ranges to Taiwan, a small but growing number of tankers 

to extend the fighters’ range, and highly capable intelligence, surveillance, and 

reconnaissance support planes, such as the KJ-500. 21  Three of the PLA Army’s 

major invasion-specific capabilities stand out: aviation, air assault, and, most 

importantly, the bulk of amphibious vessels capable of providing cross-strait 

sealift for its six amphibious combined arms brigades—four in the Eastern 

Theater Command and two in the Southern Theater Command. 22  The army 

prioritizes and trains its Taiwan-relevant forces in all three of these areas. 

For its part, the PLA Navy fields China’s largest amphibious vessels, 

including landing platform docks and amphibious assault ships (LHAs). 23 

The PLA Navy has commissioned three Type 075 LHAs, with further hulls 

under construction. The Pentagon forecasts construction of a Type 076 LHA, 

which will likely “be equipped with electromagnetic catapults, which would 

enhance its ability to support fixed-wing aircraft and make it somewhat more 

like an aircraft carrier.” 24  In 2021 the Type 05 amphibious assault vehicle 

(AAV) debuted in large numbers. Now the PLA’s most advanced amphibious            

> 19 U.S. Department of Defense, Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of
> China 2023 , 145–46.
> 20 Joshua Arostegui, “The PCH191 Modular Long-Range Rocket Launcher: Reshaping the PLA Army’s
> Role in a Cross-Strait Campaign,” U.S. Naval War College, China Maritime Studies Institute (CMSI),
> China Maritime Report, no. 32, November 3, 2023, https://digital-commons.usnwc.edu/cmsi-
> maritime-reports/32.
> 21 U.S. Department of Defense, Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic
> of China 2023 , 62–64, 89; and Felix K. Chang, “China’s Maritime Intelligence, Surveillance, and
> Reconnaissance Capability in the South China Sea,” Foreign Policy Research Institute, May 5, 2021,
> https://www.fpri.org/article/2021/05/chinas-maritime-intelligence-surveillance-and-reconnaissance-
> capability-in-the-south-china-sea.
> 22 U.S. Department of Defense, Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of
> China 2023 , 144–45.
> 23 The abbreviation “LHA” derives from the U.S. Navy’s “landing helicopter assault” classification for
> helicopter-carrying amphibious assault ships.
> 24 U.S. Department of Defense, Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of
> China 2022 (Washington, D.C., November 2022), 129, https://www.defense.gov/Spotlights/2022-
> China-Military-Power-Report; and “China People’s Liberation Army Navy (PLAN): Recognition
> and Identification Guide,” April 2024, https://www.oni.navy.mil/Portals/12/Intel%20agencies/
> China_Media/2024_Recce_Poster_PLAN_Navy__U__new2.jpg?ver=gLEmUaAtttQXpV9cL9g7Y
> A%3d%3d.

158  • The PLA in a Complex Security Environment 

armored equipment, the Type 05 boasts “an upgrade in armor, survivability, 

and speed from the last-generation Type 63A,” providing “the PLA with a 

more capable amphibious assault platform.” 25 

Numbers of larger PLA amphibious platforms remain modest, and there 

are no indications of the significant increases in the numbers of tank landing 

ships and medium-sized landing craft that would be needed to provide the 

full requisite sealift for a cross-strait invasion force to “load up, get across, 

and unload.” 26  China’s shipbuilding industry certainly has the capacity for a 

massive ramp-up in the number of amphibious vessels, but this would attract 

major foreign attention, reduce the element of surprise, and potentially 

trigger countermeasures. Additionally, personnel would need to train for 

some time with the vessels to ensure maximum effectiveness. 

Currently, the PRC is pursuing the stopgap measure of incorporating 

its Maritime Militia personnel and ramp-retrofitted roll-on/roll-off vessels 

(RO-ROs), such as large ferries, into a potential landing force. 27  As a 

professor at Army Military Transportation University and an employee 

at the PLA Navy Logistics Department writes, “among civilian vessels, 

RO-RO vessels are the most ideal vessel type for unit cross-sea delivery.” 28 

A doctoral student at Army Military Transportation University has also 

explored the in-depth means for RO-RO vessels to land at civilian wharves 

under various conditions. 29  As for larger platforms, the PLA Navy is rapidly 

improving across the board in both hardware and personnel. According to 

the Pentagon, “new attack submarines and modern surface combatants with 

anti-air capabilities and fourth-generation naval aircraft entering the force 

are designed to achieve maritime superiority within the [first island chain].”              

> 25 U.S. Department of Defense, Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of
> China 2022 , 129.
> 26 The quote is from Chen Xuanyu, Ren Cong, and Wang Fengzhong, “ 渡海登岛运输勤务保障面临的
> 问题和对策 ” [Countermeasures for Problems in Service Support in Cross-Strait and Beach Landing
> Transportation], Logistics Technology 10 (2016): 166–69. See also U.S. Department of Defense,
> Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 2023 , 142–45.
> 27 Conor M. Kennedy, “Getting There: Chinese Military and Civilian Sealift in a Cross-Strait Invasion,”
> in Wuthnow et al., Crossing the Strait , 223–52; and Conor M. Kennedy, “RO-RO Ferries and the
> Expansion of the PLA’s Landing Ship Fleet,” Center for International Maritime Security (CIMSEC),
> March 27, 2023, https://cimsec.org/ro-ro-ferries-and-the-expansion-of-the-plas-landing-ship-fleet.
> 28 Liu Baoxin and Dong Nan, “ 提高无码头卸载保障能力的对策 ” [Approaches to Improving Support
> Capabilities for Dockless Unloading], Journal of Military Transportation 1, no. 5 (2022): 26–29.
> 29 Wang Xin, “ 民用码头建设贯彻海上战略投送要求研究 ” [Research on Civil Wharfs Construction
> Implementing Maritime Strategic Projection Requirements], Traffic Engineering and Technology for
> National Defence 20, no. 5 (2022): 7–10.

Erickson  – Chapter 7  • 159 

These platforms are also intended “to deter and counter any potential third-

party intervention in a Taiwan conflict.” 30 

In sum, this critical decade is already witnessing a relentless ramp-up 

in both PRC military force posture and “full court press” activity vis-à-vis 

Taiwan. PLA forces have achieved a nearly continuous presence in the waters 

and airspace around Taiwan, as well as a heightened operational tempo in 

exercises and limited operations—to impose what Xi himself terms a “new 

normal” ( 新常态 ). 31  The subsequent sections consider potential scenarios 

of coercion or limited force against Taiwan, as well as a range of campaign 

scenarios involving both mainland Taiwan and its offshore islands. 

## All-Domain Pressure Campaign 

PRC forces are engaged in heightened periodic activity seemingly 

designed to stress Taiwanese society and wear down platforms, personnel, 

and readiness across its relatively small, resource-limited military. Perhaps 

most notably, the PLA Air Force has increased flights into Taiwan’s 

self-declared air defense identification zone (ADIZ), particularly its 

southwest corner. The Pentagon emphasizes both qualitative and quantitative 

escalation. Since September 2022, unmanned aerial systems (UAS) have 

accounted for roughly 10% of PLA aircraft tracked in the ADIZ. In 2022, the 

PLA dispatched a total of 1,737 aircraft into Taiwan’s ADIZ, a 79% increase 

from 972 incursions in 2021. 32 

To coerce Taiwan in the direction of PRC policy preferences, Beijing 

will continue to employ military, diplomatic, informational, and economic 

pressure. Analysts foresee various combinations of national efforts across 

these categories, with varying levels of synchronization and effectiveness. 

Potential tools of economic coercion include denying commodity imports, 

suspending trade negotiations, boycotting Taiwanese brands or goods, 

encouraging mob violence, disrupting employment and the stock exchange, 

conducting speculative attacks on foreign exchange markets, nationalizing 

assets, and encouraging sovereign debt divestment. 33          

> 30 U.S. Department of Defense, Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of
> China 2023 , 145.
> 31 Mathieu Duchâtel, “An Assessment of China’s Options for Military Coercion of Taiwan,” in Wuthnow
> et al., Crossing the Strait , 95.
> 32 U.S. Department of Defense, Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of
> China 2023 , 136.
> 33 Timothy R. Heath, Sale Lilly, and Eugeniu Han, Can Taiwan Resist a Large-Scale Military Attack
> by China? Assessing Strengths and Vulnerabilities in a Potential Conflict (Santa Monica: RAND
> Corporation, 2023), 76–78.

160  • The PLA in a Complex Security Environment 

## Preparatory Exercises 

PRC forces are increasing training to improve the ability of China’s 

armed forces to execute various operations against Taiwan, including 

through island seizure drills. Both frequency and realism are mounting, 

with exercises encompassing more challenging times (night), weather 

(inclement), and domains (multiple). 

Amphibious and amphibious-related exercises have been a major area 

of effort. In 2021 the PLA Navy conducted “more than 20 naval exercises 

with an island-capture element, greatly exceeding the 13 observed in 2020.” 

It conducted more than 120 maritime exercises within three months during 

2021 and incorporated Type 05 AAVs in large numbers for the first time 

that year. 34  China is also training extensively with Maritime Militia units 

as well as RO-RO ferries with retrofitted ramps and artificial causeways 

(mobilizable under the aegis of the 2016 National Defense Transportation 

Law) to avoid the need for port-based disembarkations and instead directly 

deliver AAVs. 35  Since July 2020, the PLA has been practicing such delivery. 36 

In 2022, for example, it more than doubled the number of RO-ROs involved 

in training over the previous year. 37 

The PLA Army has been conducting both service-level and joint 

amphibious assault training. According to the Pentagon, these drills 

“refined the tactics of rapid loading, long-distance transport and beach 

assault under complicated sea situations, and logistic support capabilities.” 

The Pentagon also cites media reports of extensive PLA employment of 

“sea, air, and ground UAS in support of the amphibious assault operation. 

[PLA Army] amphibious brigades reportedly conduct realistic, large-scale 

amphibious operations that are almost certainly aimed at supporting a 

Taiwan invasion scenario.” 38         

> 34 U.S. Department of Defense, Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of
> China 2022 , 107, 126.
> 35 J. Michael Dahm, “Chinese Ferry Tales: The PLA’s Use of Civilian Shipping in Support of Over-
> the-Shore Logistics,” U.S. Naval War College, CMSI, China Maritime Report, no. 16, November 1,
> 2021, https://digital-commons.usnwc.edu/cmsi-maritime-reports/16; and J. Michael Dahm, “More
> Chinese Ferry Tales: China’s Use of Civilian Shipping in Military Activities, 2021–2022,” U.S. Naval
> War College, CMSI, China Maritime Report, no. 25, January 20, 2023, https://digital-commons.
> usnwc.edu/cmsi-maritime-reports/25.
> 36 U.S. Department of Defense, Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of
> China 2022 , 127.
> 37 U.S. Department of Defense, Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of
> China 2023 , 143.
> 38 Ibid., 145.

Erickson  – Chapter 7  • 161 

## Political Pouncing and Practice 

A growing PLA pattern of “reactive assertiveness” has included sharper 

opportunistic exercises to condemn and exploit purported political wrongs, 

impose costs, and practice certain sophisticated joint operations (e.g., 

missile strikes). The most dramatic example to date since 1995–96 is the 

simulated Joint Blockade/Firepower Campaign exercises on August 2–10, 

2022, immediately following Pelosi’s visit. In August 2022 the PLA Air Force 

flew more than 250 fighter aircraft sorties into Taiwan’s ADIZ and across the 

Taiwan Strait median line, which no longer serves as a de facto delimitation 

line for PLA activities. 39  The PLA Navy deployed thirteen warships around 

Taiwan. Most dramatically, the PLA Rocket Force fired multiple ballistic 

missiles into impact zones in waters surrounding Taiwan on all sides, with 

unprecedented overflight of its mainland by at least four missiles. 40  Although 

Beijing’s response to President Tsai Ing-wen’s 2023 visit with House Speaker 

Kevin McCarthy in California was far more restrained, it contained a 

disturbing portent. On April 5, the Fujian Maritime Safety Administration 

announced a Taiwan Strait operation including patrols and “on-site [vessel] 

inspections.” While apparently unexecuted, the declaration could presage 

future escalation. 41  Further examples of military signaling, pressure, and 

even operational practice will doubtless follow. 

Many PLA activities support both the development of substantive 

combat capabilities and the signaling of resolve to use this growing potential 

should it prove necessary for achieving PRC objectives vis-à-vis Taiwan. 

It is often difficult to disaggregate the two. Retired senior captain Li Jie, a 

long-established and prolific expert at the PLA Navy Military Arts Research 

Institute, describes one such multifaceted effort: 

On February 9 [2020] the Eastern Theater Command of the PLA organized 

sea and air forces to conduct a combat readiness patrol. In systematic fashion, 

it dispatched destroyers, frigates, bombers, fighters, early warning aircraft, and 

various other types of combat platforms and weapons to test the integrated joint 

combat capabilities of multiple services. Air assets transited the Bashi Channel 

and Miyako Strait on a patrol flight and conducted targeted drills with realistic 

subject matter. It is extremely significant that multiple Chinese military services,      

> 39 U.S. Department of Defense, Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of
> China 2022 , 126.
> 40 U.S. Department of Defense, Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of
> China 2023 , 140.
> 41 Bonny Lin et al., “Analyzing China’s Escalation after Taiwan President Tsai’s Transit through the
> United States,” CSIS, June 29, 2023, 4, https://www.csis.org/analysis/analyzing-chinas-escalation-
> after-taiwan-president-tsais-transit-through-united-states.

162  • The PLA in a Complex Security Environment 

including naval and air forces, jointly conducted combat readiness patrols during 

this unusual period. 42 

In Li’s assessment, these joint patrols warned “Taiwan independence” 

forces, admonished their supporters, demonstrated competence and 

resolve to countries supporting Beijing’s cross-strait policies, and reassured 

PRC citizens that the party, state, and military were handling national 

affairs well. 43 

These patterns are likely to persist well into this decade. The U.S. Office 

of the Director of National Intelligence forecasts that “Beijing will continue 

to apply military and economic pressure…to induce Taiwan to move toward 

unification.… Beijing will use even stronger measures to push back against 

perceived increases in U.S. support to Taiwan.” 44  As PLA forces increasingly 

approach Xi’s 2027 preparation goal, their Taiwan-adjacent exercises will 

grow larger, more sophisticated, and more realistic. This will heighten 

U.S. perceptions—and likely the actual risk—that the PLA might seek to 

desensitize U.S., Taiwanese, and allied intelligence and thereby reduce 

indications and warnings of the PLA launching an actual military operation 

against Taiwan. 

## Taiwan Scenarios 

With the PLA’s successful modernization, Xi Jinping already has many 

options to shape the security environment and to initiate various combat 

operations. The risks are high, but China’s armed forces can initiate a variety 

of operations with far less warning than in the past. These options and 

influence will continue to grow rapidly in the coming years. Contingencies 

for action by China’s armed forces against Taiwan comprise four categories: 

coercion, blockade, bombardment, and invasion. Although this chapter 

discusses these groupings in ascending order of intensity and overall severity, 

they may be employed in different sequences with overlapping aspects.       

> 42 Li Jie, “ 中国实施战备巡航的四大宣誓 ” [The Four Major Declarations China Makes When
> Conducting Combat Readiness Patrols], Modern Ships , no. 07/08 (2020): 20.
> 43 Ibid., 20.
> 44 U.S. Office of the Director of National Intelligence, Annual Threat Assessment of the U.S. Intelligence
> Community (Washington, D.C., March 2024), https://www.dni.gov/files/ODNI/documents/
> assessments/ATA-2024-Unclassified-Report.pdf.

Erickson  – Chapter 7  • 163 

## Coercion or Limited Force 

Coercive PRC activities short of major combat operations might be 

divided into (1) disruptive activities, primarily involving the three warfares, 

and (2) limited use of force, including daily maritime gray-zone operations 

involving low-intensity coercion by the China Coast Guard and Maritime 

Militia. 45  Both forces are formally elements of China’s armed forces and 

answer to a PLA chain of command up to Xi himself. While some extant 

and potential activities may span both categories, the present author opposes 

as analytically obfuscatory and unhelpful the generic definition of gray-zone 

activities to encompass all manner of problematic PRC activities. This broad 

conception is commonly employed in Taiwan, the United States, and much 

of the Western world. 

At the lower-intensity end of PRC coercive activities are political and 

disinformation operations primarily captured by the three warfares. 46 

Political activities may be overt, covert, or a combination thereof. Unlike 

in 1950, the PRC now has capable fifth column assets deployed in Taiwan. 

Cyberactivity is a major enabler of such operations and may also be used to 

disrupt or even disable elements of Taiwan’s critical infrastructure, media, 

financial networks, or economic activities more broadly. The overriding, 

or at least initial, objective would be to demonstrate the ability to impose 

punishment or crippling dysfunction on Taiwan’s society and reveal its 

leadership to be ineffective and without recourse, thereby compelling 

Taiwanese officials and the populace to accept Beijing’s terms in order to 

avert catastrophe. 

At the higher-intensity end of coercive activities, the PRC has a growing 

array of tools at its disposal. 47  For instance, extensive military exercises and 

the enforcement of restrictions and closure areas through Notices to Airmen 

would require rerouting ships and aircraft and could impose significant costs 

on Taiwan’s economy. The 1995–96 exercises offer a model on which the PLA       

> 45 For an unrivaled conceptual survey of this subject, see Peter Dutton, “Conceptualizing China’s
> Maritime Gray Zone Operations,” in Maritime Gray Zone Operations: Challenges and Countermeasures
> in the Indo-Pacific , ed. Andrew S. Erickson (New York: Routledge, 2022), 19–34.
> 46 See, for example, Peter Mattis, “China’s ‘Three Warfares’ in Perspective,” War on the Rocks, January
> 30, 2018, https://warontherocks.com/2018/01/chinas-three-warfares-perspective; Elsa B. Kania, “The
> PLA’s Latest Strategic Thinking on the Three Warfares,” Jamestown Foundation, China Brief, August
> 22, 2016, https://jamestown.org/program/the-plas-latest-strategic-thinking-on-the-three-warfares;
> and Kerry K. Gershaneck, Political Warfare: Strategies for Combating China’s Plan to “Win without
> Fighting” (Quantico: Marine Corps University Press, 2020).
> 47 For an instructive background, see Duchâtel, “An Assessment of China’s Options for Military
> Coercion of Taiwan.”

164  • The PLA in a Complex Security Environment 

might build. Additionally, “PLA special operations forces could infiltrate 

Taiwan and conduct attacks against infrastructure or leadership targets.” 48 

## Blockade 

Of all major PRC military options vis-à-vis Taiwan, an air or maritime 

blockade is perhaps unrivaled in its potential flexibility, contingent nature, 

and ability to impose difficult escalation dilemmas on Taiwanese, U.S., 

and allied decision-makers. Accordingly, while a blockade could escalate 

tremendously, as well as be combined with elements of other operations 

(e.g., bombardment and strait-crossing), it is the next logical aspect to 

consider in sequence. 

Among the PLA’s set of service- and joint-level missions, the Joint 

Blockade Campaign ( 联合封锁战役 ) generally covers such aforementioned 

operations. Under this operational concept, China’s armed forces would seek 

to interrupt or sever foreign air and maritime intercourse with Taiwan, in 

part to compel the island’s surrender by cutting off critical imports. The 

PLA Air Force and Navy would have leading roles, but the PLA Army might 

well also apply its unrivaled mass, and the Aerospace, Cyberspace, and 

Information Support Forces might simultaneously implement electronic 

warfare, network attacks, and information operations (e.g., “information 

blockade”) to heighten Taiwan’s isolation and societal fracturing. Such 

efforts to isolate and enervate Taiwan could be quite prolonged, 49  although 

the longer they continued, the greater the possibility and prospect of U.S. 

and allied intervention. 50  Leading analysts have expressed concerns about 

the United States’ ability to deter China through the imposition of costs, 

mismatch of goals and capabilities, ability to prevail in protracted blockade 

warfare, and viable war termination options. 51        

> 48 U.S. Department of Defense, Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of
> China 2023 , 141. See also John Chen and Joel Wuthnow, “Chinese Special Operations in a Large-
> Scale Island Landing,” U.S. Naval War College, CMSI, China Maritime Report, no. 18, January 21,
> 2022, https://digital-commons.usnwc.edu/cmsi-maritime-reports/18.
> 49 For related considerations, see Gustavo F. Ferreira and Jamie A. Critelli, “Taiwan’s Food Resiliency—
> or Not—in a Conflict with China,” Parameters 53, no. 2 (2023): 39–60.
> 50 Max Stewart, “Island Blitz: A Campaign Analysis of a Taiwan Takeover by the PLA,” CIMSEC, June
> 13, 2023, https://cimsec.org/island-blitz-a-campaign-analysis-of-a-taiwan-takeover-by-the-pla.
> 51 For pessimistic analyses, see Lonnie D. Henley, “PLA Operational Concepts and Centers of Gravity
> in a Taiwan Conflict,” testimony before the U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission,
> Washington, D.C., February 18, 2021, https://www.uscc.gov/sites/default/files/2021-02/Lonnie_
> Henley_Testimony.pdf; and Lonnie D. Henley, “Beyond the First Battle: Overcoming a Protracted
> Blockade of Taiwan,” U.S. Naval War College, CMSI, China Maritime Report, no. 26, March 8, 2023,
> https://digital-commons.usnwc.edu/cmsi-maritime-reports/26.

Erickson  – Chapter 7  • 165 

## Bombardment 

The Joint Firepower Strike Campaign ( 联合火力战役 ) would draw on 

some of the PLA’s leading weapons. 52  Precision missile and air strikes could 

proceed in various sequences, potentially in combination with other major 

PLA operations. Given their centrality to situational awareness, Taiwan’s 

early-warning radars would likely be some of the first targets for strikes. 53 

Other major military targets seen as pivotal to Taiwan’s defenses would 

likely include bases and command and communications posts. Government 

targets seen as pivotal to Taiwan’s leadership and decision-making continuity 

and resolve to fight would include major institutions and official facilities. 54 

While Xi controls numerous and extremely capable strike assets to wage a 

Joint Firepower Strike Campaign, and there is no way to fully defend against 

them all, such a campaign would be unlikely in and of itself to realize Xi’s 

political objectives regarding “Taiwanese compatriots” and could well 

backfire strategically. 

## Invasion 

The most operationally viable effort for PLA forces at present would be 

an incremental victory or stepping-stone approach to seizing offshore islands, 

particularly the Pratas Islands and Taiping Island in the South China Sea, as 

well as Kinmen and the Matsu Islands in the Taiwan Strait. In a key example 

of operational vulnerability for Taiwan and potential opportunity for China, 

the Pratas Islands—which Beijing also claims—are located approximately 275 

miles from Kaohsiung, the municipality in southern Taiwan that administers 

them, but just 170 miles from Hong Kong (within the city’s flight information 

region). Lacking permanent inhabitants, they host a detachment of roughly 

500 Taiwanese marines. 55  The Pentagon assesses: 

The PLA is capable of various amphibious operations short of a full-scale 

invasion of Taiwan…. With few overt military preparations beyond routine 

training, the PRC could launch an invasion of small Taiwan-occupied islands 

in the SCS [South China Sea], such as Pratas or Itu Aba. A PLA invasion of a        

> 52 Michael Casey, “Firepower Strike, Blockade, Landing: PLA Campaigns for a Cross-Strait Conflict,”
> in Wuthnow et al., Crossing the Strait , 113–37, especially 118–23.
> 53 Mark Stokes and Eric Lee, “Early Warning in the Taiwan Strait,” Project 2049 Institute, April 12,
> 2022, https://project2049.net/2022/04/12/early-warning-in-the-taiwan-strait.
> 54 U.S. Department of Defense, Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of
> China 2023 , 141.
> 55 Shahn Savino and Charles Dunst, “Will Taiwan’s Dongsha Islands Be the Next Crimea?” World
> Politics Review , March 16, 2021, https://www.worldpoliticsreview.com/a-small-island-chain-could-
> be-the-next-flashpoint-in-taiwan-china-relations.

166  • The PLA in a Complex Security Environment 

medium-sized, better-defended island, such as Matsu or Kinmen, is also within 

the PLA’s capabilities. 56 

Such a victory might be pyrrhic, however, given the cost of strategic 

surprise and the political opposition that it would likely galvanize in Taiwan 

as well as the United States and its allies. It is noteworthy that the PLA 

arguably had operationally viable options vis-à-vis Kinmen and the Matsu 

Islands as early as the 1958 Taiwan Strait crisis, but that Mao decided against 

such courses of action in order to avoid undermining the PRC’s claims to 

Taiwan in its entirety. However, such a seizure would greatly raise the stakes 

and risk: if the United States failed to respond effectively, its resolve and 

commitment would come into question. 

An outright amphibious invasion probably would be the only way 

for the PRC to assert control of Taiwan permanently and conclusively. It 

also represents one of the most complex and difficult military operations 

conceivable, a challenge further accentuated by its high-stakes nature. Two 

authors—one a naval engineer specializing in amphibious operations at the 

Marine Design and Research Institute of China in Shanghai—write in the 

PLA Navy’s service newspaper: “From the perspective of past large-scale 

landing operations, once success is achieved, the gains are enormous. But the 

degree of difficulty is also large.” 57  Furthermore, failure would be obvious, 

and no amount of CCP propaganda could portray the situation otherwise. 

PLA operational concepts for an amphibious invasion of Taiwan 

center on the Joint Island Landing Campaign ( 联合登陆 ), which entails a 

coordinated combination of campaigns involving air, maritime, logistics, and 

electronic warfare components. 58  The objective is to achieve air and maritime 

superiority; circumvent, overwhelm, penetrate, or otherwise overcome 

Taiwanese defenses; seize ports and beaches, improvise landing methods, 

or otherwise establish a beachhead; accumulate combat power by rapidly 

building up and sustaining shore-based forces; and drive inland to seize key 

objectives, or even—in the most extreme of scenarios—the whole island. 59       

> 56 U.S. Department of Defense, Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of
> China 2023 , 141–42.
> 57 Wang Guo and Wang Xiang, “ 登陆作战到底难在何处 ” [Why Landing Operations Are Hard],
> People’s Navy, December 29, 2020, 4.
> 58 Cristina L. Garafola, “The PLA Airborne Corps in a Joint Island Landing Campaign,” U.S. Naval War
> College, CMSI, China Maritime Report, no. 19, March 10, 2022, https://digital-commons.usnwc.edu/
> cmsi-maritime-reports/19; and Dennis J. Blasko, “The PLA Army Amphibious Force,” U.S. Naval
> War College, CMSI, China Maritime Report, no. 20, April 27, 2022, https://digital-commons.usnwc.
> edu/cmsi-maritime-reports/20.
> 59 U.S. Department of Defense, Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of
> China 2023 , 141.

Erickson  – Chapter 7  • 167 

A conference convened by the China Maritime Studies Institute in May 2021 

found that the PLA has achieved tremendous progress in developing many 

of the capabilities needed for a cross-strait invasion, confronting Taiwan 

with an increasingly grave threat. The inherent challenges and risks remain 

high for Xi and the CCP, but they may desire to be “just good enough for 

long enough” with a hodgepodge fleet of PLA, militia, and civilian vessels. 60 

Despite the PLA’s ongoing efforts to improve its capabilities to execute 

the Taiwan Joint Island Landing Campaign, the Pentagon is skeptical of the 

prospects for an amphibious invasion: 

A large-scale amphibious invasion would be one of the most complicated and 

difficult military operations for the PLA, requiring air and maritime superiority, 

the rapid buildup and sustainment of supplies onshore, and uninterrupted 

support. It would likely strain the PRC’s armed forces and invite a strong 

international response. These factors, combined with inevitable force attrition, 

the complexity of urban warfare, and potential for an insurgency, make an 

amphibious invasion of Taiwan a significant political and military risk for Xi 

and the CCP, even assuming a successful landing and breakout past Taiwan 

beachhead defenses. 61 

Taiwan itself has a variety of means to attempt to make its ports unusable 

by an invading force. 62  Furthermore, it seems doubtful that the PLA has 

fully prepared for the challenging city operations that might be needed to 

successfully conclude an invasion of Taiwan. 63 

## PRC Perceptions: Effectiveness, Capabilities, and Trends 

It is unclear how well-informed (or forthright) most civilian PRC 

sources are regarding the current and projected state of PLA force 

development and Xi Jinping’s thinking regarding its use. The vast majority 

of sources the present author examined suggest that “peaceful reunification”         

> 60 “Quick Look Report: Large-Scale Amphibious Warfare in Chinese Military Strategy,” U.S. Naval
> War College, CMSI, June 14, 2021, available at https://www.andrewerickson.com/2021/06/quick-
> look-cmsis-4-6-may-2021-conference-large-scale-amphibious-warfare-in-chinese-military-strategy-
> taiwan-strait-campaign-focus.
> 61 U.S. Department of Defense, Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of
> China 2023 , 141.
> 62 Ian Easton, “Hostile Harbors: Taiwan’s Ports and PLA Invasion Plans,” Project 2049 Institute, July
> 22, 2021, https://project2049.net/2021/07/22/hostile-harbors-taiwans-ports-and-pla-invasion-plans.
> 63 Sale Lilly, “ ‘Killing Rats in a Porcelain Shop’: PLA Urban Warfare in a Taiwan Campaign,” in
> Wuthnow et al., Crossing the Strait, 139–57; and Elsa B. Kania and Ian Burns McCaslin, “The PLA’s
> Evolving Outlook on Urban Warfare: Learning, Training, and Implications for Taiwan,” Institute
> for the Study of War, April 2022, https://www.understandingwar.org/report/pla’s-evolving-outlook-
> urban-warfare-learning-training-and-implications-taiwan.

168  • The PLA in a Complex Security Environment 

under some sort of “one country, two systems” framework remains Beijing’s 

preferred approach. Wang Yong, director of the Center for American Studies 

at Peking University, observes that “peaceful reunification is the least costly 

way to resolve the Taiwan issue.” 64  Some civilian sources appear to suggest 

the need for a more flexible approach than Xi’s rhetoric has reflected to 

date. Two professors, one affiliated with the Shenzhen Liaison Department 

of the Central Government Liaison Office in Hong Kong, state that policy 

approaches “obviously cannot ignore reactions of the Taiwan side” and call 

for a wide-ranging exploration of possibilities for framing one country, two 

systems. 65 

Some writings suggest that Beijing remains cautious and could still be 

deterred. “Cross-strait military security crises are extremely harmful and 

can easily lead to intervention by external forces,” states Chen Xiancai, 

director of the Institute of Political Science at Xiamen University’s Taiwan 

Research Institute. He continues: “Coupled with its high cost, the willingness 

of all parties to trigger a military security crisis is reduced, such that, 

objectively speaking, endogenous forces can restrain the outbreak of a 

cross-strait military security crisis.” 66  A specialist at the China Institutes of 

Contemporary International Relations judges the probability of conflict to 

be relatively low, albeit with caveats: 

Given the deep economic interdependence between China and the United States 

and the asymmetric nuclear balance of terror, the likelihood of a large-scale 

conflict between China and the United States is low, and the triggering of a 

fierce diplomatic war and severe economic sanctions are low-probability events. 

International politics is full of chances and drama, however, and major strategic 

changes often manifest themselves in unexpected ways. 67 

Another scholar judges that while “the general direction of U.S. Taiwan 

policy may continue in a direction that is not conducive to the peaceful 

development of cross-strait relations for a long time,” nevertheless, “the          

> 64 Wang Yong, “ 和平统一、一国两制是解决台湾问题的最佳方案 ” [Peaceful Reunification and One
> Country, Two Systems Are the Best Solutions to the Taiwan Issue], China Youth Daily , December 4,
> 2022, https://www.aisixiang.com/data/138704.html.
> 65 Huang Jichao and Jin Huanyu, “ 当前大陆学界 ‘一国两制 ’台湾方案相关研究述评 ” [A Review of
> Current Research in Mainland Academia on the “One Country, Two Systems” Formula for Taiwan],
> Taiwan Studies , August 1, 2021, trans. CSIS, https://interpret.csis.org/translations/a-review-of-
> current-research-in-mainland-academia-on-the-one-country-two-systems-formula-for-taiwan.
> 66 Chen Xiancai, “ 台海危机与风险管理 : 1987–2017 为例 ” [Taiwan Strait Crisis and Risk Management:
> The Case of 1987–2017], Taiwan Studies , February 20, 2018, trans. CSIS, https://interpret.csis.org/
> translations/taiwan-strait-crisis-and-risk-management-the-case-of-1987-2017.
> 67 Zhang Wenzong, “ 美国对华威慑与胁迫及中国应对 ” [U.S. Deterrence and Coercive Diplomacy
> toward China and China’s Response], Contemporary International Relations , December 20, 2016,
> trans. CSIS, https://interpret.csis.org/translations/u-s-deterrence-and-coercive-diplomacy-toward-
> china-and-chinas-response.

Erickson  – Chapter 7  • 169 

probability of China and the United States falling into great-power conflict 

and war confrontation due to the Taiwan issue is not high.” 68 

Other specialists are far more pessimistic or hawkish. A lengthy 

analysis concludes that “Taiwan is increasingly likely to become a ‘tipping 

point’ for Sino-U.S. conflicts.” 69  In a characteristically assertive vein, Zhang 

Wenmu expresses certitude that Beijing can compel Washington to abandon 

Taiwan. 70  A similarly hard-line analysis from Leng Bo, director of the Voting 

Research Office in the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences’ Taiwan Research 

Institute, likewise suggests that things are coming to a head and that the 

clock is ticking. He invokes Xi and society alike to assert that the status quo 

is unacceptable: 

Although the opportunity is not yet completely ripe for cross-strait unification, 

the foundation for this prospect grows increasingly solid, and we have entered 

“the stage where we can reach it if we stand on our tiptoes.” In his important 

speech commemorating the 40th anniversary of the “Letter to Taiwan 

Compatriots,” General Secretary Xi Jinping mentioned the need to accelerate 

the unification process. It is no longer enough to “sit and talk”; the time has come 

to “stand and act.” The Mainland’s policy toward Taiwan is now more aimed at 

favorably shaping the unification situation. It is worth mentioning, the Mainland 

public’s hatred of “Taiwan independence” and its impatience with delay and the 

inability to resolve the Taiwan problem are all rapidly growing, while voices 

favoring “armed unification” are continuously rising. Even the patience of the 

rationalists doing research on Taiwan is decreasing. 71 

Military-affiliated sources tend to echo Leng’s impatient approach. Such 

sources would generally not be expected to acknowledge any prohibitive 

PLA inadequacies regarding Taiwan scenarios. Their general consensus is 

that Washington’s and Taipei’s cross-strait policies and actions are trending 

in an unacceptable direction, reflecting a failure thus far by Beijing and 

the PLA to curb them, but that the PLA is on track to be able to offer the 

necessary deterrence or compellence, potentially through CCP authorization 

to take harsher, more coercive approaches and even credibly threaten war. In 

interpreting China’s latest defense white paper (2019), researchers at China’s           

> 68 Li Zhenguang, “ 台湾问题的国际环境变化与台海局势走向 ” [Changes in the International
> Environment of the Taiwan Issue and Trends in the Taiwan Strait], China Review , January 17, 2021,
> https://www.aisixiang.com/data/124382.html.
> 69 Qiu Chaobing, “ 中美关系新态势下的台湾问题 :走向与评估 ” [The Taiwan Issue under the New
> Situation of Sino-U.S. Relations: Direction and Assessment], United Front Studies Research , January
> 29, 2021, https://www.aisixiang.com/data/124825.html.
> 70 Zhang Wenmu, “ 台湾问题的底线、极限、机遇 ” [The Bottom Line, Limits, and Opportunities of
> the Taiwan Issue], in 张文木战略文集 [Zhang Wenmu’s Strategic Essays] (Jinan: Shandong People’s
> Publishing House, 2020), chap. 1, available at https://www.aisixiang.com/data/127566.html.
> 71 Leng Bo, “ 百年未有之大变局下两岸关系新特征与未来趋势 ” [New Characteristics and Future
> Trends in Cross-Strait Relations in the Context of the Great Change Not Seen in a Century], Modern
> Taiwan Studies , no. 3 (2021): 14–17.

170  • The PLA in a Complex Security Environment 

Academy of Military Science’s Warfare Research Institute invoke harsh 

boilerplate: “It is better to lose thousands of troops than to lose an inch of 

soil…. The tide of history is vast and mighty. Those who submit will prosper, 

while those who resist shall perish. Reunification is the historical trend and 

the correct path.” 72 

Likely affiliated with China’s military or defense industry and written 

under a pseudonym, one unofficial but extensive and seemingly serious 

analysis emphasizes that “China’s Taiwan region is not Ukraine, and the 

PLA is certainly not the Russian Army.” The report identifies the following 

trendlines: 

[D]ue to limitations imposed by existing economic levels and available military 

equipment, it has not been until the last ten years that the PLA has started to 

gradually gain the real combat capabilities needed to use force to resolve the 

Taiwan issue and achieve unification of the motherland…. The PLA’s launch of 

a campaign to resolve the Taiwan issue can generally be seen as a [devastating] 

attack because the Taiwan military and the PLA are not of the same class. The 

PLA will definitely achieve quick, decisive victory, nothing like the war of 

attrition currently being conducted by the Russian army. 73 

Longtime government analyst Da Wei, who is deeply familiar with 

policymaking in both Beijing and Washington, offers particular insights from 

within China’s intelligence and analytic community. He explains that “rather 

than saying that each party has a ‘red line,’ it would be better to say that each 

party insists on a ‘red zone’ with blurred boundaries and a certain degree of 

flexibility.” While claiming that its Taiwan policy remains unchanged, Da 

contends that Washington has abandoned previous restrictions and restraint. 

This reversal, he insists, has moved the goal posts and dishonored the spirit 

of Washington’s commitments: “It is as if the United States removed the 

Buddha statues from the temple, leaving only an empty structure, and then 

claimed that the temple was still there.” Simultaneously, Da acknowledges 

that “despite the Chinese government’s constant reaffirmation of its basic 

policies of ‘peaceful reunification and one country, two systems,’ as long as 

the capabilities of the Chinese military are growing, and the scope of its 

activities is expanding, the United States will believe that China is gradually 

abandoning its policy of ‘peaceful reunification.’” Worryingly, he concludes 

that “this situation has left us with little time. If we cannot achieve strategic 

stability through self-restraint and mutual assurance, we may have to wait         

> 72 Deng Bibo and Chen Yue, “ 坚定不移推进实现国家完全统一 ” [Firmly Push Forward Complete
> National Unification], National Defense , no. 9 (2019): 16–17.
> 73 Long Damao, “ 国战于野--从俄乌战争看中国台湾问题 ” [Great Countries at War: Looking at
> the Taiwan Issue from the Perspective of the Russia-Ukraine War], Shipborne Weapons—Defense
> Review , no. 6 (2022): 8–14. Erickson –Chapter 7 •171

for stability to be achieved through a larger crisis, conflict, or even war. 

However, this path would be extremely costly for China, the United States, 

and the world.” 74 

PRC military-informed sources are generally pessimistic about current 

trends, believing that Taipei and Washington are insufficiently deterred. 

While some civilian sources suggest caution and potential deterrence, 

military sources emphasize preparation and the need for more coercive 

measures—precisely the path Xi appears to be taking. 

## Conclusion: Fateful Trends 

Xi Jinping has sustained rapid growth in military funding even 

as China’s economy continually slows. He has pursued an expensive, 

complex system of systems (e.g., hypersonic glide vehicles) that can only 

be developed and deployed through resource-intensive, high-stakes 

megaprojects. He has initiated and sustained an extraordinary nuclear 

weapons buildup with political, reputational, and strategic stability costs and 

risks that his predecessors all avoided. These approaches do not maximize 

China’s prospects for long-term development underwritten by economic 

growth. Rather, they are clearly designed to give Xi military options that his 

predecessors lacked. 

Xi hopes to achieve his objectives at the lowest level of escalation, using 

a meteoric military buildup to impose a Sisyphean sense of futility on Taiwan 

as part of a whole-of-government pressure campaign to eventually compel 

unification and thereby “win without fighting.” However, Xi is heightening 

expectations and time pressure in a way that increasingly risks a collision 

course with intractable opposition from Taiwan, the United States, and U.S. 

allies and partners. Even under Ma Ying-jeou, Xi was unwilling or unable 

to offer conditions that Taiwanese society could accept. Subsequently, his 

de-emphasis of carrots and increasing emphasis on sticks make apparent 

offerings far less palatable. Compounding matters, his suppression of 

Hong Kong in contravention of the Sino-British Joint Declaration and 

imposition of the popularly opposed National Security Law invalidating 

core protections promised under the framework of one country, two systems 

make any offerings to Taiwan far less credible. The increasingly apparent lack   

> 74 Da Wei, “ 如何实现台湾问题的新稳定 ,对话、危机还是战争 ?” [How Can We Achieve New
> Stability on the Taiwan Issue—Dialogue, Crisis, or War?], China Foundation for International
> Studies, August 22, 2022, trans. CSIS, https://interpret.csis.org/translations/how-can-we-achieve-
> new-stability-on-the-taiwan-issue-dialogue-crisis-or-war.

172  • The PLA in a Complex Security Environment 

of a PRC-preferred pathway toward cross-strait entente could bring a range 

of military contingencies into play. 

The PLA’s transformation has fundamentally altered Taiwan’s options 

for defending itself in a range of conceivable scenarios. Taipei can no 

longer counter PRC military strengths symmetrically. Instead, as William 

Murray cogently argues, its remaining defense options lie in emphasizing 

the asymmetrical advantage of being the defender, particularly of an 

island with favorable geography, and seeking to deny the PRC its strategic 

objectives rather than attempting to destroy its weapons systems. 75  Taiwan is 

studying and pursuing a variety of these measures, but more is needed. Sea 

mines represent one of the best weapons for this purpose, yet they remain 

underemphasized even now. 76 

The prospects are sobering; the implications are bracing. Taiwan might 

indeed have to roll its rock up the hill (by successfully deterring)—if not 

endlessly, at least through this critical decade. There are indeed asymmetric 

“porcupine-style” ways to better pace the mounting threat while avoiding 

Sisyphean futility, but progress is thus far slow, and time may well be running 

out. As Xi himself has declared: “History never waits for those who hesitate, 

those who look on, those who are idle, or those who are weak.” 77  This critical 

decade is pivotal for Taiwan’s future and the United States’ security. To deter 

aggression, they must rapidly bolster asymmetric defenses. 78            

> 75 William S. Murray, “Revisiting Taiwan’s Defense Strategy,” Naval War College Review 61, no. 3 (2008):
> 13–38.
> 76 See Matthew Cancian, “An Offensive Minelaying Campaign against China,” Naval War College
> Review 75, no. 1 (2022): 71–88.
> 77 David Bandurski, “95 Reasons to Celebrate: President Xi’s Party Anniversary Speech and What It
> Might Mean,” Hong Kong Free Press , July 1, 2016, https://hongkongfp.com/2016/07/01/95-reasons-
> to-celebrate-president-xis-party-anniversary-speech-and-what-it-might-mean.
> 78 For recommendations, see Andrew S. Erickson and Gabriel B. Collins, “Deterring (or Defeating) a
> PLA Invasion: Eight Recommendations for Taipei,” in Chinese Amphibious Warfare: Prospects for a
> Cross-Strait Invasion, ed. Andrew S. Erickson, Conor M. Kennedy, and Ryan D. Martinson (Newport:
> Naval War College Press, 2024), 449–61.

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

This chapter examines the contribution of the People’s Liberation Army 

(PLA) to China’s strategy in Southeast Asia and assesses the various means 

the country uses to achieve its strategic goals. 

> MAIN ARGUMENT

The PLA is a critical component of China’s strategy in Southeast Asia. Yet 

when considering its role in achieving the country’s strategic goals, four 

arguments must be taken into account. First, China has preferred nonmilitary, 

including gray-zone, coercion in the South China Sea in recent years. Second, 

the PLA is being used in conjunction with other means of statecraft to achieve 

China’s goals in the region, including economic sanctions. Third, these 

goals concern not only military objectives such as deterrence and combat 

effectiveness but also broader economic and geopolitical goals. Fourth, the 

use of coercion, including nonmilitary coercion, and the presence of the 

PLA’s capabilities in Southeast Asia cut against China’s “carrots,” reducing 

the effectiveness of the country’s economic statecraft. 

> POLICY IMPLICATIONS

• China is sensitive to the geopolitical costs of military coercion in the 

South China Sea and remains cautious, despite the increased frequency 

of its use of coercion. Thus, the U.S. will send stronger signals of resolve 

by maintaining its military presence and making clearer statements of 

commitment in Southeast Asia. 

• The U.S. could engage in a balancing act between signals of resolve and 

signals of reassurance. 

• Given that China coordinates its military and nonmilitary tools, the U.S. 

could provide more economic incentives and alternatives to ASEAN 

countries. Chapter 8 The PLA as a Part of China’s Strategy 

# in Southeast Asia 

## Ketian Zhang 

China has maintained a positive relationship with the Association of 

Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), especially in the economic realm. At the 

same time, it has maritime territorial disputes with some ASEAN countries, 

including Malaysia, the Philippines, and Vietnam. What is the role of the 

People’s Liberation Army (PLA) in China’s strategy in Southeast Asia? This 

chapter examines the PLA’s contribution and assesses the various means the 

country uses to achieve its strategic goals. 

The chapter is organized into the following sections. The first section 

examines changes in the PLA’s operational posture and new patterns of 

PLA activity in Southeast Asia. The second section examines to what extent 

China coordinates the use of the PLA with other means of statecraft. The 

third section then delves deeper into an analysis of China’s regional military 

objectives and broader strategic goals. The following section evaluates the 

effectiveness of PLA activities in Southeast Asia before the chapter concludes 

with a discussion of policy implications. 

## Changes in the PLA’s Operational Posture and New 

## Patterns of Activity 

This section will first examine changes in the PLA’s activities and then 

analyze the roles the PLA has increasingly undertaken in the past two decades. 

## Patterns of and Changes in PLA Activities 

In the 1990s, China utilized the PLA to coerce Vietnam and the 

Philippines in the South China Sea. The militarized seizure of Mischief  

> Ketian Zhang is an Assistant Professor of International Security in the Schar School of Policy and
> Government at George Mason University.

176  • The PLA in a Complex Security Environment 

Reef serves as one example. 1 As noted by former Chinese diplomat Zhang 

Liangfu, from December 1994 to February 1995, China seized and built 

shelters ( 高脚屋 ) on the reef, which was also claimed by the Philippines 

and Vietnam. 2 The seizure of Mischief Reef constituted both military and 

gray-zone coercion, and the PLA Navy was involved in the construction 

of shelters on it. According to one naval officer who served in the South 

Sea fleet, China used Type 991 landing ships to transport construction 

materials. 3 Furthermore, China used gray-zone tactics on January 17, 1995, 

and May 13, 1995, when Chinese fishery ships expelled Philippine vessels. 4

Its immediate goal was to stop the Philippines from controlling Mischief 

Reef. As the reef lies in the eastern part of the Spratly Islands, China viewed 

it as a good location for controlling other land features in the South China 

Sea. 5 Because Chinese-occupied land features were all in the western part 

of the Spratly Islands, closer to Vietnam, and most of the Vietnamese and 

Philippine resupply lines to land features were in the eastern part, China 

wanted to seize one land feature in the eastern Spratlys to “cut off their supply 

lines.” 6 The broader goal, however, was to enforce a “policy of restraint” on 

claimants. 7

In more recent years, however, China has preferred to use nonmilitarized 

coercion against South China Sea claimants, including economic sanctions 

and gray-zone tactics. Starting in 2007, China greatly increased its use of 

coercion, especially in the gray zone. 8 In 2012, for example, it imposed 

economic sanctions on Philippine banana exports to China after the 

Philippines arrested Chinese fishers in the disputed Scarborough Shoal. 9

In 2014, China used maritime law-enforcement vessels to ram Vietnamese 

vessels in response to Vietnam’s opposition to Chinese oil rigs operating in 

the disputed Paracel Islands. 10  Yet, unlike in the early 1990s, these were all                

> 1For further discussion of the specific case of the Mischief Reef, see Ketian Zhang, China’s Gambit:
> The Calculus of Coercion (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2023).
> 2Quoted in ibid.
> 3Author’s interview with a former navy officer, Nanjing, December 30, 2015.
> 4This paragraph is adapted from Zhang, China’s Gambit , chap. 3.
> 5Author’s interviews with government policy analysts and former government officials in Haikou,
> Guangzhou, and Beijing, April–June 2016.
> 6Author’s interview with a Chinese scholar, Xiamen, June 13, 2016.
> 7Author’s interview with a government policy analyst, Haikou, April 8, 2016.
> 8For more information and data, see Ketian Zhang, “Cautious Bully: Reputation, Resolve, and Beijing’s
> Use of Coercion in the South China Sea,” International Security 44, no. 1 (2019): 134.
> 9Zhang, “Cautious Bully,” 117.
> 10 Ibid., 117.

Zhang  – Chapter 8  • 177 

cases of nonmilitary coercion that were instead diplomatic and economic in 

nature. 11  Since the 1990s, China has not used brute force to directly confront 

other disputants in any of its maritime and territorial disputes in the South 

China Sea. 

The classic definition of coercion was provided by Thomas Schelling, 

who uses the term “compellence” for an “active strategy to make an 

adversary act in the desired way.” 12  Robert Art and Patrick Cronin further 

specify that the goal of compellence can be either forcing the adversary to do 

something it has not previously done or forcing it to stop doing something 

it is currently undertaking. 13  The term “coercive diplomacy,” however, has 

become the convention in lieu of compellence, with even Schelling using the 

terms “coercion” and “coercive diplomacy.” 14 

In authoritative Chinese sources, deterrence ( 威慑 ) is often referred to 

in the strategic, military sense. For example, the PLA’s  Science of Military 

Strategy  defines strategic deterrence as “a method of military conflict to 

achieve a political goal based on military strength, a comprehensive use of 

various means, through clever display of strength and determination to use 

strength, [which] makes the other party face unworthy or even unbearable 

consequences, and is forced to give in, compromise, or surrender.” 15 

According to the  Science of Military Strategy , strategic deterrence has two 

basic functions: “One is to stop the other party from doing what they don’t 

want to do through deterrence, and the other is to use deterrence to coerce 

the other party to do what they must do.” 16  In a way, this articulation seems 

to suggest that China’s conceptualizations of deterrence and compellence 

are somewhat blurred or blended. As such, this chapter focuses on the 

compellence aspect of Chinese coercion but uses the terms “compellence” 

and “coercion” interchangeably, acknowledging that coercion includes both                    

> 11 Zhang, “Cautious Bully,” 117.
> 12 Thomas C. Schelling, Arms and Influence (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1966), 70.
> 13 Robert J. Art and Patrick M. Cronin, eds., The United States and Coercive Diplomacy (Washington,
> D.C.: U.S. Institute of Peace Press, 2003), 8.
> 14 Alexander L. George popularized the term “coercive diplomacy.” See Alexander L. George, David
> K. Hall, and William R. Simons, The Limits of Coercive Diplomacy: Laos, Cuba, Vietnam (Boston:
> Little, Brown and Company, 1971); Alexander L. George, Forceful Persuasion: Coercive Diplomacy
> as an Alternative to War (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Institute of Peace Press, 1992); Todd S. Sechser and
> Matthew Fuhrmann, Nuclear Weapons and Coercive Diplomacy (Cambridge: Cambridge University
> Press, 2017); and Schelling, Arms and Influence , 3–4.
> 15 Xiao Tianliang, ed., 战略学 [The Science of Military Strategy] (Beijing: National Defense University
> Press, 2020), trans. China Aerospace Studies Institute, January 26, 2022, 26, https://www.airuniversity.
> af.edu/CASI/Display/Article/2913216/in-their-own-words-2020-science-of-military-strategy.
> 16 Ibid., 131.

178  • The PLA in a Complex Security Environment 

compellence and deterrence. 17  Further, it defines “coercion” as the use or 

threat of negative means to demand a change in the behavior of a target 

state. 18 

One might wonder what actions count as gray-zone coercion. 19 

Gray-zone coercion straddles strictly nonmilitary and military coercion. 

Discussions regarding “gray-zone conflicts” have gained greater traction in 

the policy world, with the term appearing in both the 2010 Quadrennial 

Defense Review and official Japanese government documents. 20  Michael 

Mazarr argues that gray-zone conflict “pursues political objectives 

through coercive, integrated campaigns” and employs mostly nonmilitary 

or nonkinetic tools. 21  He adds that gray-zone campaigns are “the use of 

civilian instruments to achieve objectives sometimes reserved for military 

capabilities.” 22  Mazarr’s characterization is insightful, but as with others in 

the gray-zone literature, his conceptualization of gray-zone actions may be 

too expansive because of the inclusion of military force. 23  As nonkinetic as 

some military actions, such as troop mobilization, might be, they are still 

militarized coercive tools and thus not gray-zone actions. Theoretically, gray-

zone actions should be carried out strictly by civilians, however violent they 

might become. Similarly, economic sanctions, which analysts like Mazarr 

classify as gray-zone actions, are not gray-zone at all because they do not 

inflict physical violence or have the potential to do so. Moreover, economic 

sanctions are a distinct category of coercive tools and have been studied 

for many decades. For example, in an edited volume by Andrew Erickson 

and Ryan Martinson on China’s maritime gray-zone operations, gray-zone 

measures are limited to actions taken by the China Coast Guard (CCG) 

and Maritime Militia. 24  Economic sanctions and diplomatic measures are                   

> 17 This paragraph is adapted from Ketian Zhang, “China’s Military Coercion: Patterns and Rationale,”
> in China’s Use of Armed Coercion: To Win without Fighting , ed. James A. Siebens (London: Routledge,
> 2023), chap. 2.
> 18 For a more specific discussion of the definition of coercion, see Zhang, China’s Gambit .
> 19 This paragraph and the next paragraph are adapted from ibid., chap 2.
> 20 See Frank G. Hoffman, “The Contemporary Spectrum of Conflict: Protracted, Gray Zone, Ambiguous,
> and Hybrid Modes of War,” Heritage Foundation, October 5, 2015, http://index.heritage.org/
> military/2016/essays/contemporary-spectrum-of-conflict.
> 21 Michael J. Mazarr, Mastering the Gray Zone: Understanding a Changing Era of Conflict (Carlisle: U.S.
> Army War College Press, 2015), 58.
> 22 Ibid., 62.
> 23 For similarly expansive definitions of gray-zone actions, see Michael Green et al., “Countering Coercion in
> Maritime Asia: The Theory and Practice of Gray Zone Deterrence,” Center for Strategic and International
> Studies, May 9, 2017, https://www.csis.org/analysis/countering-coercion-maritime-asia.
> 24 Andrew S. Erickson and Ryan D. Martinson, eds., China’s Maritime Gray Zone Operations (Annapolis:
> U.S. Naval Institute Press, 2023). Zhang –Chapter 8 •179

excluded altogether from their discussion of Chinese gray-zone measures in 

the maritime realm. 

Building on this burgeoning literature, while emphasizing the civilian 

aspect of gray-zone actions, this chapter defines gray-zone coercion as 

the physical and violent use of government organizations and agencies, 

or threats to use them, to force the target state to change behavior. These 

agencies include, but are not limited to, law enforcement, border and 

customs agencies, and coast guards. The logic of gray-zone coercion is to 

utilize civilian agencies to inflict or threaten physical pain on the target state’s 

civilians, military personnel, or military assets. For example, in maritime 

territorial disputes, coercion by law-enforcement ships works by either 

physically damaging assets of the target state or denying the target state 

access to the disputed territory. A state might also use its civilian maritime 

forces to engage in a naval blockade of the target state to force it to adopt 

whatever policies the coercer desires. 

Gray-zone coercion is analytically distinct from military coercion 

because it is conducted by civilian personnel and the instruments involved 

have a much lower capacity to inflict harm than military weapons. Being 

nonmilitarized, gray-zone coercion is also much less likely to invoke the 

target state’s defense treaties with other powers, given that such treaties tend 

to stipulate that the other powers will come to the defense of the target state 

if it is under military attack. Gray-zone coercion reduces the likelihood of 

military escalation. Even with the most recent reform in March 2018 that 

placed the CCG under the People’s Armed Police, it remains separate from 

the official PLA force structure. 25  Chinese analysts and retired military 

officials also indicate that CCG ships remain law-enforcement tools and are 

nonmilitarized. 26  In short, while China’s gray-zone coercion is not strictly 

nonmilitary, it is still more “gray” than military. 

The primary reason for China’s shift to nonmilitary, especially gray-zone, 

coercion in the South China Sea is its perception of heightened geopolitical 

backlash since the early 2000s. 27  That is, as the United States strengthened 

its military presence in Asia, particularly Southeast Asia, China became 

concerned that the use of direct military coercion in the South China Sea 

against countries such as the Philippines, which is a U.S. ally, might draw in 

the United States militarily. As the author’s interviews with former Chinese    

> 25 See “ 深化党和国家机构改革方案 ” [The Plan Regarding Deepening the Reform of the Party
> and State Apparatus], Xinhua, March 21, 2018, http://www.xinhuanet.com/politics/2018-
> 03/21/c_1122570517_6.htm.
> 26 Author’s interview with a former government official, Washington, D.C., August 27, 2019.
> 27 Zhang, “Cautious Bully.”

180  • The PLA in a Complex Security Environment 

naval officers, as well as internal materials from Chinese government think 

tanks suggest, China preferred to use nonmilitary coercive tools out of 

fear of escalation. 28  For example, one former PLA officer was particularly 

concerned that if China were to use military coercion, the U.S. Navy might 

become directly involved, admitting that the United States was still the 

“number one” threat. 29 

## The Role of the PLA 

This change to prioritize gray-zone coercion in maritime disputes, 

however, does not mean that the PLA is no longer a factor in the South 

China Sea. Although China rarely utilizes it in direct coercive attempts 

against Southeast Asian countries, the PLA plays an important role in 

several ways. First, it emphasizes improvement in combat training as well as 

logistical capacity. As early as 2013, Luo Baoming, who was at the time party 

secretary of the Hainan provincial government, noted that the emphasis 

of military training should be on improving combat capability. 30  Similarly, 

as China’s 2019 defense white paper notes, the PLA Navy has increasingly 

expanded training, including combat training exercises, in the South China 

Sea. 31  On January 2, 2017, China’s aircraft carrier battle group trained in the 

South China Sea, focusing on the landing of J-15 fighter aircraft. 32  A month 

later, PLA Navy destroyers and logistical support ships trained in the area, 

focusing on joint air defense, patrol, coordination, and logistical support 

during combat. 33  Several years later, in May 2022, the navy conducted “high-

intensity” and “multi-subject” comprehensive training for providing combat 

logistical support in the South China Sea region. 34                

> 28 Zhang, “Cautious Bully.”
> 29 Author’s interview with a former PLA officer, Guangzhou, May 21, 2016, quoted in Zhang, “Cautious
> Bully.”
> 30 “省军区第十次党代表大会开幕 ” [Hainan Provincial Military Region’s Tenth Meeting of Party
> Representatives], Hainan Daily , April 27, 2013, https://www.hainanpc.net/hainanpc/xwzx/
> snyw/2021110500293416374/index.html.
> 31 Ministry of National Defense of the People’s Republic of China (PRC), 新时代的中国国防
> [China’s National Defense in the New Era] (Beijing, July 2019), http://www.mod.gov.cn/gfbw/fgwx/
> bps/4846424.html.
> 32 “中国海军航母编队在南海组织舰载机起降训练 ” [The Chinese Navy’s Aircraft Carrier Battle
> Groups Conducted Training in the South China Sea], Hainan Daily , January 4, 2017, https://www.
> hainanpc.net/hainanpc/xwzx/snyw/2021110500451735399/index.html.
> 33 “海军南海舰队远海训练编队完成南海预定课目训练 ” [The Navy Conducted Far Sea Training
> in the South China Sea], Xinhua, February 17, 2017, http://www.xinhuanet.com/mil/2017-
> 02/17/c_129483813.htm.
> 34 “海军某支队在南海某海域开展综合作战支援演练 ” [The Navy Conducted Comprehensive Combat
> Logistical Support Training in the South China Sea Area], PLA Daily , May 17, 2022, http://www.mod.
> gov.cn/gfbw/wzll/jt_214059/16072370.html. Zhang –Chapter 8 •181

Relatedly, between 2013 and 2015, China engaged in extensive 

reclamation of and construction on several reefs in the Spratly Island chain 

in the South China Sea, which has resulted in over 2,000 acres of artificial 

landmasses on Chinese-occupied reefs. 35  A specific plan for land reclamation 

began to emerge in 2013. In April 2013, Liu Xin, party secretary and political 

commissar for the Hainan provincial military region, noted that the strategic 

importance of the South China Sea has become salient and that China has 

“a long way to go in terms of strengthening maritime defense and protecting 

maritime rights in the South China Sea.” 36  Land reclamation was apparently 

part of this plan to strengthen maritime defense and rights. In 2013, Hainan 

Province governor Jiang Dingzhi indicated in a provincial government work 

report that Hainan would promote the development of basic infrastructure 

in Sansha City, the newly established city administering China’s maritime 

rights and occupied features in the South China Sea. 37  Jiang especially 

noted that one of the major missions for Hainan in 2013 would be to finish 

planning for the construction of Woody Island and Tree Island in the Paracel 

Islands while regulating land reclamation behavior, hinting at subsequent 

land reclamation activities on these land features. 38 

Based on a document from Hainan Province, the rationale for land 

reclamation was threefold—military, administrative, and economic—with 

the aim of providing military and civilian logistical support. 39  Research 

conducted by geologists at Nanjing University, written in October 2013, 

noted that the strategic importance of reclaiming land features in the South 

China Sea was based on objective and quantifiable indicators, including 

levels of naval and air deterrence, protection of exclusive economic zones, 

and logistical support capacity. 40  The study emphasized that, based on 

existing indicators, Johnson Reef would be of low strategic value. 41  Large-

scale land reclamation, however, would significantly increase its strategic 

value, and the study therefore recommended this option. 42  Logistical 

needs were stressed concerning not only the Spratly Islands but also the           

> 35 For more information, see Ketian Zhang, “Explaining China’s Large-Scale Land Reclamation in the
> South China Sea: Timing and Rationale,” Journal of Strategic Studies 46, no. 6–7 (2022): 1185–1214.
> 36 “省军区第十次党代表大会开幕. ”
> 37 Quoted in Zhang, “Explaining China’s Large-Scale Land Reclamation in the South China Sea,” 11.
> 38 Quoted in ibid., 11.
> 39 Ibid., 12.
> 40 Ibid., 14.
> 41 Ibid., 14.
> 42 Ibid., 14.

182  • The PLA in a Complex Security Environment 

Paracels. 43  While China’s land reclamation was militarized, it was an act not 

of compellence but of deterrence. 

The PLA also conducts military diplomacy by participating in 

multilateral and bilateral exercises with countries in ASEAN. For example, 

in October 2018, China and ASEAN held a joint maritime military exercise 

for the first time. 44  It was the first time that ASEAN held a military exercise 

with just one external country, as well as the PLA’s first time conducting 

a military exercise with ASEAN as a whole. 45  The exercise adhered to the 

code of conduct for unintended encounters at sea and prioritized subjects 

on maritime security, including counterpiracy. China and ASEAN held 

a joint exercise again in April 2019. 46  Between 2005 and 2021, the PLA 

conducted 36 bilateral exercises with ASEAN countries, including Thailand, 

Singapore, Cambodia, Malaysia, Laos, Indonesia, Brunei, and Myanmar. 47 

Looking to the future, one Southeast Asia expert at the PLA Information 

Engineering University concludes that China could conduct more defense 

cooperation with ASEAN in high-sensitivity areas (i.e., involving maritime 

and sovereignty issues) to increase trust between the militaries. 48  In 

addition to multilateral and bilateral exercises with ASEAN, China has 

increased military-to-military diplomacy with extraregional countries, 

including U.S. allies. In April 2023, for example, France and China released 

a joint statement that the PLA’s Southern Theater Command will deepen 

engagement with its French counterpart in the Pacific region. 49 

## Coordination between the PLA and Other Statecraft 

As mentioned in the previous section, over the last two decades, 

China has refrained from directly using the PLA Navy in coercive attempts 

against South China Sea disputants. Instead, the Chinese government uses 

the PLA in coordination with and in support of other means of statecraft, 

including diplomacy, economic sanctions, and gray-zone coercion. Gray-            

> 43 “南海存远志 ,实干兴三沙 ” [Ambitions and Development of Sansha], Hainan Daily , May 28, 2013,
> https://www.hainanpc.net/hainanpc/xwzx/snyw/2021110500294785836/index.html.
> 44 Zhang Yan, 东盟防务外交 [ASEAN’s Defense Diplomacy] (Beijing: Shishi Press, 2022), 204.
> 45 Ibid.
> 46 Ibid., 205.
> 47 Ibid., 137.
> 48 Ibid., 240.
> 49 “中华人民共和国和法兰西共和国联合声明 (全文 )” [Full Text of the Joint Statement between China
> and France], Xinhua, April 7, 2023, http://www.news.cn/world/2023-04/07/c_1129503357.htm.

Zhang  – Chapter 8  • 183 

zone coercion includes the use of civilian law-enforcement ships to inflict 

and threaten physical damage on the target state, among other measures. 

According to a former Chinese diplomat based in Southeast Asia, China’s 

gray-zone coercion can be quite petty, such as by using maritime surveillance 

ships to throw dried tree branches, which interrupts the seismic surveys of 

Vietnamese oil and gas exploration ships. 50 

However, there are harsher forms of gray-zone coercion, including 

ramming into the vessels of other South China Sea disputants as well 

as blocking foreign ships from conducting oil and gas exploration. For 

example, during the oil rig standoff between China and Vietnam in 2014, 

CCG ships were directly involved. According to the Vietnamese Ministry 

of Foreign Affairs, on May 1, 2014, an oil rig “and three oil and gas service 

ships from China were moving southward from the northwest of Triton 

Island.” 51  Upon noticing China’s activity, Vietnam immediately used its 

maritime law-enforcement ships to counter. 52  As one former Chinese 

diplomat admits, most of the time Chinese ships rammed Vietnamese 

ships to stop them from breaking China’s line of defense. 53  For example, on 

June 5, “China employed from 30 to 137 escort vessels on a daily basis.” 54 

It constantly deployed 9 to 12 ships to closely follow Vietnamese vessels, 

ramming them and firing water cannons. Chinese vessels eventually 

damaged 24 Vietnamese law-enforcement vessels. 

The fact that the CCG was at the forefront of coercion does not mean 

that the PLA Navy was uninvolved. When China coerces South China Sea 

disputants, its navy is usually on standby in the background for deterrence 

purposes. For example, during the oil rig standoff, PLA Navy ships 

loomed just over the horizon to deter Vietnam from escalating, forming 

what Chinese analysts call “concentric circles”—with CCG ships at the 

center and PLA Navy ships along the outer edge. 55  For fear of escalating 

the tension, China refrains from using naval ships in direct confrontation 

during South China Sea disputes. Chinese government analysts believe       

> 50 Author’s interview with a former Chinese diplomat, Beijing, June 7, 2016.
> 51 “Vietnam’s International Press Conference on 7th May 2014,” Embassy of Vietnam, Berlin, Press
> Release, May 7, 2014, http://www.vietnambotschaft.org/viet-nams-international-press-conference-
> on-7th-may-2014.
> 52 Green et al., “Countering Coercion in Maritime Asia,” 208.
> 53 Author’s interview with a former Chinese diplomat, Guangzhou, May 25, 2016.
> 54 “Contents of the International Press Conference on Developments in the East Sea June 5th, 2014,”
> Ministry of Foreign Affairs (Vietnam), Press Release, June 5, 2014, http://www.mofa.gov.vn/en/
> tt_baochi/tcbc/ns140609024213/view. All details below, including how many Vietnamese vessels
> were damaged, come from this statement.
> 55 Author’s interview with a Chinese analyst, Beijing, June 7, 2016.

184  • The PLA in a Complex Security Environment 

that as long as the country’s coercive actions remain controlled and 

nonmilitarized, the United States will not get militarily involved. 56  As such, 

China has been using the PLA in coordination with nonmilitary coercive 

attempts. 

Moreover, the PLA practices military diplomacy with ASEAN countries 

to reduce tension, as noted in the previous section. Such diplomacy is 

accompanied by joint patrols between the CCG and its ASEAN counterparts. 

For example, the Grandview Institution, a private Chinese think tank, notes 

that in April 2022 Chinese and Vietnamese coast guard ships conducted a 

joint patrol in the Gulf of Tonkin, marking the 23rd such patrol between China 

and Vietnam since 2006. 57  In addition, China uses bilateral and multilateral 

diplomacy to reduce tensions in the South China Sea. For example, it has 

negotiated with ASEAN countries on the draft of a code of conduct in 

the South China Sea, even as it has continued bilateral conversations with 

disputants such as Vietnam, Malaysia, and the Philippines. 58  According to 

Wu Shicun, the founding president of China’s National Institute for South 

China Sea Studies, China should employ a two-pronged approach when 

dealing with South China Sea issues: (1) continue bilateral and multilateral 

diplomacy with ASEAN countries and (2) strengthen its capacity to deter 

certain U.S. actions in the area. 59 

The issue with using gray-zone coercion in lieu of direct military 

coercion or confrontation is the perceptual difference between China and the 

United States. As noted in the first section, China’s rationale for using gray-

zone coercion is to reduce escalation—that is, to reduce the likelihood that 

an attack on U.S. allies might trigger mutual defense treaties, which in turn 

could get the United States militarily involved in an incident in the South 

China Sea. However, the United States does not necessarily consider China’s 

gray-zone coercion de-escalatory. This perceptual difference could lead to 

miscommunication, exaggerated threat perceptions, and, consequently, 

unintended escalation.      

> 56 See Zhang, “Cautious Bully,” 174.
> 57 Lie Xiaobo, “2022 年南海安全形势大事记 ” [Major Events in the South China Sea, 2022], Grandview
> Institution, December 30, 2020, https://www.grandviewcn.com/shishipinglun/759.html.
> 58 Wu Shicun, “ 南海海上安全挑战 ,中国需要感知什么 ” [What Should China Know Regarding
> Challenges of Maritime Security in the South China Sea], Center for International Security and
> Strategy, Tsinghua University, January 15, 2022, https://ciss.tsinghua.edu.cn/info/china_wzft/4393.
> 59 Ibid.

Zhang  – Chapter 8  • 185 

## China’s Regional Military Objectives and Broader 

## Strategic Goals 

China’s use of the PLA and other means of statecraft aligns with its 

regional military objectives in Southeast Asia and broader strategic goals. 

China has two major military objectives regarding the South China Sea: 

(1) achieving deterrence in peacetime and (2) ensuring the PLA’s combat 

effectiveness during wartime. 

Official Chinese government think tank analysts and former PLA 

officials indicate that deterrence during peacetime is a major objective for 

the PLA. Xu Liping, a senior analyst at the Chinese Academy of Social 

Sciences (CASS), notes that China’s military exercises in the South China Sea 

are intended to signal the country’s resolve to defend its sovereign rights. 60 

Wu Shicun suggests that China needs to strengthen the PLA’s capability to 

achieve successful deterrence. 61  Chen Feng, a retired general and president 

of the China International Foundation for Strategic Studies, a think tank 

with close ties to the PLA and Ministry of Foreign Affairs, indicates that 

there are three possible scenarios leading to a conflict in the South China 

Sea: (1) territorial or maritime disputes with other claimants, (2) conflicts 

over sovereignty and maritime rights with countries outside the region, and 

(3) conflicts involving a U.S. presence. 62  According to Chen, China needs to 

strengthen its military capacity and be prepared to deter such conflicts. 63  His 

emphasis on deterrence in the South China Sea is shared by Guan Youfei, 

formerly the director of the Office of International Military Cooperation 

in the Central Military Commission. 64  Guan stresses that the PLA needs to 

intensify its modernization process because it still lags behind the United 

States in weaponry and technology. 

In addition to peacetime deterrence, official Chinese government 

documents such as national defense white papers and Xi Jinping’s 

speeches also emphasize combat effectiveness during wartime as a major              

> 60 Zhang Baofeng, “ 解放军今起南海军演历时五天 禁区达 10 万平方公里 ” [The PLA Will Conduct a Five-
> Day Military Exercise in the South China Sea, Restricted Area Encompasses 100,000 Square Kilometers],
> Ta Kung Pao , August 6, 2021, http://www.takungpao.com/news/232108/2021/0806/617665.html.
> 61 Wu, “ 南海海上安全挑战 ,中国需要感知什么 .”
> 62 Chen Fang, “ 对当今世界几个重大战略问题的认识与思考 ” [Reflecting on Major Strategic Issues
> of the World], in 战略态势观察 2020 [Strategic Posture Outlook 2020] (Beijing: World Knowledge
> Press, 2022), 7.
> 63 Ibid., 1.
> 64 Guan Youfei, “ 加强对话协商 ,聚焦危机管控 :保持中美两军关系长期稳定 ” [Strengthening
> Dialogues and Focusing on Crisis Management: Keeping a Stable Long-Term Relationship between
> the U.S. and Chinese Militaries], in 战略态势观察 2020, 34.

186  • The PLA in a Complex Security Environment 

objective. For example, the 2015 national defense white paper noted that 

the PLA’s preparation should focus on winning local informationized wars, 

highlighting maritime military conflicts and their preparation. 65  During a 

recent visit to the Southern Theater Command, Xi asserted that in order to 

defend China’s sovereign and maritime rights, the PLA needs to strengthen 

military training and combat capability to prepare for potential conflicts. 66 

This is in line with his directive to PLA representatives during the 12th 

National People’s Congress in March 2013 to build a PLA that can fight and 

win battles ( 能打胜仗 ). 67 

Regarding China’s broader strategic goals, Southeast Asia is both 

economically and geopolitically important to China’s overall grand 

strategy. This is established by official documents as well as annual reports 

published by two Chinese government think tanks—the China Institutes of 

Contemporary International Relations (CICIR) and the China Institute of 

International Studies (CIIS). CICIR is under the Ministry of State Security, 

while CIIS is under the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. 

To reduce concerns about China’s entry into the World Trade 

Organization and expand the country’s export market, the ASEAN-China 

Free Trade Agreement was signed in 2002. 68  As CICIR’s 2020–21 annual 

report notes, ASEAN and China had become each other’s largest trading 

partner by 2002. 69  The 2022–23 report emphasizes economic cooperation 

as an important component of China’s relations with ASEAN. 70  Southeast 

Asia has also been a valuable partner in the Belt and Road Initiative, as 

demonstrated by the many infrastructure projects China helped build in 

ASEAN countries. 71                   

> 65 Information Office of the State Council (PRC), 中国的军事战略 [China’s Military Strategy] (Beijing,
> May 2015), http://www.gov.cn/zhengce/2015-05/26/content_2868988.htm.
> 66 “习近平在视察南部战区海军时强调 :深化练兵备战 ,加快转型建设 ,全面提高部队现代化水
> 平” [While Inspecting the Navy in the Southern Theater Command, Xi Jinping Emphasizes: Deepen
> Training for War Preparation and Quicken Transformation While Comprehensively Increasing
> the Military’s Level of Modernization], Xinhua, April 12, 2023, http://www.news.cn/politics/2023-
> 04/12/c_1129516582.htm.
> 67 “‘建设一支听党指挥能打胜仗作风优良的人民军队 ’——‘ 十个明确 ’彰显马克思主义中国化新
> 飞跃述评之八 ” [“To Build a PLA That Answers to the CCP and Wins Battles”—Commentary on
> the “Ten Clarifications” Demonstrating the New Leap of Marxism in China], Xinhua, February 20,
> 2022, http://www.news.cn/politics/2022-02/20/c_1128398515.htm.
> 68 Ketian Zhang, “Bringing the Economy Back In: Economic Development and China’s Grand Strategy,”
> Journal of Indo-Pacific Affairs (2022): 6.
> 69 China Institutes of Contemporary International Relations (CICIR), 国际战略与安全形势评估
> 2020/2021 [Strategic and Security Review 2020/2021] (Beijing: Shishi Press, 2020), 181.
> 70 CICIR, 国际战略与安全形势评估 2022/2023 [Strategic and Security Review 2022/2023] (Beijing:
> Shishi Press, 2022), 193.
> 71 David M. Lampton, Selina Ho, and Cheng-Chwee Kuik, Rivers of Iron: Railroads and Chinese Power
> in Southeast Asia (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2020).

Zhang  – Chapter 8  • 187 

Geopolitically, Southeast Asia is important to China’s objective to 

increase strategic trust and not push countries toward the United States. 72  It 

is true that China maintains sovereignty and maritime claims in the South 

China Sea. Nevertheless, it wants to maintain stability in its relations with 

ASEAN countries and prevent territorial disputes from escalating—a 2018 

ASEAN-China statement noted as much. 73  In November 2021, China and 

ASEAN announced the establishment of a “meaningful, substantive, and 

mutually beneficial China-ASEAN comprehensive strategic partnership.” 74 

As such, China is utilizing a whole-of-government approach by using 

negative tools, such as coercion, and positive tools, such as economic 

inducement, in coordination with each other. China’s selective coercion fits 

its “wedge strategy” to avoid geopolitical backlash from ASEAN. 75  Chinese 

government policy analysts term such behavior “beating one and luring 

others” ( 一打一拉 ). 76 

China’s goals of improving economic relations with ASEAN and 

preventing major geopolitical backlash from member countries are in line 

with its overall grand strategy, which Xi characterizes as “comprehensive 

national security.” Political security is the key, and economic security is 

the foundation of this strategy. 77  Speeches from other Chinese presidents 

in the post–Cold War era have also confirmed the centrality of economic 

development in China’s grand strategy. 78  Economic ties with ASEAN 

countries contribute to China’s economic development, which, ultimately, 

has a positive impact on regime security. As such, it is unlikely that the PLA 

will be the most important instrument for China to achieve its objectives in 

Southeast Asia.           

> 72 China Institute of International Studies (CIIS), 国际形势和中国外交蓝皮书 2021/2022
> [International Situation and China’s Foreign Affairs 2021/2022] (Beijing: World Knowledge Press,
> 2022), 357.
> 73 “中国 -东盟战略伙伴关系 2030 年愿景 ” [ASEAN-China Strategic Partnership Vision 2030],
> November 15, 2018, available at http://www.gov.cn/xinwen/2018-11/15/content_5340677.htm.
> 74 “中国 -东盟建立对话关系 30 周年纪念峰会联合声明 :面向和平、安全、繁荣和可持续发展的
> 全面战略伙伴关系 (全文 )” [Joint Statement of the ASEAN-China Summit to Commemorate the
> 30th Anniversary of the Establishment of Dialogue Relations: Comprehensive Strategic Partnership
> for Peace, Security, Prosperity, and Sustainable Development (Full Text)], Xinhua, November 22,
> 2021, http://www.gov.cn/xinwen/2021-11/23/content_5652616.htm.
> 75 Author’s interview with a Chinese scholar, Xiamen, June 13, 2016.
> 76 Author’s interview with a Chinese government analyst, Beijing, August 19, 2015; and author’s
> interview with a Chinese government analyst, Beijing, October 21, 2015.
> 77 Zhang, “Bringing the Economy Back In.”
> 78 Ibid.

188  • The PLA in a Complex Security Environment 

## Evaluating the Effectiveness of PLA Activities in 

## Southeast Asia 

China’s goals in Southeast Asia raise the question of whether the PLA is 

being effectively used. It is often difficult to establish criteria for evaluating 

effectiveness. This section examines two indicators: military and political 

effectiveness. First, military effectiveness is defined as whether the PLA 

could achieve the military objective of winning conflicts. Second, political 

effectiveness is defined as whether the use of the PLA is conducive to 

deterrence in the South China Sea while maintaining positive relations with 

ASEAN countries. 

Regarding military effectiveness, as a recent Congressional Research 

Service report notes, despite China’s military modernization effort, the 

PLA Navy still has weaknesses in areas such as joint operations with other 

parts of the military, antisubmarine warfare, at-sea resupply of combatant 

ships operating far from home waters, and personnel training. 79  China is 

well aware of these issues, which is why the PLA has been emphasizing 

joint combat training and logistics training in the South China Sea while 

perfecting land reclamation. 

Political effectiveness results are also mixed. On the one hand, the 

use of the PLA and nonmilitary coercion has proved to be effective in 

the short term. CICIR’s annual reports consistently indicate that China 

has successfully maintained a positive relationship with ASEAN and that 

ASEAN countries have refrained from “choosing a side” in the U.S.-China 

competition and pursued a hedging strategy. 80  CICIR analysts note, in 

particular, that the Philippines reiterated in 2022 that its relations with 

China are not defined by South China Sea disputes and that such disputes 

should not prevent bilateral cooperation. 81  Similarly, one PLA analyst notes 

that, starting with the Duterte administration, the Chinese and Philippine 

coast guards engaged in meetings and signed agreements on counterpiracy 

and joint rescue. 82  In January 2020 a CCG ship visited the Philippines for the 

first time. 83  CIIS analysts also emphasize that the Philippines is not willing               

> 79 Ronald O’Rourke, “China Naval Modernization: Implications for U.S. Navy Capabilities—Background
> and Issues for Congress,” Congressional Research Service, CRS Report for Congress, RL33153,
> December 3, 2022, 4.
> 80 CICIR, 国际战略与安全形势评估 2022/2023, 187–88; CICIR, 国际战略与安全形势评估
> 2020/2021, 173, 175, 184; and CICIR, 国际战略与安全形势评估 2021/2022 [Strategic and Security
> Review 2021/2022] (Beijing: Shishi Press, 2021), 322.
> 81 CICIR, 国际战略与安全形势评估 2022/2023, 196.
> 82 Zhang, 东盟防务外交 , 139.
> 83 Ibid., 139. Zhang –Chapter 8 •189

to be a pawn in the United States’ containment strategy against China, citing 

a 2020 Duterte speech that said the Philippines will not choose sides. 84  It is 

important to note that these activities took place after China’s use of gray-

zone coercion and economic sanctions against the Philippines between 2012 

and 2016. Despite increasing tensions between China and the Philippines 

over South China Sea disputes, current Philippine president Ferdinand 

Marcos Jr. reiterated in April 2023 that the Philippines will not take sides 

and will keep regional issues from affecting bilateral relations. 85 

On the other hand, however, overusing coercion could be suboptimal 

and ineffective for China in the long term. For one, it further escalates 

tensions with the United States. For another, it could push ASEAN countries 

away, especially if or when China fails to provide them with economic 

incentives. In addition, the domestic politics within individual countries 

in Southeast Asia, such as Malaysia or the Philippines, could reduce the 

effectiveness of China’s coercion. For example, not all countries are equally 

receptive to China-backed railway projects, with Vietnam and Thailand 

being more cautious and Laos and Malaysia being more receptive. 86  This 

illustrates the inherent tension in China’s grand strategy. China needs 

economic development, and sound relations with ASEAN countries 

help it maintain economic momentum. At the same time, China also has 

sovereignty and maritime claims in the South China Sea. The very use of 

coercion, including nonmilitary tactics, and the presence of the PLA in 

the region to enforce these claims cut against China’s economic “carrots,” 

reducing the effectiveness of its economic statecraft. 

## Conclusions and Policy Implications 

This chapter has examined the role of the PLA as part of China’s strategy 

in Southeast Asia. In the 1990s, China utilized the PLA to coerce countries 

such as Vietnam and the Philippines. In more recent years, however, it has 

preferred to use nonmilitarized coercion against South China Sea claimants, 

including economic sanctions and gray-zone coercion, while using the PLA 

as a deterrence tool. Under this strategy, the PLA has increased its military 

diplomacy by participating in multilateral and bilateral exercises with        

> 84 CIIS, 国际形势和中国外交蓝皮书 2021/2022, 266.
> 85 “菲律宾总统马科斯会见秦刚 ” [Philippine President Marcos Met with Qin Gang], Ministry of
> Foreign Affairs (PRC), Press Release, April 22, 2023, https://www.mfa.gov.cn/wjbzhd/202304/
> t20230423_11063771.shtml.
> 86 Lampton, Ho, and Kuik, Rivers of Iron .190 •The PLA in a Complex Security Environment

ASEAN. The use of the PLA in China’s Southeast Asia strategy has achieved 

mixed success. On the one hand, ASEAN countries have remained unwilling 

to take sides in the Sino-U.S. competition. On the other hand, overusing 

the PLA might escalate tensions and push ASEAN countries closer to the 

United States. 

Looking ahead, several continuities in PLA activities in the South China 

Sea can be expected. First, China will most likely continue to improve the 

logistical and military capacities of the land features it has already reclaimed. 

However, barring a drastic change in U.S. posture in the region, China is 

unlikely to pursue additional land reclamation, such as at Scarborough 

Shoal. It originally planned to reclaim the shoal but was deterred by the 

United States in 2015. 87  Second, China will continue using gray-zone 

coercion against South China Sea disputants. The intensity and frequency of 

such cases will depend, in part, on the policies and actions of disputants and 

the media exposure of accidents in the South China Sea. 88  Third, the PLA 

will further engage in military diplomacy with ASEAN countries, including 

holding more joint maritime exercises, even in highly sensitive issue areas. 

What, then, are the implications for U.S. force posture? For one, the 

United States likely needs to maintain its military presence and bases in 

Southeast Asia to signal its military resolve in the region. China’s government 

agencies and think tanks have been tracking for many years U.S. actions and 

statements regarding the South China Sea, as seen in annual CICIR and CIIS 

reports. China is sensitive to any changes in U.S. statements and actions. For 

example, when the United States left Subic Bay in the early 1990s, China 

militarily seized Mischief Reef. Internal documents from CASS suggest 

that China viewed the U.S. withdrawal as creating a geopolitical vacuum, 

enabling the use of military action and coercion. 89  Beginning in the 2000s, 

however, China has become increasingly wary of using military coercion in 

the South China Sea precisely because of the U.S. presence in the region. 90 

Verbalizing resolve is also an effective deterrent, as evidenced during the 

2015 Scarborough Shoal standoff. 

Second, the United States could engage in a balancing act between 

signals of resolve and signals of reassurance. As Schelling notes, deterrence 

works when reassurance is also involved. In the case of Sino-U.S. relations, 

this means reducing the media exposure of certain actions and activities         

> 87 See Zhang, “Explaining China’s Large-Scale Land Reclamation in the South China Sea.”
> 88 For more details, see Zhang, “Cautious Bully.”
> 89 Ibid.
> 90 Ibid. Zhang –Chapter 8 •191

in the South China Sea. Overexposure of U.S. activities might make China 

believe that its own resolve is on the line and that if it does not take in-kind 

actions, it will be viewed by others as weak and irresolute. 91  Though difficult, 

optimal deterrence might involve both physical signals of resolve and private 

statements conveyed directly to Chinese leaders. In addition, just as China 

coordinates military and nonmilitary tools, the United States could also step 

up its economic statecraft in Southeast Asia. One of the reasons ASEAN 

prefers to remain neutral is the economic benefits its countries receive from 

China. The United States could provide more economic incentives to offset 

China’s influence.  

> 91 Zhang, “Cautious Bully.”

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

This chapter analyzes the significant increase in China’s security engagement 

with the Pacific Islands since 2017 as part of a grand strategy to grow its 

geopolitical influence, develop geostrategic access, and accumulate resources 

in the region through comprehensive whole-of-nation statecraft. 

> MAIN ARGUMENT

The People’s Republic of China (PRC) has actively employed security 

statecraft to develop access, presence, and posture in the Pacific Islands to 

achieve strategic objectives in competition short of conflict. The increased 

employment of PRC security means in the Pacific Islands, integrated with 

political and economic statecraft, has intensified since 2020, demonstrating 

a rising strategic priority. The PRC’s nontraditional security forces (including 

police, the China Coast Guard, and the People’s Armed Police) are part of a 

holistic security statecraft system, alongside the People’s Liberation Army. A 

police presence is more easily normalized than a military one, can affect the 

local rule of law, and can generate greater influence and access within the host 

nation. The expansion of China’s police assistance could exacerbate unrest or 

cede sovereignty. Domestic instability and climate-related crises could also 

become vectors for Chinese security statecraft. 

> POLICY IMPLICATIONS

• All countries should understand the strategic intent behind 

China’s efforts to achieve access in the Pacific Islands as part of its 

comprehensive grand strategy to control strategic space. 

• All parties should recognize the growing importance of police as 

China’s preferred means for competing in the Pacific. 

• Western partners need to better understand the interests and agency 

of Pacific Island states to assist development, mitigate natural disasters, 

and build on respected programs. 

• Partner nations should prepare to deal with civil unrest in a rapid, 

economical, flexible, and nuanced fashion, possibly in cooperation 

with Chinese forces, to meet Pacific needs. Chapter 9 Competing for Access: China’s Growing 

# Security Interest in the Pacific Islands 

## Peter Connolly 

When Xi Jinping proposed the concept that became known as the 

Belt and Road Initiative (BRI), China’s “peaceful rise” narrative remained 

dominant and many believed the People’s Republic of China (PRC) had 

no strategic interest in the Pacific Islands. 1 Some argued that China had no 

grand strategy at all, 2 while the People’s Liberation Army (PLA) continued 

to claim China would “never establish a military base on foreign soil” 3

and remained cautious of how its actions in the Pacific were perceived. 4

Nevertheless, there had been internal developments in PLA strategy and 

Chinese Communist Party (CCP) planning during the previous three 

decades that assigned a higher strategic value to the Pacific Islands, and this 

became evident from 2017. 

In 2001, PLA strategist Major General Liu Yazhou identified a 

“fragmented zone” in Southeast Asia and the Pacific (specifically mentioning 

Solomon Islands) and argued China must “get actively involved” in their 

internal affairs, “divide and place controls,” “and vigorously cultivate 

pro-China forces” to avoid China’s encirclement. 5 Earlier still, the commander  

> 1

See, for example, Jian Yang,  The Pacific Islands in China’s Grand Strategy—Small States, Big Games 

(New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2011), 2, 136–38; and Terence Wesley-Smith, “China’s Rise in 

Oceania: Issues and Perspectives,”  Pacific Affairs  86, no. 2 (2013): 360, 354.  

> 2

See, for example, Lee Jones and Jinghan Zeng, “Understanding China’s ‘Belt and Road Initiative’: 

Beyond ‘Grand Strategy’ to a State Transformation Analysis,”  Third World Quarterly  (2019): 5–6, 

14-15; and Lee Jones and Shahar Hameiri,  Fractured China: How State Transformation Is Shaping 

China’s Rise  (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2021), 3.  

> 3

Major General Zhu Chenghu (presentation at the PLA 17th International Symposium, Beijing, 

October 20, 2014). The conference was attended by the author.  

> 4

Author’s interviews at the China Institute for International Strategic Studies, Beijing, 2014 and 2017.  

> 5

Liu Yazhou, “The Grand National Strategy,” trans. Ted Wang,  Chinese Law and Government  40, no. 

2 (2007): 13–36, 35–36. The original article was published in 2001 as “Da guoce” in Mandarin. 

Peter Connolly  is an Adjunct Fellow at the University of New South Wales in Canberra and the Center 

for Strategic and International Studies in Washington, D.C, and an Adjunct Senior Fellow at Solomon 

Islands National University. 194  • The PLA in a Complex Security Environment 

of the PLA Navy, Admiral Liu Huaqing, directed the navy in 1988 to achieve 

force projection beyond the second island chain (“from the Aleutians to 

the Marianas and on to PNG [Papua New Guinea]”) by 2025. 6 According 

to Admiral Sun Jianguo, the PLA has actively pursued bases to achieve this 

goal since 2012. 7 More importantly, Wen Jiabao’s visit as premier to Suva in 

2006 and Xi’s visits as vice president to PNG in 2009 and as president to Suva 

in 2014 and Port Moresby in 2018 made it clear that China’s interest in this 

region was significant. 

Nevertheless, when BRI arrived in PNG in 2018 and spread through 

the Pacific after the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) meeting 

in Port Moresby, the PLA’s presence and influence remained light. When 

PLA defense attachés were dispatched to PNG, Fiji, and Tonga in late 2020, 

China’s strategic interest began to clarify. This presence was then reinforced 

by the arrival of permanent police advisers in Fiji in 2021, Solomon Islands 

in 2022, and Kiribati and Vanuatu in 2023. This security statecraft is now 

being reinforced by other nonmilitary means such as the China Coast Guard 

and the positioning of stores for disaster relief. It is increasingly difficult to 

argue that the PRC has no strategic interests in the Pacific. 

This chapter examines how the employment of PRC military and police 

resources (referred to collectively as “security statecraft”) in the Pacific 

Islands has changed in the last decade and assesses the motives behind these 

changes. The first section will summarize how China’s strategy developed to 

enable security statecraft support for changes to its grand strategy early in 

the new era. 8 The second and third sections will then demonstrate how PRC 

security statecraft developed in the Pacific Island countries, using the PRC’s 

strategic tasks of “security cooperation” and “protecting overseas interests” 

as a framework. Finally, the chapter will present some simple statistics that 

identify when and where changes in the scale of PRC security statecraft have 

occurred in the Pacific, suggesting an increase in strategic priority. These 

changes reveal China’s increasing use of police instead of the PLA to achieve 

security outcomes in pursuit of geostrategic access in the Pacific. Although the        

> 6Admiral Liu Huaqing, cited in Yang, The Pacific Islands in China’s Grand Strategy , 132. As vice
> chairman of the Central Military Commission in the 1990s, he continued to emphasize the strategic
> importance of the Pacific. Rush Doshi, The Long Game: China’s Grand Strategy to Displace America’s
> Order (New York: Oxford University Press, 2021), 184, 195.
> 7Sun Jianguo, “Contributing Chinese Wisdom to Leading World Peaceful Development and Win-Win
> Cooperation,” Qiushi , August 2016, trans. by Adam Ni, September 6, 2023.
> 8“Statecraft” is the goal-oriented employment of a form of national power (political, economic,
> or security) to influence other states, while “grand strategy” is the comprehensive integration of
> statecraft to achieve long-term goals in the national interest. BRI is a geoeconomic strategy at the
> core of PRC grand strategy that is both essential to China’s narrative in the global South and a
> framework for delivering statecraft.

Connolly  – Chapter 9  • 195 

police of the Ministry of Public Security (MPS) provide a lower profile and 

less confrontational vector, they are part of the same line of effort as the PLA, 

working toward the same strategic goals in the Pacific Islands. 

## China’s New Security Strategies 

When General Secretary Hu Jintao first tasked the PLA with protecting 

China’s overseas interests in 2004, 9 it led to a debate over China’s military 

capability, force projection, and basing. 10  That debate interplayed with 

the grand strategic discourse over whether and when to make the course 

correction from “keeping a low profile” to “striving for achievement,” leading 

to an unannounced shift commencing around 2009. 11  This discussion 

demanded the protection of China’s citizens and interests overseas, basing, 

and civil-military integration (also referred to as “military-civil fusion”). 

Early in this discourse, Liu Yazhou proposed China should “go west” into 

Eurasia and “divide and rule” the islands of Southeast Asia and the Pacific 

to expand China’s geopolitical influence. 12  These ideas found their place in 

PRC grand strategy during Xi Jinping’s new era through BRI and are salient 

to recent developments in the Pacific. 

In 2015,  China’s Military Strategy  was the first Chinese defense white 

paper to explain the PLA’s tasks to secure overseas interests and to conduct 

security cooperation with foreign security forces. 13  These outwardly focused 

military tasks originated from the mission assigned by Hu Jintao in 2004 

and clarified by his 2009 “actively accomplish something” speech. 14  The 

PLA’s role in the broader agenda for security was enabled through “military 

operations other than war” and the establishment of the Central National              

> 9Hu Jintao, quoted in Daniel Hartnett, “The PLA’s Domestic and Foreign Activities and Orientation,”
> testimony before the U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, Washington, D.C.,
> March 4, 2009, 1–4, https://www.uscc.gov/sites/default/files/3.4.09Hartnett.pdf.
> 10 See the section in this chapter on “Geostrategic Access and Basing.”
> 11 See, for example, David Scott, “China and the ‘Responsibilities’ of a ‘Responsible’ Power—the
> Uncertainties of Appropriate Power Rise Language,” Asia-Pacific Review 17, no. 1 (2010): 74; Aaron
> L. Friedberg, “The Sources of Chinese Conduct: Explaining Beijing’s Assertiveness,” Washington
> Quarterly 37, no. 4 (2015): 147; Rush Doshi, “Hu’s to Blame for China’s Foreign Assertiveness?”
> Brookings Institution, January 22, 2019, https://www.brookings.edu/articles/hus-to-blame-for-
> chinas-foreign-assertiveness; and Susan Shirk, Overreach: How China Derailed Its Peaceful Rise
> (New York: Oxford University Press, 2022), 86–87.
> 12 Liu, “The Grand National Strategy,” 35–36.
> 13 State Council Information Office of the People’s Republic of China (PRC), China’s Military Strategy
> (Beijing, May 2015), 4, http://eng.mod.gov.cn/Database/WhitePapers/index.htm.
> 14 Hu Jintao (speech to the 11th Ambassadorial Conference, July 2009), available in Doshi, The Long
> Game , 186.

196  • The PLA in a Complex Security Environment 

Security Commission in accordance with Xi’s 2013 “comprehensive national 

security” concept. 

The PLA’s two new strategic tasks allowed security statecraft to integrate 

with other means on the ground through BRI. The first was “to participate 

in regional and international security cooperation” and generate influence 

through deeper military relations. 15  The second was “to safeguard the 

security of China’s overseas interests,” combining the 2006 policy of overseas 

citizen protection with the need to secure China’s expanding overseas assets 

under BRI. The PLA’s two new roles were intended to “create a favorable 

strategic posture” and “seize the strategic initiative in military competition” 

by generating influence and access through the “close coordination of 

political, military, economic, and diplomatic work.” 16  This integration 

of statecraft was then enabled by legislation that reinforced civil-military 

integration. After 2018, military representatives were also subject to the 

increased coordinating power of PRC ambassadors in-country. 17 

These concepts of security cooperation and protecting interests have also 

been incorporated into the employment of nonmilitary security statecraft 

since 2017, a trend formalized by the 2023 Global Security Initiative. 18  The 

initiative’s concept paper refers to Xi’s 2013 comprehensive national security 

concept, arguing that “traditional and nontraditional security threats have 

become intertwined,” and identifies the Pacific Island countries as needing 

PRC nontraditional security cooperation. 19  China increasingly employs 

internal security means, such as MPS police, the China Coast Guard, and the 

People’s Armed Police, to project security statecraft in areas of nontraditional 

security with ease. This is a statecraft technique that most Western countries 

are not well equipped to compete with. 

## Security Cooperation 

Security cooperation is defined as engagement with foreign security 

forces and institutions to build relationships that promote mutual interests;          

> 15 State Council Information Office (PRC), China’s Military Strategy , 4, 7.
> 16 Ibid., 3–4, 6.
> 17 Andrea Ghiselli, Protecting China’s Interests: Securitization and Foreign Policy (Oxford: Oxford
> University Press, 2021), 173; and Peter Martin, Keith Zhai, and Ting Shi, “As U.S. Culls Diplomats,
> China Is Empowering Its Ambassadors,” Bloomberg, February 8, 2018.
> 18 Sheena Chestnut Greitens, “China’s Use of Nontraditional Strategic Landpower in Asia,” Parameters
> 54, no. 1 (2024): 38.
> 19 Ministry of Foreign Affairs (PRC), “The Global Security Initiative Concept Paper,” February 21,
> 2023, https://www.mfa.gov.cn/eng/wjbxw/202302/t20230221_11028348.html.

Connolly  – Chapter 9  • 197 

provide access to territory, infrastructure, information, and resources; and 

build capacity. 20  It is the primary method by which security statecraft generates 

influence. The PRC had initiated strategic partnerships with its Pacific Island 

partners and Timor-Leste in 2014, 21  providing a framework for increased 

security cooperation. Some Chinese observers believe that the motivation 

behind Xi Jinping’s offer of aid worth 2 billion yuan to eight Pacific Island 

nations in 2014 was to establish “port footholds” to secure BRI maritime 

routes and enable force projection beyond the second island chain. 22 

These security relationships in the Pacific Islands are modest from a 

Chinese perspective but have become significant in Pacific eyes, 23  with the 

potential to have an impact on domestic and regional security environments. 

In particular, the PLA’s security cooperation with the military and police 

forces of Timor-Leste, PNG, Solomon Islands, Vanuatu, and Fiji has increased 

significantly since 2017, including provision of weapons to Timor-Leste 

in 2017 and PNG in 2018 (see  Figure 1 ). These bilateral relationships are 

directed by annual strategic-level “staff talks” and facilitated by a budget. 24 

However, a successful relationship requires dialogue and coordination 

between talks, a function best filled by a defense attaché, and there were 

none in the Pacific until late 2020. Before that, China’s security cooperation 

in the Pacific was more superficial, emphasizing training in China, which 

was generally viewed to be of lower quality than Western equivalents, 25  and 

the occasional delivery of supplies and equipment (see Figure 1). 

## Defense Attachés and Police Advisers 

China demonstrated the priority of the Pacific in its long-term grand 

strategy when it changed its security adviser footprint from zero to fifteen 

personnel between October 2020 and January 2022. That footprint was then          

> 20 U.S. Joint Chiefs of Staff, Security Cooperation , Joint Publication 3-20 (Washington, D.C., May 2017), v.
> 21 Liam Fox, “China’s President Invites Pacific Island Allies to Ride the Chinese ‘Express Train’ of
> Development,” ABC News (Australia), November 23, 2014, http://www.abc.net.au/news/2014-11-23/
> chinese-president-touts-pacific-ties-on-visit-to-fiji/5911774. These were subsequently upgraded to
> comprehensive strategic partnerships.
> 22 You Ji, China’s Military Transformation: Politics and War Preparation (Cambridge: Polity Press, 2016),
> 187–88.
> 23 Author’s interviews with Papua New Guinean and Fijian officials, 2014–21.
> 24 For example, the PLA’s budget for the Papua New Guinea Defence Force increased from $2 million in
> 2017 to $9.9 million in 2019. Interviews by the author, Port Moresby, PNG, June 2017 and July 2019.
> 25 Military commanders perceived Western career courses to be of greater value because the Chinese
> courses did not align with Pacific values, doctrine, or operational needs. Author’s interviews with
> members of the PNG Defence Force, Republic of Fiji Military Forces, and Timor-Leste Defence
> Force, 2014–17.

198  • The PLA in a Complex Security Environment 

> f i g u r e  1 Chinese security statecraft in Melanesia, 2002–22
> s o u r c e  : Media reports; and author’s interviews, 2014–21.

Connolly  – Chapter 9  • 199 

doubled in the space of three months in 2023 (see  Table 1 ). Given the global 

number of China’s defense attachés in 2020, this was a significant change. 26 

PRC defense attachés and police advisers enable continuous 

engagement and relationship building with the host nation’s security forces,  

> 26

China established 59 defense attaché offices globally in the early years of “opening up.” This number 

increased to 90 by 1998, 103 by 2002, and 110 by 2020. State Council Information Office (PRC), 

China’s National Defense  (Beijing, July 1998), http://www.china.org.cn/e-white/5/index.htm; and U.S. 

Department of Defense,  Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 

2020  (Washington, D.C., August 2020), 134, https://media.defense.gov/2020/Sep/01/2002488689/-

1/-1/1/2020-DOD-CHINA-MILITARY-POWER-REPORT-FINAL.PDF.   

> t a b l e 1

PRC defence attachés and security advisers in the South Pacific 

Country  Defence attaché/Security 

adviser 

Deputy defence 

attaché/Adviser  Other personnel 

Timor-

Leste 

Senior Colonel Liu Miao 

(PLA) 

July 2020 

Lieutenant 

colonel xxx  –

PNG 

Senior Colonel Jiang Tuan 

(PLA) 

November 2020 

Lieutenant 

colonel xxx 

September 2021 

–

Fiji  Senior Colonel Yu Ke (PLA) 

October 2020 

Lieutenant 

colonel xxx 

September 2021 

Supervisor Lu Lingzhen 

(MPS)* 

September 2021 

Solomon 

Islands 

Commissioner Zhou 

Jingyong (MPS) 

January 2022 

Deputy 

commissioner xxx 

(MPS) 

January 2022 

[+10 x MPS training 

advisers] 6th Rotation 

• Surged to a total of 30 

for 2024 elections 

Vanuatu 

Commissioner Shie Jillie 

(MPS) 

August 2023 

Deputy 

commissioner xxx 

(MPS) 

August 2023 

[+6 x MPS Training 

Advisers] 3rd Rotation 

Tonga 

Senior Colonel Wang Wei 

(PLA) 

September 2021 

Lieutenant 

colonel xxx 

September 2021 

–

Kiribati 

Commissioner Li Tongde 

(MPS) 

July 2023 

Deputy 

commissioner xxx 

(MPS) 

July 2023 

[+6 x MPS training 

advisers] 3rd Rotation  

> s o u r c e

: Media reports.  

> n o t e

: Dates are for the establishment of the position. Names are for the incumbent. Asterisk 

indicates the first officer to hold this position. x indicates that person remained in this role 

while remainder of PLT rotated and appears to be a “security adviser” to PRC embassy. xxx 

indicates the name of incumbent is unknown. 200  • The PLA in a Complex Security Environment 

officials, and political class to influence strategic interests. 27  They are trained 

in clandestine intelligence, counterintelligence, and influence operations and 

are assigned and coordinated by the Intelligence Bureau of the Joint Staff 

Department, which is responsible for human intelligence and reports to the 

Central Military Commission. 28  Attachés can also follow up on training and 

agreements, maintain capabilities, and develop access in conjunction with 

BRI while providing advice to the ambassador on specific threats to and 

opportunities for Chinese interests. 

While police advisers may have different backgrounds and skills, they 

contribute to PRC security statecraft with other important capabilities. 

Advisers from China’s police forces are arguably a more effective means of 

engaging and influencing the elite, law enforcement, the Chinese diaspora, 

and the grassroots population in a developing country. Furthermore, in a 

Pacific Island state with no military, police advisers are often the only means 

of delivering security statecraft. 

For almost two decades the PRC embassy in Dili had a defense attaché 

while the Pacific Islands had none, even though Timor-Leste had a smaller 

defense force than PNG or Fiji. The PLA placed a defense attaché in Dili two 

months before Timor-Leste’s independence was declared in March 2002. 

Senior Colonel Wu Yanren, an experienced military diplomat and talented 

linguist, held the role for over three years until he died of meningitis in 2005. 

His obituary notes the geostrategic significance of the location and that China’s 

key concern was to prevent the new country from recognizing Taiwan. 29 

Senior Colonel Huang Damin, the PRC’s defense attaché to Dili 

from 2016 to 2020, sought to generate Timorese dependence on Chinese 

equipment as a form of influence, not just with the defense force but also 

with the much larger national police force. 30  Huang spoke good Portuguese, 

but unlike his predecessors, he also spoke excellent English, which he 

used to engage and understand other members of the Dili attaché corps. 31          

> 27 U.S. Department of Defense, Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of
> China 2021 (Washington, D.C., November 2021), 122, 138.
> 28 Defense Intelligence Agency, “China Military Power: Modernising a Force to Fight and Win,”
> U.S. Department of Defense, 2019, 99; and U.S. Department of Defense, Military and Security
> Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 2021 , 138.
> 29 “驻东帝汶武官 :中国总参情报部吴延仁同志殉职 !” [Defense Attaché in Timor-Leste: The
> Intelligence Bureau of the Joint Staff Department’s Wu Yanren Has Died!], October 11, 2005, trans.
> by Graeme Smith as “Obituary of Senior Colonel Wu Yanren,” September 13, 2014.
> 30 The Timor-Leste Defence Force has approximately 2,000 troops, while the National Police of East
> Timor has 5,500 members. Author’s interviews in Dili, Timor-Leste, August 2017, and in Canberra,
> June 2021.
> 31 Author’s interviews with numerous senior officials, Dili, Timor-Leste, August 2017 and Canberra,
> June 2021.

Connolly  – Chapter 9  • 201 

Huang and his ambassador were described by peers as “sharp and agile” 

and a “step change” in diplomatic capability. His successor, Senior Colonel 

Liu Miao, raised the standard of engagement further in 2020. He had 

outstanding English, had a disarming and diplomatic personality, and had 

attended the Centre for Defence and Strategic Studies in Australia in 2017 

with Captain Higino das Nevés from Timor-Leste. 32 

## PLA Defence Attachés in the Pacific Islands 

Fiji established a defense attaché in its Beijing embassy in 2007, as 

did PNG in 2016. The delayed arrival of reciprocating PLA officers for 

these positions in Suva and Port Moresby reinforced the narrative that 

the Pacific Islands had a low strategic value for China. This changed at the 

end of 2020, when Senior Colonel Yu Ke was posted to Suva in October 

and Senior Colonel Zhang Xiaojian arrived in Port Moresby in November. 

They set about establishing momentum in security cooperation slowed 

by the pandemic, eventually publishing opinion pieces to celebrate the 

anniversaries of the CCP and the PLA. 33  PRC security statecraft capacity was 

then reinforced by the arrival of Senior Colonel Wang Wei as the defense 

attaché to Tonga and lieutenant colonel deputy attachés for PNG and Fiji in 

September 2021. 

While the introduction of these statecraft capabilities indicates strategic 

intent, it does not mean they are effective in generating influence. To be 

effective, statecraft requires skill, learning, and adaptation. The exposure 

of efforts by the attaché in Suva and the early replacement of the PRC 

attaché in Port Moresby demonstrate the challenges faced by these statecraft 

practitioners as they seek access in the Pacific. 34  Approaching similar 

objectives from a different perspective, China’s police appear to have gained 

superior influence and access in Pacific countries.      

> 32 In 2017, Nevés was seen as a future commander of the Timor-Leste Defence Force. Author’s
> interview, Canberra, June 2021.
> 33 Zhang Xiaojian, “Enhance China-PNG Military,” Post-Courier , July 27, 2021, https://postcourier.
> com.pg/enhance-china-png-military; and Yu Ke, “OPINION: Keep in Mind the Mission of Peace,
> Forge Ahead Hand in Hand,” Fiji Sun , July 31, 2021, https://fijisun.com.fj/2021/07/31/opinion-keep-
> in-mind-the-mission-of-peace-forge-ahead-hand-in-hand.
> 34 Kate Lyons, “Police Remove Two Chinese Defence Attaches from Pacific Islands Forum Meeting,”
> Guardian , July 12, 2022, https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/jul/13/two-chinese-defence-
> attaches-removed-from-pacific-islands-forum-meeting; and Andrew Greene, “China Funds
> Construction of New Military Hospital at Papua New Guinea’s Taurama Barracks,” ABC News
> (Australia), December 22, 2022, https://www.abc.net.au/news/2022-12-23/china-build-military-
> hospital-barracks-papua-new-guinea/101794868.

202  • The PLA in a Complex Security Environment 

## PRC Police Cooperation in the Pacific Islands 

Fiji . The PRC’s police presence in the Pacific had started largely 

unnoticed in 2011, when China and Fiji signed a police memorandum 

of understanding (MOU). 35  This agreement instituted an annual police 

exchange through which senior officers from provincial police forces were 

embedded within the Fiji Police Force for three to six months while Fijian 

police were trained in China. 36  The MOU enabled several joint operations to 

extradite Chinese suspects from Fiji. 37  It is therefore not surprising that the 

PRC’s first permanent police advisers to the Pacific were established in Fiji. 

In September 2021, Lu Lingzhen became the MPS police liaison officer in 

Suva. 38  Supervisor Lu would “act as a bridge for promoting police-to-police 

relations and…support capability building of the Fijian Police” and raise the 

relationship to a “new level.” 39  This development built on the well-established 

relationship between the Fiji Police Force and the MPS starting in 2011, 

including a sizable 2017 joint extradition operation in Nadi. 40  Having a 

permanent police presence in Suva established a precedent for Chinese 

police advisers to deliver security statecraft in Pacific nations that did not 

have militaries. However, this well-developed police relationship was called 

into question by Fiji’s new prime minister, Sitiveni Rabuka, in 2023. 

Solomon Islands . The November 2021 Honiara riots presented an 

opportunity to deploy PRC police, and they were on the ground within two 

months. China had initially been prevented from sending a plainclothes 

armed security detachment to protect its embassy in Honiara, 41  but it 

succeeded in deploying a China–Solomon Islands police liaison team 

(PLT), which arrived in a PLA Air Force Y-20 strategic transport aircraft           

> 35 Kitione Toroca, “Fiji Reinforces Security Relations with China,” Pacific Islands Report , December 4,
> 2012.
> 36 Losirene Lacanivalu, “Chinese Attaches Boost Police Work,” Fiji Sun , July 27, 2017, https://fijisun.
> com.fj/2017/07/27/chinese-attaches-boost-police-work.
> 37 Cameron Hill, “China’s Policing Assistance in the Pacific: A New Era?” Pearls and Irritations, April 6,
> 2018, https://johnmenadue.com/cameron-hill-chinas-policing-assistance-in-the-pacific-a-new-era.
> 38 “Enhancing Collaboration,” Fiji Police Force, Press Release, September 10, 2021, http://www.police.
> gov.fj/view/1537.
> 39 Ibid.
> 40 “A Joint Statement by the Fiji Police Force and the Embassy of the People’s Republic of China,” Fiji
> Sun , August 8, 2017, http://fijisun.com.fj/2017/08/08/a-joint-statement-by-the-fiji-police-force-and-
> the-embassy-of-the-peoples-republic-of-china.
> 41 Evan Wasuka and Stephen Dziedzic, “China’s Solomon Islands Embassy Requested Weapons
> After Riots Broke Out in Honiara, Leaked Documents Reveal,” ABC News (Australia), April
> 11, 2022, https://www.abc.net.au/news/2022-04-12/chinas-solomon-islands-embassy-request-
> weapons/100985070.

Connolly  – Chapter 9  • 203 

on January 26, 2022. 42  Originally pledged as a team of two for three months 

of training, the team arrived with nine personnel and grew to twelve over 

a series of four six-month rotations. It was then doubled in size for the 

Pacific Games in October 2023. 43  The PLT presented equipment, 44  signed 

a police-to-police MOU with the Royal Solomon Islands Police Force 

(RSIPF), 45  and began a series of courses for the RSIPF in March 2022. A 

draft of the PRC–Solomon Islands Security Framework Agreement, which 

appeared in March 2022 and was signed on April 19, stated that “China 

may, according to its own needs,” replenish and transition military forces 

through Solomon Islands “to protect the safety of Chinese personnel and 

major projects in Solomon Islands.” 46 

During the PLT’s first six months on the ground, the agreement 

demonstrated the potential to increase domestic tensions rather than 

alleviate them. A potential rift developed between RSIPF elements trained 

by Australian police (referred to as the “police response team”) and those 

trained by Chinese police (referred to as the “close personal protection 

detachment”). 47  This concern remains apparent at the time of writing, 48 

exacerbated by reports of a large shipment of weapons illegally imported 

by the PRC embassy in 2022. 49  The fifth rotation of the PLT is now in 

Honiara, and the contingent was increased to 30 personnel for the national 

general elections in 2024. A public letter from officers of the RSIPF claimed 

the Solomon Islands PLT had transferred additional Chinese police from 

Kiribati and Vanuatu to bolster the PRC security for the elections without 

the knowledge of the Solomon Islands government. The letter continued             

> 42 “China Boosts RSIPF,” Solomon Star News , February 25, 2022, https://www.solomonstarnews.com/
> china-boosts-rsipf.
> 43 Stephen Dziedzic, “China Sending More Police, Donating Equipment Including Drones to Solomon
> Islands for Pacific Games,” ABC News (Australia), October 31, 2023, https://www.abc.net.au/
> news/2023-11-01/china-sending-more-police-to-solomon-islands-for-pacific-games/103048778.
> 44 “RSIPF Receives $12M Worth of Riot Gears from PRC,” Solomon Star News , February 27, 2022,
> https://www.solomonstarnews.com/rsipf-receives-12m-worth-of-riot-gears-from-prc.
> 45 “Solomon Islands Signs Police Cooperation Agreement with China,” Solomon Times , March 24, 2022,
> https://www.solomontimes.com/news/solomon-islands-signs-police-cooperation-agreement-with-
> china/11735?s=09.
> 46 The draft security cooperation agreement between China and Solomon Islands was posted
> on X (Twitter) by Anna Powles on March 24, 2022, https://twitter.com/AnnaPowles/
> status/1506845794728837120.
> 47 Wilson Saeni, “Security Pact Could Split RSIPF,” Solomon Star News , April 2, 2022, https://www.
> solomonstarnews.com/security-pact-could-split-rsipf.
> 48 This issue was raised with the author by Solomon Islanders in 2022 and 2024.
> 49 John Power and Erin Hale, “China’s ‘Replica’ Guns for Solomon Islands Likely Real, U.S. Cable
> Claimed,” Al Jazeera, September 1, 2023, https://www.aljazeera.com/economy/2023/9/1/china-
> likely-shipped-real-guns-to-solomon-islands-not-replicas-us-claimed.

204  • The PLA in a Complex Security Environment 

with a warning: “To the Chinese officers who have broken our laws, we 

remind them that we only welcome respectful cooperation with China…. 

We will not be pushed around.”  50  Naturally this account was denied by 

the RSIPF hierarchy, which was criticized in the letter. 51  The potential for 

friction within Solomon Islands’ only security force is a sensitive topic, given 

the memory of the Tensions (1998–2003). 

The original leader of the PLT in Honiara, Commissioner Zhang 

Guangbao, acted much like a quasi–defense attaché from February 2022. 

His background in the Peacekeeping Police Division of the MPS, including 

service as a peacekeeper in Liberia, made him suitable for such a role. 52  He 

engaged with senior officials and politicians, including the prime minister; 

established a network among local communities; and became involved 

with Chinese associations and the Chinese diaspora. 53  He accompanied 

the ambassador to security-related events, officiated over donations to the 

local force and community, and worked closely with the RSIPF hierarchy. 

Prime Minister Sogavare indicated the relationship required “a more 

permanent arrangement,” and as the PLT rotated in its third replacement 

team, Commissioner Zhang remained at his post. 54  He handed the position 

over to Commissioner Zhou Jinyong in mid-2023. 55  The commissioner, 

assisted by one of his deputies, effectively performs the function of a security 

adviser’s office to China’s Honiara embassy. Their tasks appear to be securing 

influence and access, shaping the environment to avoid future unrest, and 

mitigating its effects on PRC interests if it recurs. 

Kiribati and Vanuatu . Following these security developments in 

Solomon Islands, police advisory group proposals were discussed with 

several of China’s Pacific BRI partners during Foreign Minister Wang          

> 50 “A Public Letter from the Officers of the RSIPF,” posted on X, May 9, 2024. A copy of the document
> was provided to the author by a Solomon Islands observer.
> 51 “Police Denied Letter Published on Media and It Is Misleading,” Solomon Islands Government, May
> 11, 2024, https://solomons.gov.sb/police-denied-letter-published-on-media-and-it-is-misleading.
> 52 Andrew Greene, “Chinese Police Begin Work in Solomon Islands to Maintain Law and Order, as
> Australian Officials Watch Closely,” ABC News (Australia), February 24, 2022, https://www.abc.net.
> au/news/2022-02-24/chinese-police-land-in-solomon-islands-month-after-riots/100855948.
> 53 “PRC Ambassador Introduces ‘China Police Liaison Team’ to PM,” Solomon Islands Government,
> March 6, 2022; “An Interview with Zhang Guangbao, Leader of China Police Liaison Team to
> Solomon Islands,” Solomon Star News , March 6, 2022; and Eddie Osifelo, “Police Praise Business
> Body for Support,” Island Sun , June 29, 2022.
> 54 Robert Iroga, “PRC to Provide 22 Vehicles for RSIPF and Other Support Worth $22M,” Solomon Business
> Magazine , July 1, 2022, https://sbm.sb/prc-to-provide-22-vehicles-for-rsipf-other-support-worth-22m.
> 55 “Ambassador Li Ming Attended the Handover Ceremony of the Police Supplies and Police Storage
> Center,” Embassy of the PRC in Solomon Islands, Press Release, June 29, 2023, http://sb.china-
> embassy.gov.cn/tpxw/202306/t20230629_11105720.htm.

Connolly  – Chapter 9  • 205 

Yi’s mid-2022 tour of the region, leading to a variety of responses. 56  The 

following year, Kiribati and Vanuatu received “scoping visits” from the MPS. 

Commissioner Li Tongde’s contingent arrived in Tarawa, Kiribati, in July 

2023, followed by Shi Jilie’s team in Port Vila, Vanuatu, in August 2023. 57 

These contingents are following the Solomon Islands PLT model. Starting 

with a similar size and nature, they rotated in fresh personnel in early 2024 

and appear to be there to stay. 58 

These recent developments in the PRC’s employment of the MPS to 

deliver security statecraft in the Pacific Islands have demonstrated the 

advantages of using police over military resources for the same purpose. To 

Western military strategists, police are less confrontational and therefore 

present a lower-profile vector for achieving the same strategic security 

goals for China. Police can enable intelligence gathering, enable a detailed 

understanding of partners’ security needs, deliver information operations, 

enable regime survival, and establish a norm of authoritarian political control 

over law enforcement. 59  After observing a similar set of developments in 

Africa, one commentator noted that the “uncritical application of China’s 

model of absolute party control could undermine military and police 

professionalism and the idea of security for all citizens,” with implications for 

human rights. 60  China’s intent to employ policing in the Pacific was confirmed 

by Minister for Public Security Wang Xiaohong when he called for “writing a 

new chapter of mutually beneficial law-enforcement and security cooperation 

to promote the construction of a closer community with a shared future 

between China and the Pacific Island countries” in September 2024. 61 

Other PRC nontraditional security agencies are also likely to 

provide security cooperation in the Pacific Islands. The China Coast 

Guard recently registered 26 ships with the Western and Central Pacific        

> 56 Hu Yuwei and Bai Yunyi, “China Ready to Boost Kiribati’s Law Enforcement Ability, Unaffected by
> Hyping of ‘Failed Security Deal’: Envoy,” Global Times , June 1, 2022, https://www.globaltimes.cn/
> page/202206/1267096.shtml; and “Samoa PM Turns First Sod on New Police Academy,” Radio New
> Zealand, October 26, 2022, https://www.rnz.co.nz/international/pacific-news/477396/samoa-pm-
> turns-first-sod-on-new-police-academy.
> 57 Kirsty Needham, “Chinese Police Experts Arrive in Vanuatu amid Political Crisis,” Reuters, August
> 26, 2023, https://www.reuters.com/world/asia-pacific/chinese-police-experts-arrive-vanuatu-amid-
> political-crisis-2023-08-26.
> 58 Kirsty Needham, “Exclusive: Chinese Police Work in Kiribati, Hawaii’s Pacific Neighbour,” Reuters,
> February 22, 2024, https://www.reuters.com/world/china/chinese-police-work-kiribati-hawaiis-
> pacific-neighbour-2024-02-23.
> 59 Greitens, “China’s Use of Nontraditional Strategic Landpower in Asia,” 43.
> 60 Paul Nantulya, “China’s Policing Models Make Inroads in Africa,” Africa Center for Strategic Studies,
> May 22, 2023, https://africacenter.org/spotlight/chinas-policing-models-make-inroads-in-africa.
> 61 “China, Pacific Island Countries Hold Dialogue on Law Enforcement,” Xinhua, September 12, 2024,
> https://english.www.gov.cn/news/202409/12/content_WS66e2294fc6d0868f4e8eadc6.html

206  • The PLA in a Complex Security Environment 

Fisheries Commission to commence high-seas boarding and inspection 

operations from June 30, 2024. 62  These ships represent greater capacity 

than many regional navies possess 63  and could well be used to enhance 

security cooperation and influence in conjunction with the policing efforts 

described above. 

## Pacific Agency 

However, statecraft is not a one-way street. Speaking to senior officials 

from PNG, Timor-Leste, Fiji, Vanuatu, and Solomon Islands between 

2017 and 2021, I found the majority to be cautious and clear-eyed when 

considering their national interests in relation to the PRC. After the 2018 

APEC meeting, one senior PNG official explained, “BRI follows a similar 

pattern to Japanese military expansion, but Chinese expansion uses 

economic methods to seek control,” while a security official noted that 

“China is trying to make inroads into our security through money…to 

push the military relationship and squeeze themselves in.” 64  There was a 

similar awareness in Fiji, despite its closer relationship with China in the 

previous decade. One security official explained: “They want to secure a 

foothold over here in the Pacific. And they failed in Vanuatu, so what’s the 

next best option?” 65  This allowed them to hedge with an Australian offer 

to fund the Blackrock training camp. In the case of Solomon Islands, one 

official was concerned that the new relationship with the PRC would place 

the country at the “fault line of U.S.-China geopolitical competition.” 66  At 

the time, the potential economic benefits of BRI were particularly attractive 

to the political masters of these officials, but most have become experienced 

at strategic hedging in the last five years as the competition has intensified. 67 

During the lead-up to Wang Yi’s 2022 tour, the PRC Ministry of Foreign 

Affairs circulated a joint communiqué and five-year action plan proposing 

the integration of political, economic, and security cooperation between ten 

Pacific states and China. Micronesia president David Panuelo perceived that 

the document sought to “acquire access and control of our region” and alter             

> 62 Western and Central Pacific Fisheries Commission, Circular, no. 2024/22, May 1, 2024, available at
> https://www.wcpfc.int/register-inspection-vessels.
> 63 The Nansha and the Zhoushan are 165 meters in length with 76mm guns, and ten others are around
> 130 meters in length.
> 64 Author’s interviews in Canberra, and Port Moresby, PNG, 2019.
> 65 Author’s interview by telephone with a Suva-based official in 2021.
> 66 Author’s interviews, Canberra, and Port Moresby, PNG, 2019.
> 67 Hedging is “insurance-seeking behavior” in an uncertain environment. Cheng-Chwee Kuik, “Getting
> Hedging Right: A Small-State Perspective,” China International Strategy Review 3 (2021): 300–15, 302.

Connolly  – Chapter 9  • 207 

its bilateral relationships into a multilateral one. 68  The result was a lack of 

interest in signing China’s “Common Development Vision.” 69  Nevertheless, 

Wang proceeded to have bilateral discussions with each of China’s ten Pacific 

partners and Timor-Leste in June 2022, and police cooperation was quietly 

kept on the agenda. 70 

China’s “Position Paper on Mutual Respect and Common Development 

with Pacific Island Countries,” which replaced the rejected “Common 

Development Vision,” included proposals for an annual China–Pacific 

Islands police ministerial meeting, a disaster management cooperation 

forum, a climate change cooperation center, a disaster management 

cooperation center, and a reserve of emergency supplies, with sub-reserves 

held in the Pacific Islands. 71  In February 2023, the China–Pacific Island 

Countries Center for Disaster Risk Reduction Cooperation was opened 

in Jiangmen, Guangdong Province, and an installment of sub-reserves 

arrived in Vanuatu on the PLA Navy amphibious ship  Changbai Shan 

two months later. 72  These initiatives demonstrate PLA force-projection 

capabilities and could be an alternate vector for Chinese security statecraft 

to seek access. 

Since then, PNG appears to have separated China’s security initiatives 

from their strong bilateral economic relationship by signing a status of 

forces agreement with the United States in May 2023 and a bilateral security 

agreement with Australia in December 2023. 73  Between these negotiations, 

China sought a policing and security agreement with PNG in September  

> 68

Stephen Dziedzic, “China Seeks Region-Wide Pacific Islands Agreement, Federated States of 

Micronesia Decry Draft as Threatening ‘Regional Stability,’  ” ABC News (Australia), May 25, 

2022, https://www.abc.net.au/news/2022-05-25/china-seeks-pacific-islands-policing-security-

cooperation/101099978.  

> 69

Kirsty Needham, “Pacific Needs to Meet on Proposed China Pact—Samoa PM,” Reuters, June 

2, 2022, https://www.reuters.com/world/asia-pacific/chinas-foreign-minister-heads-papua-new-

guinea-amid-tensions-over-election-2022-06-02.  

> 70

Hu and Bai, “China Ready to Boost Kiribati’s Law Enforcement Ability.”  

> 71

Ministry of Foreign Affairs (PRC), “China’s Position Paper on Mutual Respect and Common 

Development with Pacific Island Countries,” May 30, 2022, https://www.fmprc.gov.cn/mfa_eng/ 

zxxx_662805/202205/t20220531_10694923.html.  

> 72

“China–Pacific Island Countries Center for Disaster Risk Reduction Cooperation Officially Launched 

in Guangdong,” Embassy of the PRC in the Independent State of Samoa, Press Release, February 27, 

2023, http://ws.china-embassy.gov.cn/eng/xwdt/202302/t20230227_11031718.htm; and Joe Harry Karu, 

“Vanuatu Gavman Nius Tudei” [Vanuatu Government News Today], Facebook, April 28, 2023, https:// 

www.facebook.com/ groups/308459200695488/permalink/ 776062487268488/?mibextid=S66gvF.  

> 73

Rebeka Kuku, “U.S. and Papua New Guinea Sign Pact amid Pacific Militarisation Concerns,” 

Guardian , May 22, 2023, https://www.theguardian.com/world/2023/may/22/us-png-defence-

security-agreement-papua-new-guinea-china-india-modi-pacific-militarisation-concerns; and 

Kirsty Needham and Peter Hobson, “Australia, Papua New Guinea Sign Security Agreement, Hail 

Close Ties,” Reuters, December 6, 2023, https://www.reuters.com/world/asia-pacific/australia-signs-

security-agreement-with-papua-new-guinea-2023-12-07. 208  • The PLA in a Complex Security Environment 

2023, using the risk to overseas Chinese caused by riots across PNG’s major 

population centers as a pretext for the arrangement, and continues to 

apply pressure. 74  Most importantly, Fiji’s new prime minister Sitiveni Rabuka 

cut the twelve-year relationship between China’s MPS and the Fiji Police 

Force. 75  Rabuka explained simply: “Our system of democracy and justice 

systems are different, so we will go back to those that have similar systems 

with us.” 76  When the second China–Pacific Island Countries Ministerial 

Dialogue on Police Capacity Building and Cooperation was held in Beijing 

at the end of 2023, Fiji did not send a representative. 77  Although Fiji recently 

restored its policing relationship with China after a thirteen-month review, 

no Chinese police will be embedded within the Fiji Police Force, as they 

had been previously from 2012 to 2022. 78  Most recently, an MPS contingent 

visited Tonga to offer security assistance for the Pacific Islands Forum Leaders 

Meeting later this year and was met with a polite but subdued response. 79 

Perhaps of greater significance than state-level agency in the Pacific are 

the interest-based responses that occur at subnational levels. In particular, 

pushback at the grassroots level can occur when a strong local community 

chooses to evict Chinese small businesses or creates laws to protect the 

microeconomy from domination by Chinese interests. This is a localized 

form of protecting interests where tribal power structures may resort to force 

in securing livelihoods and customary land. Such agency at the local level 

is often misunderstood by China (and most external actors) and is likely  

> 74

Kirsty Needham , “China, Papua New Guinea in Talks on Policing, Security Cooperation—Minister,” 

Reuters, January 29, 2024,  https://www.reuters.com/world/asia-pacific/china-papua-new-guinea-

talks-policing-security-cooperation-minister-2024-01-29 ; and Ben Westcott, “China Urges Papua 

New Guinea to Protect Its Citizens after Riots,” Bloomberg, January 11, 2024, https://www.bloomberg. 

com/news/articles/2024-01-12/china-urges-papua-new-guinea-to-protect-its-citizens-after-riots.  

> 75

Meri Radinibaravi, “PM Terminates MOU,”  Fiji Times , January 26, 2023, https://www.fijitimes.com/ 

pm-terminates-mou; and “Fiji Govt Will Again Use Taiwan’s Official Name,” Radio New Zealand, 

March 29, 2023, https://www.rnz.co.nz/international/pacific-news/486952/fiji-govt-will-again-use-

taiwan-s-official-name.  

> 76

“ ‘Our Systems Differ’: Fiji PM Rabuka Ends MoU with China, Asks Chinese Cops to Return,” 

News18, January 28, 2023, https://www.news18.com/news/world/our-systems-differ-fiji-pm-rabuka-

ends-mou-with-china-asks-chinese-cops-to-return-6929335.html.  

> 77

Only three pacific ministers attended, along with representatives from four other nations. Fiji and 

the Federated States of Micronesia did not attend at all. Stephen Dziedzic, “Pacific Island Police 

Ministers, Delegates Enter High-Level Security Talks with China in Beijing,” ABC News (Australia), 

December 11, 2023, https://www.abc.net.au/news/2023-12-11/pacific-islands-police-ministers-

security-talks-beijing/103213960.  

> 78

Ivamere Nataro, “Fiji to Stick with China Police Deal after Review, Home Affairs Minister Says,” 

Guardian , March 14, 2024, https://www.theguardian.com/world/2024/mar/15/fiji-china-police-

exchange-intelligence-deal.  

> 79

Stephen Dziedzic and Marian Kupu, “Chinese Security Delegation Visits Tonga to Provide Police 

‘Assistance’ Ahead of Pacific Islands Forum,” ABC News (Australia), April 4, 2024, https://www.abc. 

net.au/news/2024-04-04/china-security-group-in-tonga-ahead-of-pacific-islands-forum/103665524. Connolly  – Chapter 9  • 209 

to result in violence if handled poorly. However, the prospect of unrest is 

increasingly being employed as an opportunity for China’s security statecraft 

and a vector for support from Chinese law enforcement. This invites a 

greater risk of instability that is not in the interest of the host nation but may 

be in the interest of a small elite. 

## Protecting Overseas Interests 

The PLA’s 2015 strategic task “to safeguard the security of China’s 

overseas interests” was a well-timed response to BRI guidance delivered 

two months earlier. 80  The task broadened the decade-old policy of 

overseas citizen protection to include the assets, organizations, resources, 

infrastructure, and lines of communication of Chinese interests. Given that 

many of China’s new BRI partners were developing countries experiencing 

some form of insecurity, a significant number of Chinese companies were 

operating in challenging security environments. This concerned China’s 

Ministry of Commerce, state-owned enterprises (SOEs), and Ministry of 

Foreign Affairs. The intent behind BRI—to generate the influence, resources, 

and posture to enable China’s “unimpeded rise” 81 —required “strategic power 

projection” to protect these interests. The PLA Navy’s “two oceans” strategy 

to counter U.S. containment, 82  “far seas protection” developed under a policy 

of “going out,” and extant capabilities for evacuation operations all possessed 

a common thread: PRC strategy required force projection to protect overseas 

interests and counter encirclement. 83 

China’s “Indo-Pacific ambition,” which You Ji described as “reverse 

Mahanism”—economics first, followed by military presence and access 84 —             

> 80 National Development and Reform Commission, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, and Ministry of
> Commerce (PRC), Vision and Actions on Jointly Building Silk Road Economic Belt and 21st Century
> Maritime Silk Road (Beijing, March 2015), available at https://asiasociety.org/sites/default/files/inline-
> files/2015_NDRC%20MOFA%20and%20MEE_Vision%20and%20Actions%20on%20Jointly%20
> Building%20Silk%20Road%20Economic%20Belt%20and%2021st%20C%20Maritime%20Silk%20
> Road_E.pdf.
> 81 Nadège Rolland, China’s Eurasian Century? Political and Strategic Implications of the Belt and Road
> Initiative (Washington, D.C.: National Bureau of Asian Research, 2017), 119.
> 82 Ji, China’s Military Transformation , 186.
> 83 See, for example, Shaio H. Zerba, “China’s Libya Evacuation Operation: A New Diplomatic
> Imperative—Overseas Citizen Protection,” Journal of Contemporary China 23, no. 90 (2014): 1107.
> 84 Ji, China’s Military Transformation , 186–91.

210  • The PLA in a Complex Security Environment 

has led to the development of a globally capable blue water navy. 85  These 

capabilities can be used for evacuation, humanitarian, or stabilization 

operations, but are designed for fighting wars. The capacity to project force 

deep into the Pacific to protect overseas interests, counter encirclement, and 

dominate strategic space has revealed itself over time as the PLA’s highest 

priority in the Pacific Islands, and this requires some form of basing. 

## Geostrategic Access and Basing 

China’s debate about overseas bases was prompted by the Malacca 

dilemma and intensified by Hu Jintao’s 2009 direction to protect overseas 

interests, discussed earlier. 86  Under Deng Xiaoping’s strategy of “keeping 

a low profile,” China had repeatedly pledged in its defense white papers to 

not build military bases abroad. 87  An internal discourse subsequently grew 

in which bases were often referred to with euphemisms such as “strategic 

strong points,” “maritime stations,” “support bases,” and “facilities.” 88  Many 

contributed to this debate, 89  including Shen Dingli, who argued “overseas 

military bases is not an idea we have to shun; on the contrary, it is our 

right.” 90  In 2010, Rear Admiral Yin Zhou proposed the concept of “dual-use 

facilities.” 91  In 2016, the deputy chief of the Joint Staff Department stated 

that the PLA was “steadily advancing the construction of overseas bases” to 

advance China’s “overseas strategic positioning” in response to Xi Jinping’s  

> 85

The PLA’s force-projection capabilities now include 9 Type-071 Yuzhao-class amphibious ships, 3 

Type-075 Yushen-class landing helicopter docks, and 3 aircraft carriers, and the PLA is developing 

the Type-076 amphibious assault ship (unmanned combat aerial vehicle launcher) and more 

than 30 Xian Y-20 strategic lift aircraft. “China Naval Modernization: Implications for U.S. Navy 

Capabilities—Background and Issues for Congress,” Congressional Research Service, CRS Report 

for Congress, RL33153, January 30, 2024, 30–35.  

> 86

Hu Jintao, quoted in Hartnett, “The PLA’s Domestic and Foreign Activities and Orientation.”  

> 87

See, for example, Information Office of the State Council (PRC),  China: Arms Control and 

Disarmament  (Beijing, November 1995), 3, available at http://www.andrewerickson.com/wp-content/ 

uploads/2019/07/China-Defense-White-Paper_1995_Arms-Control_English.pdf; Information Office 

of the State Council (PRC),  China’s National Defense  (Beijing, July 1998), 8, available at https:// 

www.andrewerickson.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/07/China-Defense-White-Paper_1998_ 

English-Chinese.pdf; and Information Office of the State Council (PRC),  China’s National Defense 

in 2000  (Beijing, October 2000), 6, available at https://www.andrewerickson.com/wp-content/ 

uploads/2019/07/China-Defense-White-Paper_2000_English.pdf.  

> 88

Doshi,  The Long Game , 206.  

> 89

These included Major General Chen Zhou, Colonel Dai Xu (PLA Air Force), Professor Shen Dingli, 

Rear Admiral Yin Zhou, Admiral Sun Jianguo, and Major General Shou Xiaosong.  

> 90

Shen Dingli, “Don’t Shun the Idea of Setting Up Overseas Military Bases,” China.org, January 28, 

2010, www.china.org.cn/opinion/2010-01/28/content_19324522.htm.  

> 91

Christopher D. Yung et al., “  ‘Not an Idea We Have to Shun’: Chinese Overseas Basing Requirements 

in the 21st Century,” Institute for National Strategic Studies, October 1, 2014, 13, https://inss.ndu.edu/ 

Media/News/Article/652894/not-an-idea-we-have-to-shun-chinese-overseas-basing-requirements-

in-the-21st-ce. Connolly  – Chapter 9  • 211 

directions in late 2012. 92  Major General Shou Xiaosong articulated the 

CCP’s requirement as “a forward base for the deployment of military forces 

overseas, as well as exerting political and military influence.” 93 

Starting in 2015, the CCP’s direction was applied overtly in Djibouti, 

Tajikistan, and the South China Sea. The PRC adopted a less direct approach in 

countries such as Sri Lanka, Pakistan, and Cambodia (and possibly Myanmar, 

the United Arab Emirates, Namibia, Angola, Tanzania, Equatorial Guinea, and 

Kenya). 94  This is a combination of Chen Zhou’s proposal to use “diplomatic 

and economic means” to achieve “legal access” and Yin Zhou’s “dual-use 

facilities” to achieve Shou Xiaosong’s “force projection” and “influence.” 95  This 

subtle approach is more appropriate in the Pacific during competition. 

Clearly China is not the first rising superpower to seek overseas bases 

for force projection. 96  However, its strategic ambitions in the Pacific are 

constrained by the modern norms of sovereignty, stronger Pacific agency, 

a competitive environment, and strategic hedging among smaller states, 

making the dual-use facility an attractive option. 

Studies from 2014 and 2022 found that dual-use facilities best meet 

PRC needs. 97  A dual-use facility is a commercial port or airfield established 

by a Chinese company that is capable of sustaining and projecting a 

military contingent for low-intensity operations during competition. Such 

commercial investments are less likely to provoke negative reactions than 

military bases, but offer a path to a future military base and could protect 

Chinese interests. 98  In conflict, despite being easily isolated, a dual-use facility 

could be used to impose risk or to interdict allied lines of communication. 

The PRC’s aims for a base might also extend to post-conflict objectives. 

Viable dual-use facility proposals in the Pacific normally deliver a 

fundamental developmental need for the host nation. While 96 major ports 

are partially owned or operated by Chinese firms globally, the construction                     

> 92 Sun, “Contributing Chinese Wisdom to Leading World Peaceful Development and Win-Win
> Cooperation.”
> 93 Shou Xiaosong, ed., The Science of Military Strategy (Beijing: Military Science Press, 2013), 254,
> quoted in Doshi, The Long Game , 206.
> 94 See, for example, Julian Borger, “Work on ‘Chinese Military Base’ in UAE Abandoned after U.S.
> Intervenes—Report,” Guardian , November 20, 2021; and Lolita C. Baldor, “General: China’s Africa
> Outreach Poses Threat from Atlantic,” Associated Press, May 7, 2021.
> 95 Murray Scot Tanner and Peter W. Mackenzie, China’s Emerging National Security Interests and Their
> Impact on the People’s Liberation Army (Quantico: Marine Corps University Press, 2015), 87.
> 96 Robert E. Harkavy, Strategic Basing and the Great Powers, 1200–2000 (Abingdon: Routledge, 2007),
> 25, 28–31, 44–59.
> 97 Yung et al., “ ‘Not an Idea We Have to Shun,’ ” 12, 39; and Isaac B. Kardon and Wendy Leutert, “Pier
> Competitor: China’s Power Position in Global Ports,” International Security 46, no. 4 (2022): 9–47.
> 98 Yung et al., “ ‘Not an Idea We Have to Shun,” 17, 45.

212  • The PLA in a Complex Security Environment 

or resupply of the facility by an SOE may be sufficient. 99  This is more likely 

in the Pacific Islands, where the scale of operations is much smaller. The 

interdependence of competitors in such facilities can also be weaponized 

through economic coercion or denial. 100  A network of dual-use facilities 

appeals to the PLA as a “next best” solution to enabling force projection in 

the gray zone without geopolitical consequences. 

## Why China Wants Bases in the Pacific 

During interviews between 2014 and 2019, Chinese academics and 

officials argued that the rising strategic priority of the Pacific would include 

some type of basing, that China had the right to have bases, and that the 

first base would be established before 2027. 101  Their reasons included 

the need to protect BRI interests, protect “the eastern flank,” provide an 

alternate sea route, posture for a potential conflict, and support space 

development with a satellite facility. In 2018 a well-connected strategist 

predicted that “the South Pacific is next,” and that it “will be important to 

the Chinese military after 2025.” 102 

There are a range of objectives that the PLA could achieve from a dual-

use facility in the Pacific. These objectives can be divided into two general 

roles for two different environments: competition and conflict. The first role 

meets the priorities of the current environment as China expands its sphere 

of influence into the Pacific, while the second prepares for a potential war 

with the United States and its allies. 

During competition, the facility would enable low-intensity operations 

such as humanitarian assistance and disaster relief, evacuation operations, 

peacekeeping, stability operations, and gray-zone operations. 103  For 

these operations to succeed, the PLA and MPS require facilities and 

relationships that can assist with access to the region. These facilities could 

enable Chinese contingents to collect information for their situational 

awareness, project force further into the region, or maneuver within it 

to respond to nontraditional threats. Such a facility would then provide      

> 99 Kardon and Leutert, “Pier Competitor,” 10–12, 40.
> 100 Ibid., 16, 42–46.
> 101 Author’s interviews with Chinese academics in Guangzhou, Beijing, and Australia, 2017–19;
> with PLA officers in Beijing, 2014 and 2017; and with Pacific graduates of PLA schools, 2014–22.
> 102 Author’s interview with a Chinese academic in Australia, September 2018.
> 103 Gray-zone operations are defined as “competitive acts between opposing states short of all-out
> warfare.” Geoffrey Till, “Grey Zone Operations: The Rules of the Game,” S. Rajaratnam School
> of International Studies (RSIS), IDSS Paper, April 5, 2022, https://www.rsis.edu.sg/wp-content/
> uploads/2022/04/IP22024.pdf.

Connolly  – Chapter 9  • 213 

the administration and logistics to sustain low-intensity operations and 

maintain a presence to grow China’s influence. Denying Western countries 

access could be considered even more important during this phase. In 

this first role, a dual-use facility directly supports the security of BRI, the 

propagation of China’s geopolitical narrative, and the expansion of PRC 

influence and access in the region. 

In the event of conventional conflict, which China currently seeks to 

avoid by competing in the gray zone, Chinese dual-use facilities could be 

used in warfighting despite being quite vulnerable. Such installations could 

enable resupply of ships and aircraft operating over great distances, collect 

information to enable understanding of the battlefield, and generate risk 

for adversaries using economy of force. This contribution to surveillance 

and collection could enable the targeting of allied platforms or installations 

by remotely operated or long-range PLA capabilities without unmasking 

the location of the observer. Dual-use facilities could be used to deter or 

deny access by holding enemy forces and sea lines of communication at risk 

with anti-access/area-denial capabilities. A series of facilities could interdict 

resupply or assistance between allied partners, or contain a smaller partner. 

These facilities would not be expected to participate overtly in conventional 

warfighting because they could be easily isolated, their capacity would be 

rapidly exhausted, and their survivability would be poor. However, they 

could be sacrificed by the PLA at a decisive point in a campaign to prevent 

the commitment of allied forces and resources to a higher strategic priority. 

## Dual-Use Facilities in the Pacific 

Many have assessed China’s geostrategic interest in the Pacific Islands as 

a component of its grand strategy over the last two decades. 104  These views 

were once described as “alarmist” or “baseless” due to China’s “peaceful 

rise” narrative. 105  Confusion partly stems from different perceptions of 

what China wants. Is it a base in the most traditional sense, or is it access 

that enables the employment of dual-use facilities for force projection and 

influence? For now, it appears to be the latter.            

> 104 Some early examples are John Henderson and Benjamin Reilly, “Dragon in Paradise: China’s
> Rising Star in Oceania,” National Interest , Summer 2003, 94–104; Susan Windybank, “The China
> Syndrome,” Policy 21, no. 2 (2005): 29; and Tamara Renee Shie, “Rising Chinese Influence in the
> South Pacific: Beijing’s Island Fever,” Asian Survey 47, no. 2 (2007): 307–26.
> 105 See, for example, Yang, The Pacific Islands in China’s Grand Strategy , 136–37; Wesley-Smith,
> “China’s Rise in Oceania: Issues and Perspectives,” 354; and Zhou Fangyin, “A Reevaluation of
> China’s Engagement in the Pacific Islands,” in The China Alternative: Changing Regional Order in
> the Pacific Islands , ed. Graeme Smith and Terence Wesley-Smith (Canberra: ANU Press, 2021), 254. 214 •The PLA in a Complex Security Environment

If the purpose is to enable force projection during competition, does 

the facility need to be built by a Chinese company? The simple answer is 

“not necessarily.” However, there are perceived advantages from a Chinese 

perspective. The first is that it best contributes to the PRC’s broader narrative 

associated with BRI if the force projection is enabled by “BRI facilities.” 

The second is that a Chinese firm can create greater flexibility, operational 

security, or storage by maintaining control of a piece of the facility, such 

as a warehouse. Finally, the facility may have additional utility for conflict 

through its characteristics and capacity. 

Table 2  summarizes China’s projects in Melanesia and Timor-Leste 

between 2007 and 2023 that have potential as dual-use facilities. It is not 

exhaustive, and it cannot be proved that facilities are designated for dual-

use until they are used for security purposes. The primary obstacle is the 

value that Pacific countries place on their sovereignty, despite appearing to 

leverage it in a hedging strategy. Therefore, successful proposals normally 

deliver a fundamental development need for the host nation (such as Lae 

Port in PNG or Tibar in Timor-Leste). 

During interviews, Pacific security officials were adamant that a 

Chinese base would be an infringement of their sovereignty and “a kind of 

red line” to their national interests. 106  Most seek to create as much freedom 

of choice and opportunity as possible, and hosting a Chinese base sacrifices 

flexibility and leverage. Beyond the opinions of officials and practitioners, 

there are also politicians who appear to be more prone to elite capture and 

can overrule officials. However, they remain wary of grassroots opinions, 

which frequently express negative sentiment toward Chinese interests. This 

is why, for now, PRC security statecraft prioritizes access through dual-use 

facilities rather than declared “bases” in the Pacific. 

## From Luganville to Honiara 

Of the examples in Table 2, Vanuatu in 2017–18 is worthy of closer 

examination. In August 2017, Ambassador Liu Quan officially opened the 

new Luganville Wharf on Espiritu Santo Island. 107  The wharf was built by 

the Shanghai Construction Group with an Export-Import Bank of China 

loan of $88 million. 108  Shortly afterward, the government of Vanuatu forced    

> 106 Author’s interviews with officials in Dili, Port Moresby, Port Vila, Honiara, and Suva, 2017–21.
> 107 Liu Quan, “Treat It as Equals No Matter Big or Small, Rich or Poor,” Prime Minister of Vanuatu,
> August 12, 2017.
> 108 The Japan International Cooperation Agency delivered a similar capability in Port Vila at the
> same time for $70 million. The difference was the unused Luganville Passenger Terminal—an
> expensive white elephant. Author’s interview with ni-Vanuatu journalist, May 2022.

Connolly  – Chapter 9  • 215   

> t a b l e 2

Potential dual-use facilities in Melanesia 

Country  Year and 

location  Proposed facility  Status 

Timor-Leste  2007 

Baucau 

Radar array and control 

facility 

• Only to be operated by 

Chinese staff 

• Monitoring deep-water 

Ombai-Wetar Strait 

Offer by PRC defense 

attaché 

• Declined 2007 

PNG 

2009 

Rempi/Vidar 

(near Madang) 

PMIZ (Pacific maritime 

industrial zone) 

• Port facility, tuna 

processing/cannery/ 

refrigeration 

• Fuel farm, container 

terminal, power plant, 

water facilities 

• Significant resistance 

from local population 

CSYIC contracted 2008 

• China Eximbank Loan 

2009 

• Phase 1 “complete” 

2019 

• Controversy over 

corruption 

2014 

Lae 

Port facility:* Lae Tidal 

Basin extension 

• 230-m wharf, 14 m deep 

• Container handling 

facilities 

• Phase 2: Extend berth to 

700m 

• Phase 3: 2x wharfs, fuel 

farm, dry dock, power 

plants, free trade zone 

Built by CHEC 

• Phase 1 complete 

2014 

• Discontinued due to 

quality 

Fiji 

2015 

Suva  Naval base for RFMF 

Offer by PRC 

ambassador 

• Declined 2016 

2017 

Blackrock 

(near Nadi) 

Peacekeeping and HADR 

training camp 

• Large accommodation 

facility 

• Air base 

Offer by PLA 

• Declined 2018 

Vanuatu 

2017 

Luganville 

(Espiritu Santo 

Island) 

Port facility and passenger 

terminal 

• 360m wharf 

• Passenger terminal 

unused 

• 2018 proposal by PRC 

ambassador for PRC SAR 

element 

Built by SCG 

• Complete 2017 216  • The PLA in a Complex Security Environment 

Table 2 continued 

Country  Year and 

location  Proposed facility  Status 

PNG 

2018 

Lombrum 

Wharf 

(Manus Island) 

Joint naval base 

• Rebuild existing facility at 

Lombrum 

Offer claimed by PM 

• Declined 2018 

2019 

Momote 

Airfield 

(Manus Island) 

Upgrade of terminal and 

runway 

• Runway extended to 

2,010 m 

Upgrade by CHEC 

• Complete 2022 

Timor-Leste  2019 

Tibar Port 

Port facility* 

• Multipurpose handling 

facility 12 km from Dili 

• 630-m-long pier with 

berth 16-m deep 

• Connected to deep-water 

channel 

Built by CHEC 

• To be completed 

(2022) 

Solomon 

Islands 

2019 

Gold Ridge 

Mine 

(near Honiara) 

Port, transport 

infrastructure, and power 

for mine 

• Harbor, rail, road, bridges, 

and power 

• Infrastructure to be built, 

owned and operated by 

SOE 

CRI Group (COVEC) and 

Wanguo Intl Mining 

Co. Ltd. 

• Contracted 2021 

2019 

Tulagi Island 

Special economic zone 

• 75-year lease with 

exclusive rights above 

and below the water 

Contract with China 

Sam Group 

• Denied by attorney-

general 

2020 

Isabel Island 

“Naval infrastructure” for 

the PLA Navy 

• 75-year lease with 

exclusive rights 

Offer by AVIC Intl and 

China Sam 

• No response 

2020 

Munda 

Airfield 

(New Georgia 

Island) 

Upgrade to international 

airfield 

• Munda International 

Terminal (CCECC) 

• Strengthening of airfield 

(CHEC) 

Upgrade by CCECC and 

CHEC 

• Commenced 2022 

• To be completed mid-

2023 

PNG 

2020 

Daru Island  Fish processing facility/city 

Fujian Zhonghong 

Fisheries 

• MOFCOM and MFA 

supported 

• Has not commenced 

2021 

Daru Island 

Harbor, airport, industrial 

zone 

WYW Holdings Ltd & 

A&A Oil and Gas 

Corporation 

• Announced in China Connolly  – Chapter 9  • 217 

the World Bank to accept the proposal of the China Civil Engineering 

Construction Corporation (CCECC) to rebuild Santo-Pekoa International 

Airport at Luganville. 109  After a significant delay, CCECC was contracted to 

extend the Luganville airport’s runway in 2022. 

Despite rumors that a Chinese naval base would be built in Vanuatu, 110 

the decision to build the wharf was made by the government of Vanuatu 

to boost tourism and create a new export and transshipment hub. 111  Two 

years after construction it was well short of achieving these objectives. A 

2018  Sydney Morning Herald  article identified the wharf ’s potential dual 

use by the PLA Navy, 112  and according to a well-placed source, there was 

evidence behind this concern. After securing Prime Minister Charlot  

> 109

Author’s interview with ni-Vanuatu journalist, May 2022.  

> 110

See “Mi Harem Se,”  Vanuatu Daily Post , April 1, 2017, http://dailypost.vu/gossip/mi_harem_se/ 

miharemse/ article_b5ef6dc19dca57bfb3a9e0308f14f74b.html; and “Special Report: The Belt 

and Road: China’s ‘Project of the Century’ Increasing China’s Presence in Vanuatu,”  Yumi Toktok 

Stret , August 23, 2017, http://www.yumitoktokstret.today/chinese-presence-vanuatu-rapidly-

growing-chinese-policy-known-belt-road-chinas-project-century.  

> 111

Author’s interview with a port operator, Luganville, Vanuatu, February 2019.  

> 112

David Wroe, “China Eyes Vanuatu Military Base in Plan with Global Ramifications,”  Sydney 

Morning Herald , April 9, 2018, https://www.smh.com.au/politics/federal/china-eyes-vanuatu-

military-base-in-plan-with-global-ramifications-20180409-p4z8j9.html. 

Table 2 continued 

Country  Year and 

location  Proposed facility  Status 

Vanuatu 

2022 

Luganville 

(Espiritu Santo 

Island) 

Airfield extension 

• Length from 2,000 to 

2,600 m 

• Width from 30 to 45 m 

CCECC 

• To commence in 2022 

Solomon 

Islands 

2023 

Honiara 

Honiara Port* (and 3 

others) 

• Rehabilitate international 

port* 

• Build domestic port and 

two provincial ports 

CCECC 

• ADB contract  

> s o u r c e

: Media reports and interviews.  

> n o t e

: Asterisk indicates these ports are critical infrastructure but could be dual-use. CHEC 

= China Harbor Engineering Company; CCECC = China Civil Engineering Construction 

Corporation; COVEC = China Overseas Engineering Company; SCG = Shanghai Construction 

Group; CSYIC = Shenyang International Economic & Technical; AVIC = Aviation Industry 

Corporation of China; WYW Holdings and A&A Oil and Gas are registered in Hong Kong. 218  • The PLA in a Complex Security Environment 

Salwai’s support for the PRC position on the South China Sea in 2016, Liu 

Quan attempted to influence him again in early 2018. 113  He proposed that a 

search-and-rescue contingent from the China Coast Guard be permanently 

stationed at Luganville with a “technical surveillance capability.” 114  If this 

proposal had eventuated, it would have been a significant development 

in the PLA’s security presence in Melanesia. 115  However, Liu was exposed, 

drawing international media attention and a denial from the government of 

Vanuatu. He was prematurely posted to Suriname, where his career ended. 

It was not the act of building the facility that demonstrated its dual use, but 

the attempt to secure access for security purposes that followed. 

The more recent example of the security relationship between the PRC 

and Solomon Islands demonstrates China’s interest in access even more 

keenly. On recognizing an opportunity, the PRC rapidly locked in four 

instruments of security statecraft: the PLT arrived in January to conduct 

training, a senior officer was established as the liaison officer with the 

embassy, an MOU on policing cooperation was signed in March, and the 

“Framework Agreement for Security Cooperation” was signed in April. 

The framework agreement enabled PRC “police, armed police, military 

personnel, and other law enforcement and armed forces” to access Solomon 

Islands. 116  Several facilities now under development (such as CCECC’s 

A$170 million contract with the Asian Development Bank to build four 

ports) could be used for this access in the future. 117 

As one senior Solomon Islands official observed five months before the 

2021 riots, “the friendship that has developed recently with Sogavare and the 

‘new friend’, which is China, it can lead to him being able to call on them in 

a situation where he felt that his government is under threat…. China finds 

a convenient place, better than any other in the Pacific, to run its business in 

the Solomons.” 118  Within a year, he had been proved correct.            

> 113 “Vanuatu Gov’t Issues Position on South China Sea,” Vanuatu Daily Post , May 26, 2016, https://
> www.dailypost.vu/news/vanuatu-govt-issues-position-on-south-china-sea/article_df783f0f-
> 5a6a-50e1-b48a-54610d728c1b.html.
> 114 Author’s interview with ni-Vanuatu journalist, May 2022.
> 115 The China Coast Guard is part of the People’s Armed Police, which answers to the Central
> Military Commission and has a low-profile humanitarian purpose, but sufficient capabilities to
> be employed for security statecraft.
> 116 This is seen in the draft security cooperation agreement between China and Solomon Islands
> posted on X by Anna Powles, 4–8.
> 117 Kirsty Needham, “China Firm Wins Solomon Islands Port Project as Australia Watches On,”
> Reuters, March 22, 2023, https://www.reuters.com/world/asia-pacific/chinese-company-wins-
> tender-redevelop-solomon-islands-port-official-2023-03-22.
> 118 Author’s interview with a Solomon Islands official, June 2021. Connolly –Chapter 9 •219

Most Chinese attempts to generate a base-like effect are dual-use and 

difficult to detect. These efforts have been supervised by Chinese security 

statecraft on the ground since 2020, supported by interagency efforts, 

reinforced by the BRI narrative, and integrated with economic and political 

statecraft to achieve China’s grand strategy (see  Figure 2 ). 

## Presence and Projection of PRC Security Forces 

The strategic tasks of cooperation and protection provide plausible 

explanations for an increase in the projection and presence of PRC security 

statecraft in the Pacific at the time of China’s 2015 defense white paper. The 

2019 white paper then sought to explain further increases in operations, 

presence, and assistance in the context of “actively contributing to building 

a community with a shared future for mankind,” in which China’s security 

forces “actively provide international public security goods.” 119  However, 

these arguments do not fully explain the level of activity that followed. 

It is unsurprising that the level of PLA and MPS engagement with their 

Pacific Island counterparts increased as the Pacific was integrated into BRI. 

Furthermore, it appears that PRC security statecraft has become far more 

overt, persistent, and influential in the Pacific in the last three years. While 

this assessment makes sense and accords with the anecdotal evidence, there 

does not appear to be a database of events that can be referred to as evidence. 

For that reason, a timeline of open-source PRC security events in Oceania 

from 2009 to 2023 was generated to provide additional data for this chapter. 

It is of limited value beyond illustrating a change in resourcing PRC security 

means to influence the Pacific. There is no comparative data for other regions 

and no internal weighting for the significance of an event. 

This simple database focuses on PLA and MPS activity in the Pacific 

Islands region along with multilateral exercises and force-projection 

activities that involve Australia and New Zealand. It refers to Oceania as 

the Pacific beyond the second island chain. It does not include equivalent 

events within the PRC (such as the training of military or police members 

in China), except when an event is directly connected to the development 

of an influential capability or presence in the Pacific Islands themselves. An 

event is recorded in a specific category (operations, engagement, or materiel 

from the PLA or MPS) with a single value in a given year. A ship visiting    

> 119 State Council Information Office (PRC), China’s National Defense in the New Era (Beijing, July
> 2019), 31, 36.

220  • The PLA in a Complex Security Environment 

> f i g u r e  2 PRC integrated statecraft in Melanesia, 2022
> s o u r c e  : AIDDATA, 2021; Observatory of Economic Complexity, 2021; Lowy Pacific Aid Map, 2021; MOFCOM country guides; media reports; and author’s
> interviews, 2014–21.

Connolly  – Chapter 9  • 221 

several countries is only recorded as a single event. Thus, an MPS police 

detachment that remains in-country for the entire year is recorded as an 

event with the same value as a delivery of equipment to a defense force. 

That said, a persistent presence is then recorded as an event for every year 

that it remains in place. These limitations should be borne in mind when 

using the database. However, the data is useful in that it indicates changes 

in the prioritization and employment of PRC security means in the region, 

signaling strategic interest and allowing the assessment of intent. 120 

## PLA Activity in the Pacific Islands 

The PLA activity in Oceania in  Figure 3  demonstrates a consistently 

growing emphasis on engagement, starting with exercises and ship visits and 

then rising decisively in the latter years with the establishment of defense 

attaché offices. While engagement tends to overshadow operational activity, 

there are two points at which overt operations are higher than elsewhere       

> 120 David A. Baldwin, Economic Statecraft (New Jersey: Princeton University Press, 1985), 14–15, 39;
> and Doshi, The Long Game , 9, 16.
> f i g u r e 3

PLA activity in Oceania  

> s o u r c e

: Media reports and author’s interviews, 2014–22. 

> 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 0246810 12 Number of events/activities PLA engagment PLA operations PLA materiel Total PLA

222  • The PLA in a Complex Security Environment 

due to significant PLA force-projection activities in the region, leading to a 

spike in overall PLA activity. The first of these was in 2016, when the PLA 

contribution to searching for MH370 overlapped with PLA Navy surveillance 

in the region and several task group deployments at the same time as a high 

level of regional engagement, resulting in a high number of events. The 

second was when a series of incidents, ranging from riots in Solomon Islands 

to the volcanic eruption in Tonga, were met with the deployment of PLA 

Navy and Air Force operational capabilities, compounding with the sudden 

arrival of PLA defense attachés and their assistants to create high totals in 

2022 and 2023. The PLA’s materiel contribution to Pacific Island security 

forces has been modest, with its highest mark being the years leading up to 

the Pacific Islands joining BRI and the APEC 2018 summit. 

## PRC Police Activity in the Pacific Islands 

By comparison, the contribution by PRC police to China’s relationships 

in the Pacific started off modest, but constant, and largely focused on Fiji 

from 2011 to 2021 (see  Figure 4 ). The China-Fiji Police MOU permitted 

small groups of Chinese provincial police to work within the Fiji Police   

> f i g u r e 4

PRC police activity in the Pacific Islands       

> 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 0246810 12 Number of events/activities Police engagement and agreements Police operations and advisers Police materiel Total police
> s o u r c e :Media reports and author’s interviews, 2014–22. Connolly –Chapter 9 •223

Force on exchange for up to six months a year and occasionally produced a 

favorable outcome for China, such as the extradition of Chinese nationals 

in 2013 and 2017. Beyond this focused presence, the PRC occasionally 

provided materiel to regional police forces. This pattern of behavior has 

changed dramatically in the last four years. 

In 2021, the first police liaison office in the region was established in Suva, 

and equipment was provided to police forces in PNG, Solomon Islands, and 

Fiji. In 2022, in the wake of the Honiara riots, the MPS established access to 

Solomon Islands through the China–Solomon Islands Security Framework 

Agreement. Then, in 2023, as the police arrangements in Fiji were called 

into question by a new prime minister, opportunities developed to establish 

MPS advisory contingents in Kiribati and Vanuatu, and the PLT in Solomon 

Islands doubled in size for the Pacific Games. This single spike in the later 

years continues to build as new Chinese policing initiatives are developed and 

introduced. These statistics clearly reflect the engagement of opportunity with 

a significant investment of statecraft to meet strategic objectives. 

## PRC Security Activity in the Pacific Islands 

The comparison of military and police statistics indicates that police 

involvement in the Pacific was slower to develop but is now taking the lead 

over PLA engagement. What the statistics do not illustrate is the additional 

value of this police presence for China’s security statecraft in terms of greater 

persistence and deeper influence. The experience from Solomon Islands, 

now being replicated in Vanuatu and Kiribati, is that PRC police advisory 

groups arrive with the promise of delivering a short training package, 

but never leave. Furthermore, they seek to integrate with the indigenous 

force and affect its approach to the local rule of law. In doing so, they can 

assist in regime maintenance when it suits PRC interests and deal with 

instability when it concerns the welfare of the overseas Chinese diaspora or 

the narrative of how China is regarded within that country. Nevertheless, 

Figure 5  demonstrates that the combined security effect of military and 

police cooperation has increased significantly in the Pacific over the last 

four years. Regardless of the magnitude of this security compared with other 

regions, such a change within the Pacific Islands indicates an increase in the 

PRC’s strategic interest in them. That increased effort is seeking access with 

police engagement, which may be used by the PLA. 

Given the strategic rationales assessed in this chapter, it appears the 

PRC has actively employed military and police resources to develop access, 224  • The PLA in a Complex Security Environment 

presence, and posture in the Pacific Islands since 2020 to achieve five 

strategic objectives through competition short of conflict: 

• to  penetrate  the first island chain to counter China’s perceived 

encirclement; 

• to  expand  beyond the second island chain to extend its strategic reach 

as a global power; 

• to  displace  competing powers in the process (deny, deter, contain/ 

encircle, or interdict); 

• to  posture  for a conflict against the United States and its allies, if war 

eventuates; and 

• to  control  the region post-conflict, or post-displacement of its 

competitors.   

> f i g u r e 5

Combined PRC security activity  

> 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 0510 15 20 25 Number of events/activities  Total PLA Total police Total PRC
> s o u r c e

: Media reports and author’s interviews, 2014–22. Connolly  – Chapter 9  • 225 

## Conclusion 

This chapter has explained the significant increase in China’s 

security engagement with the Pacific Islands since 2017, supported by the 

comprehensive, integrated, and adaptive employment of PRC political 

and economic statecraft. Through the enhancement of statecraft on the 

ground, Chinese representatives deliver the PRC’s grand strategy in the 

Pacific Islands to enhance the country’s geopolitical influence, expand 

its geostrategic access, and accumulate resources. Each of these interests 

motivates China’s competition for strategic space in the geographic, human, 

and information terrain of Oceania. The PRC has actively employed security 

statecraft to develop presence, access, and posture in the Pacific Islands with 

the aim of penetrating the first island chain, expanding beyond the second 

island chain, displacing competing powers, posturing for possible conflict, 

and eventually controlling the region. 

This intensified competition demonstrates both that the Pacific 

Islands are a higher strategic priority for China than it has previously 

acknowledged and that Western powers need to adapt their approaches to 

avoid being displaced, losing without fighting in the gray zone, or being 

forced to fight a future conflict from a position of serious disadvantage. 

A key adaptation that all stakeholders must recognize is the growing and 

effective role of China’s police forces as part of a greater security statecraft 

system in the Pacific. 

This is particularly the case in the majority of Pacific Island nations that 

have no military and rely completely on their police forces to safeguard their 

national security. The PRC offers its police forces to Pacific Island states as 

a “public good” without acknowledging the strategic motives behind their 

deployment. Because PRC police have generally been viewed by Western 

and Pacific governments as lower-profile or less strategically confrontational, 

they have become China’s weapon of choice for competing in the gray 

zone in the Pacific Islands. Starting quietly in Fiji from 2011, but more 

significantly in Solomon Islands from 2022, the PRC has found its police 

adviser contingents capable of influencing local authorities, maintaining 

a persistent presence, and propagating its narrative to populations on the 

ground. By offering a means to support regimes against instability (which 

frequently involve grassroots anti-Chinese sentiment), China’s PLTs are 

natural security partners to PRC political and economic statecraft in Pacific 

countries, particularly within the framework of BRI and the rationale of 

the Global Security Initiative. Chinese police can reinforce elite capture, 226  • The PLA in a Complex Security Environment 

consolidate the delivery of China’s grand strategy in the Pacific, and pave the 

way for the PLA’s future access. 

However, the governments and people of the Pacific Island states will 

ultimately decide whether China’s police advisers are welcome in their 

countries, and whether they succeed in achieving strategic objectives. In the 

short term, the environment of competition could accentuate Pacific voices 

and reinforce hedging strategies. About the Contributors  • 227 

# About the Contributors 

Dennis J. Blasko  is a retired Lieutenant Colonel, U.S. Army, with 23 

years of service as a military intelligence officer and foreign area officer 

specializing in China. He served in infantry units in Germany, Italy, and 

South Korea and in Washington, D.C., at the Defense Intelligence Agency, 

Headquarters Department of the Army (Office of Special Operations) 

and the National Defense University War Gaming and Simulation Center. 

From 1992 to 1996, he was an army attaché in Beijing and Hong Kong. 

Mr. Blasko is a graduate of the U.S. Military Academy and the Naval 

Postgraduate School. He has written numerous articles and chapters 

on the Chinese military, along with the book  The Chinese Army Today: 

Tradition and Transformation for the 21st Century , 2nd ed. (2012). 

Peter Connolly  is an Adjunct Fellow at the University of New South Wales 

in Canberra and the Center for Strategic and International Studies in 

Washington, D.C., and an Adjunct Senior Fellow at Solomon Islands 

National University. In 2023, he completed a PhD at the Australian 

National University with a thesis entitled “Statecraft and Pushback: 

Delivering China’s Grand Strategy in Melanesia 2014–2022.” His 

research on Chinese interests in Melanesia drew on an extensive range 

of interviews in China, Papua New Guinea, Solomon Islands, Vanuatu, 

Fiji, and Timor-Leste. Dr. Connolly has previously conducted academic 

research on international relations and strategy, including the Australia-

Indonesia relationship and Australia’s whole-of-government response to 

terrorism. During a 33-year career as an infantry officer in the Australian 

Army, he commanded troops on active service in Somalia, Timor-Leste, 

and Afghanistan from platoon through to battalion level. Dr. Connolly 

also served in Parliament House, Sandhurst, and the Pentagon, and 

completed his service as director of international engagement–army 

and director of the Australian Army Research Centre. He now advises 

the Australian Department of Defence on the Pacific. 

Andrew S. Erickson  is a Professor of Strategy in the China Maritime 

Studies Institute (CMSI) at the U.S. Naval War College. He helped establish 

CMSI in 2006 and has played an integral role in its development. CMSI 

inspired the creation of other research centers, which he has advised and 228  • The PLA in a Complex Security Environment 

supported. He is also an associate at the China Aerospace Studies Institute. 

His research focuses on Indo-Pacific defense, international relations, 

technology, and resource issues. Dr. Erickson is currently a visiting scholar 

in full-time residence at Harvard University’s John King Fairbank Center for 

Chinese Studies, where he has been an associate in research since 2008. 

He is also a member of the Council on Foreign Relations and the Institute 

of Maritime Policy and Strategy’s International Advisory Committee and 

serves on the editorial boards of  Naval War College Review  and  Asia Policy .

He has presented extensively at academic, private-sector, and government 

institutions throughout the United States and Asia. Dr. Erickson received 

his PhD and MA in politics from Princeton University and graduated from 

Amherst College. He studied Mandarin in the Princeton in Beijing program 

at Beijing Normal University’s College of Chinese Language and Culture. 

His research website is www.andrewerickson.com. 

Kim Fassler  is a Foreign Affairs Officer at the U.S. Department of State’s 

Office of China Coordination. Prior to joining the Department of 

State in 2023, she worked for twelve years at the U.S. Department of 

Defense, where her assignments included senior analyst at U.S. Indo-

Pacific Command’s  China Strategic Focus Group as well as posts at the 

U.S. Embassy in Beijing in the Office of the Defense Attaché and  the 

Defense Intelligence Agency. Ms. Fassler has an MA from the Johns 

Hopkins University School of Advanced International Studies, including 

graduate coursework in Mandarin at the Hopkins Nanjing Center on a 

David L. Boren Graduate Fellowship, and a BA from Williams College. 

She is from Honolulu, Hawaii, and worked in public affairs at the Hawaii 

State Legislature and as a reporter for Hawaii’s largest newspaper before 

starting her career with the federal government. 

Rick Gunnell  is the Research Professor of China Military Studies in the 

U.S. Army War College’s China Landpower Studies Center. He focuses on 

the Central Military Commission as an organization and the PLA’s “land 

domain” people, organizations, and activities. Mr. Gunnell is proficient in 

Chinese and earned his BA in international business and management 

with a focus in East Asian studies from Dickinson College in 2006. 

Timothy R. Heath  is a Senior International Defense Researcher at the 

RAND Corporation. Prior to joining RAND in October 2014, he served as About the Contributors  • 229 

the senior analyst for the U.S. Pacific Command China Strategic Focus 

Group. He has over twenty years of experience researching and analyzing 

military and political topics related to China. Fluent in Mandarin Chinese, 

he has extensive experience analyzing China’s national strategy, politics, 

ideology, and military, as well as Asian regional security developments. 

He has a PhD in political science from George Mason University and an 

MA in Asian studies from George Washington University. 

Maryanne Kivlehan-Wise  is Director of the China Studies Program at 

CNA. She has over two decades of experience directing projects and 

conducting research and analysis on Chinese military and strategic 

issues. Her research interests include Chinese military modernization, 

politics and foreign policy, economic statecraft, media issues, strategic 

communications, and information operations, as well as the South 

China Sea and ASEAN issues. She is the author of chapters in several 

edited volumes addressing Chinese security issues. Before joining CNA, 

Kivlehan-Wise worked for an international nonprofit organization, where 

she directed projects on Chinese and Mongolian affairs. She also worked 

in Bosnia with the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe 

in support of elections. Kivlehan-Wise holds an MA in security policy 

studies, with a focus on Northeast Asian security issues and Chinese 

foreign policy, from the Elliott School of International Affairs at the 

George Washington University and a BA in political science from the 

State University of New York at Buffalo. She is also a graduate of the Johns 

Hopkins–Nanjing University Center for Chinese and American Studies 

and has studied Mandarin Chinese in Beijing at Capital Normal University. 

Erin Richter  is a Senior Analyst within the U.S. Department of Defense, 

where she has specialized in foreign military capabilities and civil-

military interdependencies for nearly two decades. Before joining the 

Department of Defense, she served as a logistics officer in the U.S. Marine 

Corps, and she continues to serve as an intelligence officer in the Marine 

Corps Reserve, having completed assignments in the Indo-Pacific, Middle 

East, Africa, and Europe. Ms. Richter is a graduate of the Marine Corps 

Expeditionary Warfare School, the Marine Corps Command and Staff 

College, and the Air War College. She holds an MA in international affairs 

from American University and a BA in anthropology from the University 

of Maryland, College Park. 230  • The PLA in a Complex Security Environment 

Tsun-Kai Tsai  is a Senior Research Specialist in the China Studies Program 

at CNA. His research interests and expertise focus on contemporary 

Chinese politics, contemporary Taiwanese politics, and cross-strait 

relations. Before joining CNA, Mr. Tsai was a research intern at the Center 

for Strategic and International Studies and also served in the Marine 

Corps for more than six years. As a native Chinese Mandarin speaker, he 

was able to provide language and analytic support to various missions 

and research projects. Mr. Tsai holds an MA in international policy from 

the University of Georgia (nonproliferation track) and a BA in psychology 

from the University of California, Irvine. 

Howard Wang  is a Political Scientist at the RAND Corporation. His primary 

research interests include China’s elite politics, emerging capabilities in the 

People’s Liberation Army, and maritime security in the Indo-Pacific region. 

Before joining RAND, Dr. Wang served as a policy analyst for the U.S.-

China Economic and Security Review Commission, where he researched 

U.S.-China military competition and deterrence in the Taiwan Strait. He 

has also spent time at Guidehouse, the Jamestown Foundation, and the 

Center for Strategic and International Studies. Dr. Wang completed his 

doctorate in international affairs at the Johns Hopkins School of Advanced 

International Studies, where he was awarded distinction for his thesis 

research on the Chinese Communist Party’s sea-power strategy. He also 

completed an MPP at the Georgetown University McCourt School of 

Public Policy and a bachelor’s degree at Boston University. 

Joel Wuthnow  is a Senior Research Fellow in the Center for the Study 

of Chinese Military Affairs within the Institute for the National Strategic 

Studies at National Defense University (NDU). He is also an Adjunct 

Professor in the Edmund A. Walsh School of Foreign Service at Georgetown 

University and a Nonresident Fellow at the National Bureau of Asian 

Research. His research areas include Chinese foreign and security policy, 

Chinese military affairs, U.S.-China relations, and strategic developments 

in East Asia.  Prior to joining NDU, Dr. Wuthnow was a China analyst at CNA, 

a postdoctoral fellow in the China and the World Program at Princeton 

University, and a predoctoral fellow at the Brookings Institution. He holds 

an AB from Princeton University, an MPhil from Oxford University, and a 

PhD from Columbia University. He is proficient in Mandarin. His recent 

books include  Crossing the Strait: China’s Military Prepares for War with 

Taiwan  (2022, lead editor),  Gray Dragons: Assessing China’s Senior Military About the Contributors  • 231 

Leadership  (2022),  The PLA Beyond Borders: Chinese Military Operations 

in Regional and Global Context  (2021, lead editor),  System Overload: Can 

China’s Military Be Distracted in a War over Taiwan?  (2020), and  China’s Other 

Army: The People’s Armed Police in an Era of Reform  (2019). 

Ketian Zhang  is an Assistant Professor of International Security in the 

Schar School of Policy and Government at George Mason University. 

She studies rising powers, coercion, economic statecraft, and maritime 

disputes in international relations and social movements in comparative 

politics, with a regional focus on China and East Asia. Dr. Zhang bridges 

the study of international relations and comparative politics and has 

a broader theoretical interest in linking international security and 

international political economy. Her book  China’s Gambit: The Calculus 

of Coercion  (2023) examines when, why, and how China uses coercion 

when faced with issues of national security, such as territorial disputes in 

the South and East China Seas, foreign arms sales to Taiwan, and foreign 

leaders’ reception of the Dalai Lama. Part of her research has appeared in 

International Security , the  Journal of Strategic Studies , and the  Journal of 

Contemporary China , among other venues. Dr. Zhang is currently working 

on her second book that explores the relationship between economic 

interdependence and rising power grand strategies. She received her 

PhD in political science from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology 

in 2018 and her BA from the University of Wisconsin, Madison. the national bureau  of  asian research 

> one union square
> 600 university street, suite 1012
> seattle, washington 98101
> nbr @nbr.org, www.nbr.org

The PLA in a Complex Security Environment: Preparing for High Winds and Choppy Waters  features 

papers from the 2023 People’s Liberation Army Conference convened by the National Bureau of Asian 

Research, U.S. Indo-Pacific Command’s China Strategic Focus Group, and the Miller Center of Public 

Affairs at the University of Virginia. The volume examines how Chinese leaders assess China’s external 

security environment, including both the opportunities and threats presented; how this assessment is 

driving changes to the PLA’s strategy, planning, and modernization efforts; and how the PLA’s posture 

and capabilities are evolving in key theaters of interest to the United States, including the Taiwan 

Strait, Southeast Asia, and the South Pacific. 

Editors Benjamin Frohman is Research Director for the People’s Liberation Army Conference and a Nonresident Fellow at 

the National Bureau of Asian Research. Jeremy Rausch is Director with the Political and Security Affairs group at the National 

Bureau of Asian Research. 

Contributors Dennis J. Blasko, Peter Connolly, Andrew S. Erickson, Kim Fassler, Rick Gunnell, Timothy R. Heath, 

Maryanne Kivlehan-Wise, Erin Richter, Tsun-Kai Tsai, Howard Wang, Joel Wuthnow, and Ketian Zhang 

Past volumes in the People’s Liberation Army Conference series include: 

China’s Military Decision-making in Times of Crisis and Conflict 

Modernizing Deterrence: How China Coerces, Compels, and Deters 

Enabling a More Externally Focused and Operational PLA 

The People of the PLA 2.0 

Securing the China Dream: The PLA’s Role in a Time of Reform and Change 

The Chinese People’s Liberation Army in 2025
