Title: Is China embedding military-aged males inside the U.S. in preparation for war with the United States?

URL Source: https://lawenforcementtoday.com/is-china-embedding-military-aged-males-inside-the-u-s-in-preparation-for-war-with-the-united-states

Published Time: 2023-10-05T07:13-0400

Markdown Content:
**USA-**_Law Enforcement Today_ recently reported about the number of military-age Chinese males entering the United States via the porous southern border, using the so-called “Darien Gap.”

That is a favored route for illegals to travel from South America to the United States.

This is a way for Chinese nationals who would otherwise be prohibited from entering the country to join the millions of illegal aliens who have entered the US since Biden’s installation on January 20, 2021.

What does that mean? It means that thousands of young Chinese males, who fall into the demographic of those who would serve in the Chinese military, are allowed into the United States, free to scatter about the country until their asylum “court dates,” often set many months, if not years, from when they cross our border, Michael Snyder writes in Substack.

As with most illegal aliens who have entered the United States, where they went or what they are doing is unknown. Since none are here on student visas, it is a certainty they are not studying molecular biology at Harvard.

Fox News reports the number of Chinese nationals being encountered at our border far exceeds any such encounters in history. And those are the ones who are caught at the border by Customs and Border Protection, not the so-called “gotaways” who evade detection:

_So far in fiscal year 2023, U.S. Customs and Border Protection encountered nearly 40,000 Chinese nationals on both the southern and northern borders, far surpassing the approximately 23,500 and 27,800 encountered in fiscal years 2021 and 2022, respectively._

_In July, more than 6,000 crossed the border, just two months after the COVID-19 rule that allowed for expelling illegal migrants quickly—known as Title 42—expired._

Most illegal Chinese aliens arrive in the United States having started their journey in Ecuador. From Yahoo News:

_The Chinese migrants typically start their journey in Ecuador, which is visa-free for Chinese citizens, as per The Diplomat. From there, they head to Necoli, a town on Colombia’s northern coast, which then leads to the Darien Gap, a 66-mile dense jungle reportedly filled with armed guerillas, drug traffickers, and deadly biodiversity. Some who undertake the treacherous journey allegedly pay smugglers up to $35,000 for help._

Needless to say, Secretary of Homeland Security Alejandro Mayorkas and Joe Biden are on top of this potential threat to national security, correct? Not quite. In fact, they are doing nothing about it, which is frustrating many Republican lawmakers.

House Homeland Security Committee Chairman Mark Green (R-Tenn.) expressed outrage over the administration’s handling of the southern border and their apparent ignorance of the Chinese threat. He also believes the Chinese Communist Party is sending these men to the United States for a specific purpose.

From the _Daily Mail:_

_House Homeland Security Chairman Mark Green, R-Tenn., told DailyMail.com that there has been a “massive increase” of Chinese nationals tied to the People’s Liberation Army (PLA) that have gained access to the U.S. by crossing over the border._

_And there have been over 17,800 Chinese nationals released into the U.S. this year alone, he claimed._

_Green called the “stupidity” of the Biden administration’s border policies currently in place “mind-blowing” because now Chinese spies could act as “saboteurs” in the same manner Russian military men established residency in Ukraine before the invasion._

Clearly, relations between the United States and China are precarious, especially with the Chicoms' saber-rattling over Taiwan. While the United States military has been engaging in politically correct virtue signaling, the Chinese have built their military might. With Chinese men of military age crossing the borders in staggering numbers, there is good reason to be concerned.

Moreover, these Chinese men are not crossing over one or two at a time but in groups. Earlier this year, Muckraker showed footage that showed “hundreds of military-aged Chinese men in Panama heading toward the U.S. border…”

_A reporter released new video that appears to show hundreds of military-aged Chinese men in Panama heading toward the U.S. Border._

_Muckraker.com founder Anthony Rubin said on “Fox & Friends First” Wednesday that every day, multiple times a day, groups of men are lining up and getting on buses to continue their journeys._

It also appears there is a sense of coordination among these Chinese men. Once they enter the United States, they’re not headed toward enclaves of Chinese citizens in places like San Francisco or New York City. In fact, many end up in places that are disturbing at the least:

_The Chinese nationals posed as “tourists” wandered onto a missile launch site in New Mexico, as first reported by the Wall Street Journal. In addition, some reportedly staged as scuba divers in order to get close to a Florida rocket launch site, while others claimed to be staying on an Army base in Alaska._

Often, these Chinese nationals claim to be tourists and are “lost” or say they are looking for fast food restaurants such as McDonald’s or Burger King, all ironically (or not) adjacent or close to U.S. military facilities.

As mentioned, these are only the ones that are known. It is anyone’s guess how many Chinese nationals are “gotaways” and could be anywhere in the U.S.

For example, Snyder cites a crime wave occurring in Oakland County, Michigan, a significant distance from the southern border. Law enforcement authorities say that “transnational gangs” from South America have been committing “high-end” burglaries on “upscale” homes in the county.

According to _The Blaze,_ Oakland County Sheriff Michael Bouchard said thieves are targeting homes and stealing jewelry, precious metals, high-end watches, expensive purses, etc., with the total loss exceeding $1 million.

**“They typically hit homes from 5 to 9 pm; they seem to want houses where nobody’s home, and they usually come in through windows in the back,” Bouchard said.**

One can guarantee that young Chinese men aren’t here to engage in home burglaries but have other nefarious goals, such as embedding in the country. If we should have learned anything from the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks, we need to pay attention to who we are letting into the country and what they are up to.

It has gotten so bad that even some Democrats are sounding the alarm about Biden’s loosey-goosey border policies, including New York City Mayor Eric Adams and New York Gov. Kathy Hochul. The Gateway Pundit reports that former sanctuary state (and city) proponent Hochul is demanding the federal government do something about the unfettered invasion of our country.

Appearing on CBS _Face the Nation,_ Hochul called for limits on immigration and additional border patrol agents. Being a Democrat, Hochul wouldn’t lay the blame on Joe Biden where it belongs, instead laughably blaming Republicans and (now former) Speaker of the House Kevin McCarthy (R-Calif.).

As long as our southern border (primarily) remains open, the United States remains highly vulnerable to an attack. If God forbid war does erupt with China at some point, the People’s Liberation Army will have a contingent of young, fighting-age Chinese men at their disposal to carry out their will, potentially tens of thousands of “soldiers, spies, and saboteurs” at the ready.

“I swear…that I will support and defend the Constitution of the United States of America, against all enemies, foreign and domestic, that I will bear true faith and allegiance to same.” Joe Biden took that oath at noon on January 20, 2021. He has failed to live up to that oath, and our country is a far less safe place due to it.
