Title: AIST report 2024

URL Source: https://www.aist.go.jp/pdf/aist_e/aist_report/aist_report_2024.pdf

Published Time: Tue, 25 Mar 2025 04:17:55 GMT

Markdown Content:
Create the Future, Collaborate Together 

## Sustainability Report Transforming AIST into an organization that links research results to social implementation 

The National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST) is currently undergoing a transformation, from an organization that only produces research results, to one that promptly and reliably implements said results in society. This is the consequence of our management reforms in various areas, including the research structure, organizational management, and the personnel system. The first step in reform is to improve two-way trust and contribution, or engagement* 1, between an organization and its staff. The most important factor for this is empathy for the organizational vision. In order to create an environment wherein all staff members share in the organizational direction and cooperate with each other in taking on the challenge of creating new value, AIST employees came together over a period of time to discuss and formulate the AIST vision:* 2 “Create the Future, Collaborate Together.” This is a representation of the role AIST should play in the future for Japan and the world at large, and the kind of organization we as AIST should aspire to be for those who work in it. AIST’s greatest asset is its human resources. In order to draw out the strengths of the researchers and engineers who devote their energies to research and development, the administrative and support staff who manage the institute, and the employees of AIST Solutions Co. (“AISol”)* 3 who promote social implementation, the vision must be one which all members can “make their own.” We are confident that the AIST vision, created based on feedback from the field, will motivate employees and eventually lead to the creation of new value. 

Becoming the core of a national innovation ecosystem with a mission to solve social problems and strengthen industrial competitiveness 

Japan’s industrial competitiveness has been on a steady decline for more than 30 years. One of the major reasons for this is the lack of an innovation-generating ecosystem in Japan. I believe that the key to innovation is diversity. New ideas are born when a mix of people interact and diverse opinions are combined. Open innovation, such as collaboration between companies, and between companies and universities/research institutions, is effective in expanding diversity. However, open innovation in Japan is sluggish compared to overseas. According to the “Science and Technology Indicators 2023,” issued by the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, the total R&D expenditures by Japanese companies in 2021 was approximately 14 trillion yen, of which joint research expenditures with public research institutes and universities amount to around 100 billion yen, a mere 0.7% of the total. Compared to China (4.6%), Germany (6.3%), the U.K. (3.8%), and France (2.3%), these figures are overwhelmingly low, indicating that Japanese companies still have astrong tendency toward self-reliance. This may mean that not much is expected of public research institutes. We are very much aware of the danger that companies may not see AIST as aco-creation partner. In order to achieve the same level of open innovation as the rest of the world, both the companies tackling R&D head-on, and research institutes like ourselves must change. AIST sets out a “medium- to long-term plan” every five years. In the current 5th Medium-to-Long-term Plan (FY 2020–FY 2024), our mission is to “solve social problems and strengthen industrial competitiveness.” We, the management team, have thoroughly discussed, and clearly presented our fifth management policy* 4 for achieving this mission. The policy identifies our vision for FY 2030 and beyond as being “the core of the national innovation ecosystem.” The national innovation ecosystem is a scheme wherein innovation in Japan is continuously generated through collaboration and cooperation among various players in industry, academia, and government. In addition, backcasting from this vision of the future, we, in the 5th term, decided to build a prototype of the ecosystem and establish the AIST brand. By setting concrete action plans based on this management policy and steadily implementing them one by one, we intend to grow and advance the innovation ecosystem toward FY 2030 and beyond. Japan is said to be a “problem-oriented” nation, facing a variety of social challenges such as adeclining birthrate and aging population, labor shortage, and energy and environmental issues. Many in the public and private sectors are working to solve these issues. Yet, said issues are so complex and multilayered, that finding solutions is no small feat. There is a limit to what one company, one organization can do. However, if we combine the wisdom and technology of Japan as a whole, we should be able to find the key to break through. We at AIST are ready to play a central role in the innovation ecosystem by uniting the wisdom of industry, academia, and government. Opening a new door in the culture of self-reliance among Japanese companies—that is one of the key roles expected of the national innovation ecosystem. By serving as its core component, AIST hopes to aid Japan in its eventually becoming known as an “advanced problem-solving nation” and once again raise its industrial competitiveness to the top level. 

Promoting organizational reform and development of advanced facilities to become an engine for innovation co-creation 

AIST has undertaken two major organizational reforms in the fifth term. The first is governance reform. What I would like to emphasize here is the creation of a management structure that facilitates the execution of comprehensive strength through research department supervision. AIST has seven research departments, and there was a tendency for each department to act independently of one another. However, there are now many problems that cannot be solved by one department alone. Therefore, in order to create synergy across all seven departments, we established a Chief Technology Officer (CTO)* 3 who oversees the entire organization, and a Research Strategy Planning Department* 3 that, under the direction of the CTO, formulates research strategies for AIST as a whole. By creating a structure that facilitates the integration of research departments, we have strengthened our ability to 

# Transforming AIST to achieve its mission of “solving social problems and strengthening industrial competitiveness” 

# TOP MES SAGE 

*1 Engagement ▶P37 *2 Vision of AIST ▶P04 

*3 Talk between Chief Technology Officer and Chief Marketing and Business Officer ▶P10 / Organizational and Management Structure ▶P57 

*4 Management Policy for the 5th Fiscal Year ▶P62 

President & CEO National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST) ISHIMURA Kazuhiko 

National innovation ecosystem with AIST Group at its core 

▶ Seamless and rapid social implementation 

▶ Creating the next seeds by returning the profits of companies 

Company Company Company Company Universities and public institutions Universities and public institutions empirical research applied research basic research problem-setting Startup 

social implementation social implementation 

social implementation social implementation innovation 

01 respond to complex social issues. The second is the establishment of AISol in April 2023. AISol will work on social implementation of research results from the same perspective and at the same speed as companies. It will work alongside companies, and serve as an engine for innovation co-creation that will change said companies’ business portfolios. As a result of creating a structure to integrate research departments, and collaboration with companies being strengthened, the private funding acquired in FY 2023 exceeded 12 billion yen. The AIST Group, under which AIST and AISol become one, is preparing to further expand its scale in FY 2030 and beyond. One such initiative is the “100 company visits” which I myself have been conducting on an ongoing basis. With the goal of visiting 100 companies that have unique strengths, I hold top-level meetings with the presidents and propose scenarios for co-creation with AIST. More than 85 companies have been visited thus far, and an increasing number of cases have progressed to the collaboration phase with a view to social implementation. Throughout my career, I have witnessed many examples of excellent technologies and ideas that have been buried. Yet, every time I have the opportunity to meet with top executives, I am reminded of the underlying strength of Japanese companies. At times I feel that, if only we had some sort of “leverage,” we might be able to move the world by fully utilizing the technological strengths of these companies. Open innovation is precisely what I consider to be the equivalent of leverage. One of the major supporting pillars of our ambitious goals is the creation of cutting-edge facilities and environments. We established the Global Research and Development Center for Business by Quantum-AI Technology (G-QuAT)* 5 in July 2023, and the Semiconductor Frontier Research Center (SFRC) in October of the same year. Open to the public, these research centers will serve as a platform for open innovation. In addition, two Bridge Innovation Laboratories (BIL), namely, the “Kanazawa Institute of Technology-AIST Advanced Composite Materials BIL,” and the “Nagaoka AIST Biological Resource Circulation BIL,” were established in July and November, respectively. BILs work with local universities and other organizations to develop and implement technologies based on the needs of local companies. We are also eagerly engaging in open innovation to revitalize the local economy. 

AIST’s core competence is human resources. We take on the challenge of creating an environment wherein a variety of career paths may be chosen 

AIST’s strength is its R&D capabilities, and its human resources, as the source of said capabilities is AIST’s core competence. Needless to say, recruiting and training human resources are important. With young people becoming less interested in pursuing a career as researchers, competition for human resources among companies, universities, and research institutes continues to intensify. We consider recruitment to be an up-front investment, and have been taking proactive measures. While expanding our recruitment of master's degree research positions from FY 2023, we at AIST launched a new training program for researchers with master’s degrees from FY 2024. In it, obtaining a doctoral degree is designated as a work assignment at AIST, with tuition and other expenses to be covered by AIST. This will enable us to increase the number of doctoral researchers and broaden the scope of our recruitment. We have also been reviewing our personnel evaluation system to make it a more rewarding scheme with greater recognition for those who work hard. We intend to continue improving the system as we devise new ways of doing so. Diversity of human resources* 7 is also essential for AIST to enhance its value. The objective of both the AIST Innovation School, which cultivates researchers who take on the challenge of innovation, and the AIST Design School, which fosters “co-creative leaders,” is to have their graduates play an active part in society as human resources with acquired expertise. Some of our corporate alumni are involved in establishing in-house co-creation spaces, and in operating learning spaces. On the other hand, there are graduates who join AIST having been attracted to us through their studies at either school. In this way, both schools serve as a pathway for AIST to increase the diversity of its human resources. In recent years, the career paths of our staff have become more diverse. Some employees may change their research theme during the course of their research. If a staff member who has been dedicated to research wants to work on social implementation, they may play an active role at AISol. They may choose to move to another research institute, and should they decide to return to AIST, they are welcome to do so. 

Conduct research and development as needed by society in response to a drastically changing external environment 

How to deal with risks in R&D and social implementation is a serious subject for AIST. In order for a technology to be accepted by society, the risks associated with it must be properly explained, and the technology must be implemented with measures in place for dealing with the aforesaid risks. For example, while generative AI is a subject attracting the most interest these days, at the same time, there are ethical concerns, its reliability and safety are being questioned, and the importance of AI governance is also being pointed out. AIST has long been researching AI quality management aimed at reducing such risks, and we are continuing our efforts to implement the results in society. Since 2020, we have published, and have continually revised the “machine-learning quality management guidelines,” which systematizes quality management in the design and development of AI systems. These guidelines are being used by a variety of organizations. 

Facing operational risks and strengthening governance *8 to fulfill our responsibilities 

Today, governance is becoming increasingly important in all organizations. It is impossible not to mention here, two incidents that occurred in the last fiscal year. The indictment of a former employee in July 2023 on charges of violating the Unfair Competition Prevention Act was truly regrettable. Although we are taking steps to prevent a recurrence, such as strengthening our monitoring measures, the methods for the illegal removal of confidential information are becoming more sophisticated every year. We intend to bolster our staff training and strengthen our preparedness for both real life and virtual threats. The other incident concerns a paper fraud that was publicized in March 2024. AIST conducted athorough investigation, and published the results as well as measures to prevent a recurrence. The researchers who perpetrated the fraud must have been in a hurry to obtain results as soon as possible. AIST takes these incidents very seriously, and the entire AIST Group is working to prevent a recurrence, including further strengthening information management and thorough education on research ethics. As the head of the AIST Group, I am determined to promote the social implementation of research results and the innovation creation. I will fulfill my responsibilities to achieve our mission of solving social problems and strengthening industrial competitiveness, by realizing a national innovation ecosystem in which AIST will play a central role. 

# T O P M E S S A G E I S H I M U R A K A Z U H I K O   

> *5 Research case G-QuAT ▶P14 *6 Human resource development ▶P40 *7 Diversity ▶P38 /AIST Innovation School and AIST Design School ▶P32
> *8 Governance ▶P56

“Create the Future, Collaborate Together.” ......These words are at the core of AIST’s vision of “designing the future, creating the future together with society,” “building a research institute where members recognize each other and take on challenges together,” and is a representation of the AIST brand. So what exactly is a brand? While there are many expressions about brands in the world, for my part, Iunderstand a brand as being, “the ability to create unique characteristics + the passion to display said characteristics + the ability to pass them on.” This is my current point of view, based on my experiences of being involved in corporate brand management for many years, and observing various global corporate brands in action. What, then, are AIST’s unique characteristics? AIST has strong assets that have been cultivated over many years, including the ability to create new value, namely, through the collective strength of its individuals and collaboration (human resources and team capability), by integrating seven diverse research fields while enhancing their sophistication (domain integration capability), and by building upon world-class basic research with the primary goal of solving social and individual issues (social implementation capability). AIST's unique characteristic is the “power of process” to flexibly and freely integrate these strengths and link them to the results of research and development and their implementation in society. In addition, it is the passion of the staff, including researchers, to maximize these strengths, and the organizational management to further evolve and deepen these strengths. In terms of social implementation capability in particular, in the last fiscal year, we established a subsidiary company called AIST Solutions Co. (AISol), and shifted to a structure that promotes industry–academia–government collaboration. We aim to solve social issues and strengthen industrial competitiveness, not only by providing intellectual property licenses, research and engineering facilities, measurement, analysis and diagnostic technologies, and other expertise, but also by quickly creating new value through industry–academia–government collaboration and open innovation. The team strength of AISol’s over 200 marketing personnel is one of our unique endeavors. The “100 company visits” by AIST President Ishimura and AISol President Osaka, which are conducted as a prerequisite for this initiative, are an attempt to realize a robust research program by directly proposing co-creation with AIST to many company leaders. Today, as we look at Japan’s economic growth process, we see that, following the period of growth that was advocated as “Japan as No. 1” (1979), the “lost 30 years” has continued, and industrial competitiveness on the global market stage is declining. In addition, constraints due to global environmental problems, increasingly complex social issues, and diversifying individual values, as well as geopolitics and fragmentation risks have become apparent. Under conditions that make it difficult to predict the future, solutions are being sought for an era in which there are no solutions. This is, indeed, a critical time to challenge for a Japanese-style industrial revitalization model that will continue into the future. We invite you to expand your image of AIST as it seeks to challenge for a new Japanese-style innovation model, and to create a future society. 

## Challenging for a New Japanese Innovation Model 

External Vice-President’s Message 

> Vice-President (part-time) Advisor, Yamaha Motor Co. Ltd.

YANAGI Hiroyuki 03 02 地球環境の保全と人類の安全に資する研究を推進し、 安心・安全で質の高い生活や環境と調和した社会の実現を目指します。 13 環境安全に関する情報の発信を推進し、 地域社会との調和・融合に努めます。 また、 万一の事故、 災害においても、 迅速・的確な対処を行うとともに、 「公開の原則」 に則り、 得られた知見・教訓の社会への還元に努めます。 

# 環 境 安 全 憲 章 

# 2 環境安全に関する諸法規を遵守するとともに、 自ら、 ガイドライン等の自主基準を設定し、 日々、 環境保全と安全衛生の向上に努めます。 未 来 を デ ザ インし 、 社 会 と 共 に 未 来 を 創 る 。 互 い を 認 め 、 共 に 挑 戦 す る 研 究 所 を 築 く。 産 総 研 ビ ジ ョ ン 

志ある多様な人材が集い、 互いを尊重しながら、 共に挑戦し成長する 文化を育みます。 世界水準の研究のみならず、 社会課題の 掘り起こし ・施策提言 ・社会実装 ・知的基盤整備など あらゆる活動をこれまでの産総研の枠を 超えて推し進めます。 強い個の発揮と協働を通じた総合力で、 多様な価値を創り出すことを大切にします。 

## Charter of Environment and Safety 

We strive to promote research activities that contribute to the global environmental protection and the security of mankind and pursue our work to realize a safe and reliable society of high quality of life harmonious with the environment. We promote the dissemination of information related to the environmental protection and make every effort to be in harmony with and coexist with the local community. Naturally, in case of disasters or emergencies, we take prompt and proper measures to deal with the situation. Furthermore, in conformity with the ‘principles of disclosure,’ we shall endeavor to return the knowledge acquired and accumulated to society. In compliance with the applicable laws and regulations related to environmental protection, we establish the autonomous standards of the institute such as Safety Guidelines, etc. and with this in mind, we shall endeavor to conserve environment and promote health and safety at all times. Designing and co-creating the future with society. Encouraging mutual respect and endeavors. AIST VISION 

We foster a culture that attracts diverse people with high aspirations and encourages mutual respect and endeavors. We promote diverse activities beyond the conventional AIST roles through achieving excellence in research, discovering social issues and implementing solutions, underpinning intellectual infrastructure. and assisting with policy advocacy. We respect creating diverse values through individual strengths and organizational power. 

# Create the Future, Collaborate Together 

## Our mission Our values Our culture 

05 04 

## Top Message  00 

## AIST Group Initiatives for Value Creation  06 

## History of AIST  08 

## Promoting R&D and Social Implementation to Achieve the Mission  10 

## Industry–Academia– Government Collaboration 

## Human Capital Management 

## Environmental Safety 

## Governance 

## Overview of AIST Third-Party Opinion / Auditor’s Opinion Research Bases 

AIST publishes the “AIST Report” every year to promote understanding of AIST’s activities among va r i o u s s t a ke h o l d e r s a n d to b u i l d a d e e p e r relationship of trust between society and AIST. AIST Report 2024 aims to be an integrated report that comprehensively conveys the entire picture of AIST’s activities, going beyond the scope of a conventional sustainability report, in order to further enhance the transparency and credibility of AIST’s activities and to provide a deeper understanding of the sustainability and value-creation processes. This report focuses on AIST’s mid- to long-term value creation process, and reports on AIST’s strategy and efforts to become the “core of the national innovation ecosystem” to achieve its mission of “solving social issues and enhancing industrial competitiveness.” The report is designed to convey that the AIST Group, along with AISol established in April 2024, is united in its efforts to create value through the entire process f r o m r e s e a r c h a n d d e v e l o p m e n t t o s o c i a l implementation. We have expanded information disclosure more than ever, emphasizing the high feasibility of AIST's stated strategies. 

The data on the environmental report for each research base is available on our website. 

［Official website of AIST ］www.aist.go.jp /

●Scope of reporting 

Activities at all AIST research bases 

●Reporting period 

April 2023–March 2024 

●Rounding of numbers 

Rounded to the nearest displayed digit 

●Reporting areas 

Organizational governance, human rights, labor practices, fair operating practices, coexistence with society, environmental activities, occupational health and safety activities, and open innovation activities at AIST 

●Guidelines, etc., used as reference 

• “ I n t e r n a t i o n a l I n t e g r a t e d R e p o r t i n g F r a m e w o r k ”, International Integrated Reporting Council (IIRC) 

• “Guidance for Inte grate d Corporate Disclosure and Company-Investor Dialogue for Collaborative Value Co-Creation 2.0 (Guidance for Collaborative Value Creation 2.0) ”- Collaborative Creation of Value-Creation Scenarios to Achieve Sustainability Transformation (SX) - Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry 

• “Environmental Repor ting Guidelines (2018 Edition)”, Ministry of the Environment, Japan 

• “A c t o n t h e P r o m o t i o n o f B u s i n e s s A c t i v i t i e s w i t h Environmental Consideration by Specified Corporations, etc, by Facilitating Access to Environmental Information, and Other Measures” 

• Guidance for Environmental Reporting (3rd Edition), Ministry of the Environment, Japan 

• “Japanese Translation of ISO 26000: 2010 Guidance on Social Responsibility”, Japanese Standards Association (ed.) 

• “GRI Standard”, Global Reporting Initiative 

• Report of the Study Group on Dialogue Contributing to Long-Term Management and Long-Term Investment for Sustainable Corporate Value Creation (SX Study Group) (Ito Report 3.0), Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry 

●Next issue 

September 2025 

# CONTENTS Editorial Policy 

## 22 36 48 56 62 66 67 （▶P64） 

# AIST Group Initiatives for Value Creation 

# AIST Vision: “Create the Future, Collaborate Together.” （▶P04） Fifth Term Management Policy （▶P62） ～Toward the Establishment of a National Innovation Ecosystem ～

Co-creation with diverse stakeholders including companies, governments, universities, and research institutions 

Development of advanced technologies in line with national growth strategies 

●AI ●Quantum ●Semiconductor ●Material DX 

Research and development backcasting from social issues 

●Responses to energy and environmental constraints 

●Measures for declining birthrate and aging population 

●Contribution to a resilient country and disaster prevention 

●Measures for epidemic control and infectious diseases 

Research and development to enhance industrial competitiveness 

●Strengthen core technologies ●Basic fundamental research 

●Intellectual infrastructure development 

Research DX Research areas covering diverse industrial fields 

●Department of Energy and Environment 

●Department of Electronics and Manufacturing 

●Department of Life Science and Biotechnology 

●Geological Survey of Japan 

●Department of Information Technology and Human Factors 

●National Metrology Institute of Japan 

●Department of Materials and Chemistry 

●Global Research and Development Center for Business by Quantum-AI Technology 

●National strategies/national projects ●Integrated fields project 

●Young scientists’ integrated challenging research 

●Problem-solving integrated challenging research 

●Core technology development support project 

●Signing of comprehensive and individual MOUs 

●Establishment of an international network of research personnel 

Strengthening innovation infrastructure 

●Provide intellectual infrastructure 

●Realization of appropriate international rules, such as international standardization 

●Providing a venue for open innovation through a cutting-edge technology platform 

●Support and technical consultation through public research organizations 

●Human resource development 

【Technological assets 】【Collaborative research 】【Business co-creation 】●Cooperative Research Laboratory 

Initiatives to promote research and development Technical intelligence 

●Material DX 

●AI/Semiconductors 

●Energy Solutions 

●Circular Economy 

●Digital Platform 

●Biotech/Well-being 

Promotion of social implementation through co-creation with companies 

●Large-scale joint research with companies and joint research with small and medium-sized companies (including technical consulting) for PoC development and demonstration 

●Licensing of AIST research results (intellectual property) 

●Creation of startups 

●Technical consulting 

●Intellectual property and technology transfer 

●PoC and MVP development 

●Provision of advanced research facilities 

●Creation of startups 

●Value chain development 

R & D Promotion of Social Implementation 

Input Business Activities 

Output Outcome Creation of new value 

●Paper presentation 

●Patent applications and registrations 

Creation of research results that lead to social implementation Financial capital 

（▶P36） 

Human capital 

（▶P29） （▶P08） 

Intellectual capital 

（▶P24） （▶P48） 

Research infrastructure 

(development of research centers and infrastructure) 

Social capital Environmental consideration 

Promoting “R&D” and “social implementation” as two wheels of a cart. 

●Geological information development 

●Development of measurement standards 

●Standardization activities 

Efforts to improve intellectual infrastructure, etc. Strengthening international collaboration Service Solution area 

Promote large-scale cooperation with companies Promotion of corporate collaboration and business co-creation through AISol 

● Various social issues (energy and environmental constraints, declining birthrate and aging population, disaster prevention, countermeasures against emerging and reemerging infectious diseases, etc.) 

● Rise of emerging technologies such as generative AI and quantum computing 

●Decline in Japan's relative position (industrial competitiveness and research capabilities) 

●Decrease in the superiority and indispensability of key technologies in an increasingly severe and complex international situation 

Return to and enhancement of capital 

External environment surrounding AIST Group 

●Many new products and services are born and spread from companies collaborating with AIST. 

●Creation and expansion of new businesses through startups 

▶Create and expand new markets, capture overseas markets, and revitalize local industries 

●Maintain and improve the technical capabilities of domestic companies 

●Strengthening the human resources of domestic companies 

●Expanding the enhancement and utilization of intellectual infrastructure to support economic activities and innovation 

▶Improve quality and reliability and promote new innovations by enhancing measurement infrastructure, etc. 

▶Facilitate acquisition of overseas markets 

▶Strengthening of national and local government efforts for disaster prevention and mitigation 

# Strengthening Industrial Competitiveness Strengthening Industrial Competitiveness Solving Social Issues Strengthening Industrial Competitiveness 

> Improvement of the external environment

●Regional innovation promotion project 

●AIST and AIST consortium activities 

●University collaboration (OIL/BIL) 

Collaboration with local communities, small and medium enterprises, and universities 

07 06 Modernization Period of rapid economic growth From pandemic to post-Covid 19 Japan-US trade friction Burst of economic bubble Main research results 

Since the modernization of Japan, AIST has constantly responded to the changing society and produced research results required by each era and society. In order to realize our mission, “to solve social issues and strengthen industrial competitiveness,” we are flexibly changing the form of our organization. In 2023, we established AISol, and by crossing science and technology with marketing, we will more strongly promote the creation of research results and their social implementation—we have done so and we will do so in the future. The AIST Group will continue to provide indispensable value to society. 

# h i s t o r y 1860 1960 1980 1990 2020 

●

> Social events

Squalene 

・PAN-based carbon fiber 

・ETL Mark- IV Alloys for nickel-metal hydride battery anodes TMR element for magnetic heads Planck's constant measurement that led to the revised definition of the kilogram IDEA ABCI first in Japan Quantum annealing machine 

Historical background 

# o f A I S T 

Maintenance and management of international prototype of Japan 

Geological Map of Japan 

# 1889 ～

# 1916 1957 

Glucose isomerase 

# 1965 1990 2010 2004 2021 2010 2018 1890 ～

Ammonia synthesis method 

# 1920 ～1930 

●Promulgation of the Constitution of the Empire of Japan (1889) 

●World War II (1939-1945) 

●Cuban Crisis (1969) 

●Oil crisis (1973) 

●Dismantling of the Berlin Wall (1989) 

●Adoption of Kyoto Protocol (1997) 

●Announcement of iPS cell generation technology (2007) 

●Japan’s population peaked in 2007. 

●Tokyo Olympics and Paralympics (2021) 

●Adoption of the Paris Agreement (2015) 

●UN SDGs adopted (2015) 

●Great East Japan Earthquake (2011) 

●Noto Peninsula Earthquake (2024) 

●Start of commercial use of the internet in Japan (1993) 

●FOMA service launched (2001) 

●Completion of decoding the human genome (2003) 

●SARS pandemic (2003) 

●Establishment of the Nobel Prize (1901) 

●First human powered flight (1903) 

●Russo-Japanese War (1904-1905) 

09 08 AISol was born out of a desire to revive the Japanese economy. Murayama : It is a pleasure to be discussing with you today. First of all, I would like to start by talking about the prehistory that led to the establishment of AISol. It all started in fiscal year 2021, when President Ishimura said, “We should formulate a management policy to more strongly promote social implementation.” At almost the same time, the Council of the Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry was also discussing how to strengthen AIST’s functions. At the end of FY 2021, AIST decided to establish a corporation for supporting the utilization of research results (later, AISol), and the Council also proposed the same. In FY 2022, an internal working group developed a blueprint, and President Osaka, as AIST’s councilor, visited almost all research sites from Hokkaido to Kyushu. After extensive discussions, the project was officially launched on April 1, 2023. As for me, I believe that the greatest value of AISol lies in its ability to conceptualize and create businesses. 

Osaka : In my previous job, I was involved in both business portfolio transformation and the launch of new businesses. From that experience, I knew that in order to maximize the potential of a technology, it is necessary to address not only the technology itself, but also marketing, so I was very motivated when I heard about AISol. And what I noticed when I actually tried it was the high level of technology at AIST. I have been working with President Ishimura on top sales, and the response from companies is amazing. They highly value our technology. I felt that the AIST staff may not have realized the high potential of our technology, and that AIST’s ability to solve problems based on our multidisciplinary research and development had not been fully conveyed to the companies. 

Murayama : President Ishimura believes that AIST's mission is to revive the Japanese economy. Japan that once ranked first in the world in GDP per capita has dropped to 38th place. There is a strong desire to revive it. 

Osaka : It is often said that we have “lost 30 years,” but Japan has not lost its technological capability itself. I would like researchers at AIST to polish their technologies with confidence. AISol is responsible for the part of returning AIST's technology to social value, and we will work toward the needs of society and companies based on a deep understanding of AIST’s strong technologies. 

Murayama : The key point here is how to properly and objectively evaluate our technologies. We are currently working to identify AIST's core technologies and focus resources on those with competitive advantages. At the same time, regarding our approach to addressing social issues, we are making concerted effort focusing on four key areas: “addressing energy and environmental constraints,” “addressing the declining birthrate and aging population,” “contributing to a resilient country and disaster prevention,” and “measures for epidemic control and infectious diseases.” Our major challenge for the future is how to link the technologies developed in these areas to AISol’s business concept. 

What has changed and what have we seen in the past year? Murayama : A major change in the past year since AISol was established is that the career paths of our personnel have become more diverse. Many staff members have been transferred from AIST to AISol, and there are many examples of them thriving at 

It has been one year since the AIST Group, consisting of AIST and AISol, began full-scale operations. During this period, social implementation of research results has accelerated, leading to the emergence of new projects one after another. In this talk, AIST Vice-President Murayama Norimitsu (Chief Technology Officer) and AISol President Osaka Seiji (Chief Marketing and Business Officer, AIST), two powerful leaders in solving social issues and strengthening industrial competitiveness, discussed what would change and strengths could emerge through the collaboration. 

## ～AIST and AISol’s Challenge toward Solving Social Issues and Strengthening Industrial Competitiveness ～

# R&D and Social Implementation to Create the Future 

AIST AISol Promoting R&D and Social Implementation to Achieve the Mission 

11 10 Murayama O S A K A 

AISol by doing work that they could not accomplish within AIST. 

Osaka : As you say, I believe that the form of work will develop. For example, as we conduct joint research, we will achieve results that exceed expectations, a number of large joint research projects will emerge that will have an impact on corporate portfolios, and new ventures will be born. ...... At such times, one will experience a different kind of joy in one’s work. 

Murayama : In terms of creating businesses, the first example is OpenSUSI, an open semiconductor design business. In addition, the operation of ABCI, AIST's AI-focused computing infrastructure, has been transferred to AISol, making it more accessible and user-friendly for companies. We expect this to accelerate social implementation and strengthen industrial competitiveness. Also, startups are making great progress under Mr. Osaka’s leadership. 

Osaka : While the technological elements in the 12 due diligence items (detailed investigation process) set for AISol startup certification are important, I believe that business elements such as marketing and management systems are equally critical. In the future, my ideal is that AIST’s “technology scientists” and AISol’s “marketing scientists” will team up to create a new business that has never existed before. 

Linking AIST’s cutting-edge technologies to solving social issues and strengthening industrial competitiveness Osaka : AIST is a national research institute, and companies see an opportunity to get involved in the national growth strategy through AIST’s activities, don’t they? 

Murayama : In line with the national growth strategy, we are working on advanced technologies including quantum, AI, semiconductors, material DX, and biotech manufacturing to strengthen industrial competitiveness. In particular, when the new center combining quantum and AI technologies is completed, it will become a facility with the world’s best capabilities, attracting people from all over the world. We are already building relationships with global companies, and AISol will take the lead in negotiations when conducting large-scale joint research in the future. AISol is also planning how to manage AIST's platform for materials DX. In addition, AISol's role will become increasingly important as we plan to work with global companies in the field of semiconductors. 

Osaka : Recently, a European national organization and an economic mission visited us, focusing on those AIST technologies. The world seems to be saying, “We need to collaborate more with Japan and reassess the potential of Japan’s technological capabilities.” Meanwhile, within Japan, the mindset of business executives and CTOs is undergoing significant change. Stakeholders are no longer satisfied with merely generating short-term profits; instead, they demand strategies for the next decade and contributions to solving social issues. To solve increasingly complex social issues and drive corporate development, it is crucial to move beyond an in-house approach. Open innovation, which combines diverse insights, is essential for quickly addressing social issues. 

Murayama : Just as you say, AIST established AISol not to make a profit from AISol, but to contribute to solving social issues. When creating a business together with AISol, the most important criteria for making decisions are “How it contributes to solving social issues?”, and “How it strengthens industrial competitiveness?” 

Perspectives on Research Management and Social Implementation Murayama : Regarding research management, before and after the establishment of AISol, I sent out two messages as the chief technology officer. The first was “be determined to fulfill social implementation.” This means that, if important issues arise as a result of marketing, I would like the researchers to proactively dedicate part of their efforts to address them, but ultimately, they must follow the chief technology officer’s decision, which seems to have shocked researchers. The second message was “diversity of performance evaluation and significance of paper publication toward social implementation.” This means that from now on, research results will be evaluated based on various factors, including not only the number of publications but also how much they contribute to social implementation. In addition, publishing papers is not the goal of research, but the first step toward social implementation, and we should publish papers with the mindset of how to connect them to social implementation. 

Osaka : In the diagram of the national innovation ecosystem, the starting points are “problem setting” and “basic research.” If a research project can be said to be “research for realizing a prosperous future,” then the paper holds significant value, regardless of the phase of the research. 

Murayama : I always tell them that I would like each researcher to stay true to their core, while flexibly adapting to the process of backcasting from social issues and combining their individual technologies. However, since there are differences in perspectives among researchers, it is also my responsibility to shift their mindset towards keeping social implementation in mind. Continuously presenting examples like OpenSUSI and increasing the sense of fulfillment from working with AISol will be one way to change the mindset. 

Osaka : OpenSUSI, which you just mentioned, is one of the examples of social implementation. To broaden the base of the semiconductor business, AIST and AISol created an open platform so that venture companies can freely design semiconductors and receive support. We are also working on a super clean room so that semiconductor fabs for research can be used more by the private sector. We also spent a year creating IDEA, a system to disseminate to industry an inventory database of environmentally hazardous substances such as CO 2. We will also expand the capacity of ABCI, which is attracting attention from around the world, to further promote its use by the private sector. AISol will also play such a role. 

Becoming a World-Leading Nation in Science and Technology Once Again Osaka : Japanese companies are now seeking growth strategies for the next 10 years. When we meet with corporate executives and CTOs, we bring together technology scientists and marketing scientists to make new proposals. Once this approach gains momentum, we will truly realize the national innovation ecosystem in both name and substance. 

Murayama : The AIST Group is working on creating mechanisms for open innovation, where people with diverse backgrounds come together to generate new value. We also place importance on contributing to the regional economy, and I believe that AISol can pave the way for new developments in regional innovation. 

Osaka : If there is a unique technology in the region, it will contribute to the regional economy, and possibly even to the Japanese and global economies. The strength of the technology is the key, after all. 

Murayama : What we want to accomplish is to revive the Japanese economy. Young employees have only experienced a Japan in decline, so perhaps it is our role to ignite a fire in their hearts. 

Osaka : When we entered the workforce, it was the era of “Japan as No. 1.” When the Japanese economy is growing, it offers individuals exciting career experiences. Let me tell you one more story. When I started working for AISol, I visited a national research institute. That institute was established, saying, "Aim for AIST, we want to be like AIST.” And in the 1980s, when they implemented the reforms that President Ishimura and Vice-President Murayama are now aiming to achieve, the industrial policy of that country began to take off. Now, when it comes to social implementation, we are the ones learning. Since such cases certainly exist, let’s start with AIST to help Japan become a science and technology nation that leads the world once again. The real challenge starts here. 

Murayama : AIST and AISol have taken the first step as the AIST Group. Let us move forward with determination, overcoming various challenges and striving for growth together. 

# Norimitsu SEIJI 

National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST) Vice-President (Chief Technology Officer) AIST Solutions Co. President and CEO 

（Chief Marketing and Business Officer, AIST) Promoting R&D and Social Implementation to Achieve the Mission 

13 12 Quantum computers run on a completely different mechanism than conventional computers and far exceed the conventional processing power. It is expected to be a “dream technology” that will drastically change society. The common issue worldwide is how to utilize quantum technology in the real world. On July 27, 2023, AIST established the Global Research and Development Center for Business by Quantum-AI Technology (G-QuAT) to support industrialization and create markets. 

# G-QuAT, a global hub paving the way for the world’s first quantum industry, is launched. 

A research center bearing the words “business development” and “global” that supports the industrialization of quantum technology in collaboration with like-minded countries 

Since quantum computers have made dramatic progress and started to be available for actual use around 2020, many countries have announced their quantum strategies for industrialization from 2022 to 2023. The Japanese government has been ahead of the rest of the world in formulating strategies for the industrialization of quantum technology, such as the “Vision of Quantum Future Society* 1”and the “Strategy of Quantum Future Industry Development* 2 .” G-QuAT was established based on the analysis and recommendations of these strategies. We interviewed Horibe Masahiro about its positioning. “G-QuAT is not only an R&D organization, but also has the mission of building a global business ecosystem. We will promote the development of applications that take advantage of Japan's strengths and the construction of supply chains for component materials, but what is important here is that the companies responsible for the business play a leading role. We are in a position to support the industrialization of quantum technology by companies through the provision of state-of-the-art facilities and environment, diverse R&D results, human resource development, and intellectual property/standardization strategies.” Another major feature of the G-QuAT’s efforts to promote global collaboration is the appointment of eight world-renowned domestic and international top runners to the International Advisory Board. In ad ditio n, A IST s igne d a M e m o r a n dum of Understanding (MOU) for research collaboration with Keysight Technologies and IBM in February and May of this year, respectively, and has begun to strengthen its ties. 

Three platforms from usage environment of quantum computers to facilities for prototyping and evaluation of materials for the components 

To support industrialization, G-QuAT is developing three platforms: the first is a quantum and AI computing platform. During this fiscal year, the supercomputer ABCI-Q (with 2020 NVIDIA GPU H100s), a neutral atom quantum computer (QuEra), and a superconducting quantum computer (Fujitsu) will be installed. A commercial optical quantum computer (OptQC) will also be launched at G-QuAT. The second is an evaluation testbed. Quantum computers are used in a very special environment, and we provide evaluation services by preparing evaluation facilities that are close to the actual usage environment. This is a concept unique to G-QuAT, not found anywhere else in the world. 

The third is device manufacturing technology for quantum chips and control circuits, which are the heart of quantum computers. AIST’s Qufab (Superconducting Quantum Circuit Fabrication Facility) is scheduled to begin foundry services in October of this year so that many people can use it. 

“When considering business creation, it is a heavy burden for companies and start-ups to develop basic infrastructure and locations from scratch. AIST is the only R&D organization that can provide its own facilities and location based on the Industrial Competitiveness Enhancement Act. Since it is possible to commercialize the results of joint development at AIST, we have received a great deal of interest and expectation from companies and startups in Japan and overseas," says Horibe, who has been impressed by the response to the project. 

Hybrid with classical computers to accelerate use case development 

When using a quantum computer as a “tool,” there is still a limit to what can be done. The mainstream is to use the combination of classical computers and quantum computers. G-QuAT will be one of the first to build this hybrid environment to accelerate the development of use cases. 

The more use cases there are, the wider the base of users becomes, and this is also where AIST can demonstrate its strengths. AIST’s seven research areas have already established a model in which new solutions using computation are developed and implemented in society by collaborating companies. By incorporating new computational technologies such as quantum and AI into this model, we can expect the speedy creation of industrially valuable solutions and pave the way for the promotion of business use of quantum technology. 

In addition, an incubation and collaboration space will be established on the second floor of the Quantum-AI Fusion Research Building, scheduled for completion next March, and opened to users, vendors, suppliers, investors, and others seeking to create businesses. The idea is to provide a place where people can connect with each other, thereby inducing collaboration among diverse stakeholders and accelerating business creation. In the process of developing this infrastructure, Yoshida Yoshiyuki says that information security is becoming increasingly important. “As quantum is positioned as important emerging technology along with semiconductors and AI, we are discussing how to protect technical information and are considering security zoning for the new research building.” 

The next few years are the time to move toward a society in which quantum and AI technologies are “usable.” 

In order to win against the world in both technology and business in the field of quantum computers, Horibe sees “the next three to five years as the time of challenge.” 

“I hope that the use of computational infrastructure as an industrial tool will improve labor productivity in Japan and lead to economic affluence. I also hope that a world in which robots like nursing care robots and autonomous driving work along with us will be realized in the next 20 years or so through a hybrid of quantum and AI technologies.” 

Yoshida envisions a future in which quantum and AI technologies are implemented in society as follows: “Ultimately, I envision a society in which everyone in the world can compute without being aware that they are using a quantum computer. To begin with, people are not aware that ordinary computers use CPUs for calculation and GPUs for display, right? In the same way, the ideal society would be one in which people can say, ‘Oh, your calculations are very fast,’ or ‘Actually, we are using quantum technology, aren’t we?’ ” 

As business creation progresses, a society in which quantum computers are used in a common manner will soon arrive. G-QuAT, with its advanced facilities and unique concepts, aims to be the world’s one and only research center, and is now in full swing to show the world that Japan has a presence in the world. 

> Global Research and Development Center for Business by Quantum-AI Technology(G-QuAT)

YOSHIDA Yoshiyuki Deputy Director Global Research and Development Center for Business by Quantum-AI Technology (G-QuAT) HORIBE Masahiro Deputy Director Promoting R&D and Social Implementation to Achieve the Mission 

> *1 Decided by the Integrated Innovation Strategy Promotion Council on April 22, 2022
> *2 Decided by the Integrated Innovation Strategy Promotion Council on April 14, 2023

15 14 AIST Solutions Co. Business Creation Department, Business Design Division OGAWA Hirotaka Producer Digital Architecture Research Center TAKANO Ryousei Deputy Leader 

AI supercomputer with world-class compute and energy-saving performances and easy access for companies 

AIST’s efforts to build ABCI came at a time when a series of extremely important technologies for deep learning were being developed overseas. In Japan, on the other hand, although interest in AI was high, only about 10% of companies had adopted the technology. Therefore, we decided to provide a “place” where people can actually try out AI by building a large-scale computational infrastructure that is accessible not only to research institutes and universities, but also to companies. 

The result was ABCI, which at the time was ranked fifth in the world for supercomputer speed performance. It has a half-precision arithmetic performance of 550 petaflops and is equipped with 4,352 of the latest GPUs; more GPUs mean higher power consumption and heat generation, but it is also characterized by the world's highest level of energy-saving performance. We asked Takano Ryousei about how it works. 

“A typical data center requires almost as much power for cooling as the power consumed by the computers. However, in the case of ABCI, cooling can be done with less than one-tenth of the power consumed by the computers. The most important point is that the hot water cooling is done throughout the year using only cooling towers, which is called free cooling, instead of using a chiller that consumes a lot of power like an air conditioner. This is extremely efficient and energy-saving, and contributes to reducing operating costs.” 

Many achievements in the development of generative AI with faster, state-of-the-art GPUs 

In May 2021, we upgraded the system to ABCI 2.0. Ogawa Hirotaka explains the process as follows. 

“The number of users continues to increase steadily and the utilization rate has reached a very high level, so we have introduced a new system equipped with the latest, faster GPUs, which can be used in conjunction with the existing system. To begin with, the performance of generative AI improves with the number of parameters and the amount of data to be learned. As the number o f p a r a m e te r s a n d d a t a a r e i n c r e a s e d, t h e performance suddenly increases at a certain point. That is why various developers are working hard on the development of generative AI. For such users, ABCI 2.0 allocates resources to the development of generative AI as a priority.” 

GPU servers and storage systems have been augmented to increase the performance of half-precision operations to 851.5 petaflops. Various results have been produced by utilizing this ABCI 2.0. Some examples are: “Building a Large-Scale Japanese Language Model with ABCI” (Preferred Networks), “Building a New Logistics Infrastructure with AI and Autonomous Driving Technology” (T2), “Finding Bones in Meat through Image Recognition, Evolution of Meat Processing Machines” (Mayekawa Manufacturing), “The New Digitalization of Fluid Proper ties Challenge d by Vide o A nalysis AI “DeepLiquid”” (AnyTech), etc.” 

World-class development environment enabled by upgrading to ABCI 3.0 

With the rapid expansion of the global generative AI market, an upgrade to ABCI 3.0 is currently underway. Ogawa explains, “In 2.0, models with tens of billions of parameters can be developed, but the most advanced generative AI at the moment, such as ChatGPT (OpenAI) and Gemini (Google), use models with more than 1 trillion parameters. The haves, the Big Techs, can develop such generative AI, but the have-nots like the Japanese industry, academia, and government cannot do so. Upgrading to 3.0 will close this gap and create an environment that will enable Japanese industry, academia, and government to develop generative AI that can compete with the word.” 

AIST is also conducting research to connect generative AI to solutions to social issues, according to Takano. “Research is being conducted with a focus on the practical application of generative AI in areas where the real world and cyberspace merge. For example, we are working on a research project to detect anomalies on factory lines by using generative AI capturing data from the real world.” 

Another major challenge is how to transition to ABCI 3.0. “Our goal is to minimize the period when users cannot use ABCI, and ultimately switch from 2.0 to 3.0 without any downtime. First, we plan to expand the power supply, data center, and cooling systems, and then gradually replace them with 3.0 while operating 2.0, which will be a very difficult task.” 

By this, the half-precision arithmetic performance w i l l b e c o m e 6 . 2 2 ex a f l o p s , a n i n c r e a s e o f approximately 7 times. The transition is underway with the aim of starting operation in January 2025. 

Transferring operations to AISol to foster a generative AI market 

Operations were transferred to AISol in April of this year, and efforts have begun to further expand usage and provide more detailed services. Ogawa sees this as an opportunity to change the usage price and user group. 

“Under the Ministr y of Economy, Trade and Industry's “Cloud Program,” a number of cloud service providers, including Sakura Internet and GMO Internet Group, have begun to develop supercomputers for AI development and offer them to users. In order not to hinder the emergence of this market, ABCI 3.0 prices will be raised to the same level as those of other service providers. As for the user group, ABCI intends to promote development for the public good by giving priority to national research institutes, universities, publicly funded contractors, subsidized projects, and startups.” 

Takano sees the role that AIST will play as follows: “In the future, we will focus more on research to advance and add value to computational resources. We will develop technologies such as AI safety and security, inference environments including collaboration with edge AI, and power-saving mechanisms, with a view to ABCI’s role in the ecosystem of generative AI. We would like to validate these technologies with ABCI and contribute to raising the level of Japan’s computational resource industry through technology transfers to companies.” 

Now that the computational infrastructure is growing, the challenge is the overwhelming lack of human resources who can handle a large number of GPUs. AIST will continue to lead the development and social implementation of AI in Japan, including the development of human resources capable of developing generative AI on par with the world’s best. 

The AI Bridging Cloud Infrastructure (ABCI), which connects AI algorithms with big data from the real world, was developed by AIST as an openly available large-scale computational infrastructure to accelerate the development and social implementation of AI technologies, and began operating in 2018. It was upgraded to ABCI 2.0 in 2021 and to ABCI 3.0 this year. It has been utilized by a wide range of users in industry, academia, and government achieving remarkable results and is driving industry creation through AI technology. 

# High-performance, easy-to-use AI Bridging Cloud Infrastructure to accelerate development and social implementation of generative AI 

Promoting R&D and Social Implementation to Achieve the Mission 

17 16 Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) is a method to “visualize” the environmental impact of products and services. To correctly assess the environmental impact of its entire supply chain, in addition to direct data related to manufacturing, a company needs background data related to processes outside its own manufacturing activities, from resource extraction to disposal and recycling. As part of efforts by AIST to contribute to the realization of a sustainable society, AIST-IDEA (National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology-Inventory Database for Environmental Analysis (IDEA)), an inventory database that provides background data for processes in the life cycle of products and services in Japan, is being developed by the IDEA lab. 

# One of the world’s largest inventory databases for measuring environmental impact from a life cycle perspective 

IDEA covers every industry in Japan, so users can get all the data they are looking for. 

In order to address global environmental issues such as climate change, companies are beginning to utilize LCA. However, to quantify the environmental impact of each stage of “production,” “use,” and “disposal,” data must be collected for all inputs and outputs of all processes at each of these stages, for example the energy consumed to produce purchased raw materials. It is not realistic for companies to collect all of this data on their own. To provide this data, AIST developed IDEA. 

IDEA Ver. 1 (3,000 data sets) was released in 2010. Since then, regular updates and enhancements have been released, and IDEA Ver. 3.4 (5,250 data sets) was released this April. 

IDEA is one of the world's largest databases of its kind, and its comprehensiveness is one of its main characteristics. Tahara Kiyotaka, who serves as the head of the IDEA Lab, explains. 

“Based on national statistics, IDEA covers all industries in Japan, including agriculture, industry, and services. The 5,250 data sets are organized by classification codes based on the Japan Standard Industrial Classification. For example, the medium level class “food manufacturing industry” contains the small level class “livestock food manufacturing industry,” which contains the detailed level classes “dairy products,” “cheese,” and so on, This creates a hierarchical structure where all products always fit somewhere, so users can easily obtain the data they seek. IDEA’s coverage is world class, and highly original, the variety of data is still at the level of a convenience store, not a general supermarket. We need to continue to update IDEA as more companies use it.” 

18 diverse areas of impact and transparent unit process data 

We asked Tahara about IDEA's development guidelines and key points for data preparation. 

“As there is a growing interest in climate change around the world, many people only think of LCA as looking at carbon dioxide (CO 2) and greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions. IDEA is special in that it covers a much wider range of issues. In total, there are 18 areas of impact that can be assessed, ranging from acidification and resource depletion to carcinogenicity of toxic chemicals.” 

“We also ensure transparency by disclosing as much as possible the sources and methods we use to create the input and output data of materials and energy used to make a product as well as what substances are released, which is called “unit process data.” However, most companies are unwilling to share data on their manufacturing methods and the amount of each raw material used. Therefore, we rely on information from references such as energy statistics and the PRTR (Pollutant Release and Transfer Register) system to estimate unit process data. At that time, since there are various manufacturing processes for the same product, we aim for representative and average areas, and to some extent, we make data with a degree of foresight. That is where our technique and know-how come in,” says Tahara. 

Data updated in Ver. 3.4 to reflect international cooperation and social needs 

Looking around the world, only a few countries have developed inventory databases. Global LCA Data Access of the UN (GLAD) is working on aligning the three largest databases of the world and making them mutually usable. IDEA Ver. 3.4 has been updated to reflect such international trends and social needs. 

In addition, international standards and guidelines have diverse requirements. An example is the quantification of GHG emissions related to land use. IDEA has responded with a major update to enable quantification of GHG emissions, so that the effect on climate change of changes in land use, such as the clearing of forests, can be assessed. IDEA also addresses biogenic CO 2 . When there is a balance between CO 2 absorbed through photosynthesis and CO 2 emissions from biomass combustion and other sources, it is easier to count both absorption and emissions as zero. However, recently there is a demand to properly count CO 2 fixed by biomass products. To do this, the amount of CO 2 absorbed by photosynthesis and fixed in the form of biomass must be expressed as a negative emission, and the CO 2emitted when biomass products, etc. are combusted must be accounted for separately. Although IDEA does not contain all of this data yet, as a provisional measure, it provides the amount of CO 2 sequestered by photosynthesis into each biomass product so that the amount of CO 2 fixed by biomass products can be assessed. 

Focusing on continuous development to become a more widely used evaluation tool 

We interviewed Monna Tetsuya, about the activities of the Consortium for Promotion of LCA Application, which he manages and that promotes the use and dissemination of IDEA. 

“We have a growing number of members, with about 500 members at the end of the last fiscal year. Some of them are beginners in LCA, so we provide services such as workshops, consultation sessions, and lectures to help them use IDEA properly and effectively.” 

From April this year, development will continue as before at AIST, but AISol will act as the sales contact. For this purpose, AISol has concluded a license agreement with the three existing sales companies. Since IDEA is intended to be a database for all industries, efforts are being made to establish a system to make it available to as many companies as possible. 

Regarding future prospects, Tahara said, “The world is moving toward carbon neutrality by 2050, and it is important to see how much environmental impact has been reduced at that time. I also hope to develop a database that can be used for international cooperation, especially in Asia. Toward this end, we are conducting research to extend IDEA temporally and spatially.” 

Finally, we asked Monna what kind of society he would like to create through the social implementation of IDEA. “For example, by using IDEA, makers of food products will be able to show GHG emissions together with lists of ingredients, and consumers will be able to choose what they want to buy based on this information. In this way, I hope that the results of IDEA will be used as a basis for making decisions when buying various products such as cars and houses, and that we can create a society in which people can make their own decisions with consideration of the environmental impact of their daily lives.” 

The development of the inventory database is never ending, and AIST will continue to work on further upgrading IDEA in order to contribute to the realization of a sustainable society. 

> Research Institute of Science for Safety and Sustainability IDEA Lab., Lab Director

TAHARA Kiyotaka Research Institute of Science for Safety and Sustainability Principal Research Manager MONNA Tetsuya 

> アイスト－イデ ア

Promoting R&D and Social Implementation to Achieve the Mission 

19 18 

> Members of the IDEA Lab, IDEA is the result of the combined efforts of many people

Developing a technology that can decompose PET at room temperature to tackle the difficult task of recycling composite fibers 

About 8.24 million tons of plastics are disposed of in Japan each year, and about 86% are recycled through chemical recycling, material recycling, and energy recovery. However, according to the EU definition, which does not include energy recovery, Japan's recycling rate is only 25%. Therefore, more chemical and material recycling is needed, and the development of basic technologies is an urgent task. Most plastic waste is a composite material, and chemical recycling is suitable for effectively reusing it in a cyclical manner. However, the conventional method involves a reaction at a high temperature of 200°C or higher, which poses a challenge in terms of energy cost. Tanaka Shinji has developed a revolutionary technology to overcome this problem. “The chemical depolymerization (decomposition) of PET with methanol is an ester exchange reaction in which alcohols are exchanged with each other. The problem is that it is an equilibrium reaction in which both forward (decomposition) and reverse (polymerization) reactions occur. If the reverse reaction is not suppressed, the decomposition efficiency will decrease. Therefore, we came up with an idea to accelerate the reaction by using a solvent called “dimethyl carbonate,” which easily reacts with the byproduct ethylene glycol, and converting it to ethylene carbonate, which is chemically stable. With this method, PET can be depolymerized at room temperature.” In the verification process after crushing PET bottles, they finally succeeded in obtaining dimethyl terephthalate, a raw material for PET, with a recovery rate of more than 90%. When they published their paper and press release on November 8, 2021, the response from the textile industry was even greater than expected. Six months earlier, the Ministry of the Environment had released a “Sustainable Fashion” website to disseminate information on clothing and its environmental impact. In fact, Tanaka ’s technology is also effective for composite fibers. “We hope to expand the technology we have developed to composite fibers and dyed fibers. Recently, we conducted experiments with composite fibers made of polyester and cotton, and polyester and polyurethane, and demonstrated that the depolymerization reaction proceeds under almost the same conditions and dimethyl terephthalate can be recovered, while cotton and polyurethane can also be recovered respectively.” To extract all components from composite fibers in a reusable form—ambitious research continues to establish this extremely difficult technology. 

Scaling up for social implementation to identify issues and master the technology 

Yamamoto Tetsuya, who belongs to the newly established Engineering Office in April 2023, is responsible for developing scale-up technologies for social implementation of research results. “The project is on a tight schedule to have the commercial plant up and running by 2030. This year, we conducted a demonstration test at a bench plant that can process from 5 kg to 50 kg of feedstock, compared to a maximum of 500 g at the lab scale. We will now move on to the basic design and construction of the pilot plant and then to the demonstration test.” Various issues were found at each stage of the scale-up process, and Yamamoto is working with Tanaka to advance development. “If unreacted fabric components remain inside the reactor, the problem is how to recover them. On the other hand, sometimes the agitation in the reactor works well and produces better results than in the lab. Until now, it was easy to react with 100% PET, but from now on, we will need to refine the technology so that it can be adapted to raw materials with mixed components such as cotton and polyurethane.” 

With an eye toward the formation of a circular economy ecosystem 

AISol’s role is to link AIST’s excellent seeds to social implementation, but its goal is not limited to the practical application of technology, according to Nakabayashi Akira. “We are trying to form a circular economy ecosystem. At the root of this is the problem of global population growth, and we must contribute with technologies and systems that consider the total balance between well-being and activities that do not exceed the planet's limits (planetary boundary). We see the social implementation of AIST’s innovative PET chemical recycling technology as one of the flagships for achieving resource recycling through technological innovation. Mr. Tanaka’s technology has a very clean reaction and is very efficient. That's why it could be possible to significantly shorten the 10 years it would normally take for social implementation, and we have set 2030 as our target year.” Nakabayashi is considering recycling plastics as a whole; as a set of both of expanding existing material recycling while complementing areas that until now could only be disposed of or incinerated with Tanaka's chemical recycling. 

AIST Group’s unique new structure to promote both R&D and social implementation 

We asked the three about their thoughts on how they perceive the system in which researchers, engineering personnel, and AISol work together to promote social implementation. “There are many things that can be learned only by scaling up, and I am very grateful for this experience, which I would not normally have. It will be my strength when I pursue research and development on other themes in the future. Also, under this system, I can concentrate on my own basic research and think about the next technological seeds.” (Tanaka) “I feel a great sense of fulfillment because this technology has a great impact on social issues. This is the first case at AIST where this system is being implemented in society. I want to do everything I can to make this a good model case.” (Yamamoto) “I feel that working at the AIST Group enhances my perspective because we have a great group of people and a high level of technology. It is very interesting to think about how we can help society as a whole to develop.” (Nakabayashi) The three are moving forward in a team that aims for social implementation, with an eye beyond toward the realization of a sustainable circular economy. 

Environmental pollution caused by plastic waste is a major problem worldwide. AIST has focused on polyethylene terephthalate (PET) resin, which is very widely used in modern society as PET bottles and polyester fiber, and developed low-energy and low-cost chemical recycling technology. Now, researchers, engineering personnel, and AISol are teaming up to implement this technology in society. 

# New chemical recycling technology to recycle composite material plastics 

> Interdisciplinary Research Center for Catalytic Chemistry Silicon Chemistry Team

TANAKA Shinji Senior Researcher Engineering Office, Research Strategy Planning Department YAMAMOTO Tetsuya Associate Manager AIST Solutions Co. Business Creation Department, Business Design Division NAKABAYASHI Akira Business Producer Promoting R&D and Social Implementation to Achieve the Mission 

21 20 23 22 

# Industry–Academia–Government Collaboration 

See pages 34–35 for more details.  ▶︎ Data of Research Activities (FY 2023) 

# Social Implementation of Technology AIST conducts joint research, commissioned research, technology consulting, technical advising, contract testing, provision of research samples and so forth, and contributes to R&D and product development by businesses. At hubs such as the Cooperative Research Laboratories and Open Innovation Laboratories, AIST collaborates with companies and universities to investigate possible applications of technology and promotes open innovation. 

●Active invitation of external researchers 

•Acceptance of external researchers for joint research accepted in FY 2023: 1,878 AIST provides researchers from our joint research partner institutions with an access to AIST’s state-of-the-art facilities to conduct effective joint research. 

● A platform for industry–academia– government collaboration 

AIST recruits members from, and collaborates with, various companies and organizations to organize thematic meeting structures (AIST Consortiums). We explore potential application of cut ting- edge technologies and aim at promoting R&D and creating new markets. 

● Joint and commissioned research projects conducted in past years 

Our joint research is R&D projects between AIST a n d o u r c o o p e r a t i v e p a r t n e r s— c o m p a n i e s , universities, or public research institutions with common objectives and goals—with the aim of creating innovative results that cannot be achieved by individual research. Commissioned research is a type of R&D project conducted solely by AIST under contract with a company or other organization. Through this research, companies can use AIST’s research potential to offset their lack of necessary technology to proceed with their own R&D project. Technology consulting is a system by which AIST—a multidisciplinary group of professionals—provides solutions based on its cut ting-edge research capability and abundant knowledge to overcome c h a l l e n g e s t h a t c o m p a n i e s c a n n o t s o l ve by themselves. In FY 2023, 865 cases were conducted. 

See page 35 for more details . ▶︎ 

## Provide a Platform for Industry–Academia–Government Collaboration and Promote Acceptance of Researchers 

I n a d d i t i o n to “ te c h n o l o g y p r o p o s a l t y p e” c o l l a b o r a t i o n , i n w h i c h A I S T p r o p o s e s i t s technological seeds as solutions to the needs of companies, AIST is strengthening its efforts in “co-creation type consulting,” in which it searches for and proposes new businesses together with companies and conducts the necessary studies based on its technology consulting system. We are also promoting marketing activities aimed at creating innovations for companies in a wide range of industries and business sizes. In order to achieve our mission of “solving social issues and strengthening industrial competitiveness,” and to strengthen the system and activities for social implementation of research results, AIST established AISol, a 100% AIST-invested corporation in April 2 0 2 3 , i n a c c o r d a n c e w i t h t h e “A c t o n t h e Revitalization of Science and Technology Innovation,” as a supporting corporation for application of results. Based on the technologies that AIST has cultivated over the years, AISol promotes collaboration with companies in six different solution areas: Energy Solutions, AI & Semiconductors, Circular Economy, Material DX, Bio-Wellbeing, and Digital Platforms. Specifically, we provide the high business value demanded by companies and society by providing technology assets, coordinating joint research, implementing demonstration projects for social implementation, building value chains, and creating startups. AIST, with an eye on future social issues, conducts a wide range of research from basic research to applied research and even empirical research. It is building an ecosystem in which the results are linked to social implementation and innovation at the optimum time through joint research with companies and other means. AISol will par ticipate in this ecosystem and actively work to create higher business value. 

## Marketing Activities toward Creation of Innovation Data on Personnel Training and Use (FY 2023) 

Research presentations (in journals) 3,889 cases 

Cross-appointment program users 51 people 

AISol employees 152 people Students who finished courses at AIST Innovation School 46 people 

Research presentations (oral) 7,949 cases 

AIST Research Assistant Program users 429 people 

Technology consulting 865 cases 

Students who finished courses at AIST Design School 8people 

Joint research projects with companies 877 cases 

Technical trainees accepted 1,490 cases 

Technical advice 2,675 cases 

Joint research revenue 338.3 million yen 

Contribution of AIST researchers to international standardization activities 560 people 

Commissioned research projects from companies 77 cases AIST standard proposals 48 cases 

Commissioned research fund from companies 20.3 million yen MOUs concluded with overseas organizations 18 institutes 

Acceptance of external researchers for joint research 1,878 people Foreign researchers 702 people 25 24 

Standardization themes that crossover a number of industries are increasing such as for various connected products with the advancement of digital technology. Under such circumstances, Intellectual Property and Standardization Promotion Division and research domains coming together, is fur ther promoting cross sectoral standardization activities that span over industry and research based on political and industrial needs. 

At international organizations such as International O r g a n i z a t i o n f o r S t a n d a r d i z a t i o n ( I S O ) a n d International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC), 73 AIST researchers are actively serving as chairs, committee managers, or convenors while 487 in total are contributing as experts to the development of standards based on their expertise. 

In FY 2023, ISO/TR 5469 (Artificial Intelligence), the foundation for “safety and security” in AI industrial applications, was issued, and a total of 48 domestic and international standards were proposed by AIST, i n c l u d i n g p r o m o t i n g i n t e r n a t i o n a l s t a n d a r d development and rule formation in cooperation with NIST of the United States and relevant European organizations. 

AIST’s Standardization Officers (SOs), who provide support for standardization promotion, have been recognized for their ongoing standardization efforts, and five support members including SOs received the “2023 Industrial Standardization Awards” (including awards from the Director-General of the Industrial Science and Technology Policy and Environment Policy Bureau). AIST’s priority issues i n c l u d e, fo r exa m p l e, s t a n d a r d iz a ti o n of G X technologies and smart cities, and support for the development of standardization strategies for the realization of a circular economy-based society, which is one of the challenges facing society. 

## Promotion  of  International  Standardization 

In order to conduct R&D that more closely relates to the strategies of companies, we are collaborating with partner companies and have set up Cooperative Research Laboratories in AIST bearing the names of these partner companies. The partner companies provide researchers and research funding, and AIST provides research resources including researchers, research facilities and intellectual proper ty. The researchers loaned from the companies and AIST’s researchers work on R&D in cooperation. As of March 2024, we were operating 20 Cooperative Research Laboratories. We hope they continue to make an impression as platforms for collaboration and synergy involving companies, universities and other research institutes. In FY2023, “TOHO HOLDINGS –AIST Universal Medical Access Cooperative Research Laboratory” and “Konica Minolta–AIST Bioprocess Technology Cooperative Research Laboratory” were established. 

## Cooperative  Research  Laboratory 

AIST has set up Open Innovation Laboratories (“OILs”), which are industry–academia–government collaborative research bases sited on university campuses. As of April 2024, 7 OILs were in operation. The co-operation of research bases with universities makes it possible to seamlessly conduct basic research, application research, development, and testing. As part of this collaboration, we also utilize our Cross-appointment Program to accelerate research through mobility of human resources as well as the Re s e a rc h A s s i s t a nt Pro g r a m to tr a in do c to r a l candidates by practical approaches. Through these efforts, we integrate the university's basic research with AIST’s goal-oriented basic and applied research, and will promote social implementation of technology to solve social issues. 

I n F Y 2 0 2 3 , w e s t r e n g t h e n e d o u r s o c i a l im p l e m e nt a ti o n f u n c ti o n in c o ll a b o r a ti o n wi th universities, local governments, and businesses by developing opportunities for co-creation. 

## OIL  (Open  Innovation  Laboratory) 

A technology research association (hereafter referred to as “association”) is a mutual assistance organization in which companies, universities, and national research institutes cooperate to conduct experimental research on technologies used in industrial activities by providing researchers, research funds, and equipment, and jointly manage the results and utilize them among the association members. AIST participates as a member and contributes to the activities of the association from planning to research implementation and utilization of the results. Pa r ti c u l a r l y by s h a r in g o u r “p e r s o n n e l” a n d “premises” with the associations, we aim to serve as a field where various people from different organizations can share their knowledge toward co-creation. We thus aim to help promote open innovation. 

Specifically, AIST “people” par ticipate in the association as researchers, project leaders, and officers. AIST also provides its facilities and equipment as a “place” for conducting research to researchers from industry and universities who participate in the association. 

## Participation  in  Technology  Research  Associations 

●Technology Research Associations in which AIST participated (FY 2023) 

> Name
> Photovoltaic Power Generation Technology Research Association (PVTEC)
> 12345678910 11 12 13
> Lithium Ion Battery Technology and Evaluation Center (LIBTEC) Fuel Cell Cutting-Edge Research Center Technology Research Association (FC-Cubic) The Research Association of Automotive Internal Combustion Engines (AICE) Technology Research Association for Next Generation Natural Products Chemistry Manufacturing Technology Association of Biologics (MAB) International Research Institute for Nuclear Decommissioning (IRID) Decarbonized Industrial Thermo-System Center (DITS) NMEMS Technology Research Organization (NMEMS) Technology Research Association for Future Additive Manufacturing (TRAFAM) Leading-edge Semiconductor Technology Center (LSTC) Geological Carbon Dioxide Storage Technology Research Association (CCS) Control System Security Center (CSSC)

One of the main missions of the AIST Group is to contribute to the development of the economy and industry by disseminating its research achievements to society. To achieve this mission, the AIST Group develops a strategic approach to obtain intellectual property (IP) rights, and appropriately maintain and manage such IP rights, and strongly promotes technology transfer with intellectual property at the core led by AISol which was established in April 2023. Specifically, based on the needs of the partner in cooperation for AIST Group’s intellectual property, we perform the necessary procedures (signing a non-disclosure agreement, a material transfer agreement, a technical information disclosure agreement, a license agreement and such), and promote wide dissemination of AIST’s research outcomes in society. 

## Technology  Transfer  Activities 

> See page 34 for more details.  ▶︎

●Technology transfer process 

Matching (signing non-disclosure agreement if necessary) Material transfer agreement 

> ●Original AIST samples
> ●Function and performance assessment

License agreement New IP 

> Equity according to contribution
> ●License grant, license fee

Optional agreements 

> ●Feasibility assessment

IP information, presentation of AIST research results Technical information disclosure agreement 

> ●Technical assessment
> ●Know-how and non-disclosed patents

Joint research 27 26 

this year, and expre s se d his hope for close r collaboration between ITRI and AIST in terms of social implementation. After keynote speeches by Executive Director Usuda, Deputy Director Man of ITRI's Green Energy and Environment Research L aborator ie s, a nd Pre side nt O s aka of A IS ol, p r e s e n t a t i o n s o n r e s e a r c h c o l l a b o r a t i o n achievements of the two institutions, and a lab tour, technical sessions were held on three themes, during which lively discussions took place. 

On the following day, the 16th, lab tours were held at the Fukushima Renewable Energy Institute, AIST (FREA) and AIST Tsukuba. 

New Zealand 

> ●The University of Auckland
> ★GNS Science (GNS)
> ★National Institute of
> Metrology, Standardization
> and Industrial Quality
> (INMETRO)

Brazil Canada 

> ●National Research Council
> Canada (NRC)
> ★Department of Natural
> Resources Canada (NRCan)
> ★University of Toronto
> ★National Institute of Metrology (NIM)

China Mongolia 

> ●Ministry of Mineral
> Resources and Energy
> (MMRE)

UK 

> ★University of Sheffield
> ★University of Manchester

Norway 

> ★The Foundation for Scientific
> and Industrial Research
> (SINTEF)
> ★Institute for Energy Technology
> (IFE)

Finland 

> ●Technical Research Centre of
> Finland (VTT)

Turkey 

> ★General Directorate of
> Mineral Research and
> Exploration (MTA)

Russia 

> ★Russian Scientific Research Institute for Metrological Service (VNIIMS)

Thailand 

> ●Thailand Institute of Scientific
> and Technological Research
> (TISTR)
> ●National Science and
> Technology Development
> Agency (NSTDA)
> ★National Institute of Metrology
> (NIMT)

Vietnam 

> ●Vietnam Academy of Science and
> Technology (VAST)

Australia 

> ●Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO)

Taiwan ●Industrial Technology 

> Research Institute (ITRI)

India 

> ★Indian Institute of Technology Hyderabad (IITH)
> ★All India Institute of Ayurveda (AIIA)

France 

> ●Centre National de la
> Recherche Scientifique
> (CNRS)
> ●Commissariat a l’energie
> atomique et aux energies
> alternatives (CEA)
> ★International Bureau of
> Weights and Measures
> (BIPM)
> ★University of Montpellier
> (UM)

Portugal 

> ★Institute for Systems and
> Computer Engineering,
> Technology and Science
> (INESC TEC)

Switzerland 

> ★Swiss Federal
> Laboratories for Materials
> Science and Technology
> (Empa)
> ★Federal Metrology
> Institute (METAS)

Italy 

> ★National Institute
> of Geophysics and
> Volcanology (INGV)

Germany 

> ●Fraunhofer-Gesellschaft (FhG)
> ●German Aerospace Center (DLR)
> ★German Research Center for Artificial
> Intelligence (DFKI)

The Netherlands 

> ★NMi Certin B.V the
> Nederlands Meetinstituut
> (NMi)

EU 

> ●Joint Research Centre (JRC)

USA 

> ●National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL)
> ●National Institute of Standards and Technology
> (NIST)
> ●Brookhaven National Laboratory (BNL)
> ★United States Geological Survey (USGS)

Korea 

> ★Korea Research Institute of
> Standards and Science (KRISS)

Singapore 

> ★*Agency for Science, Technology
> and Research (A*STAR)

●： Comprehensive MOUs ★： Specific MOUs (promotion of collaboration in specific fields. excerpts) 

●List of MOUs 

As of March 31, 2024 

## Accepting  Foreign  Researchers 

To enhance cooperation with overseas research institutes and to develop an international network of researchers, AIST welcomes foreign researchers from universities and research institutes around the world. In FY 2023, a total of 702 foreign researchers engaged in research at AIST. 

See page 35 for more details.  ▶︎ 

AIST has concluded Memoranda of Understanding (MOUs) on comprehensive research collaboration with 18 leading institutes representing various countries/ regions worldwide and is engaged in the development of international research networks. In accordance with these MOUs, we aim to tackle global issues through joint research and personnel exchanges with overseas research institutes. 

At the same time, through international collaborative research, workshops and seminars, and international conferences, AIST is forming a global network with influential research institutes in countries around the world and is promoting efficient and effective research cooperation. In November 2023, a joint symposium with the Industrial Technology Research Institute (ITRI) of Taiwan, “AIST–ITRI Joint Symposium 2023” was held at the AIST Tokyo Waterfront. Approximately 60 people attended the symposium, including AIST President Ishimura, Vice-President Tsuneto, Executive Officer Usuda, and others from AIST; President Osaka from AISol; President Liu, Vice President Hu, CMO Lin, and Representative Yang from ITRI; and researchers from both organizations. 

I n h i s o p e n i n g r e m a r k s , Pr e s i d e n t I s h i m u r a congratulated ITRI on its 50th anniversary this year and expressed his pleasure at being able to hold a joint symposium face-to-face for the first time in four years. He also mentioned that AIST established AISol in April 

## Strengthening  International  Collaboration  to  Solve  Global  Issues 

AIST–ITRI Joint Symposium 2023 Group Photo 

AIST has been raising its international profile not only by conducting world-leading research but also by strengthening collaboration with overseas research institutes and through inter-organizational personnel exchanges. As an effort to enhance collaborative relations with overseas institutes, AIST, together with RIKEN, organized the Twelf th Global Summit of Research Institute Leaders in October 2023. The purpose of this summit was to bring together the heads of the world's leading research institutes to discuss the future of science and technology, the role of each institute, and collaboration among research institutes. 

The heads of 25 research institutions and other organizations from countries and regions around the world par ticipated in the conference, and AIST President Ishimura attended. In response to this year's theme “Challenges facing research institutions from potentially disruptive technologies, in par ticular generative AI,” in his opening remarks, President Ishimura noted the need to recognize and deepen understanding of both the positive and negative impac ts of ge ne r ative A I a nd othe r innovative technologies on research activities. After presentations by the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO) of Australia and AIST, there was a lively exchange of views on the status of generative AI and other technologies in each country and the efforts of each research organization. 

## Increasing  Global  Presence 

# Strengthening International Collaboration AIST is building a global network with prominent research institutes around the world and is promoting efficient and effective research cooperation through international collaborative research, workshops and seminars, and personnel exchanges which include dispatching and inviting researchers. 29 28 

AIST Hokkaido AIST Shikoku AIST Chugoku Hokuriku Digital Manufacturing Center Bioresource analysis  

> PF is competent for developing new functions and applications of bioresources, expanding them for applied technologies such as improvement of productivity and functionality of agricultural, forestry, and marine products, advancement of bio-production of useful substances, and treatment and effective utilization of wastewater and waste. The PF provides solutions to technical issues such as advanced analysis of genomes and genes of microbes and plants, and microflora in environmental samples such as soil and water, and primary functional evaluation of agricultural, forestry, marine and food products. O p e n e d o n M ay 2 1, 2 0 2 3 . P F c o n d u c t s demonstrations related to smart textiles, metal 3D printers, and shape measurement technology, using digital manufacturing technology to solve i s s u e s r e l a t e d t o h i g h v a l u e - a d d e d a n d service-oriented textile industry, high-precision and high-efficiency processing technology, and IoT human resource development. ◀High-performance cluster machines for advanced utilization of
> industrial microorganisms

Digital healthcare analysis 

> P F c an evaluate and analy ze ever y t hing f rom substances to biological functions and behaviors such as gait, in order to solve the social issues of declining birthrate and aging society. It solves technical issues such as exploring the functionalit y of various m at e r ia l s , eva lu at in g b i o l o gi c a l e f fe c t s , a n d measuring and analyzing physical movements.

Analysis and evaluation of resin and rubber materials 

> P F d i a g n o s e s r e s i n , r u b b e r, a n d bio-based materials, solving various t e c h n i c a l i s s u e s r e l a t e d t o r e s i n materials, such as resin degradation, product defects, and how to recycle resins and other materials.
> Virtual Reality (VR) Integrated Treadmill Walking System ▶
> ◀Transmission electron microscope for
> observation of resins

Digital manufacturing 

> ◀Metal 3D printer for rapid manufacturing
> using digital technology

AIST Tohoku Prototyping and evaluation of nanomaterials 

● Development of a prototyping and evaluation platform 

U t i l i z i n g t h e R e g i o n a l I n n ova t i o n C r e a t i o n Collaboration Center Development Project of the FY 2 0 21 s u p p l e m e n t a r y b u d g e t , e t c ., o n e n e w protot yping and evaluation plat form (PF ) was e s t a b l i s h e d i n 20 23 a n d f o u r n ew PFs we r e developed, leveraging the strengths of the regional research bases (see figures below). AIST has introduced equipment and facilities to provide a set o f s e r v i c e s r a n g i n g f r o m u n d e r s t a n d i n g t h e development needs of products and services of local SMEs, etc. to R&D, prototyping, and evaluation. AIST will contribute to the promotion of regional innovation by providing support for usage and analysis of investigation results. 

● Nanomaterial Evaluation and Prototyping PF (AIST Tohoku) 

To enhance the industrial competitiveness of the Tohoku region by leveraging its local nanomaterial resources (such as clay microcrystal dispersion materials and nanoscale materials like zeolites), we have installed equipment and facilities for the design, prototyping, and evaluation of nanomaterials. By integrating AIST's expertise in nanomaterial design, manufacturing, and evaluation with the capabilities of this platform, we aim to support companies engaged in developing and distributing materials for resource recycling technologies, hydrogen storage products, electric vehicle components, and more. 

● What was the 2024 Noto Peninsula Earthquake? 

The 2024 Noto Peninsula Earthquake (hereafter referred to as the “Noto Peninsula Ear thquake”) occurred at 16:10 on January 1, 2024 in the Noto region of Ishikawa Prefecture, Japan, with a magnitude of 7.6 (epicenter depth of 16 km). In Shika Town and Wajima City, the seismic intensity was 7, in Nanao City, Suzu City, Anamizu Town, and Noto Town, it was upper 6. In addition, the earthquake claimed the lives of 260 people (as of June 25, 2024), making it the deadliest earthquake since the start of the Reiwa era in 2019. 

● Survey conducted before the Noto Peninsula Earthquake 

 The Geological Survey of Japan (GSJ), AIST, has been conducting marine geological surveys around the Japan Sea since the 1970s, initially under the Agency of Industrial Science and Technology. GSJ conducted marine geological surveys around the Noto Peninsula area from the late 1980s to the early 1990s, and has published several marine geological maps. In addition, following the magnitude 6.9 earthquake that struck the Noto Peninsula in 2007, GSJ developed a new high-resolution multichannel seismic survey system to fill in the blank area between marine geological maps and terrestrial geological maps, and used to investigate active faults in shallow waters off the northern coast of the Noto Peninsula. The results of these surveys were used by the Study Group on Large Scale Earthquakes in the Japan Sea (2014) to develop models of the largest class of tsunami faults. Furthermore, GSJ has pioneered research on earthquakes in the Noto region by conducting studies such as elucidating the history of coastal uplift associated with past earthquakes. 

●Response to the Noto Peninsula Earthquake 

Based on the above, GSJ began responding to media inquiries on the day of the earthquake, and by January 8, one week after the earthquake, GSJ dispatched survey teams to the site and promptly published initial findings on its official website. Among the findings, the results of the survey, which confirmed a 4 m uplift at Kaiso, Monzen Town, Wajima City, were covered by many media outlets (Figure 1). 

In April 2024, GSJ conducted an emergency survey on submarine active faults to determine the previously undetermined earthquake source fault (Figure 2). These results were provided to the Earthquake Research Committee of the government's Headquarters for Earthquake Research Promotion, and contributed to the evaluation of the earthquake as being caused by “the possibility that active faults offset in two new areas.” 

●Future Initiatives 

The Noto Peninsula has at least three coastal terraces, indicating large earthquakes, similar to the 2024 event, have periodically uplifted the coastline by several meters. However, the recurrence intervals of such large events remain unclear. Furthermore, there are still many unknowns, such as the continuity of the submarine active faults, the mechanism by which the faults moved simultaneously, and the relationship with the ear thquake swarm around Suzu Cit y since December 2020. GSJ will continue to conduct further surveys and research in the Noto region to clarify the h i s t o r y a n d m e c h a n i s m s o f t h e s e m a s s i v e earthquakes. 

## Response  of  the  Geological  Survey  of  Japan  to  the  2024  Noto  Peninsula  Earthquake Strengthening  the  prototyping  and  evaluation  platform  function  of  regional  research  bases 

Nanomaterial Evaluation and Prototyping PF website: https://unit.aist.go.jp/tohoku/nepp/. 

Nanomaterial Evaluation and Prototyping PF 

Approx. 3 meters 

(Figure 1) Coastal uplift of approximately 4 m observed at Kaiso, Monzen Town, Wajima City (Figure 2) Seismic reflection profiles of the northern coast of the Noto Peninsula acquired in April 2024. The yellow dotted line indicates the location of the seafloor surface at the time of the 2008 survey. The survey results show that the southeastern (landward) side of the fault (solid black line) was uplifted by approximately 3 m. 

# Community Involvement Northwest side (oceanside) Southeast side (land side) 

●Other prototyping and evaluation PFs 

> ▼Sea level at 12:03 +3.8 to 3.9 m

31 30 

The technical training is a program in which AIST accepts researchers, engineers, and students from companies, universities, and public research organi-zations for defined periods and provides them with an opportunity to study technologies under the instruc-tion of AIST researchers. The program may also be used for the purposes of short-term research training (internships) and educational programs for academic credits, which are both designed mainly for university students. 

●Partner Graduate School Program 

Using the knowledge and experience gained at AIST, AIST researchers teach as visiting scholars at graduate schools that have cooperation agreements with AIST. Within this program, AIST also provides technical training to the graduate students on the site of AIST. This program is deemed to be part of the students’ academic degree programs. With the purpose to develop human resources with world-class, high-level expertise and high competency to perform in diverse situations in society, AIST has es-tablished the AIST Research Assistant Program to hire graduate students with high levels of ability. This pro-gram allows talented graduate students to focus on their research activities to earn a degree without finan-cial concerns. In addition, it gives them opportunities to participate in AIST’s R&D activities of high social needs, from which they can develop the ability to plan and conduct advanced research appropriately at the professional research site. 

In FY 2023, 429 graduate students conducted R&D at AIST. To create a cross-institutional research system, in No-vember 2014 AIST established a cross-appointment program. This program allows a researcher to enter into employment contracts with multiple institutions and he/she can work in research, development, and education according to his/her role in each institution. By accepting faculty members from universities and other institutions and transferring AIST researchers to universities and companies, AIST is expected to in-crease the mobility of human resources and, as the core of the innovation ecosystem, smoothly promote social implementation toward practical application and the creation of new industries by drawing on the excel-lent technological seeds generated from basic re-search at universities and other institutions. Currently, 31 researchers from 12 universities, 3 pri-vate companies, and 2 institutions have been accept-ed, and 10 researchers have been sent to 4 universi-ties, 1 private company, and 3 institutions (as of April 2024). 

## Cross-appointment  Program 

# Deploying and developing human resources AIST promotes staff exchanges to facilitate the development and utilization of personnel who will produce innovation. AIST's efforts to develop training activities include AIST Innovation School and AIST Design School. 

See page 35 for more details.  ▶︎ 

●Employment requirements for AIST Research Assistants (as of June 2024) 

Superb R&D and paper-writing abilities that contribute highly to the promotion of AIST R&D projects, and capability to work independently under staff guidance. R&D abilities that may help to promote AIST’s R&D projects and capability to work independently under staff guidance. Graduate students in PhD programs Graduate students in master’s programs 2,100 yen/hour (approx. 220,000 yen/month for 14 working days) 1,700 yen/hour (approx. 90,000 yen/month for 7 working days ) 429 Avg. 10-14 days/month Avg. 4-14 days/month 

Candidate Requirements Days of employment Number of graduate students employed (FY 2023) Salary 

## Technical  Training AIST  Research  Assistant  Program 

・Tohoku University 

・Tohoku Gakuin University 

・Yamagata University 

・Fukushima University 

・Hokkaido University 

・Kagawa University 

・The University of Tokushima 

・Hiroshima University 

・Yamaguchi University 

・Kanazawa University 

・Japan Advanced Institute of Science and Technology 

・Kanazawa Institute of Technology 

・Nagoya University 

・Nagoya Institute of Technology 

・Meijo University 

・Daido University 

・Aichi Institute of Technology 

・Chubu University 

・Gifu University 

・Gifu Pharmaceutical University 

・Kyushu University 

・Kyushu Institute of Technology 

・Saga University 

・The University of Kitakyushu 

・Kumamoto University 

・Kagoshima University 

・University of Tsukuba 

・Ibaraki University 

・Utsunomiya University 

・Gunma University 

・Saitama University 

・Chiba University 

・Chiba Institute of Technology 

・Nihon University 

・The University of Tokyo 

・Toho University 

・Tokyo University of Science 

・Tokyo Metropolitan University 

・Tokyo Institute of Technology 

・Sophia University 

・Tokyo University of Agriculture and Technology 

・Rikkyo University 

・Aoyama Gakuin University 

・Meiji University 

・Waseda University 

・Ochanomizu University 

・Shibaura Institute of Technology 

・University of Electro-Communications 

・Tokyo Denki University 

・Tokyo City University 

・Chuo University 

・Nagaoka University of Technology 

・Shinshu University 

・Shizuoka University 

・University of Yamanashi 

・Yokohama National University 

・Yokohama City University 

・Kanagawa Institute of Technology 

・Tokai University 

・Kanto Gakuin University 

・Niigata University of Pharmacy and Life Sciences 

・Kobe University 

・Kwansei Gakuin University 

・Ritsumeikan University 

・Kyoto Institute of Technology 

・Doshisha University 

・University of Fukui 

・Wakayama University 

・Nara Institute of Science and Technology 

・Osaka University 

・Osaka Prefecture University 

・Kansai University 

・Osaka Electro-Communication University 

・Kinki University 

・University of Hyogo 

See page 34 for more details.  ▶︎ 

(as of June 2024) 

●75 universities with partner graduate school agreements 33 32 

The Design School is operated to foster human re-sources who will become co-creation leaders who will create the next society through social implemen-tation of technology. The master course is an 8-month comprehensive course for companies, pub-lic institutions, and AIST staff, while the short and one-session courses are offered exclusively for AIST staff. The outline of the master course is as follows. 

The promotion of innovation requires the verbaliza-tion of the objectives, beliefs, and values of an orga-nization and its members, as well as the raising and co-creation of new values for society. In this pro-gram, each participant verbalized what he or she wanted to accomplish and what actions should be taken to achieve it, and then formed a project team consisting of participants with different affiliations and experiences, and learned through experience to co-create to improve the current situation by explor-ing social issues and finding solutions. As in the real world, the participants were able to confirm and un-derstand the objectives of each team member from a situation with no clear answers, and acquire the atti-tudes and competencies required for “co-creation leaders” who aim for a better society through the so-cial implementation of technology. 

In September, the students visited the Danish De-sign Center, KAOSPILOT, the most exciting business school in Denmark, and ALS ELECTRONICA, a festi-val of art and technology that proposes a future soci-ety. At these places, the students were able to catch up with the latest trends through dialogues with peo-ple engaged in cutting-edge activities, and deepen exchanges through workshops organized by the stu-dents. In addition to strengthening public relations to increase awareness and participation, AIST also worked to enhance the value of the program by ac-quiring certification from the Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry for the Fourth Industrial Revolu-tion Skills Acquisition Course. AIST Innovation School aims to develop research per-sonnel who can contribute to the creation of innovation in society at large. In order to solve diverse social is-sues, it is important to create innovative technologies by integrating ideas and technologies inside and out-side the institute, and key research personnel are needed to promote this process. Therefore, AIST ac-tively accepts postdoctoral researchers and graduate students and provides them with lectures and exercis-es to learn and nurture the three skills: “research skills” to promote social implementation-oriented research, “collaboration skills” to cooperate with researchers in different fields and companies, and “people skills” to communicate and present appropriately. In FY 2023, 16 students enrolled in the “human re-sources for innovation course” for postdoctoral re-searchers, a program consisting of lectures, exercises, and long-term corporate training. In addition, as a training program for graduate students, a six-month “basic research skills development course” was con-ducted online, and 31 students participated in the pro-gram, which included lectures, exercises, and partici-pation in external presentations. 

## AIST  Innovation  School 

> The President’s final lecture

## AIST  Design  School 

●Main Curriculum of the Innovation School  

> 1

Lectures and exercises at AIST 

• Postdoctoral human resources expected by com-panies 

•Intellectual property training 

•Research ethics 

•Companies and industries 

• Examples of AIST research (goal-oriented basic research, applied research, social implementation research, integrated research, standardization, etc.) 

•Research project planning workshop 

• Presentation skills that are understandable to lis-teners regardless of their position or expertise 

•Manners and communication training 

•Exercise on career development 

•Coaching for interdisciplinary collaboration 

•Data science  

> 2

Training at AIST 

•Practice of research in laboratories  

> 3

Corporate training 

(2 months or more, part of the training course of “hu-man resources for innovation”) 

• Understand the concept and approach to research and development in a company, and the impor-tance of cost consciousness and business mind-edness 

• Experiencing the importance of teamwork and col-laboration with other departments Since its opening, the school has accepted a total of more than 700 people in both courses. School gradu-ates are active in a variety of fields, including business, universities, and public research institutions. In FY 2023, we held an event in Tokyo in collaboration with the “Osho Club,” an alumni group organized by gradu-ates of the Innovation School, to grasp the status of their activities and to help current students understand their possible career paths. 

●Expanding the horizons of young researchers 

The school students commented, “Through the lec-tures and communication among school students, I was able to make connections with school students from various universities in different fields of expertise,” “Through research at AIST, I was able to experience cutting-edge research for practical application,” and “During the corporate training, I understood the impor-tance of cost-conscious R&D efforts.” As shown above, the school students' perspectives as research personnel have been broadened. 

●Competencies to be developed 

•Construct a firm axis of self and understand oneself deeply (introspective, axial strength) 

•Awareness of one’s own cognitive limitations and the ability to explore the world from new perspectives (bird’s-eye view, exploration) 

•Through rich dialogue, deeply empathize with and understand others and society (dialogue skills, em-pathy). 

•Co-create new value for society and lead the world (co-creation, execution skills) 

•Attitude to tolerate unanswerable situations (negative capability) 

●Main Curriculum of Design School 

•Dialogue to approach the essence 

•Creative leadership training in collaboration with KAOSPILOT (confirmation concluded in 2019) 

•Development of aspiration, the interface between the individual and society 

•An insight into a possible future by Hitotsubashi Uni-versity professor 

•Idea generation and prototyping by a professor of the University of Tokyo who taught at the Royal Col-lege of Art (RCA) for many years 

•Team project formation by members from different backgrounds and project design through practice, etc. 35 34 

Acceptance of external researchers for joint research 

From domestic corporations, etc. From universities in Japan From private companies in Japan 

2,500 2,000 1,500 1,000 500 0(Persons) 

1,547 398 290 1,194 374 310 1,281 369 341 1,258 405 327 1,474 430 350 

2023 2019 2020 2021 2022 

Number of trainees on technical training 

From domestic corporations 

1,800 1,600 1,400 1,200 1,000 800 600 400 200 0

34 101 1,151 65 32 1,122 20 143 40 122 1,143 46 135 118 1,306 48 

2022 2019 2020 2021 2023 

Joint and commissioned research with companies 

Fund received for joint research Fund received for commissioned research 

01,600 1,400 1,200 1,000 800 600 400 200 0

186.6 

2019 2020 2021 

74.8 89 93 86 84 76.7 

2022 2023 

Number of joint research projects Number of commissioned research projects 41 82 1,281 86 

Number of foreign researchers by country and region (FY 2023) Number of foreign researchers 

Technical trainees Visiting researchers Contract employees Employees 

1,000 900 800 700 600 500 400 300 200 100 0

231 149 288 196 147 210 67 249 153 91 

2022 2023 FY (Persons) 

2019 2020 2021 3,000 80 60 70 50 40 30 20 10 0

26 29 22 26 

2022 2019 2020 2021 

14 53 925 727 

2023 

692 687 865 690 

800 900 700 600 500 400 300 200 100 0

784 

2022 2019 2020 2021 2023 

Number of proposed standards 

International standards Domestic standards 

Number of technology consulting 

*Numbers in parentheses are those with employee status. From domestic companies From universities in Japan From overseas institutions 

147 201 59 247 148 220 91 243 

600 500 400 300 200 100 0

70 464 73 487 64 427 69 429 57 436 

2022 2023 2019 2020 2021 

Number of AIST staff to international standardization activities 

Experts Chairs, committee managers, convenors. 

80 70 60 50 40 30 20 10 0

11 37 16 51 12 44 13 35 16 35 

2022 2023 2019 2020 2021 

Number of cross-appointment program users 

Acceptances Temporary transfers 

340 320 300 280 260 240 220 200 180 160 140 120 100 80 60 40 20 

101 10.2 338.3 8.9 8.6 9.8 20 5

total 

# 702 

China 

210 (38 )

Korea 

63 (28 )

India 

51 (2)

Asia, etc. 

151 (31 )United States of America 

29 (5)

Americas, etc. 

26 (6)

France 

64 (10 )

Europe, etc. 

70 (19 )

Oceania, Middle East, Africa 

38 (9)

1,063 1,019 877 1,086 1,245 19.0 77 

FY FY FY FY FY (100 million yen) (Cases) (Cases) (Cases) FY (Persons) (Persons) (Cases) FY 

# R&D Promotion Data 

## R&D  related  data 37 36 

> Meaningful work Inter-organizational collaboration and communication Trust in management Opportunities for growth Enriched work environment Supportive management
> Survey period Respondents Overall response rate Questioned content

Late December 2023–mid-February 2024 Regular and contract employees (including seconded staff) 75 ％

(1) Meaningful work (2) Supportive management (3) Enriched work environment (4) Opportunities for growth (5) Trust in management (6) Inter-organizational collaboration and communication 

3.49 3.65 3.40 3.06 3.22 2.87 43.9 %● Positive ● Neutral ● Negative 

32.0 ％

24.1 ％

Overall Score Last year 3.39 （0.14 ↑） 

# 3.53 

## Basic  Approach  to  Human  Resource  Management 

Japan is currently facing a variety of social challeng-es, such as energy and environmental constraints, low birthrate and aging population, disaster prevention, and countermeasures against new coronavirus infec-tions, for which solutions are strongly needed. Looking at the world, a major transformation is taking place in which digitalization is spreading to all aspects of soci-ety through the development and social implementa-tion of technologies such as IoT, big data, and AI. 

AIST is required to utilize its comprehensive capabili-ties to promote active and interdisciplinary research and development in response to increasingly complex social issues and extremely rapid changes of the times, in other words, to create innovations that contribute to “solving social issues and strengthening industrial competitiveness” as stated in its mission. 

In order for AIST to continue to be an entity capable of achieving this mission in accordance with the fifth management policy, it is essential that AIST significant-ly strengthen its innovation creation function and play a central role in the innovation ecosystem of Japan as a whole. To do this, we need diverse and highly skilled human resources, including those who conduct out-standing research, those who create synergy effects, and those who promote social implementation. 

To this end, AIST is promoting human resource acqui-sition (recruitment), personnel evaluation, career path/ talent development, and the creation of a comfortable workplace, with the two pillars of improving human re-source capabilities and enhancing engagement. 

AIST has approximately 2,200 researchers, one of the largest in Japan, and approximately 700 research sup-porters. Including external researchers involved in spe-cific research projects, more than 10,000 people are involved in world-leading research on a daily basis. 

In order to attract even more diverse human resources in the future, we have recently begun hiring highly spe-cialized technical and engineering personnel with dif-ferent perspectives and backgrounds. In order to pro-vide an environment in which each of these diverse employees can maximize their abilities, we have estab-lished a personnel evaluation system to fairly assess those who take on challenges and support autono-mous career development. We also promote the devel-opment of an environment that facilitates active in-volvement of diverse human resources, including the promotion of flexible work styles. 

By hiring a diverse workforce and implementing initia-tives focused on improving human resource capabili-ties and engagement, we aim to improve the perfor-mance of the institute as a whole, enhance the value of AIST, and provide valuable results to society. 

Through these efforts, we will continue to strengthen our R&D system and contribute to the development of highly skilled research personnel in Japan. To improve organizational performance, it is neces-sary to make the workplace a place where all staff members are motivated to work, in other words, to improve engagement. In order to understand the state of engagement in the organization and link it to improvement measures, we started an engagement survey in FY 2021. 

We intend to conduct an engagement survey of reg-ular and contract employees to identify organization-al strengths and challenges, and to further improve engagement. We will continue to conduct the survey over time and make fixed-point observations. 

The results of the six topics in the question content showed the highest score for “supportive manage-ment” and the lowest score for “inter-organizational collaboration and communication.” 

While the strengths of “high expectations and satis-faction with work content” and “good communication within their departments” were observed, it was con-firmed that there were problems in “opportunities to express opinions when new rules are decided” and “cross-departmental information collaboration.” We believe that this is largely due to the impact of various organizational reforms within AIST in response to changes in the external environment. In the future, we will aim to communicate more carefully than before by combining a top-down approach, in which infor-mation is disseminated from management and cor-porate departments, and a bottom-up approach, in which measures considered at the field level are picked up. Items that improved from the previous year include those related to personnel evaluation, such as evalu-ation validity and process evaluation, as well as ca-reer-related items such as career paths and career support environment. The reasons for the score im-provement can be attributed to the introduction of an appraisal salary increase system, which determines the range of salary increase based on performance, instead of the conventional uniform salary increase, and to the introduction of a career plan survey to pro-mote individual autonomy. However, scores are still low, and we will continue to work to improve them. 

## Engagement  Survey  Results 

# Human Capital Management Basic Concept 

●Basic Approach to Human Resource Management 

Personnel evaluation system 

Improvement of human resources Increased engagement Talent acquisition (recruitment) 

> Fair evaluation of those who took on the challenge Recruiting talented and diverse personnel

Career paths and talent development 

> Support for autonomous career development

Creating a comfortable workplace 

> Creating an environment in which diverse individuals can maximize their potential Creating time for self-improvement by improving work-life balance Open work environment where appropriate feedback can be shared By identifying strengths and areas for improvement, providing opportunities for increasing self-awareness and growth

DEI (diversity, equity, and inclusion) 

●Engagement Survey 39 38 

DEI Human Resources Division internal organizations DEI Promotion Committee external 

> (external experts + in-house members) Research and education institutions and private companies

National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology 

> report cooperation proposal measure implementation

AIST believes that promoting Diversity, Equity, and In-clusion will enhance the value of AIST. In order to cre-ate innovative ideas that lead to innovation, it is neces-sary for diverse people to maximize their individual qualities and abilities. To this end, it is important to gather a diverse range of people, including those who have not been part of AIST in the past, provide fair op-portunities to them, and create an environment where each individual can work with a sense of unity while demonstrating their individuality. The DEI Human Resources Division was established in January 2024 by integrating the Human Resources Division and the Diversity and Equal Opportunity Office in order to more strongly promote DEI. It aims for hu-man resource management based on DEI, and speedy management of human resource measures. The mission of the DEI Human Resources Division is to build an environment where everyone working at AIST is respected and can demonstrate their abilities to the fullest. We aim to improve AIST's performance by promoting DEI through recruitment of diverse human resources and support for career building, just evalua-tion of those who have taken on challenges, and devel-opment of an environment where diverse human re-sources can demonstrate their full potential. 

The DEI Promotion Committee, led by the DEI Human Resources Division and including outside experts, will promote DEI while incorporating third-party perspec-tives. 

# Diversity 

## Basic  Approach  to  DEI  Promotion DEI  Promotion  Structure 

## Message from the person in charge 

## Major  Action  Plans  and  Initiatives  for  Diversity  Promotion 

•In place of the previous teleworking system for childcare support, a new teleworking system was introduced in May 2023 to enable more flexible work styles. Currently, teleworking is taking root, with approximately 38% of regular employees using the teleworking system in December 2023. 

Promote work-life balance support measures and workplace environments that enable each and every AIST employee to work in harmony with their work life and reduce career loss due to life events. 

> Target

Realization of work-life balance 1

> Main implementation status in FY 2023

•The percentage of female managers was 12.7% (56/442) (as of March 31, 2024). 

•The ratio of female researchers is 14.2% (18/127) (FY 2023 entrants), and the 5th term cumulative total of female researchers is expected to be 20.5%. 

Promote efforts to motivate and raise the awareness of employees and improve the workplace environment to support the promotion of women to management positions. Promote proactive public relations activities and initiatives tailored to the actual situation in each research area to recruit female researchers. Aim to maintain the ratio of female managers at 12% by the end of the period (March 31, 2025) and the ratio of female researchers at 18% cumulatively (April 1, 2020–March 31, 2025). (Targets in the Action Plan for the Act on the Promotion of Women’s Active Engagement in Professional Life ) 

> Target

Promotion of female employees and expansion of employment of female researchers 2

> Main implementation status in FY 2023

•Achieved the legally mandated employment rate of 2.6% in FY 2023. Eight new employees were hired through open recruitment at Hello Work and referrals from employment support centers for persons with disabilities. 

•We have improved facilities including installation of handrails, upgraded stairway evacuation vehicles for the physically challenged, and eliminated steps in the sidewalks of the roads in the premises to create abarrier-free environment that makes it easier for employees with disabilities to work. 

To further support people with disabilities so that they can play an active role as members of society by creating a comfortable work environment for t h e m a n d p r o m o t i n g t h e i r e m p l o y m e n t i n compliance with the legally mandated employment rate. 

> Target

Support for the performance of people with disabilities 3

> Main implementation status in FY 2023

•The percentage of foreign nationals hired for research positions in FY 2023 was 13.8% (18/130). •In addition to holding Japanese language seminars for foreign researchers and host employees, Japanese language classes were held online to support their daily lives, with 40 participants, including foreign researchers affiliated with regional research bases. In addition, the AIC Community Café was held five times as a place for foreign researchers to make connections with other employees. To support the recruitment and acceptance of excellent foreign researchers, AIST will increase awareness of AIST among foreign researchers by, for example, preparing information for foreign researchers on the English version of the official website. 

> Target

Support for foreign nationals 4  

> Main implementation status in FY 2023
> ●Chikako Yoneyama
> (Director, DEI Human Resources Division, General Affairs Headquarters)

AIST is one of the largest research institutes in Japan with approximately 2,200 researchers, producing the world's most advanced research on a daily basis. Needless to say, we believe that human resources are the most important factor in producing research results based on the AIST vision and in promot-ing social implementation and intellectual infrastructure development. We will continue to respect diversity and build an environment where every-one working at AIST can maximize their abilities. This will create a virtuous cycle in which the skills of human resources are utilized to the fullest extent, and the individual strengths brought out will im-prove the performance of the institute as a whole, leading to further utiliza-tion of human resources. 41 40 

# Human Resource Development 

● Expand employment of master’s degree holders and create a training and support plan for master’s research employees 

The number of students enrolling in graduate school doctoral programs in Japan has been on a long-term downward trend since peaking in 2003. Therefore, while continuing to maintain and strengthen our re-search base by recruiting excellent doctoral person-nel, we have begun recruiting master's degree hold-ers for research positions in all research fields, etc. from the fall of 2023 as a new measure to secure hu-man resources. 

In conjunction with the expansion of employment of master's degree researchers, AIST established the “AIST Training and Support Plan for Master’s Re-search Employees” in FY 2023 to foster independent research personnel in collaboration with universities through a process in which hired master's degree re-searchers obtain a doctoral degree on a related topic in addition to their research at AIST. In this plan, the acquisition of a doctoral degree is positioned as a job, and master's graduate researchers study in the doctoral program while working at AIST, and AIST pays all expenses to acquire a doctoral degree. 

Through these efforts, we will continue to strength-en our R&D system and contribute to the develop-ment of highly skilled research personnel in Japan. 

●Basic idea of internal human resource development 

Internal human resource development is an important measure to support the achievement of AIST's mission, the sustainable growth and innovation of the institute as a whole. AIST has established diversity, equity, and inclusion as its basic principles, and has created an environment in which all AIST employees can maximize their individual abilities. Since AIST needs diverse and highly skilled human resources to achieve its mission, we respect individual autonomy rather than uniform career development, and have established a training system and various career paths to foster diverse human resources. In addition, we are working to create a culture of nur-turing human resources by breaking down barriers be-tween job types and departments and assigning per-sonnel based on their aptitude. Recently, we have established a plan for developing researchers who have finished master’s courses. 

●Training system 

AIST provides training in four areas: “hierarchy-spe-cific training” to acquire the knowledge and abilities required for job performance at specific job levels; “field-specific training” to acquire knowledge and skills in specific fields, improve job performance, and design career paths; “self-development training” to provide opportunities for self-development through self-im-provement and practical work; and “basic training for staff” to ensure a thorough understanding of AIST's organizational ethics and rules. AIST has provided training for a total of over 13,000 AIST employees. 

In addition to the above, we also provide training specific to each department (e.g., Research DX train-ing). 

●Diverse career paths 

In addition to providing a variety of training pro-grams, we started a career path model example and career plan survey in FY 2023 with the aim of foster-ing awareness of autonomous career development and promoting talent management. 

In the career path model, we categorized the human resources to be aimed for into three categories and visualized a typical career path for each category with examples. 

In addition, the survey on reassignment preferences, which had previously been conducted separately for each job category, has been consolidated into a sin-gle “career plan survey” for all employees, and up-dated to include content that will make them even more aware of autonomous career design. 

We believe that by this the individual autonomy of diverse human resources is respected, and it con-tributes to the improvement of each employee’s en-gagement and the realization of management poli-cies. 

## Internal  Human  Resource  Development (Age) 

> 40 45 55 50 35 30 25
> Veteran employee

Improvement of mindset formation and engagement at each level of hierarchy Self-development Understanding AIST rules Career development and acquisition of professional skills (Human resource management policy exercise)   

> Mid-career employee  Young & newcomers
> Career design training (at age 54) Training for mid-career research staff (career training: at age 44) Mid-career staff training (10 years of employment) Regional research base training for young staff Newly hired staff training OJT
> Newly hired administrative FU training Young research FU training Training for chief clerks, etc.
> OJT leader training Regional dispatch training Dispatch training in Japan Overseas training Research administrator training Research unit director training Graduate school dispatch training Basic management training Entrepreneurship training Digital technology and literacy training Basic IP training Basic training for project research human resources Science communication training Coaching training Self-organized training Organizational management human resource training I Organizational management human resource training II Individualized programs according to human resource portfolios (specialized training in each department, on-the-job training, training at other ministries) Subsidy system (language and qualification acquisition) Basic training for staff (e-learning) Information security training Compliance Training
> Hierarchy-specific training Self-development training Field-specific training

About 1 to 2 years after admission Research conducted at AIST 

> Join AIST as a research scientist with a master's degree

Learn how to be a researcher at AIST, basic research skills, etc. 

Up to 10 years* Participate in joint research between the university and AIST, and enter a doctoral program on a related topic 

Obtain a doctoral degree as “work” while working. 

After obtaining a doctoral degree Continue research at AIST 

Aim to “create the world’s most advanced technology” as an AIST researcher 

> *Obtain a doctoral degree within 10 years of entering AIST and within 5 years of commencing studies

By trainiang Purpose 

Hierarchy-specific training Field-specific training To acquire the knowledge, abilities, etc. required for job performance at each specific level. Example: Training for newly hired staff, training for young staff at regional research bases, training for mid-career staff To acquire the knowledge, skills, etc. in specific fields (industry–academia–government collaboration, intellectual property, human resources, etc.) to improve one's ability to perform one's duties and design a career path. Examples: Basic intellectual property training, entrepreneurship training, digital technology and literacy training, training for research managers, training for graduate school dispatch 

By trainiang Purpose 

Self-development training Basic training for staff To provide opportunities for self-development through self-study or practical work. Example: Self-planned training To ensure awareness of AIST’s organizational ethics and rules. Example: AIST overview, management and utilization of research results, labor management training 

123

〈Career path model 〉

“Research implementation related” to conduct high quality research, expand research presence and social implementation 

“Social implementation promotion related” to promote social dissemination of research results 

“Management related” to formulate organizational and research policies and strategies, and manage the institute 

●Human resource development system chart 

●Training list 

(Persons) 

FY2019 

Research position Of which, master’s degree holders 

94 8

FY2020 

81 6

FY2021 

82 7

FY2022 

97 9

FY2023 

128 7

FY2024 

> (only those who started wor on April 1)

130 18 

●Number of employees hired in the past 5 years 43 42 

● Safety and Health Committee and distribution of “Accidents and Safety and Health Information” 

The Safety and Health Committee meetings attended by labor and management representatives are held monthly to discuss safety and health issues. Each month, “Accidents and Safety and Health Informa-tion,” which includes information on past accidents, hazard prediction training, and hazard experience train-ing, is streamed over the intranet. By making it manda-tory for all employees to view online streaming, we work on increasing safety awareness. 

●Establishment of Safety and Health Guidelines 

Safety and Health Guidelines set out precautions on handling hazardous chemicals and high-pressure gas cylinders, disposal of research wastewater, fire, and di-saster prevention. 

Serving as the basis for employee safety education and for laboratory work, these guidelines are reviewed and revised as needed. 

●Emergency preparedness 

AIST conducts disaster, fire, and other security drills so that we can promptly respond to emergencies such as disasters and accidents, thereby minimizing damage. We also perform safety confirmation drills, using our “safety confirmation system*” for quick and smooth grasping of the safety of employees. 

To ensure a means of communication with each re-gional research base in the event of a disaster, we also conduct emergency communication drills, using Micro-soft Teams and emergency radiotelephones installed at those bases. As part of preparedness for disasters such as large-scale earthquakes, we stockpile food, rescue equipment, and other emergency supplies which are inspected and refreshed on a regular basis. AIST conducts ergonomic research involving human subjects, and medical research carried out in compliance with our Ethical Guidelines for Medical and Biological Research Involving Human Subjects. 

In FY 2023, we implemented 164 research projects in-volving ergonomic experiments and 109 medical research cases. 

Regarding an ergonomic experiment, the experimental protocol is reviewed based on opinions of the Committee on Ergonomic Experiments, which consists of external members, in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki* to ensure the safety and scientific validity of the experi-ment. Likewise, a medical research experiment is re-viewed in accordance with ethical guidelines based on the opinions of the Bioethics Committee consisting of ex-ternal members. 

When an experiment is performed, its participants are given thorough oral and written explanations of the details of the experiment and of their right to revoke consent. In this way, we ensure that their human rights and dignity are protected. 

# Human rights Safety and health Many people work at AIST, including officers, permanent employees and contract employees, as well as temporary employees, visiting researchers, technical trainees, contractors, visitors participating in industry–academia– government programs, and visitors participating in international programs. Everyone performs their duties with the awareness that it is important to have an attitude of respect and support for each other, regardless of title or position. As would be expected in laboratories, AIST uses substances and equipment that may affect the human health and the environment, such as various chemical substances, high-pressure gases, radioisotopes, genetically modified organisms, nanomaterials, laser equipment, and various experimental equipment. Accordingly, AIST creates a work environment in which all people working there can do so in a safe and healthy manner. 

## Protecting  Human  Rights  in  Research 

* Subtitled “Ethical Principles for Medical Research Involving Human Subjects,” this is a code of conduct regarding human subjects adopted by the 18th World Medical Association General Assembly in Helsinki. Medical researchers have established this rule to regulate themselves with regard to medical research involving human subjects. 

*In the event of a disaster, the safety confirmation system automatically sends bulk safety confirmation emails to executives and employees. It automatically collects the results and displays them on the web. 

Harassment stains a person’s personality and hurts the dignity of the person being harassed and causes emo-tional distress and disadvantage. Not only the person ha-rassed but also those who learn of the presence of ha-rassment may suffer from reduced motivation to work, and the loss such as adverse effects on the results of re-search and resignation of talented people can be immea-surable. AIST has internal rules in place and provides training to make the workplace free of harassment. In addition, training is provided for counselors at each research bases, etc., on the prevention of harassment and how to respond when consulting on harassment. 

●Harassment prevention measures 

•AIST has in place rules for handling harassment and has defined procedures for the prevention of harassment. •In addition to conducting training on harassment pre-vention in the basic training for all employees, we also hold a seminar on harassment prevention targeting all employees to enhance awareness. AIST provides coun-selors placed at AIST work sites with training on how to prevent harassment and provide counseling for harass-ment victims. 

●Counseling system 

Each research base has workplace harassment coun-selors. The counselors work to counsel, investigate, and mediate so that harassment victims are not distressed and suffer alone as a result of their experience. If the line of management or a counselor cannot address a harass-ment issue, it is possible to file to the Compliance Promo-tion Committee for the recovery from the disadvantages suffered. The committee reviews the issue and recom-mends the appropriate actions, which are then taken. 

In addition, we have established an external counseling organization and made counseling by email, telephone or face to face or online interview possible to make it easier to seek counsel and protect privacy. 

## Harassment  Prevention Occupational  Safety  and  Health 

●Training programs provided on harassment in FY 2023 

Training program, etc. Objectives Trainees Number of participants (FY 2023) 

Harassment prevention seminar Basic training for staff (e-learning) Newly hired staff training Participants learn about the basics of harassment and how to prevent it. As part of acquiring basic knowledge of AIST’s organizational ethics and rules, participants learn the basics and preventive measures for harassment. As part of the training for necessary awareness, basic knowledge, and basic skills to perform their work, employees learn the basics and preventive measures for harassment. The program provides knowledge on harassment prevention and interviewing skills as a counselor. AIST employees who wish to attend Persons working at AIST New AIST employees Harassment counselors Training for harassment counselors and others (online training and e-learning) 

> *Including basic training for foreign employees

For general staff: 417 For managers: 188 197 6,874 29 123(Views) 

●Flow of the counseling process  

> Person who seeks counseling Lawyer/specialist physician/ external expert Third party
> Reporting Decision Instruction Counseling Collaboration
> External professional organizations (outsourcing) Employee who is deemed to be the offender Offender Staff Office Supervisor (superior)
> Hearings as needed Counseling Hearings as needed Guidance and advice
> Harassment counselors (more than one) Chief harassment counselor
> Reporting *If the consulter wishes. Counseling Hearing and advice

*Those who seek counseling can include people other than the employees involved (i.e. they can be the employee who is deemed to be the offender, the employee who is deemed to be the victim, or someone else, such as a colleague or a supervisor). *Counseling can be sought by means of a face-to-face meeting, telephone call, email, letter, or fax. (contact by email, telephone, or online with external specialized organizations) *Seeking counseling causes no disadvantage. *Adequate consideration is given to the protection of privacy, and any information acquired in the course of counseling is kept strictly confidential. (Persons) 

FY2021 FY2023 FY2022 

Sexual harassment Power harassment 

Total 

218 

20 

318 

21 

115 

16 

●Harassment counseling cases Number of people who used the various leave programs (Persons) 

Number of employees (Persons) Number of executives in FY 2023 (Persons) 

Number of staff in managerial positions Newly hired in FY 2023 Change in employment rates for people with disabilities Percentage of people with disabilities remaining at work Employment rate by disability type 

(Persons) (Persons)                                  

> FY2019 FY2020 FY2021 FY2022 FY2023 FY2019 FY2020 FY2021 FY2022 FY2023
> Male Total Men Total Total Men Researcher Administrative staff Administrative staff Full-time Part-time Women Women Rate Rate Women
> Full-time Part-time Women Researcher Administrative staff
> Total Men Researcher Administrative staff Women Researcher Administrative staff
> Female Male Female Male Female Male Female Male Female

Leave to care for sick children Special childcare leave Extended childcare leave* Nursing care leave Extended nursing care leave* *Number of employees starting the leave within the fiscal year *Number of employees starting the leave within the fiscal year *Total number 

Number of employees who used child daycare services     

> Employees Employees Employees Employees Employees Contract employees Contract employees Contract employees Contract employees Contract employees

AIST Tsukuba AIST Chubu AIST Kansai Private child daycare facilities and babysitters All employees Executives Of foreign nationality With PhD FY2023 FY2022 FY2021 FY2020 FY2019 FY2023 FY2022 FY2021 FY2020 FY2019 

'

> Researcher

(Persons)     

> % of June 1 of each year
> Statutory employment rate Statutory employment rate Statutory employment rate
> FY2020 FY2021 FY2022 FY2023 FY2024

Number of people at the beginning of the fiscal year Number of people who left AIST within the fiscal year Employee turnover rate Employee retention rate     

> FY2019 FY2020 FY2021 FY2022 FY2023

Mentally challenged 

35 %  

> (of which those with developmental disorder:

6%)

Intellectually challenged 

18 %

Physically challenged 

46 %

> as of June 1, 2024

Personnel data (Persons) 

> Visitors related to industry–academia– government and international partnerships Emeritus advisor, emeritus councilor, joint appointed fellow AISol employees Researchers
> of which engineering human resources
> Administrative employees Executives Contract employees
> Post-doctoral Technical staff Invited researchers Research assistants
> *As of March 31, 2024. However, number of visitors related to industry–academia–government and international partnerships is of FY 2023. *Retirees include those who retire or those whose term of employment has expired.

45 44 

# Data relating to human resources 

●Outline of return to work program 

Submission of medical certificate of absence from work Start of leave of absence Return to work Follow-up after returning to work 

●Meetings with industrial physician twice a month (for 6 months) 

Care during leave and follow-up during preparation for return-to-work 

●Monthly meetings with industrial physician 

●Implementation of return-to-work support plan *Depending on the length of leave, etc. 

General and special medical examinations are per-formed in spring and autumn every year. We strive to increase the percentage of employees who undergo medical examinations by raising awareness that they are required to take these examinations, including health screening. As follow-up care after medical ex-aminations, an industrial physician and industrial health staff provide health advice detecting and preventing employees’ health disorders and illnesses in their early stages. In response to employees’ diverse needs, we also provide health information through health support seminars to raise health awareness, and thus provide support to improve the performance of individual em-ployees and AIST as a whole. To address mental health issues, we have developed a unified Mental Fitness Program in accordance with the directives and guidelines of the Ministry of Health, Labor, and Welfare. Four programs based on the Men-tal Fitness Program are implemented in a continuous and planned way. They focus on (1) self-care; (2) line care through implementation of education and training and seminars; (3) care by in-house industrial health staff and others through face-to-face counseling with an industrial physician and industrial health staff and support in returning to work; and (4) care by external resources through the use of external mental health organizations. We use a stress check system (once a year) to en-courage awareness of stress situations of staff and to promote workplace improvement to create a comfort-able workplace. By doing this, we are making efforts to strengthen measures to prevent staff from suffering mental health disorder. For the entire AIST, the average stress score has been lower than the national average since the stress check was introduced. 

## Health  Management  and  Mental  Health 

●Preventing occupational accidents 

In the event of a work-related accident, an investiga-tion and analyses are conducted to determine the cause, and recurrence-prevention measures are imple-mented. Information on accidents is communicated to all employees through the “Accident and Health and Safety Information” to prevent similar accidents. AIST holds a National Safety Information Liaison Meeting connecting the Environment and Safety Divi-sion with each research base, using a web conference system, to share information on accidents and near-miss incidents. The aim is to share details of recur-rence prevention measures and thus improve safety and health. The number of occupational accidents in FY 2023 was the same as in FY 2022, and none of them were serious. In order to prevent accidents, we provide safe-ty education to make sure that appropriate protective equipment is worn, prepare work procedure manuals and risk assessment for high-risk tasks, conduct haz-ard prediction training, and hazard experience training, and enhance sensibility by conducting risk prediction activities to foster safety culture. 

●Safety education 

AIST accepts many researchers, engineers and stu-dents from businesses, universities and the like for co-operative research, technical training and so forth. With a view to preventing accidents, AIST runs various safe-ty training programs and classes, both for employees and for visitors from other organizations. Safety educa-tion provided when employees are hired and when there is a change in work details is managed by an in-ternal safety education management system, which al-lows learning history and program contents to be checked as needed. 47 46 

Special medical examination Permanent employees Contract employees Total Spring 

676/678 492/492 322/322 17/17 326/326 8/8 3/3 702/702 449/449 71/71 22/22 165/165 16/16 2/2 1,378/1,380 941/941 393/393 39/39 491/491 24/24 6/6 

Permanent employees Contract employees Total Autumn 

670/670 485/485 319/319 18/18 58/58 0/0 3/3 722/722 465/465 74/74 25/25 34/34 0/0 3/3 1,392/1,392 950/950 393/393 43/43 92/92 0/0 6/6 

Trends in the number of occupational accidents Frequency rate of accidents resulting in absences from work Number of permanent and contract employees (including temporary employees) who underwent special medical examinations in FY 2023 

* no. of examinees/ total no. of applicable employees    

> 510 15 20 25 0
> (Cases)
> 2023 2019 2020 2021 2022

Number and percentage of permanent and contract employees who underwent periodic medical examinations (including health screening), 2019 ‒2023 

(1) Employees (excluding (2)) * 1(2) Contract employees * 2

99.7% 2,569/2,577 99.8% 2,986/2,992 99.9% 2,399/2,401 99.7% 3,021/3,030 99.9% 2,409/2,411 99.7% 2,975/2,984 99.5% 2,426/2,437 99.6% 2,982/2,994 

2019 FY 2020 2021 2022 

99.7% 2,459/2,466 99.7% 2,889/2,899 

2023 

Top: percentage of examinees Bottom: no. of examinees/ total no. of eligible employees * 1 Excluding those on extended childcare leave and sick leave and those on long leave due to overseas relocation * 2 The target is short-term members of mutual aid association. 

Main education and training programs and workshops in FY 2023 

19 32 1,893 1,021 292 251 434 94/385 432 12-----25/--

Hazard experience training (dangers of electrical accidents) Course on skills required for a Health O ffi cer's License Courses on specialized safety (waste) (e-learning) Education and training for recombinant DNA experiments (e-learning) Education and training for animal experiments (e-learning) Education and training for life science and medical experiments (e-learning) Education and training for ergonomic experiments (e-learning) Specific safety training course (radiation) (online workshop / e-learning) Specific safety training course (X-ray) (e-learning) 

Program No. of sessions No. of participants 

2019 FY FY 2020 2021 2022 2019 2020 2021 2022 

Other activities of health management 

(Persons) 

Number of employees with significant findings from AIST’s medical examinations, and number of employees who received face-to-face counseling 

169 4.0% 849 20.0% 157 3.8% 857 20.7% 159 3.7% 872 20.6% 140 3.1% 817 18.3% 136 3.4% 896 22.6% 142 84.0% 766 90.2% 129 82.1% 789 92.1% 130 81.8% 779 89.3% 121 86.4% 726 88.9% 

2019 2020 2021 2022 

119 87.5% 842 94.0% 

2023 

Definition of criteria: A: no anomalies; B: mild abnormalities but no interference with daily life; C: follow-up examination required; D: health advice required; E: treatment required; F: counseling required (applicable only to special medical examinations) 

198 82 145 55 

video streaming 

**

146 

video streaming video streaming video streaming video streaming video streaming video streaming video streaming video streaming Exercises to refresh Walking lessons Emergency first-aid workshops Mental health seminars 

183 119 --239 43 --214 50 

video streaming 

-246 -

video streaming 

video streaming 

2023 2023 

video streaming video streaming video streaming 

308 --

video streaming 

Workshops (training) Anger management workshops dental health Food and nutrition seminar 

Grand total 

AIST Tsukuba/Tokyo Regional research bases 

2019 FY 2020 2021 2022 

Flu shots (at AIST) 

(Persons) 

1,962 640 

2,602 

2,000 578 

2,578 

00

02023 

00

0

00

0

65

> 2.00 2.50 1.50 1.00 0.50 02023

2019 FY 2020 2021 2022 

Number of face-to-face health consultations in FY 2019–2023 

(Cases) 

921 525 5,599 

7,045 

1,439 573 5,496 

7,508 

727 768 4,338 

5,833 2023 

954 740 3,966 

5,660 

736 *

777 *

5,414 

6,927 

* Classification has been readjusted. * Due to Covid-19, the event was not held. (Exercises to refresh were conducted via video streaming.) 

2  

> 2022 2019 2020 2021

0.10 1.95 2.09 2.14 0.30 0.40 0.10 0.00 1.80 2.06 

Calculation method AIST: (number of applications for compensation for absence from work due to industrial accidents/total number of working hours) x 10 ⁶

All industries: (number of deaths and injuries due to occupational accidents/total number of working hours) x 10 ⁶

*The occupational injury rate for all industries is calculated by limiting the number of casualties to those who lost at least one day of work or lost part of their body or its function due to industrial accidents. 

261155 3364811

Other External wounds Falling over Exposures to chemicals  

> FY FY

AIST All industries 

Medical examination for organic solvent poisoning prevention Medical examination for specified-chemical poisoning Medical examination for ionizing radiation exposure Medical examination for lead poisoning Medical examination for laser injury Medical examination for pneumoconiosis Medical examination for asbestos exposure 

(1) Number of employees with significant findings, and their percentages of the total (2) Number of employees who received counseling, and their percentages to employees with significant findings With significant findings (D-diagnosis) With significant findings (E-diagnosis) 

2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 FY FY 

With significant findings (D-diagnosis) With significant findings (E-diagnosis) Industrial physician Physical Mental Industrial health staff 

Total 

video streaming /60 

# Health and safety data + Health management data 49 48 

AIST delivers the results of its research and development to society with the aim of solving social issues and realizing a sustainable society. In the process of research and development, AIST conducts its business activities in compliance with laws and regulations, while giving due consideration to environmental safety. Environmental safety 

Efforts regarding environmental and safety considerations are promoted under the following system. 

## Implementation  Structure  of  Policies  Related  to  Environment  and  Safety 

As a unique initiative, AIST streams “Accidents and Safety and Health Information” (Summary of Inci-dents and Near Misses (Hiyari-Hatto) and Safety and Health Management) to all employees via the intranet and conducts a monthly “Environmental and Safety Self-check” to check the status of their own safety and health efforts after viewing the information. We implement the PDCA (Plan, Do, Check, Act) cy-cle which includes viewing summary of incidents and near misses and safety and health management, im-plementing safety and health efforts, conducting en-vironmental and safety self-checks, and improving safety education based on inspection results, to en-sure the succession of safety and health know-how, reduce potential risks, and prevent accidents. 

## Environmental  and  Safety  Self-check 

## Overview  of  Environmental  Burdens 

We also set a policy for promoting the procurement of eco-friendly goods and services in accordance with the Act on Promotion of Procurement of Eco-friendly Goods and Services by the State and Other Entities and the Green Purchasing Act. ( ): results of FY 2023 

*Used energy for FY 2023 is calculated according to the revised energy conservation law. 

INPUT Energy 1,979 TJ （2,073 TJ） 

213,001 MWh (199,288 MWh) 2,229 MWh (2,179 MWh) 

・Electricity 

・Renewable energy 15 kg (147 kg) 7 kg (21 kg) 

OUTPUT REUSE / RECYCLE 

720,000 m³ (872,000 m³) 913 cases (953 cases) 

・Recycled water 

・Equipment, materials, etc. 

Aquatic emissions Water quality Atmospheric emissions 

・Sewage discharges 

・Public waters 102,000 t-CO 2(102,000 t-CO 2)

・BOD 

・COD 

・Suspended substances 26 kg (157 kg) 125 kg (317 kg) 53 kg (310 kg) 

・Nitrogen 

・Phosphorus 

・Greenhouse gases 

・NOx 

・SOx 

Waste 

・Specially controlled industrial waste 

・Industrial waste 

・Non-industrial waste 

313 t (369 t) 1,383 t (1,552 t) 527 t (497 t) 921,000 m³ (766,000 m³) 12,000 m³ (13,000 m³) (generated at AIST) 

Water resources 

7 kL (9 kL) 10 TJ (13 TJ) 

・Liquid fuels 

・Purchased energy 

・City gas 

・Propane gas 

2,913,000 m³ (2,903,000 m³) 830 kg (650 kg) 

・Clean water 

・Groundwater 

1.66 t (1.87 t) 0.01 t (0.01 t) 8,000 m³ 

> （8,000 m³）

929,000 m³ 

> （740,000 m³）

General Affairs Headquarters President Facilities and Safety Headquarters 

Procurement Division 

・Green procurement policy 

Environment and Safety Division/ Tsukuba Safety Management Division 

・Environment and Safety Policy 

See pages 52–55 for more details.  ▶︎ 

AIST has established the Charter of Environment and Safety to make steady progress in environmental consider-ations and other initiatives. Under the Charter of Environment and Safety, we have also established the Environment and Safety Policy, sharing within AIST that “global and local environmental conservation” and “ensuring the safety and health of all AIST employees” are important issues. 

## Environmental  Policy 

We seek to reduce the consumption of energy and resources and the generation of waste, and thus aim to reduce loads on the environment. We seek to prevent pollution and work-related accidents, to take prompt and appropriate actions in the event of an emergency, and to prevent the spread of damage. We are conducting activities to ensure environmental conservation, safety and health with the participation of all members of AIST; we seek continuous improvement. We actively disclose environmental, safety and health information by publishing environmental reports and disclosing informa-tion to promote communication with society. We proactively conduct research that contributes to conservation of the environment and the development of a healthy and safe society. 

1

We comply with laws, regulations, ordinances, and agreements, and strive to protect the environment and to improve health and safety. 

23456

Environment and Safety Policy 

In order to appropriately manage the wide variety of chemical substances used in our research activities, we have introduced the Chemicals and Gas Manage-ment System that enables us to manage the amount of hazardous chemicals and high-pressure gases we possess and use. Through this system, we are also able to ascertain the type and quantity of chemical substances in our possession, and ensure that we comply with laws and regulations and that we prop-erly control the quantity possessed. 

●Response to PRTR system 

Based on the PRTR system* and ordinances and guidelines of some local governments, we monitor the amount of relevant chemical substances released into the atmosphere and transferred as sewage and waste. For FY 2023, we reported on hydrogen fluo-ride and its water-soluble salts, ferric chloride, N,N-dimethylacetamide subjected to the PRTR sys-tem, methanol and chloroform under the Tokyo Met-ropolitan ordinance, volatile organic compounds (VOC) in accordance with the Osaka Prefectural ordi-nance, and ammonia, nitric acid, ammonium hydrox-ide, potassium hydroxide, and hydrogen peroxide in accordance with Fukushima Prefecture guidelines. 

## Appropriate  Management  of  Chemical  Substances 

*PRTR system: Pollutant Release and Transfer Register is a system introduced in FY 2001 for reporting the amount of chemical substances released into the environment or transferred out of bu sine s s e st a blishme nts a s wa ste, ba se d on the Ac t on Confirmation, etc. of Release Amounts of Specific Chemical Substances in the Environment and Promotion of Improvements to the Management Thereof. The system requires that the amount of hazardous chemical substances released into the environment and the amount transferred out of business establishments as waste be counted and disclosed to the public. Some local governments have also established similar systems through ordinances. 51 50 

In order to comply with the Cartagena Act* to ensure biodiversity, we provide education and training (e-learning) to personnel engaged in recombinant DNA experiments and a total of 1,021 persons took the course in FY 2023. In addition, we review the content of experiments based on the opinions of the Recombi-nant DNA Experiment Committee which is composed of outside experts. Furthermore, in principle, on-site inspections are conducted once a year at laboratories conducting recombinant DNA experiments to ensure that the content of the experiments is consistent with the experimental plan and that the experiments are conducted in accordance with the law. 

In animal experiments, we examine whether the 3Rs (Replacement: use of alternative methods, Reduction: reduction of the number of animals used, and Refine-ment: reduction of suffering) stipulated in the Act on Welfare and Management of Animals are taken into ac-count, and we disclose the results of our self-assess-ment on our official website. In addition, we have un-d e r g o n e e x t e r n a l v e r i f i c a t i o n b y t h e J a p a n Pharmaceutical Information Center (JAPIC) and ob-tained certification for the animal experiment facilities. *The Cartagena Act: In Japan, the Act on the Conservation and Sustainable Use of Biological Diversity through Regulations on the Use of Living Modified Organisms came into effect in 2004. It aims to ensure safe handling of living modified organisms that could have adverse ef fects on the conser vation and sustainable use of biodiversity. 

## Consideration  for  Biodiversity  and  Animal  Welfare 

We work on reducing energy consumption per unit to an annual average of over 1%* in the medium to long term, an amount required under the Act on Rational Use of Energy. To achieve the target, we actively install devices with high energy-saving effect when renovat-ing facilities, in addition to taking energy conservation measures by appropriate temperature settings of air-conditioners. Our existing solar power systems are being used effectively, and renewable energy systems have been installed in our new buildings. Presently so-lar power systems are installed at AIST Tsukuba, Fukushima Renewable Energy Institute (FREA), AIST Tohoku, AIST Kashiwa, AIST Tokyo Waterfront, AIST Chubu, AIST Kansai, AIST Chugoku, and AIST Kyushu. Wind power generation is installed at FREA. 

Regarding photovoltaic power generation, we aim to install photovoltaic power generation equipment in ap-proximately 50% or more of the area available for in-stallation by FY 2030, in accordance with the “Plan for Measures to be taken by the Government for the Con-trol of Greenhouse Gas Emissions in its Affairs and Businesses.” By FY 2023, the installation area of pho-tovoltaic power generation has increased to 16,103 m3 (30% of installable area). *Average change of energy consumption per unit over the five-year period of FYs 2019–2023: 98.0% (96.4% compared to the previous year) 

> ○Amount of renewable energy generation in FY 2023: 2,228,616 kWh (about 0.8% of total electricity consumption of AIST)

## Energy-saving  Efforts 

●Reduction of fluorocarbon emissions 

In accordance with the Act on Rational Use and Prop-er Management of Fluorocarbons, AIST conducts peri-odic inspections and spot checks of refrigeration and air conditioning equipment that uses fluorocarbons as refrigerants, to restrict emissions of fluorocarbons into the atmosphere. In FY 2023, a total of about 624 t-CO 2was released, and it was less than the amount (more than 1,000 t-CO 2) required to report under the Act. 

●Prevention of air pollution 

Regarding boilers for air conditioning that are major sources of NOx and SOx, we measure the effluent gas-es twice a year so that they do not exceed the emis-sion standards under the Air Pollution Control Act. Re-garding NOx, in FY 2023, the measurement results were all within the limits. Of SOx, there has been little emission since 2017, and the results fall far below the emission standard. In addition, when replacing equip-ment, we choose chiller units with high energy-saving effects and downsized units to reduce emissions. 

## Consideration  for  Atmospheric  Emission 

Each year AIST discloses its policy for promoting the procurement of eco-friendly goods and services based on the Act on Promoting Green Purchasing. In accor-dance with the Green Contract Law, AIST evaluates the price and environmental performance (fuel efficiency) of automobile leases comprehensively and concludes a contract with the party that achieves the best result in the general evaluation bidding method. In the case of electricity and industrial waste, the contract was awarded to the lowest bidder that cleared the standard after evaluating their reduction efforts for global warm-ing gas emission and compatibility to the certification system for excellence. 

## Compliance  with  Green  Purchasing  Act Consideration  for  Water  Resources 

●Prevention of water pollution 

Wastewater from laboratories is sent to wastewater treatment plants and processed to abide by the Water Pollution Prevention Act and to meet municipal effluent standards. It is then discharged into the public sewer-age system. To prevent water containing hazardous substances from leaking into groundwater, AIST builds dikes and conducts periodic inspections of buried re-search wastewater pipes and groundwater quality to check for abnormalities. 

●Use of recycled water 

For the efficient use of water resources at AIST Tsukuba and AIST Tokyo Waterfront, research waste-water is neutralized, treated with reducing agents, and reused as recycled water. It is used for cooling labora-tory equipment and flushing toilets. In FY 2023, 43% of the total water use was recycled water.  

> Wastewater treatment facility in AIST Tsukuba Recycled water tank in AIST Tsukuba

AIST conducts contact, communication, and emer-gency action drills at all research bases once a year to minimize damage in the event of an environmental accident such as a leakage of oil or chemicals. We have a system that receives a report and responds immediately in the event of an accident. After expe-ditious measures, related organizations are notified. The Facilities and Safety Headquarters analyzes the cause of the accident and takes measures to prevent a recurrence of such an incident. Accident case in FY 2023 Leakage of freezer refrigerant (R407C fluorocarbon) 

During a periodic inspection of a refrigeration unit, an inspector found an oil leak, and upon investigation with gas leak detection fluid, bubbles were formed and a refrigerant leak was confirmed. The cause was corrosion of piping connections (welds). As a re-sponse, the refrigerant was recovered, and the leak-ing part was repaired. Environmental accident drills of FY 2023 13 accident drills conducted across all research bas-es (Assuming damage to research drainage pipes, leakage during transport of waste fluid, etc.) Monthly Accidents and Safety and Health Informa-tion and e-learning is used to educate staff on themes that have impact on the environment, such as how to dispose of waste fluid and emission gas from research, and how to sort and dispose of waste. 

> ○Cases of reuse for FY 2023: 913

AIST is promoting 3R (Reduce, Reuse, Recycle) initia-tives to reduce environmental burdens. In particular, since the reuse of research equipment can be expect-ed to reduce costs, AIST has introduced a system to promote the reuse of unneeded research equipment, office equipment, fixtures, and consumables by post-ing information on its internal website. 

## Promotion  of  3Rs Environmental  Education Response  to  Environmental  Accidents 

> Scene of an environmental accident drill simulating a water supply control failure in a rooftop scrubber and water leakage from an overflow pipe joint in a circulation tank

53 52 

Energy 

●Changes in amounts of energy used 

City gas, purchased heat, etc. Electricity 

2,500 2,000 1,500 1,000 500 0（TJ） 

1,937 2,009 162 1,896 161 153 1,933 140 1,840 139 1,955 174 1,907 147 2,113 184 

0

2,033 146 1,001 965 1,080 1,024 2,093 135 1,047 

0（MWh） （t） ●Changes in renewable energy generation and CO 2 emissions reduction 

> Wind power-generated electricity/ Solar power-generated electricity

Solar power-generated electricity (MWh) Wind power-generated electricity (MWh) CO 2 emissions reduction effect (t) CO 2 emissions reduction effect 

Waste 

●Breakdown of generated waste (FY 2023) 

Non-industrial waste Industrial waste 

Plastic waste Metal scrap Sludge Glass/concrete/ceramic waste Slag Other Specially controlled industrial waste 

Flammable waste oil 

Strong acids 

Infectious waste 

Waste oil (hazardous) 

Sludge (hazardous) 

Acid waste (hazardous) Other 

Total 

526.7 1382.9 450.1 267.8 365.1 40.2 18.6 241.0 313.4 45.0 208.7 15.2 4.4 11.7 4.2 24.2 

2,223 

88.9 421.9 82.7 25.5 253.7 16.9 1.5 41.6 106.8 3.8 65.6 5.9 0.4 9.9 0.3 20.8 

618 

16.9 30.5 18.4 9.5 69.5 42.0 7.9 17.3 34.1 8.5 31.4 38.9 8.3 84.7 6.9 86.1 

27.8 

Waste type Amount disposed of (t) Amount landfilled (t) Percentage of waste landfilled (%) Water resources 

●Breakdown of water received ●Changes in amounts of water received and reused 

1,500 1,000 500 0（1000m³） 

913 802 988 897 831 921 747 937 

Received water Recycled water 

872 720 

Unit: 1000 m 3

FY2023 FY2020 FY2021 FY2022 

Potable water Groundwater Industrial water Received water Recycled water 

929 80937 720.383 913 80921 897 

FY2019 

974 14 0988 913 795 70802 831 740 80747 872 

Atmospheric emissions 

●Estimated leakage of CFCs (FY 2023) 

0

Estimated t-CO 2 released by R-number R-number Type Estimated t-CO 2released by type 

HCFC Mixed R22 R32 R134a R404A R407C R410A Mixed refrigerant 

593.941 

HFC 

●Changes in CO 2 emissions by year 

150 100 50 0（1000t-CO₂） 

100 99 105 102 102 

●Storage and disposal of PCB-containing items and PCB waste 

0150 ℓ 156 810 ℓ 0060 ℓ 4000 ℓ 2050 ℓ 6050 ℓ 

Added waste cloth used for analysis Stored research chemicals, etc. Stored research chemicals, etc. 

●Changes in atmospheric environmental loads 

NOx SOx 3.00 2.00 1.00 0.00 （t） 

0.01 0.01 0.01 

2022 2019 2020 2021 

0.01 

2023 

Capacitors Electrical ballasts Transformers Oils/paints (L) Other contaminated materials 

156 720 ℓ 

Waste type Quantity stored at the end of FY 2021 Quantity added in FY2022 Quantity disposed of in FY 2022 Quantity stored at the end of FY 2022 Quantity added in FY 2023 Quantity disposed of in FY 2023 Quantity stored at the end of FY 2023 

Disposed research chemicals and waste cloth used for analysis Disposed research chemicals and waste cloth used for analysis Added waste cloth used for analysis 

00.803 60.632 42.728 209.568 280.21 30.507 

1.87 0.01 1.63 1.60 2.29 1.80 

2023 2019 2020 2021 2022 2,500 2,000 1,500 1,000 500 2,000 1,500 1,000 500 2,500 2023 FY FY 2022 2019 2020 2021 2,500 3,000 3,500 4,000 2,000 1,500 1,000 500 0（t） 

1,295 377 1,639 733 2,429 612 418 361 389 1,552 497 369 1,383 527 313 

●Changes in amounts of disposed waste 

Non-industrial waste Specially controlled industrial waste Industrial waste 

●Changes in amounts of landfill waste 

300 400 500 600 700 200 100 （t） 

594 618 

0

369 351 475 

30.507 

624.448 Total 

Stored research chemicals, etc. 

2022 2023 FY FY FY 2019 2020 2021 2023 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2022 2019 2020 2021 2023 2022 2019 2020 2021 FY FY 

# Environmental Reporting Data 55 54 

Water quality 

●Monitoring groundwater at AIST Kansai 

> Sampling month

0.020 0.046 0.037 0.047 0.042 0.011 15 10 29 ●Types and number of environmentally friendly contracts (FY 2023)  

> Types of green contracts Number of cases

Lease of motor vehicles Electricity supply contract Industrial waste 

Green purchasing and environmentally conscious contracts 

●Procurement results of eco-friendly goods and services 

Paper Stationery Office furniture, etc. Imaging equipment, etc. Office equipment, etc. Automobiles, etc. Service Fire extinguisher *Copiers, MFPs, expandable digital copiers 

10,466.0kg 1.0kg 359.0kg 2,545.0kg 10,558.0kg 122 185 6,671 8,142 237 1,740 621 50,119 840 378 693 -130 --3,076 1,677 41 --99-540 1,018 100% 32% 80% 100% 94% 63% 79% 92% 93% 99% 100% 98% 98% 82% 78% --96% 97% 80% ---100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% --100% 100% 100% ---100% 100% 10,477.0kg 4.0kg 451.0kg 2,547.0kg 11,198.0kg 195 235 7,231 8,765 240 1,740 635 51,018 1,023 487 693 -138 --3,198 1,733 51 --69-540 1,018 

Photocopier paper Forms Coated paper for inkjet color printers Toilet paper Tissue paper Mechanical pencils Mechanical pencil leads Ballpoint pens Marker pens Media cases Glue (solid) (including refills) Glue (tape) Files Chairs Desks Photocopiers, etc. Scanner Toner cartridges Ink cartridges Paper shredders Automobiles Fire extinguishers Passenger transportation Purchased Leased/rented (new) Leased/rented (continued) Purchased Leased/rented (new) Leased/rented (continued) Purchased Leased/rented (new) Leased/rented (continued) Purchased Leased/rented (new) Leased/rented (continued)    

> Category Amount of specified purchase items Target attainment Target value Total amount purchased Item

2023.4 2023.5 2023.6 2023.7 2023.8 2023.9  

> Measurement of arsenic and other compounds (standard value: 0.01 mg/L or less) Sampling month

0.019 0.038 0.037 0.057 0.020 0.055 2023.10 2023.11 2023.12 2024.1 2024.2 2024.3 

> Measurement of arsenic and other compounds (standard value: 0.01 mg/L or less)

100% 100% 94% 100% 

Environmental accident drills 

●Environmental accident drills in FYs 2018–2023.  

> FY Number of drills

●Number of reuse transactions 

Reuse of equipment, materials, etc. 

> 1,200 200 400 800 1,000 600 0（Cases）

171 122 321 148 241 88 88 489 156 135 132 557 148 148 196 124 357 92 167 213 127 227 238 95 226   

> 2022 2021 2020 2019 2023 FY

Other Physical and chemical equipment Measuring instruments Office fixture OA equipment 

Proper management of chemical substances (FY 2023) 

●Amount of chemical substances reported under the Chemical Control Program 

Fukushima Renewable Energy Institute, AIST AIST Tsukuba West AIST Kansai AIST Tokyo Waterfront Annex Ammonia (kg) Ammonium hydroxide (kg) Nitric acid (kg) Hydrogen peroxide (kg) Potassium hydroxide (kg) N, N-dimethylacetamide (kg) Hydrogen fluoride and its water-soluble salts (kg) Chloroform (kg) Methanol (kg) VOC(kg)  

> Sewer Substance Research site Volume handled Atmosphere

82 110 160 110 120 2,800 500 92.4 194.9 1,900 000000380 00011 0000009.1 6.8 80 3,800 110 160 110 120 970 3,300 100 200 2,000 

> Waste Amount transferred Amount discharged

AIST Tsukuba West: PRTR Law (AIST Tsukuba West's liquid waste containing N, N-dimethylacetamide was stored in a liquid waste tank for multiple years, and industrial waste treatment was done in 2023.) AIST Tokyo Waterfront: Ordinance on the Environment to Ensure the Health and Safety of Tokyo Citizens AIST Kansai: Osaka Prefectural Ordinance on Preservation of Living Environment, etc. Fukushima Renewable Energy Institute, AIST (FREA): Fukushima Prefecture Guidelines for Proper Management of Chemical Substances (Substances whose handled, released, or transferred amounts are 100 kg or more are listed) 

100% 100% *2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 18 19 19 19 19 13 57 56 

# Governance Basic Concept 

## Improve  Governance  by  Separating  Management  and  Execution Organizational  management  structure 

●Basic approach to governance 

AIST reviewed its organizational management struc-ture and separated management and execution as of April 1, 2021, in order to establish effective governance to demonstrate its comprehensive strength. 

The Board of Directors, established to assist the President in decision-making, focuses on deliberation of important matters related to the overall management of the corporation, and in order to further incorporate an objective viewpoint from the outside, the number of external directors has been increased and now con-sists of the President, the Senior Vice-President, three internal directors, and three external directors. In order to strengthen the objective executive oversight func-tion, the internal directors do not concurrently serve as heads of so-called business units (e.g., heads of re-search departments, etc.). The AIST Group Executive Committee is chaired by the Chief Executive Officer and deliberates on matters related to management execution. The vice chairper-sons are the Chief Technology Officer, the Chief Oper-ating Officer, and the Chief Marketing and Business Officer. The Chief Technology Officer is responsible for the overall research of AIST, and is responsible for the overall optimization of research and development, thereby establishing a system to demonstrate the over-all strength of the institute. In particular, AIST is ad-vancing research toward “world-leading solutions to social issues,” which was set as the most important mission in the fifth medium- to long-term goal period, by taking advantage of its strength as a comprehensive research institute with diverse research areas. The Chief Operating Officer is in charge of organizational management, including general affairs and safety man-agement, and is working to demonstrate our compre-hensive capabilities, including organizational manage-ment functions. Furthermore, under the direction of the Chief Execu-tive Officer, the position of Chief Marketing and Busi-ness Officer responsible for promoting the social im-plementation and commercialization of AIST’s research results was initiated in April 2023 with the establish-ment of AISol, an organization to support the utilization of AIST’s research results. With this establishment, AIST constructed an organization and management structure for the entire AIST Group. We will ensure the appropriateness of overall business operations so that AIST can fully demonstrate its capabili-ties and fulfill its mission. 

Board of directors President Minister of Economy, Trade and Industry Auditor Accounting auditor Committee on the System of Evaluating Incorporated Adminis-trative Agencies 

運 営 統 括 責 任 者 

AIST Group Executive Committee 

> Consultation and reporting of draft goals, etc. Goals and other instructions, performance evaluation, etc. Nomination Audit Appointment Appointment Decision-making on important matters Management decision Execution monitoring

Chief Executive Officer Chief Marketing and Business Officer Chief Technology Officer  Organization of eight research areas, etc. Organization of general affairs, safety management, etc. Chief Operating Officer Planning Headquarters Audit Office 

> Audit

Internal Control Committee Personnel Committee Compliance Promotion Committee Security and Information Promotion Committee 59 58 

●Research misconduct 

When an allegation on research misconduct is made, we handle the allegation rigorously in ac-c o r d a n c e w i t h t h e r e l eva n t r u l e s a n d r e g u l a -tions. 

A s pa r t of o u r ef fo r t s to p reve nt the o c c u r-rence of re search misconduct, we provide re -search ethics education through various training programs. We have also made and distributed the Handbook on Ethics for Researchers to the executives and employees that summarizes the ethical standards and precautions required as “5 minds” of researchers to fulfill their research activity. 

We a ls o p romote the u se of online to ols fo r dete c ting plagia rism to preve nt re se a rch mis -conduct. 

To raise employee awareness of compliance and take our organizational culture to the next level, AIST undertakes the following measures to strengthen compliance: 

## Promotion  of  Compliance 

Compliance initiatives 

In principle, we hold a Compliance Promotion Committee meeting every week to gather risk information and determine how to address it. Risk information is also shared at regular in-house meetings to prevent recurrence. 

> 1

In the event of an allegation of internal report or research misconduct, an investigation committee is formed to investigate the matter, the results are reported to the President, and necessary corrective measures are taken. 

> 2

In line with the Compliance Specialist Committee of the Council of National Research and Development Agencies, we usually designate December as “Compliance Month.” We announce messages from management, hold training and seminars, and display posters in this month. 

> 3

In addition to e-learning courses for the executives and employees, we provide compliance education as part of training for newly hired employees and management training for unit directors and research group leaders, with content adjusted to each group of participants. 

> 4

In an effort to instill compliance, we post monthly compliance posters titled “Compliance Letter,” created under a different theme for each month. This is aimed at increasing employee awareness of compliance and urging them to be vigilant at work. 

> 5
> ●

Response to research misconduct at AIST 

> ・Thorough research ethics education
> ・Use of online tools for detecting plagiarism
> ・Conduct preliminary and main investigations
> ・Action taken by the President (correction recommendation of research results, etc.)
> When research misconduct is alleged Response to research misconduct allegations Research ethics education President Supervisor of Ethics for Researchers

●Management of Research records 

As a public research institute, AIST has been strongly required to prevent research misconduct— such as fabrication, falsification, and plagiarism—, which is mentioned in the guidelines issued by the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology and the Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry. Accordingly, AIST has set “Rules on Management of Research Records” and has made it obligatory to re-cord research information. AIST has made it obligato-ry to register the research information required to be stored as research notebooks in the recording sys-tem to have the research notebooks examined by su-pervisors. In addition, to ensure the careful manage-ment of research information, AIST has restricted the removal of research notebooks and copies upon re-tirement, and has established guidelines for handling research information other than research notebooks. AIST will continue to do its utmost to ensure the in-tegrity and transparency in research and will make efforts to prevent research misconduct. 

 

●Internal Report System 

AIST has established an internal reporting system based on the regulations not only for consultation and reporting of harassment and research miscon-duct, but also for early detection and correction of misconduct to maintain public trust in AIST and to ensure fairness in business operations. 

●Risk ｍanagement 

In FY 2023, AIST announced the arrest of an em-ployee on suspicion of violation of the Unfair Compe-tition Prevention Act and two cases of research mis-conduct. In the case of the violation of the Unfair Competition Prevention Act, the employee had taken AIST's technical information outside without permis-sion, and in the case of the research misconduct, an investigation committee including outside experts conducted investigations and found specific miscon-duct (fabrication, falsification, etc.) in each case. We take these incidents very seriously, and to prevent such incidents from happening again, we will take group-wide measures, including further strengthen-ing information management and thorough education on research ethics. 

## Disclosure  of  information  and  protection  of  personal  information 

●Disclosure of information 

To increase the transparency of AIST’s activities and fulfil its accountability requirements, AIST proactively discloses information on its website and by other means in accordance with the Act on Access to Infor-mation Held by Incorporated Administrative Agencies (implemented October 1, 2002). 

●Information Disclosure and Personal Information Protection Desk 

Requests for information disclosure in accordance with the Act on Access to Information Held by Incor-porated Administrative Agencies and the Act on the Protection of Personal Information can be made at Information Disclosure and Personal Information Pro-tection desks of AIST Tsukuba and other regional re-search bases as well as the website (the website ac-cepts request in accordance with the Act on Access to Information Held by Incorporated Administrative Agencies only). Each desk also provides help on the procedures for disclosure and personal information protection. 

●Protection of personal information 

In accordance with the Act on the Protection of Per-sonal Information enforced on April 1, 2022, AIST protects the individual’s rights and interests while ensuring that activities at AIST are conducted prop-erly and smoothly. We promote understanding of personal information protection and appropriate management of personal information by educational training and e-learning to executives and employees every year. We also strive to raise awareness of the appropriate management of information including personal information and com-pliance of information security. 61 60 

At AIST, the Audit Office is deemed an independent organ that reports directly to the president. In collabo-ration with the auditor and the accounting auditor, the office endeavors to achieve (1) effective and efficient work, (2) observance of laws and ordinances governing AIST operations, (3) preservation of assets, and (4) reli-able financial and other reports. Toward these ends, the office monitors whether individual operations func-tion properly and efficiently and based on the findings, recommends improvements and other corrective ac-tions. These internal audits are performed to support the auditees, not only by detecting and pointing out problems in work processes, but also by suggesting effective improvements based on mutual understand-ing that is built through thorough discussion on the problems. 

●In FY 2023, audits were performed concerning the following topics: 

・On specific themes that urgently need auditing as well as cross-sectional themes, for administrative headquarters, and research units, audits were con-ducted. While the audits confirmed that these opera-tions were generally all being carried out properly, issues in terms of compliance, effectiveness, and ef-ficiency of some were identified. The auditees con-cerned were advised to swiftly make suggested im-provements and the improvements were confirmed. 

・As information security audit and personal informa-tion management audit, audits were conducted on implementation status of various rules, and the au-dits confirmed that these matters were generally be-ing handled properly. 

## Internal  Audits   

> ●Activities as a whole
> ●Decision-making by the President
> ●Creation and operation of internal control systems
> ●Appropriateness of financial statements
> ●Operational audit
> ●Accounting audit
> ●Activities as a whole
> ●Risk management, confirmation and appropriateness of operation of internal control systems
> ●Improvement of work process efficiency
> Points of audit
> ●Appropriateness of financial statements (effectiveness of internal control systems)
> ●Operational audit
> ●Accounting audit
> ●Compliance audit
> Scope of audit
> ●Accounting audit

Internal audit Auditor audit Accounting auditor audit Collaboration Collaboration 

We conduct appropriate work management based on the law. 

## Fair  Operating  Practice 

Subject Purpose Action in FY 2023 

To maintain peace and security within the international community, AIST has tight security export controls in place in accordance with AIST’s Rules on Security Export Control (internal rules and regulations), formulated based on the Foreign E xchange and Foreign Trade Act, thereby preventing AIST’s technology from being used for the developme nt of we apons of mass destruction. W e p r o m o t e a u t o n o m o u s , continuous rational procurement with its operational attributes in mind while keeping its fairness, a n d tra n s p a re n cy th ro u g h th e P D C A c y c l e , b a s e d o n t h e Promotion of Rational Procurement in Incorporated Administrative Agencies (decided by the Minister f o r I n t e r n a l A f f a i r s a n d Communication May 25, 2015) 

Information Security Implementation of Security Export Control Promotion of Rational Procurement Management of Conflict-of-Interest 

●Information security measures •Planning and procurement for the implementation of a zero-trust security suitable for the institute's operations •Response to information security incidents by the Computer Security Incident Response Team (CSIRT) •Conduct drills based on business continuity plans in preparation for information security incidents, etc. 

●Information security training •Training by job level according to roles related to information security 

●Information security audit •Conducting information security audits for all departments Through (1) dissemination of the latest information on legislative amendments within AIST; (2) export control training for AIST staff; (3) export control instruction to individual staff members; (4) classification and transaction screening; and (5) internal audits, efforts are being made to raise awareness of security export control at staff level, and by maintenance of departmental systems, we are implementing appropriate export controls. Management of conflict-of-interest is conducted based on the rules for conflict-of-interest management. In order to ensure information security regarding information systems and important information, AIST implements measures that comply with Common Standards for Cybersecurity Measures for Government Agencies and Related Agencies. Each year, we formulate an AIST Rational Procurement Policy, and conduct ex-post facto inspections of individual contracts by a Contract Oversight Committee, whose members include outside experts. We answered to questions from members and obtained their agreement. Once a fiscal year ends, we conduct a self-assessment of how our rational procurement policy for the fiscal year has been implemented using the set indicators, and the results are publicized. As part of the CSR procurement and pursuant to the Act on Promotion of Government’s Procurement of Goods Supplied by Facilities for Persons with Disabilities to Work, every year AIST also discloses its policy for promoting the procurement of goods from those facilities and its procurement results. As outcome of efforts in line with the policy, we were able to achieve a goal that exceeded the results of the previous year. Furthermore, AIST has introduced a procurement method that evaluates suppliers based on how they promote work-life balance, with the aim of realizing public procurement contributing to women’s active participation in the workforce. (To see how the rational procurement plan is conducted, list of documents of the Contract Oversight Committee, AIST policy of Goods Supplied by Facilities for Persons with Disabilities to Work and procurement records, please look up announcements on the following website: aist.go.jp/aist_j/procure/) •In order not to give the impression to society that individual profits from other parties in industry–academia–government collaborations are put before duty by executives or research responsibility, a conflict-of-interest management system is in place. 3,386 executives and employees who needed to declare their own status of conflict-of-interest all submitted their self-assessments. 3 employees who had particular concern for conflict-of-interest were interviewed by outside counselors to observe their activities. Additionally, after the Conflict-of-Interest Management Committee consisting of outside experts deliberated, they were notified of points of caution in promoting industry–academia–government collaborations. •In order not to give the impression that we are putting profits before public responsibility, from FY 2020, we operate a management system for conflict-of-interest on a full scale. We targeted 54 corporate bodies with which we have close collaborative relations, and will continue to observe the industry–academia–government collaboration activities and procurementresults in the Committee of Conflict-of-Interest. ●Collaboration in audits 63 62 

# Fifth Term Management Policy Under the vision “Create the Future, Collaborate Together,” AIST is pursuing research activities to give the world technologies that can enable a sustainable society, address social problems, and generate economic development. 

## Aiming  to  Fulfill  the  AIST  Mission 

# Overview of AIST 

AIST adopted the 5th Term Management Policy in September 2021. Backcasting from a future vision in which AIST continues to be at the core of the innovation ecosystem for the whole of Japan in the 7th Term and beyond, this man-agement policy sets goals of the 7th Term being a period of evolution, the 6th Term being a period of growth, and the 5th Term being a period for building a prototype of the innovation ecosystem. To realize this future vision, we will maxi-mize the value of AIST while accelerating social implementation. In the 5th Term, we aim to increase the value of AIST by strengthening the core functions of a national innovation ecosystem and improving the team strength of AIST. In this way, we aim to build a prototype of the national innova-tion ecosystem and establish the AIST brand. Realizing the building of this prototype starts with switching from the cost basis to value provided. Consequent to strategic investment in research infrastructure and human resources, the aim in the 5th Term is for the business scale of the whole AIST Group including external corporations to reach around 120 billion yen, about 20 billion yen of that being private capital. 

As the AIST Group works together to realize its management policies, the President's Message program is delivered once a quarter as an opportunity for the top management to convey a direct message to all people working in the AIST Group. In FY 2023, the program was held four times, and in order to provide an opportunity for all people working in the AIST Group to work together with a sense of unity, employees from diverse locations and job categories also appeared on the program to talk directly with top management, thereby contributing not only to the dissemination and penetration of management policies but also to the revitalization of internal communication. 

Overview of the 5th Term Management Policy (1)  Strengthening the core functions of the national innovation ecosystem · We will further enhance AIST’s strengths by selecting and concentrating management resources, creating value through system design, and promoting unique research base equipment. 

· We will improve social implementation of research outcomes by using the Dejima approach (setting up external corporations and the like) to accelerate so-cial implementation, strengthening AIST-initiated startups (helping to create unicorns), and improving the one-stop system. 

· We will enhance AIST’s potential by expanding next-generation research with consideration for market prospects and improving international de-ployment of R&D outcomes. 

(2) Improving the team strength of AIST · Manifesting AIST's team strength to the greatest ex-tent is important for increasing the value of AIST. We will improve each of the elements that make up AIST’s team strength: 1) research strength, 2) orga-nizational strength and 3) human resources. 

· Improving engagement based on two-way trust and assistance between staff and the organization is also important as a foundation for the three ele-ments of AIST’s team strength. As key points in im-proving engagement, we will work on (1) building re-lationships of trust, (2) sharing a vision, (3) providing fulfillment, (4) preparing suitable workplaces, and (5) supporting personal development. 

●Overview of the 5 th Term Management Policy 

Prototype a national innovation ecosystem with AIST at its core 5th Term targets: Solving social problems and strengthening industrial competitiveness Establishing multiple coalitions of the strong with AIST at the core Multiple diverse coalitions to lead regional innovation Establish the AIST brand             

> Switch from cost basis to value provided.
> Consequent to strategic investment in research infrastructure and human resources, private capital invested in the whole AIST Group including external corporations to be approx. 20 billion yen Improve team strength

Improve human resources Improve engagement Improve research strength Improve organizational strength Increase the value of AIST Strengthening ecosystem core functions         

> ・Select and concentrate management resources
> ・Create value through system design
> ・Promote unique research base equip
> ・Use the Dejima approach (setting up external corporation, etc.) to accelerate social implementation
> ・Strengthen AIST-initiated startups (help to create unicorns)
> ・Improve the one-stop system
> ・Expand next-generation research with consideration for market prospects
> ・Improve international deployment of R&D outcomes

Maximizing the value of AIST Mapping the 5th Term Management Policy with a view to the long-term prospects of AIST 

By switching from a cost accumulation basis to a value provided basis for cooperative research with private businesses and the like, we will produce a virtuous cycle in which capital investments in AIST increase, enabling strategic investment in subsequent research infrastructure and human resources. 

Business scale in the 7th Term and beyond 

To accelerate social implementation, we aim to double the scale of business of AIST Group, which includes external corporations, from the current business scale (about 100 billion yen) to 200 billion yen. We are aiming for private funds to then be of the order of 60 to 70 billion yen (bringing the ratio of private funds, public funds, and subsidies close to 1:1:1). 

5th Term (FY 2020 to FY 2024) 

Mapped as a period to “prototype a national innovation ecosystem with AIST at its core” with the tagline “establish the AIST brand,” the aims are “coalitions of the strong with AIST at its core” and that “diverse coali-tions lead regional innovation.” 

6th Term (FY 2025 to FY 2029) 

Mapped as a period to “grow the national innovation ecosystem with AIST at its core” with the tagline “AIST leaps ahead,” the aims are “coalitions of the strong turning social implementation models into reality” and that “diverse coalitions lead regional innovation to create new industries.” 

7th Term and beyond (from FY 2030) 

Mapped as a period to “evolve the national innovation ecosystem with AIST at its core” with the tagline “con-tinuing trust for AIST from society,” the aims are for “the coalition of the strong model with AIST at its core to be a key for industrial growth in Japan” and that “new industries created by diverse coalitions drive regional economies.” 

Toward the penetration of management policies 

> TOPICS

Financial Data 

> (1000 million yen) (1000 million yen)

●Income Operating subsidy Facility maintenance grants Commissioned research funds Joint research revenue Technology consulting revenue Intellectual property revenue Other      

> 2023 FY FY 2019 2020 2021 2022 400 600 800 1,000 1,200 1,400 1,600 1,800 2,800 200 0

*Numbers may not equal totals due to rounding to the nearest 10 million yen. *The figures for fiscal years 2019 through 2022 are the amount of the settlement of accounts in the “Statement of Accounts” stipulated in Article 38 of the Act on General Rules for Incorporated Administrative Agencies. *The figures for FY 2023 represent the total revenues and total expenses of the AIST Group and are calculated for convenience in order to show the scale of the AIST Group’s business. *These are account items associated with accounting procedures specific to independent administrative agencies. 

84.4 69 72.6 86 27.5 9.6 9.6 15.7 3.8 45.3 36.7 10.9 7.5 175.4 225.9 263.7 76.7 631.3 633.5 654.3 623.9 132.8 96.1 

●Expenditure Financial expenses Facility management costs Commissioned expenses Indirect costs    

> 2023 2019 2020 2021 2022 400 600 800 1,000 1,200 1,400 1,600 1,800 2,800 200 0

763.4 168 75.4 87.4 616.7 130.5 214.6 68.6 646 115.4 242.9 69.8 780.6 149.3 269.3 99.3 1025.1 83.9 275.1 113.7 45 15.8 17.3 98.2 179.5 287.5 287.2 186.6 338.3 1090.2 48.8 

Consolidated Statements of Income (April 1, 2023–March 31, 2024) (Yen) 

Income before income taxes and minority interests 

Corporate, resident and business taxes 31,767,701 

17,417,098,324 

Net income 17,385,330,623 

Reversal of reserve carried forward from the previous medium-term target period* Gross profit for the year 

927,537,905 18,312,868,528 

Non-recurring loss 

Loss on disposal of fixed assets Impairment loss of fixed assets Other 

332,030,220 3,570,557 197,206 

Total non-recurring loss 335,797,983 

Non-recurring profit 

Reversal of operating subsidy in lieu of assets* Reversal of donated assets* Reversal of donation received in lieu of assets* Reversal of grants-in-lieu-of-assets, etc.* Reversal of provision for loss on damages* Other 

59,748,537 15,918,053 147 626,793 300,000,000 16,225,547 

Total non-recurring income 392,519,077 

Operating costs Subject Amount 

Research service expenses Personnel expenses Depreciation and amortization Other research service expenses 

43,751,644,549 15,232,851,908 43,207,580,928 102,192,077,385 9,247,050,387 3,266,793,323 132,588,396 5,847,668,668 

General management expenses Personnel expenses Depreciation and amortization Other general and administrative expenses 

Total operating expenses 111,439,127,772 

Revenue Revenue from subsidy for operation Reversal of subsidy for operation in lieu of assets National and local governments Other Organizations Building and property loan fees Other Subsidy revenue* Revenues from receipt of goods and services Intellectual property revenue Research revenue Commissioned research funds Subsidy and other revenue* Donation revenue* Revenue related to the bonus allowance receivable* Income related to the provision for retirement benefits* Miscellaneous income 

52,805,547,329 5,809,706,255 3,977,747,834 21,089,354,180 22,187,470 756,293,008 58,615,253,584 1,157,353,753 1,070,290,370 34,937,243,141 25,067,102,014 681,312,005 37,986,640 4,539,031,789 1,915,451,228 

Total revenue Operating profit 

128,799,505,002 17,360,377,230 

778,480,478 

65 64 

# Financial Data Offices Site 

●Tsukuba Central 

●Tsukuba West 

●Tsukuba North 

●University of Tokyo collaborative 

research site 

●University of Tsukuba collaborative 

research site 

Tokyo Headquarters AIST Tohoku 

Site ●Tohoku University 

collaborative research site 

AIST Hokkaido 

Site ●AIST Sapporo Odori Site 

AIST Chugoku AIST Shikoku AIST Kansai 

Site ●Osaka University collaborative research site 

AIST Kashiwa 

Site ●University of Tokyo collaborative 

research site 

Fukushima Renewable Energy Institute, AIST AIST Chubu 

Site ●Nagoya Ekimae Site 

●Nagoya University collaborative research site 

●Kanazawa Institute of Technology collaborative 

research site 

AIST Tsukuba Headquarters AIST Tsukuba AIST Kyushu AIST Tokyo Waterfront 

Site ●Waseda University collaborative research site 

# Research Bases 

> as of Aug. 2024

Hokuriku Digital Manufacturing Center 

Site ●Ishikawa Site 

●Fukui Site 

67 

T H I R D P A R T Y O P I N I O N A U D I T O R ’ S O P I N I O N 

KIKUCHI Masahiro, Auditor 

On the Publication of AIST Report 2024 On the Publication of AIST Report 2024 

AIST has decided to publish AIST Report 2024, which aims to enhance the contents of the Sustainability Report up to the last fiscal year and to go beyond the existing reports to become an integrated report for the AIST Group. As we enter the final year of the fifth medium- to long-term target period, in the opening message from President and Chief Executive Officer ISHIMURA Kazuhiko, he described the organizational transformation that has been underway up to the last fiscal year. In order to become the core of the national innovation ecosystem, the AIST Group is promoting collaboration with companies and public institutions, strengthening marketing functions, enhancing governance, and improving engagement. “Promoting R&D and Social Implementation to Achieve the Mission” featured a dialogue between the AIST Group’s Chief Technology Officer and Chief Marketing and Business Officer who expressed their commitment to the future of the AIST Group, and introduced four examples of research promotion. The AIST Group’s value creation process was repeatedly discussed at the AIST Group Management Meeting to enhance the content. YANAGI Hiroyuki, Vice-President (part-time) and Advisor to Yamaha Motor Co., Ltd. expressed his high expectations for AIST's challenge to a new Japanese open innovation model. At the end of the report, as a third-party opinion, we re c e ive d va lu a b le c o m m e nt s a n d gui da n c e f ro m M r. YAMAGUCHI Tamio, Director of the Workers Club for Eco-harmonic Renewable Society, a non-profit organization. We also included an opinion from an internal perspective of the organization by KIKUCHI Masahiro, Auditor. Working together with stakeholders to “Create the Future, Collaborate Together,” the AIST Group will work as one to drive innovation in Japan. Through this report, we will strive to build a deeper relationship of trust with society by introducing the activities of the AIST Group and our vision for the future. 

MIYAZAKI Koyomi, Director, Branding and Public Relations Department 

In the editorial policy, it was clearly stated that the report “aims to be an integrated report that comprehensively conveys the entire picture of AIST's activities, going beyond the scope of a conventional sustainability report.” This report describes AIST's vision for 2030 and beyond as “the core of the national innovation ecosystem,” and reports on the various organizational and management reforms currently being undertaken, backcasting from this vision. An integrated report is the most appropriate medium at this stage to convey this sense of dynamism and the value creation process toward the vision, and we believe choosing such a form was a wise decision. The framework of the entire report is summarized on pages 06–07, “AIST Group Initiatives for Value Creation,” which was prepared with full consideration of AIST's position, and it is a very convincing value creation process. Regarding outcomes, IIRC clarifies that there is a lack of understanding of the concept of outcomes and limited disclosure of outcomes compared to outputs, but we understand that the description here is accurate and will have a significant impact on the two missions. 

Recently, human capital has been the focus of attention and disclosure of related matters has been progressing. AIST, which has human resources as its core competence, has also detailed the improvement of human resource c a p a b i l i t i e s a n d e n g a g e m e n t a s “ h u m a n c a p i t a l management” in this report. One of the most memorable aspects of the report is the initiative to acquire doctoral degrees. PhD holders have a weak presence in Japan, and if the trend away from doctoral degrees continues, it is inevitable that our national strength will be damaged. We hope that you will continue to report on the results of this matter in the future. 

There are some requests for reports for the next year and beyond. The most important of them is the identification of materiality. Some reports indicate that approximately 90% of integrated reports identify it. This is because materiality identification plays an important role in improving the quality of communication by identifying the key challenges and opportunities facing the organization and clarifying the va l u e c r e a t i o n s t r a te g y to r e a l i ze t h e v i s i o n. W h e n identifying materiality, we expect discussions to take place across various departments, not just a few. This will break down silos between departments, stimulate discussion within the organization, and cultivate “integrated thinking,” which we believe will make a significant contribution not only to the preparation of integrated reports but also to management reform. The most impressive achievement during the 5th mid- to long-term target period, especially in FY 2023, is that AIST has put high priority on building up its value creation process to help our society and companies solve serious problems. It has spun off its marketing functions to its fully-owned company (AISol) which contributes most effectively to the solutions of the above problems, and has started its new governance system as the AIST Group. I appreciate that the AIST Group is strongly conscious of promoting integrated research through collaboration and cooperation among each research area in a wide range of fields from basic research to social implementation toward the management goal. The brand-new policy has been well discussed and summarized in one easy-to-understand diagram (p. 06–07) as the Group's value creation process. The AIST Group as well as Japanese corporations as a whole have their traditional tendency to convince themselves that good things would be valued fairly by the public without speaking out about their excellence and usefulness. However, now there is an assertive attitude toward advancing valuable R&D, achieving remarkable outcomes, and being given their legitimate evaluation on the assumption that it is based on deep discussion and full understanding of what is necessary to solve social and corporate problems. The people of the AIST Group are currently in the process of changing the mindset to overcome the traditional framework of a National Research and Development Agency. Needless to say, this unprecedented battle for change has a long way to go. 

In doing so, I emphasize that establishing an unwavering governance structure as the AIST Group, including AISol, on a trial-and-error basis, is the first requirement for achieving the Group’s objectives. In particular, the brilliant management of the Group’s organization and human capital is impor tant so that its people with diversified backgrounds corporate with each other to achieve maximum outputs. The AIST Group has conducted wide-ranging internal and external reforms to this end. The Group is suffering from its complicated operation processes because AIST as an independent administrative agency and AISol as a company have to follow different procedures due to different laws and accounting standards. It will aim to overcome the difficulties to achieve its integrated management as the AIST Group. I look forward to the establishment of the AIST Group’s organization that considers the balance between the promotion of free and vigorous research operations and the solid compliance systems. 

Lastly, I must inform you about two regrettable incidents that have deeply damaged the Group’s unrelenting efforts for change. The arrest of an ex-researcher for his leakage of technical information and the revelations of research misconduct by another researcher last year have harmed the Group’s high reputation considerably. The Group has taken many effective measures to prevent recurrence of such incidents, but ultimately it is a matter of the morals of all those belonging to the AIST Group. I strongly hope that all the people of the AIST Group are fully aware that these incidents are their problem, not others’, and build up a vibrant organization with a high level of moral and compliance. Workers Club for Eco-harmonic Renewable Society (NPO) 

YAMAGUCHI Tamio, Director 

66 Branding and Public Relations Department 

1-1-1 Umezono, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8560, Japan E-mail M-ccg-ml@aist.go.jp 

○Reproduction in whole or in part without written permission is prohibited. Published in March, 2025
