Title: Ready for Take-off? (EN)

URL Source: https://www.oecd.org/content/dam/oecd/en/publications/reports/2021/02/ready-for-take-off_64c92c83/6e3f6792-en.pdf

Published Time: Wed, 14 May 2025 00:46:04 GMT

Markdown Content:
Ready for Take-Off? 

# Integrating Drones into 

# the Transport System 

> Corporate Partnership Board

# CPB Ready for Take-Off? 

# Integrating Drones into 

# the Transport System 

# Research Report 

# 2021 The International Transport Forum 

The International Transport Forum is an intergovernmental organisation with 62 member countries. It acts 

as a think tank for transport policy and organises the Annual Summit of transport ministers. ITF is the only 

global body that covers all transport modes. The ITF is politically autonomous and administratively 

integrated with the OECD. 

The ITF works for transport policies that improve peoples’ lives. Our mission is to foster a deeper 

understanding of the role of transport in economic growth, environmental sustainability and social 

inclusion and to raise the public profile of transp ort policy. 

The ITF organises global dialogue for better transport. We act as a platform for discussion and pre -

negotiation of policy issues across all transport modes. We analyse trends, share knowledge and promote 

exchange among transport decision -makers and civil society. The ITF’s Annual Summit is the world’s largest 

gathering of transport ministers and the leading global platform for dialogue on transport policy. 

The Members of the Forum are: Albania, Armenia, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Belarus, 

Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, China (People’s Republic of), Croatia, 

Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, India, 

Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kore a, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, 

Mexico, Republic of Moldova, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, the Netherlands, New Zea land, 

North Macedonia, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Russian Federation, Serbia, Slovak Republic, 

Slovenia, Spa in, Sweden, Switzerland, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine, the United Arab Emirates, the 

United Kingdom, the United States and Uzbekistan .

International Transport Forum 

2 rue André Pascal 

F-75775 Paris Cedex 16 

contact@itf -oecd.org 

www.itf -oecd.org 

# ITF Research Reports 

ITF Research Reports are in -depth studies of transport policy issues of concern to ITF member countries. 

They present the findings of dedicated ITF working groups, which bring together international experts over 

a period of usually one to two years , and are vetted by the ITF Transport Research Committee. Any findings, 

interpretations and conclusions expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect 

the views of the International Transport Forum or the OECD. Neither the OECD, I TF nor the authors 

guarantee the accuracy of any data or other information contained in this publication and accept no 

responsibility whatsoever for any consequence of their use. This document and any map included herein 

are without prejudice to the status of or sovereignty over any territory, to the delimitation of international 

frontiers and boundaries and to the name of any territory, city or area. 

Cite this work as: ITF (202 1), Ready for Take Off? Integrating Drones into the Transport System , ITF 

Research Reports, OECD Publishing, Paris. Acknowledgements 

In December 2018, the International Transport Forum (ITF) at the OECD convened more than 30 

distinguished international experts to form a Working Group “Drones in the Transport System: Acceptability and Integration” discussing the integration of drones into the overall transport system and 

the prerequisites for public acceptance of regular drone transport. The group assembled renowned practitioners and academics from areas including aviation regulation, transport modelling, innovation policy and urban planning. It was first chaired by Laura Ponto, then Counsel at Hogan Lovells, and later by Richard Cross, Manager Strategic Policy and Innovation, New Zealand Ministry of Transport – Te Manatū Waka. 

The Working Group was facilitated by Katja Schechtner, Advisor for Innovation and Technology at ITF and Visiting Scholar at Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), and Elisabeth Windisch, Team Lead Empirical Policy Analysis, ITF. They would like to thank Ombline De Saint Leon Langles, Andrew Lombardi and Vatsalya Sohu (all ITF) for their support on compiling this report and Edwina Collins (ITF) for her support in the publishing process. The group brought together knowledge from 14 countries and three international organisations to provide insights on one of the most discussed issues in aviation today. The authors* of this Working Group report are: Nathanel Apter, Swiss Federal Office of Civil Aviation (FOCA) Franziska Biermann, City of Hamburg Ryan Coates, Transport Canada Richard Cross, New Zealand Ministry of Transport Dagi Geister, German Aerospace Center (DLR) Larissa Haas, Swiss Federal Office of Civil Aviation (FOCA) 

Tomáš Habán, Czech Transport Research Centre (CDV) 

Jaehyun Han, Korea Transport Institute (KOTI) Peter Irvine, US Department of Transport (DoT) Marcel Kägi, Swiss Federal Office of Civil Aviation (FOCA) Yeon Myung Kim, Korea Institute of Aviation Safety and Technology Adam Kleczatsky, Czech Technical University Frederic Malaud, International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) Isabel Carole Metz, German Aerospace Center (DLR) Tale Ørving, Norwegian Centre for Transport Research (TØI) Henry Pak, German Aerospace Center (DLR) Laura Ponto, Hogan Lovells Andreas Richter, City of Hamburg 

Katja Schechtner , International Transport For um (ITF) 

Michael Scheibenreif, Austro Control and UNICEF 

Stefan Seer, Austrian Institute of Technology (AIT) 

Anna Straubinger, Bauhaus Luftfahrt 

Jan Walulik, University of Warsaw 

Elisabeth Windisch, International Transport Forum (ITF) 

Stefan Zaß, German Mi nistry for Transport and Digital Infrastructure 

Additional expertise and review were provided by: 

James Bell and Adam Martin, UK Department for Transport (DfT); Peter van Blyenburgh, UVS International; 

Francine Zimmermann, Swiss Federal Office of Civil Aviation (FOCA) ; Severine Charmant, French Drone 

Council; Leslie Cary, International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO); Francois Combes, French Institute of 

Science and Technology for Transport, Development and Networks (IFSTTAR); Lorenzo Casullo, OECD ; Iain

Macbeth, Transport for London (TfL); Hans Heerkens, University of Twente; Anders Lindström, Swedish 

National Road and Transport Research Institute (vti); Vassilis Agouridas , Airbus ; Alexander Norman ,

Matternet ; Tassilo Wanner , Lilium .

The Working Group report also benefited from the insights of the 2018 ITF Report: “(Un)certain Skies, 

Drones in the World of Tomorrow” that was developed in cooperation with ITF’s Corporate Partnership 

Board. 

* all affiliation s as provided at time of contribution to the group TABLE OF CONTENTS   

> READY FOR TAKE -OFF? INTEGRATING DRONES INTO THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM © OECD/ITF 2021

5

# Table of c ontents 

Abbreviations and acronyms  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...............  7

Executive summary  ................................ ................................ ................................ .............................  8

1 Introduction  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ...  11 

Drones will have positive economic i mpacts, but will also create economic risks ........................ 12 

To build social acceptance, drones will need to provide clear benefits to the general public ...... 13 

Drones will create new environmental challenges ................................ ................................ ........ 13 

Policy makers will need to support the development of physical and 

digital infrastructure while ensuring equitable access ................................ ................................ .. 14 

Policy should emphasise filling gaps in the network while supporting broader goals ................... 14 

2 Drones for transport: Potential market and economic impacts of drones for transport .................  16 

Impacts on transport operations ................................ ................................ ................................ ... 16 

Impacts on competition ................................ ................................ ................................ ................ 23 

Impacts on employment ................................ ................................ ................................ ............... 25 

Impacts on property/land value ................................ ................................ ................................ .... 27 

Refe rences  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ........  30 

3 Societal impacts and acceptance of drones  ................................ ................................ ...................  34 

Impacts on the equity of the transport system ................................ ................................ ............. 34 

Impacts on privacy ................................ ................................ ................................ ........................ 37 

Impacts on con nectivity to remote regions ................................ ................................ ................... 40 

Impacts on accessibility in urban and sub -urban areas ................................ ................................ . 42 

References  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ........  45 

4 Environmental impacts of drones  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..  49 

Noise impacts ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ 49 

CO 2 impacts ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ... 52 

Air pollution impacts ................................ ................................ ................................ ..................... 56 

Wildlife impacts ................................ ................................ ................................ ............................. 57 

Other environmental impacts ................................ ................................ ................................ ....... 58 

References  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ........  60 

5 Infrastructures for drone deployment: Droneports and Unmanned Air Traffic Management  ........  65 

Ground infrastructures – The future of droneports ................................ ................................ ...... 65 

Unmanned Air Traffic Management (UTM) systems ................................ ................................ ..... 70 

References  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ........  81

6 Drones as part of the transport system  ................................ ................................ .........................  84 

Existing relationships bet ween transport modes ................................ ................................ .......... 84 

Potential impacts of integrating drones with other transport modes ................................ ........... 86 

References  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ........  92 

Annex: Working Group participants ................................ ................................ ................................ ...  96 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

6 READY FOR TAKE -OFF? INTEGRATING DRONES INTO THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM © OECD/ITF 2021 

# Figures 

Figure 1. Price comparison  of passenger  drone services with other mode s of 

transport during first years of operation (USD/mile)  ................................ ................................ ........  20 

Figure 2. Airport ownership and operation options ................................ ................................ ..........  69 

Figure 3. Airspace classes in the United States  ................................ ................................ .................  72 

Figure 4. Competition of transport modes as a function of travel distance  ................................ .....  85 

# Boxes 

Box 1. Examples of drone delivery trials and applications ................................ ................................ 18 

Box 2. Examples of passenger drone trials and ambitions ................................ ................................ 19 

Box 3. Examples of non -transport applications of drones related to the transport sector ............... 21 

Box 4. General Data Protection Regulation principles relating to processing of personal data ........ 38 

Box 5. Examples of drone trials in and to remote regions to deliver medical supplies ..................... 41 

Box 6. Access to airspace ................................ ................................ ................................ .................. 72 

Box 7. M obility as a Service: The Helsinki example ................................ ................................ ........... 86 ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS   

> READY FOR TAKE -OFF? INTEGRATING DRONES INTO THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM © OECD/ITF 2021

7

# Abbreviations and acronyms 

AAM advanced air mobility 

ANS air navigation services 

ANSP air navigation service provider 

ATC air traffic control 

ATM air traffic management 

API application programming interface 

DOT U.S. Department of Transportation 

gCO 2 grams of CO 2

GDP gross domestic product 

GHG greenhouse gas 

IATA Inte rnational Air Transport Association 

ICAO International Civil Aviation Organization 

IPP Integration Pilot Program 

KPI key performance indicator 

LCA life -cycle assessment 

MaaS Mobility as a Service 

PPP public -private partnership 

UAM urban air mobility 

UAS unmanned aircraft systems 

UTM unmanned traffic management 

VTOL vertical take -off and landing EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

8 READY FOR TAKE -OFF? INTEGRATING DRONES INTO THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM © OECD/ITF 2021 

# Executive summary 

What we did 

Recent years have seen rapid developments in drone technology. Today, drones have the potential to 

become a reliable technology for civil, commercial and leisure use. However, existing policy frameworks 

are often lagging behind technological advances, causing reluc tance among potential adopters or 

hampering new developments .

This report presents policy options for integrating drones into the wider transport system while reaping 

their opportunit ies and limiting any potential risks. It focuses on standard public concerns related to the 

introduction of new transport services, such as their acceptability, efficiency and sustainability. It therefore 

goes far beyond the frequently debated safety and s ecurity issues of drones. The report considers the use 

of drones for different scales of payloads and autonomies, mainly used in freight and passenger transport .

It also looks at drone use cases in the transport sector that go beyond the transport of passe ngers or goods ,

such as their use in the maintenance of transport infrastructure .

The insights and policy options presented in this report build on the collective knowledge of the Working 

Group on Drones in the Transport System: Acceptability and Integrat ion by the International Transport 

Forum. The group included more than 30 renowned practitioners and academics from 14 countries with 

expertise in aviation, transport regulation, mobility systems and urban planning .

What we found 

Drone technology – includi ng related research and development , manufacturing and operations – enables 

significant economic activity . It offers many potential use cases that can ultimately deliver substantial 

economic , social and environmental benefits . Countries should recognis e these potential benefits and 

work to wards safely integrating drones into their aviation and overall transport systems . However , various 

public concerns about the large -scale deployment of drones have not yet been thoroughly addressed .

There remain substant ial knowledge gap s about how to respond to such concerns as there is only limited 

research on the potential impacts of drones that goes beyond assessing safety, security and privacy 

concerns. In parallel , policy makers continue to assess the appropriatenes s of existing regulations (e.g. for 

aviation) and how best to adopt n ew policies and rules for drone use to ensure their market potential can 

be leveraged and societal benefits realised. 

What we recommend 

Establish clear objectives and priorities for the introduction of drone transport by identifying the best first 

use cases 

Like all new technologies, drones will have both positive and negative impacts. To keep up with the 

developments of new technologies and enable future research within the sector, authorities should clarify 

priorities for drone integration by identifying initial use cases that align with the overall transport policy 

goals. Where possible, early trials of drones should also focus on use cases that have clear public benefit s,

such as transporting medical goods and improving access to remote communities. Industry claims 

concerning, for example, the efficiency or sustainability of drones should be objectively evaluated. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY    

> READY FOR TAKE -OFF? INTEGRATING DRONES INTO THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM © OECD/ITF 2021

9

Design a communicati on strategy that directly addresses public concerns 

Public acceptance will have a major impact on the speed of drone development. Authorities can enhance 

acceptance by directly addressing concerns such as about safety, privacy, noise, visual disturbance, 

equit able access related to drones. This can be accomplished by ensuring that the public is informed about, 

for example, accident and incident rates, method s of reporting and addressing grievances , rules that 

govern the flight and take -off and landing proce dures of drones , and the benefits provided by drone 

operations. 

Clarify and develop drones’ status within the broader framework of aerospace regulation 

Drone transport services may be subject to the same market access restrictions as manned aviation under 

the Chicago Convention (1944) and associated aviation licensing and traffic rules. Restrictions on 

operations could especially constrain the development of drone companies that engage in the carriage of 

goods or people. Authorities wishing to exempt drone operations from restrictive rules, such as the 

prohibition on cabotage, need to determine how to distinguish drone services from manned aviation and 

whether to distinguish transport drones from those performing other commercial services (such as aerial 

su rveillance) .

Co -ordinate with the drone industry to inform investment, development, and equitable policy making 

Governments can establish mechanisms to address issues related to regulation, governance, and the 

funding of drone infrastructure. Such mechani sms can consult different levels of government and industry 

stakeholders as appropriate and on an ongoing basis, taking into account national, regional or local 

characteristics. Private industry is currently spearheading most drone technology developments, thus 

gaining the expertise and insights that can inform and support policy development. Where appropriate, 

governments are encouraged to actively collaborate with industry to develop policies to support drone 

development and deployment in ways that increa se public acceptance. 

Foster the emergence of civil aviation authorities with interdisciplinary competencies and capabilities in 

order to integrate drones into the transport system 

The emergence of drone applications will fundamentally transform the aviat ion industry by attracting 

many new players with different backgrounds, characteristics and requirements. To ensure that 

authorities can keep their active role in integrating drones in the airspace in accordance with this 

transformative ecosystem, they nee d to transform themselves too. Thus, civil aviation authorities should 

promote more flexibility, by investing in interdisciplinary c ompetencies that may far exceed expertise in 

aviation and transport .

Support the design and implementation of a robust Unman ned Air Traffic Management system 

Unmanned Air Traffic Management (UTM) will be essential for managing drones, especially as they 

increase in volume. UTM can ensure the physical separation of aircraft, allocate airspace, and optimise 

route planning, especi ally in densely populated areas with crowded air corridors . There is no one -size -fits -

all approach to UTM, and a number of different governance approaches are currently being tria lled. Any 

future UTM system must prioritise safety, security, interoperabilit y, and equitable access to airspace. 

Drone registration and remote identification are key building blocks that will support the development of 

UTM in order to increase t ransparency and public accountability. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

10 READY FOR TAKE -OFF? INTEGRATING DRONES INTO THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM © OECD/ITF 2021 

Develop method s for assessing the im pact of drones’ full life cycle on the environment 

Policymakers should focus on the total energy consumption and emissions generated from drones, 

including those associated with the manufacture and disposal of the drone s. The net impact on carbon 

emissions will , a mong other parameters, depend on the source of energy used and on the activities that 

drones perform. Other environmental impacts, including noise and vibration, will also vary greatly 

depending on the drone use case , and comparisons of impacts with manned aviation will not always be 

appropriate. 

Incorporate drone operations into long -term urban planning strategy using data and predictive models 

Drone operations will likely have a small infrastructure footprint compared to manned aviation, at least 

initial ly, but could be deployed in combination with existing modes of transport. Cities should incorporate 

drone operations into their long -term planning, and leverage data and research to identify areas where 

drones may be most suitable. The best environments f or initial drone deployment include areas where 

noise and visual disturbance can be minimised, where new or more efficient transport links can be created, 

where the value of existing land use and properties is maintained, and drone operations (both passeng er 

and cargo) can be seamlessly integrated with other modes of transport to reduce transfer times. 1. INTRODUCTION   

> READY FOR TAKE -OFF? INTEGRATING DRONES I NTO THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM © OECD/ITF 2021

11 

# CHAPTER 1

# Introduction 

For several years, drones have been transforming the way many businesses operate. Initially, the limited 

range and payload of drones meant that they were best suited to conducting tasks that were costly or 

impractical to perform using traditional (manned) aircraft, such as aerial photography, surveying and 

mapping. However, as drone technology has advanced, the use cases for drones have rapidly expanded. It 

is now evident that in the decades ahead drones will play an increasingly import ant role in all aspects of 

the transport system, including transporting both goods and people. 

Drones are no longer limited to the small, electric rotor aircraft commonly used by photographers, tourists 

and hobbyists. The term drone is used throughout thi s report as it is more commonly understood by the 

public. It is an umbrella term that encompasses all flying vehicles without a human operator on board .*

The underlying technologies used in drones can be fitted to virtually any conventional aircraft, and t here 

is wide variation in their size, weight, level of automation, design features and method of propulsion. 

Like all new technologies, drones bring both benefits and risks. Drones are expected to improve safety by 

automation (hereby limiting the degree o f human interaction and related possible human error) and create 

economic benefits by reducing costs and improving efficiency, resulting in new business processes and 

opportunities. However, drones will also introduce new risks and externalities. Technolog y developers will 

naturally highlight the benefits of drones while tending to understate or overlook risks and challenges ;

mitigating these risks will be crucial for building public acceptance, which will ultimately determine where 

and how dro nes are used in the future. 

Although drones have unique characteristics, they are still aircraft, and they will need to fit into an existing 

aviation system to ensure ongoing safety and public acceptance . This system has been established over 

many decades and is suppo rted by a myriad of regulations and standards , which are set out in international 

conventions and mirrored in domestic legislation , regulations, and operator practices throughout the 

world. Integrating drones into this system without compromising the safet y or security of the aviation 

system will be a significant challenge for many years to come. There are extensive trials underway, and 

significant resources and literature dedicated to evaluat ing safety and security issues. These issues are not 

discussed he re, but their importance is by no way overlooked by the authors of this report. There is far 

less dialogue and research identifying possible approaches to integrating drones into the economy and 

society with a high level of public acceptance .

Realising th e full potential of drones will require new tools and new ways of working. The private sector 

will have a key role to play, not only in developing the drones themselves, but also in developing the 

technologies needed to support their integration into the t ransport system. Drones will need to integrate 

into not only the aviation system, but also into the transport system and society more broadly . This will 

require input from experts in new technology fields and other transport sectors beyond aviation ; and 

experts from bot h aviation and from outside the sector will need to understand the regulatory            

> *Other, more technical terms are also used to discuss drones in many countries and aviation. The most frequently
> used terms are remotely -piloted aircraft system (RPAS) and unmanned aircraft system (UAS). Literature also refers to
> unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV), autonomous aerial vehicle (AAV) and remotely piloted aerial vehicle (RPAV). 1. INTRODUCTION

12 READY FOR TAKE -OFF? INTEGRATING DRONES INTO THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM © OECD/ITF 2021 

environment and culture of both aviation and other transport policy fields, such as urban transport 

planning .

Unmanned traffic m anagement (UTM) systems will be an essential part of the drone ecosystem. UTMs 

enable deconfliction of air traffic and real -time identification of drones in flight ; they can also identify the 

most efficient route for a given flight based on its origin and destination, weather, other air traffic, and a 

number of other factors. In the future, UTMs are likely to be an important tool both for managing the 

environmental impacts of drones (allowing flights to be planned to take into account restrictions on noise 

or visual disturbance ) and for ensuring equitable access to take -off and landing areas in areas of high 

demand. Regulators and policy makers around the world will need to work closely with industry and other 

stakeholders to establish performance -based standards for UTMs that are inte roperable and interact with 

existing air traffic control systems. 

A key message of this report is that although drones have the potential to improve many aspects of our 

society and economy, the realisation of these benefits will depend on policy makers pu tting into place a 

good foundation . With careful management, drones could improve access to places of opportunities (such 

as jobs, health care, education) and contribute to a safer, more efficient and more sustainable transport 

system – but if they are not managed carefully , they have the potential to increase emissions, noise and 

other environmental impacts while exacerbat ing inequality in the transport system. This report is a call to 

action for policy makers to look beyond the most obvious potential impa cts of drones, and to consider 

how they can shape some of the less -obvious potential impacts of drones through the policies they 

develop. 

Drones will have positive economic impacts, but will also create 

economic risks 

There is a wide range of potential u se cases for drones. These include networks of small drones carrying 

parcels and/or medical goods over short distances , larger cargo drones carrying heavier payloads over long 

distances , and drones transporting passengers. Passenger drones may be used with in large and sprawling 

urban areas, or to connect cities with regions that are either difficult to access by surface transport or lack 

the infrastructure or scale necessary to support traditional forms of aviation. 

The economic benefits of drones are significant. Drones are expected to expand access to goods by 

allowing for faster and less expensive air transport, unbound by the expensive and expansive infrastructure 

traditional aircraft require. Drones are likely to increase productivity and create new manufacturing and 

technology development streams, which will create jobs throughout the economy . In the more distant 

future, t hey may also shift or eliminate jobs within portions of the transport sector. 

Over time, dr ones can also be expected to affect land use and property values, both positively and 

negatively. Where drones are perceived to provide benefits, property values are likely to increase, but 

where they are perceived to be an annoyance (e.g. due to noise, vi sual disturbance or privacy concerns), 

property values are likely to decrease. Drones may also affect land use patterns, as improved accessibility 

may create an incentive for people or businesses to move away from dense urban areas. 

The development of new markets for drones will depend in part on regulation. In particular, as drones are 

generally considered “ civil aircraft ”, they are likely to fall within the Convention on International Civil 

Aviation , or Chicago Convention (1944) . They may also be subject to national licensing framework s which 

limit the ability of foreign investors to participate in the aviation industry. In facilitating the integration of 1. INTRODUCTION    

> READY FOR TAKE -OFF? INTEGRATING DRONES INTO THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM © OECD/ITF 2021

13 

drones, policy makers will need to consider whether the economic regulation of drones under th ese

fra mework s is beneficial or necessary. 

To build social acceptance, dr ones will need to provide clear 

benefits to the general public 

Drones, particularly passenger carrying drones, have the potential to significantly reduce costs compared 

to traditional forms of aviation. If these cost reductions can be realised, they have the potential to create 

new markets and significantly improve connectivity – both within large metropolitan areas and in remote 

or geographically isolated regions which are poorly served by other modes. This in turn may lead to 

changes in commuting patterns and/or urban development. While this will bring benefits for some people, 

it may also raise significant sustainability issues by incentivising urban sprawl and increasing the ecological 

fo otprint of the existing population. 

A key risk with drones used for passenger services is that, at least initially, services may be priced to recover 

high investment costs , and therefore reach levels that are appealing only to passengers with high incomes .

The benefits of these services could largely be confined to wealthy citizens, while their externalities (such 

as visual disturbance or noise) would affect the general public. Drone delivery services may result in similar 

equity concerns if they are perce ived to be catering primarily to wealthy citizens, particularly if they are 

delivering non -essential goods. If drone services are not affordable to a majority of citizens, social 

acceptance will be low, and large -scale drone innovation and deployment may b e impeded from the 

outset. Policy makers and drone companies will have to think carefully how to address social acceptance 

and ensure that drones are seen as providing value to the public at large. 

Drones will create new environmental challenges 

Traditional aviation has a significant impact on the environment, but these impacts are generally well 

understood, and a range of policies, standards and operational procedures have been developed to ensure 

that these impacts are addressed. In contrast, th e environmental impacts of drones have received 

comparatively little attention. The huge variation in both the size and physical characteristics of drones, 

and the environments in which they operate, mean that the mitigations that have been developed for 

traditional forms of aviation are unlikely to be sufficient to manage the environmental impacts of drones, 

and new approaches will be required. 

Noise is a key factor which could be a major obstacle to drone integration if it is not carefully managed. 

This is due not only to the actual noise drones produce ( often a high -pitched tone that is typically between 

20 and 70 decibel s), but also to the ways in which noise is perceived – such as people’s familiarity with and 

acceptance levels of drones , or surrounding noise levels . In cities, the ambient noise levels of conventional 

vehicles may make drone noise less apparent. However, their proximity to residential areas, and the 

increasing uptake of quieter electric vehicles , may make drones more noticeabl e. 

Although most drones produce zero tailpipe emissions, this does not mean they do not contribute to net 

greenhouse gas emissions. All drones will consume energy. The amount of energy used will depend on the 

design of the drone, its payload, the energy m ix used for electricity production, and the method of 

electricity transmission to the battery. The production and scrapping of drones at the end of their lifespan 

will also consume energy and produce emissions. The net emissions of drones compared to tradi tional 

modes of transport will depend on the specific use case and the local context. In some cases (such as 1. INTRODUCTION 

14 READY FOR TAKE -OFF? INTEGRATING DRONES INTO THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM © OECD/ITF 2021 

carrying lightweight packages in sparsely populated areas that would have otherwise required a delivery 

van), drones may reduce emissions. In other cases, drones may result in a net increase in emissions. 

Drones will also have other environmental impacts, both positive and negative. They are likely to help 

alleviate air pollution in urban cities, as the majority of drones are electric powered. Drones may also have 

impact s on wildlife and generate visual disturbance, however, and these impacts will need to be carefully 

managed. 

Policy makers will need to support the development of physical and 

digital infrastructure while ensur ing equitable access 

In order to operate safely, drones will rely on infrastructure. This includes both physical infrastructure 

(such as charging stations and designated take -off and landing areas) as well as digital infrastructure (such 

as UTM services and associated communicati ons infrastructure). 

Most drones are smaller than traditional aircraft . Their ability to take off and land vertically with a high level 

of precision means that they typically occupy a smaller spatial footprint. The specific characteristics of the 

physical infrastructure will depend on both the location and its intended use cases. In rural areas, 

infrastructure for drones is likely to be relatively inexpensive. In dense urban areas, suitable take -off and 

landing areas (particularly for larger, passenger car rying drones) are likely to be scarce, and will require 

careful planning in order to comply with zoning and other regulations. In some cases, demand for landing 

sites in a given area may exceed supply, and in these instances there may be a case for either public funding 

or regulations to ensure fair and equitable access to take -off and landing sites. 

Currently, in most countries, drones are able to fly at low altitudes in uncontrolled airspace without 

authorisation or communication with air traffic control . However, in the future, drones are expected to 

regularly operate in other classes of airspace as they become larger and fly at higher altitudes , and there 

are likely to be an increasing number of aircraft in the skies . New UTM systems will be required to enable 

seamless communication between drones, other aircraft, and air traffic control. To date, the development 

of UTM has been led by the private sector, with the public sector helping to establish and ensure 

compliance with performance -based standards. This creates a risk that private sector actors may priori tise 

certain operations (including their own commercial operations) or apply fees that have the effect of 

commercialising public airspace. This, in turn, could lead to the emergence of a UTM structur e that is 

dominated by a handful of private monopolies. To mitigate these risks, policy makers will need to have a 

better understanding of the way data is produced, collected, stored, analysed and repurposed within the 

UTM ecosystem. They will also need to keep th e risk s in mind as they establish regulatory frameworks to 

support UTM systems , emphasi sing interoperability .

Policy should emphasise fill ing gaps in the network while support ing 

broader goals 

Drones will not operate in isolation. Rather, they will be integrated into a larger, inter -modal transport 

system. For example, freight may travel by boat, rail, or truck, and then be transported by airborne drone 

to its final destination; and passenger drones may transport people to airports or rail stati ons as just one 

leg of their journey. In some cases drones may act as a complement to existing modes, helping to fill gaps 

in the network and making it more viable for people to get around without the need to own a private 1. INTRODUCTION    

> READY FOR TAKE -OFF? INTEGRATING DRONES INTO THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM © OECD/ITF 2021

15 

vehicle. In other cases, drones m ay act as a substitute, or induce demand for new trips which otherwise 

would not have been made or that were not previously possible to make .

Although m ost drone services are likely to be provided by the private sector, governments can still 

influence how and where they are used. For example, through planning policy, governments can 

encourage the integration of drone services into existing transfer hubs to provide seamless connections 

to other transport modes. Other tools – such as establishing flight corr idors , or using drone registries and 

geofencing to prevent flights over certain areas – can also help to ensure that drone services are 

supporting public policy goals. 2. DRONES FOR TRANSPORT: POTENTIAL MARKET AND ECONOMIC IMPACTS OF DRONES FOR TRANSPORT 

16 READY FOR TAKE -OFF? INTEGRATING DRONES INTO THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM © OECD/ITF 2021 

# CHAPTER 2 

# Drones for transport : Potential market and 

# economic impacts of drones for transport 

Drones have the potential to unlock a wide range of economic benefits by improving the efficiency of 

supply chains and offering a new mode of passenger transport. However, as with all technologies, drones 

also create economic risks that must be considered and mitigated to allow for the ir succes sful 

development. 

This chapter discusses promising use cases for drones in the transport sector and provides policy 

recommendations that can help materialise the drones’ market potential. The chapter also assesses the 

impacts of drones on competition and employment in the transport sector, as well as on land and property 

values, and propos es policy actions that can help mitigate any unwanted, related effects. 

Impact s on transport operations 

Drones in the transport sect or may be used for freight and passenger transport operations. Policy makers 

should pursue policies that ensure this market potential materialises and provides for the economic 

development of the transport sector, while minimising any potential externaliti es (as discussed throughout 

this report). Use cases in transport may also go beyond the transport of goods or passengers and benefit 

the sector as a whole (such as when deployed to aid the maintenance of transport infrastructure) .

Drones for freight transp ort 

Consultancy firm Roland Berger (2020) identifies four different cargo -drone use cases that can be 

differentiated by the drone’s payload and degree of autonomy . In all applications, the aim is to automate 

the transport of goods to provide faster, more flexible, and less expensive services compared to traditional 

means of transport: 

 Automation of intralogistics (in factories and warehouses): Drones may be deployed to deliver 

single items directly to the production line or to help in warehousing activities (refilling of 

depleted shelves , etc.). For example, carmaker Audi has been piloting an indoor drone at its 

Ingolstadt plant. It travels at up to 8 km/h and transports automotive parts up to 2.0 kg to the 

required step in the manufacturing proces s. 

 Delivery of medical goods (often to remote places): Drones can be a fast and reliable transport 

option for urgent medical goods, especially where existing transport infrastructure (or a lack 

thereof) does not allow for efficient deliveries. For example , Zipline – a US company that designs, 

manufactures, and operates delivery drones – has been operating a medical supply drone service 

to 25 hospitals and clinics in Rwanda since 2014, primarily to deliver blood samples and blood 

products. Similar services have since expanded around Africa and beyond, and have seen 

increased interest duri ng the Covid -19 crisis ( see  Box 5 in Chapter 3 for further examples). The 

delivery of medical goods is closely related to the concept of first/last -mile parcel delivery (see 

the next bullet point) as the payload and range of the respective drones can be very similar. For 2. DRONES FOR TRANSPORT: POTENTIAL MARKET AND ECONOMIC IMPACTS OF DRONES FOR TRANSPORT   

> READY FOR TAKE -OFF? INTEGRATING DRONES INTO THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM © OECD/ITF 2021

17 

many drone operators and/or manufacturers, the deliver y of medical goods is a start, with the 

aim of expand ing operations to also provide first/last mile deliveries. 

 First/last mile parcel delivery (often in/around urban areas): Drones can bring significant increases 

in productivity and profitability (and he nce cost savings) for logistics companies in first/last mile 

operations. Often this part of the freight transport chain constitute s the most expensive and least 

efficient part of a delivery, requiring significant manpower , vehicle numbers and time (especially 

where poor traffic, poor roads or geography impede existing delivery methods). Delivery drones 

could also be combined with other new technologies , such as driverless vehicles. Driverless 

vehicles loaded with parcels c ould dispatch multiple delivery drones when they near the most 

efficient point from which to complete their deliveries. Such a vehicle would serve as a base 

station for the drones , providing charging and payload swapping as required (PwC, 2018). See 

Box 1 for examples of drone delivery applications. 

 Transport of air cargo (for longer -distance applications): Cargo drones could allow the 

transportation of g oods more flexibly than truck or train transport allows; they could also provide 

an effective means of balanc ing out stock across different warehouses. For example, US start -up 

Elroy Air has been developing a drone that can carry up to 225 kg within a maxi mum range of 500 

km (Elroy Air, 2020); US -based Yates Electrospace Corp . (YEC) has announced a new widebody 

cargo delivery drone with a payload of 567 kg (Air Cargo News, 2020); Natilus, a California -based 

start -up, is developing a 60m -long drone with a 10 0-ton capacity (Jordan, 2019); and in May 2020 

Sabrewing Aircraft Company unveiled a drone with a payload of more than 2 000 kg (when taking 

off and landing from a runway) and a range of almost 2 000 km (Harry, 2020 ; Hsu, 2020). To date, 

commercial applications of such high -payload cargo drones have not started. 

Alternatively, cargo drone use cases could also be categorised into intralogistics, short -range/last -mile 

delivery, and long -haul/large -payload delivery services. 

The par cel delivery sector’s existing use of automation, broad network, and high visibility have led to early 

adoption of drone technology by many firms, including new -entrant technology providers and existing 

freight and logistics companies. Today , parcel delive ry is the among the most prevalent drone use cases in 

the transport sector (especially when combined with the related use case of medical suppl y transport ). For 

firms that ship millions of packages per day, small reductions in the cost of transporting pack ages improve 

profitability, and improvements to margins and new business models will likely develop over time as 

automation is successfully introduced. Delivering goods to customers more quickly can increase 

competitiveness and network coverage as well. 

A 2016 study (Sudbury and Hutchinson, 2016) conducted a hypothetical analysis of the cost reductions 

that Amazon could achieve through drone deliveries while accounting for factors such as labour, capital, 

maintenance and regulatory costs, and weather delay s. The analysis predicted that a network of drones in 

Chattanooga, Tennessee , would reduce costs by one -third or more, compared to ground -based delivery 

methods. Amazon’s drone technology intends for drones to replace traditional forms of package delivery 

which are both labour and capital intensive. It is envisioned that one drone operator will monitor multiple 

drones simultaneously. 

Another study (Aurambout, Gkoumas, and Ciuffo, 2019) undertook modelling, using EU -wide population 

and land use data, to con sider the potential economic viability of “drone beehives” (a type of consolidation 

centre , patented by Amazon, that accommodate s landing and take -off of drones in densely populated 

areas) as a last -mile delivery solution in urban areas. The study finds th at drone beehives are economically 

viable in many European urban areas (reaching 7 -30% of EU citizens, depending on the scenario). The 2. DRONES FOR TRANSPORT: POTENTIAL MARKET AND ECONOMIC IMPACTS OF DRONES FOR TRANSPORT 

18 READY FOR TAKE -OFF? INTEGRATING DRONES INTO THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM © OECD/ITF 2021 

study concludes that such drone activities are likely to develop quickly when regulatory limitations are 

overcome. 

In ad dition to bringing efficiencies to large supply chain firms, drones can provide small businesses with 

greater access to the on -demand delivery market, reduce delivery times, and increase access to goods, 

especially for time -sensitive products. This could f oster competition and increase economic growth. 

However, parcel deliveries with drones will also face a number of limitations. They are likely to be restricted 

from operating in adverse weather conditions, such as high winds, icing or heavy rainfall. In s ome 

circumstances they may also be less efficient than other modes of transport for delivering goods, e.g. when 

direct drone delivery to a household or specific address is im possible given the availability of drone 

infrastructure and/or potential flight or landing restrictions. They may also not be preferred by some 

customers. As a result of these limitations, it is likely that drones in the freight transport sector will be a 

complementary or optional mode of transport versus more conventional modes. 

Box  1. Examples of drone delivery trials and applications 

Drone delivery trials have taken place all over the world, employing  various  types of aircraft and delivery 

models . Some trials involve delivering packages to a specific landing sp ot or locker in a given area, where 

the consumer collects the goods. Others deliver directly to a consumer’s home, potentially even without 

the need to land. Lyons Place, a  London  residential complex designed by architect Sir Terry Farrell, will be 

the fir st in the U nited  Kingdom  to implement rooftop  “vertiports ”, encouraging drone delivery services 

(Stouhi, 2019). 

In 2016, Amazon carried out  its  first successful drone delivery operation in Cambridge,  UK . In 2019 it 

unveiled  the  latest version of its Prime Air delivery drone and announced that it wanted to launch a delivery 

service using drones in “the coming months” (Vincent and Gartenberg, 2019). 

In March 2018,  The People’s Republic of  China -based logistics giant SF Express beca me the first company 

to be issued with a commercial license by the Civil Aviation Administration of China (CAAC) that allows 

them to drop off products using their drones. The company aims to use drones for delivering goods to 

rural and sparsely populated a reas in China.  JD.com, China’s second -largest e -commerce company,  has 

also been testing  drones and wants to build 185  droneport s in China’s mountainous southwest region, 

with the aim  of  cut ting  its logistics costs there  by more than half (Huang, 2018). 

In  May 2018, Matternet , a California -based manufacturer of  drones , was selected to carry out drone 

logistics operations for  U.S.  hospitals under the  Federal Aviation Administration ’s  (FAA)  drone integration 

program. In  partner ship  with WakeMed Health  (in Nor th Carolina ) and UPS, they have completed over 

1 000 medical deliveries (UPS, 2019) (Matternet, 2019). 

In April 2019, Wing Aviation,  a cargo drone specialist owned by Google -parent Alphabet, was awarded the 

first U.S. FAA air -carrier certificate licensing  commercial deliveries using cargo drones. The permissions 

allow multiple pilots to oversee numerous simultaneous flights making commercial deliveries to the public. 

In October 2019, the first commercial flight took place in Christiansburg, Virginia.  Using  a smartphone app, 

customers can make an order at one of the partnering retailers ; t he delivery drone then takes off within a 

few minutes (or when scheduled)  and  delivers the parcel directly to the customer’s home  (by lowering the 

package within a small, d esignated area of the homeowner’s property ) before returning to Wing’s “Nest” 

in North Christiansburg (Murphy, 2019). 2. DRONES FOR TRANSPORT: POTENTIAL MARKET AND ECONOMIC IMPACTS OF DRONES FOR TRANSPORT   

> READY FOR TAKE -OFF? INTEGRATING DRONES INTO THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM © OECD/ITF 2021

19 

> Drones for passenger transport

There is now an emerging consensus that drones will eventually play a future role in transporting 

passengers. Over the past few years, an entirely new industry segment is emerging, with companies 

around the world competing to develop drones capable of carr ying passengers and taking off and landing 

vertically. The development of this segment has been partly driven by new start -ups that see an 

opportunity for these aircraft to revolutionise urban mobility . However, all of the major aircraft 

manufacturers – including Airbus, Boeing and Embraer – are also developing variants of drones. Many of 

these drones are expected to carry a pilot on board in the early stages of the business plans. In the short 

term, passenger drones would be used mainly for short -distanc e trips (in and around, but not limited to ,

urban areas) where air or surface transport is either not feasible (e.g. due to infrastructure constraints) or 

very expensive (given its labour -, fuel - and capital -intensity). Drones may eventually also be used f or 

longer -distance passenger trips. Se e Box 2 for examples of passenger drone trials. 

Box  2. Examples of passenger drone trials  and ambitions 

Passenger drone trials are still rare and have not yet gone beyond single test flights. Furthermore,  as of 

June 2020, fully remotely -controlled test flights with passengers have not been carried out to the 

knowledge of the authors. 

In 2017,  Lilium, a Munich -based start -up, launched its  two -seater prototype drone. In 2019, this was 

followed by a first flight of a  five -seater drone. The company envisions offering drone passenger services 

to the public in various cities around the world by 2025,  initially with a human pilot on board (Lilium, 2020). 

Volocopter, also a German -based drone start -up, conducted its first piloted flight with its  two -seater drone 

in Singapore in October 2019.  Th e event marked the end of a long period of trials and  engag ement  with 

the local government. At the same occasion, it also unveiled its vertiport design, called  “Voloport ” – the 

physical infrastructure required for the vertical take -off and landing of the drone (Future Travel 

Experience, 2019).  The company hopes tha t its  “air taxis ” can launch in Singapore as early as 2021, also 

with a pilot on board at first (Elangovan, 2019). 

In May 2018, Airbus created Airbus Urban Mobility. The goal is to offer passenger drone flights across 

congested cities and from suburbs to city centres at a cost that is competitive with traditional ground taxi 

service (Downing, 2019; Airbus, 2020). 

Uber  Air plans to be able to provide shared air taxi services to their customers by 2023, with test flights 

planned in the cities of Dallas, Los Angeles, and Melbourne in 2020 (Uber, 2020). 

The costs for transporting passengers by drone are still highly unc ertain. However, those developing the 

technology have suggested that it will be affordable to the wider population . In the longer run, they expect 

prices to become similar to those of normal taxis (for short trips) or high -speed rail or economy flights (at 

longer distance), or even below the costs of using your own car and viable for daily commuting (Uber, 

2016; Hader, 2018; Downing, 2019; Wakefield, 2020). 

An analysis carried out for the US National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) in 2018 ( Booz 

Allen Hamilton , 2018) estimated a passenger price per mile of USD 11 for a two -seater drone (comparable 

to current limo usine -type services) and USD 6.25 for a five -seater drone (cheaper than limo services, but 

more expensive than luxury ride -sharing servi ces) in the first years of operation (s ee Figure 1 ). This is based 2. DRONES FOR TRANSPORT: POTENTIAL MARKET AND ECONOMIC IMPACTS OF DRONES FOR TRANSPORT 

20 READY FOR TAKE -OFF? INTEGRATING DRONES INTO THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM © OECD/ITF 2021 

on the assumption that, in these first years of operation, drone services require one full -time -equivalent 

pilot per drone and one full -time -equivalent ground crew member. The ground crew i s expected to serve 

multiple roles including passenger check -in, security check and any other customer -related service. The 

assessment also accounts for capital and insurance costs, energy costs, battery costs, infrastructure costs, 

maintenance costs, rout e costs (for the use of airspace) and indirect operating costs. It also defines 

premiums, likely profit margins , and taxes and fees to convert cost estimates into likely consumer prices. 

Once air taxi services become fully automated, labour costs would dec rease, putting downward pressure 

on the prices offered to consumers (assuming a competitive environment ).

Figure 1. Price comparison of passenger drone services with other modes of 

transport during first years of operation (USD/mi le)  

> Source :Booz Allen Hamilton (2018).

Uber (2016) believes that in the long term, drones will be an affordable form of daily transport for most 

people , and even less expensive than owning a car. This may be due to economies of scale in 

manufacturing as drones become more akin to automobiles than aircraft ; and also to their ridesharing 

model , which could amortise vehicle cost efficiently over paid trips. The pooling of trips would also achieve 

higher load factors and thus lower the prices for each indivi dual. This would then drive demand for the 

services and the drones themselves, lowering manufacturing costs further. 

Based on these estimates, there are several ways in which the so -called Urban Air Mobility (UAM) or 

Advanced Air Mobility (AAM) market cou ld evolve. It could complement existing ground -based , short -

distance transport modes or develop its own unique offering – either helping to extend existing networks 

or providing an alternative. The f irst mode -choice studies addressing UAM/AAM show that tri ps by active 

modes (walking and cycling) are unlikely to be substituted, while people currently using private cars, car 

sharing or taxi s are more likely to consider using UAM/AAM providers for some of their trips. Depending 

on price levels and service desi gn, some public transport trips may also be substituted (Fu, Rothfeld, and 

Antoniou, 2019). 

With further technological improvements in battery technology, reliability of communication links, and 

certification processes for automation, it is possible that drones may eventually become capable of making 

medium – to -long –distance trips, competing with rail or traditional aviation models. They could open new 

inter -city or inter -regional markets on routes which currently have little demand, and could make 

passeng er transport easier across natural barriers such as lakes, rivers, mountains and bays. There are also 

hybrid and fossil fuel powered drones under development. 2. DRONES FOR TRANSPORT: POTENTIAL MARKET AND ECONOMIC IMPACTS OF DRONES FOR TRANSPORT   

> READY FOR TAKE -OFF? INTEGRATING DRONES INTO THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM © OECD/ITF 2021

21

> Other drone uses in the transport sector

There are many drone use cases that are relevant for th e transport sector and that go beyond the transport 

of goods or passengers. For example, drones equipped with cameras may be used for the inspection or 

monitoring of transport infrastructure (such as railway lines, roads or bridges) or aircraft. They may a lso 

be used for the surveillance and monitoring of traffic or peoples’ movements (such as at mass events or 

during times of crisis), and they could offer efficiency gains and improved outcomes for emergency and 

search and rescue operations which are curren tly performed by conventional helicopters. Drones often 

offer a means to carry out respective tasks more safely, more efficiently and/or more accurately than what 

would be possible by more traditional means, especially where humans are put in harm’s way. A s a result, 

such, and related, drone use cases are of increasing interest in the respective industries. 

Box 3 provides several examples of drone uses that are relevant to the transport sector but that go beyond 

the transport of passengers or goods. 

Box  3. Examples of non -transport applications of drones related to the transport sector 

Under the Unmanned Aircraft Systems (UAS) Inte gration Pilot Program (IPP) launched by the United  States 

Department of Transportation (DOT) in October of 2017, the City of Memphis deploys  drones for aircraft 

inspections,  airport warehouse and security fence inspections, security patrols of ramps, and p erimeter 

security of the Memphis International Airport (FAA, 2019;  Memphis  International Airport , 2019). 

An engineering firm in Minnesota uses  drones to inspect bridges  to save time and costs, while increasing 

the accuracy and frequency of inspections. The  drone requires no traffic control to transport  and  no 

additional time to reach the site, and can be operated by a single inspector compared to the two or more 

personnel that would be required otherwise. The drone also allows the inspector to see  normally 

inaccessible areas like the spaces between beams (Hayley, 2018). 

In Germany,  drones are being used  for highway maintenance and rebuild operations . Using 

photogrammetry software, the drones can deliver 3D models and respective data to analyse vegetation, 

vehicles or on -site resources (Hayley, 2019). 

During the Covid -19 crisis, many relevant drone uses have emerged, ranging from contact -free deliveries 

to the  disinfection of large areas . For example, in China, more than 900 km 2 in 20 Chinese provinces have 

been disinfected using a total of 2  600 drones. In Korea, drones used in the city  of Daegu sprayed an area 

of 10  000 m 2 in around ten minutes (Sinha, 2020). See  Chapter  3 for examples  of contract -free deliveries 

during the pandemic and ITF (2020) for further examples. 

> Resulting market potential for drones in transport applications

The market potential for drones in the transport sector remains uncertain at this point in time. As with 

other new technologies, market development will highly depend on, for example, the regulatory 

framework and potential supportive measures put in place, technological advances, related costs of 

drones and their services , etc. The societal acceptance of drones as a me ans of transport – whether for 

freight or passenger s – will also be a key determining factor for the drones’ market potential. 

Furthermore, studies on the market potential for drones in key transport applications (i.e. the transport of 

passenger and goods ) are limited. Often, the market potential for drones is assessed across the whole 

economy. For example, research by PwC suggests that the global value of businesses and labour that could 

have been replaced by drones in 2015 is USD 127 billion – this, howe ver, includes services in sectors such 2. DRONES FOR TRANSPORT: POTENTIAL MARKET AND ECONOMIC IMPACTS OF DRONES FOR TRANSPORT 

22 READY FOR TAKE -OFF? INTEGRATING DRONES INTO THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM © OECD/ITF 2021 

as transport, infrastructure, insurance, media & entertainment, telecommunication, agriculture, security 

and mining (PwC, 2016). In the U nited Kingdom alone, drones could lead to a GDP uplift of GPB 42 billion 

(or 2%) by 2030 (PwC, 2018). 

Looking more specifically at the global drone transport and logistics market, available studies suggest that 

this sector could grow from USD 11 billion in 2022 to USD 29 billion by 2027 (or to USD 27 billion by 2030 

when looking at t he drone package delivery market alone) (MarketsandMarkets Research, 2018). In the 

UK, the transport and logistics sector could be responsible for around 11 000 drones, increasing the 

productivity of the sector by 8.4% by 2030, and resulting in cost saving s of around GBP 2.8 billion. They 

would contribute to a GDP increase in the sector of around 1.5% by the same year (PwC, 2018). 

Roland Berger (2018) provides an outlook specifically for passenger drone applications in the UAM/AAM 

market. They see around 10 0 000 passenger drones in operation by 2050 (across 100 cities) that are either 

used as airport shuttles, air taxis or for intercity flights. The base case of another study suggests a market 

potential of USD 21 billion and USD 11 billion for intra - and int er -city passenger drones , respectively , by 

2035, relying on a global passenger drone fleet of 23 000 vehicles (Porsche Consulting, 2018). A study 

carried out for the US government suggests that the air taxi market has a potential demand of around 

55 000 da ily trips (or around 80 000 passengers) that can be served by around 4 000 passenger drones in 

the first years of operation. The corresponding annual market value would be USD 2.5 billion (Booz Allen 

Hamilton, 2018).   

> What can policy makers do?

It is in a p olicy maker’s interest to pursue policies that seize the opportunities and market potential that a 

new technology and related industry may provide. To seize the market opportunities provided by drones, 

policy makers should consider: 

 Recruiting experienced personnel from the drone and information technology industries to 

recognise drone innovation and its associated potential in the early stages. 

 Defining responsibilities across public authorities and levels of government (e.g. with regard to 

enforcement of rules and regulations) to create clarity for policy makers but also for industry 

stakeholders. 

 Assessing how much economic regulation is necessary for the drone industry and whether existing 

approaches to economic regulation (e.g. in the area of air transp ort) could impede the 

development of new drone services. Where obstacles arise, they should be addressed 

appropriately and in consultation with citizens and industry. *

 Fostering developments with public -private partnerships to overcome the initial uncerta inty that 

usually accompanies investments in new technologies. This could help kick -start drone research 

and deployment. 

Policy makers should further consider all risks and public concerns that may come with drone deployment 

(as outlined in this report) an d address them adequately , to limit any potential adverse effects of drones     

> *For example, policy makers should carefully assess the adequacy of national regulations developed under the
> Chicago Convention (1944) establishing the core principles for international air transport that are likely to apply to
> international drone services. If applied in their current form, they could put significant restrictions on foreign drone
> operators to operate in domestic markets or transoceanic transport business models. This may unnecessarily
> constrain the gr owth of drone services, the industry and their market potential overall. 2. DRONES FOR TRANSPORT: POTENTIAL MARKET AND ECONOMIC IMPACTS OF DRONES FOR TRANSPORT
> READY FOR TAKE -OFF? INTEGRATING DRONES INTO THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM © OECD/ITF 2021

23 

as much as possible. In this regard, policy makers would do well to incorporate lessons from the 

development of similar industries, i.e. traditional aviation and telecommunications. 

Impacts on competition 

The effectiveness of transport services relies on competition among firms as well as accessibility and 

quality of infrastructure. In the case of manned aviation, services could not be provided on an industrial 

sca le without the existence of aerodromes, aeronautical telecommunication, and air traffic services, 

among others. 

Drone -based services will be reliant on similar infrastructure and may therefore follow a similar trajectory 

to manned aviation. Drone applicat ions will give rise to a new “second ” economy – the data economy –

whose economics have yet to be worked out. Nevertheless, it is clear that this economy will trigger new 

business models, shift competitive dynamics, redefine market structures, and attract new players in the 

transport industry and far beyond. These developments will have significant implications for competition 

in the industry and may turn into regulatory challenges that policy makers should note. 

> Impacts of drones

Markets involving transpor t infrastructure may present competition issues. Usually, duplication of 

transport infrastructure is not feasible technically or viable economically. Consequently, natural 

monopolies that have sole access to respective infrastructure may develop. They give producers or service 

providers the ability to surcharge their outputs, because incentives to control costs of, or develop, new 

products or services are limited. 

Critical components of drone infrastructure could also be susceptible to monopolies – in parti cular, 

ground -based equipment (such as drone charging stations or vertiports ) and UTM systems and the data 

they collect. When address ing competition concerns , policy makers may be able to emphasise the 

differences in drone infrastructure requirements compar ed to manned aviation. For instance, drone 

operating sites are less expensive and require less space than manned facilities, which could allow for more 

new players. However, spatial, regulatory or environmental constraints, especially in densely populated 

areas, may lead to the natural monopoly of ground -based facilities such as charging stations or vertiports. 

The susceptibility of UTM to monopoly may depend on the types and compatibility of technologies 

deployed, how data is distributed among actors, and the nature of airspace allocation (e.g. its 

fragmentation into urban drone corridors, drone highways etc.). 

Competition problems may also occur outside the scope of natural monopolies, such as the vertical 

integration of supply chains. Where upstream or d ownstream markets do not provide adequate services, 

the strategy of an enterprise may include self -supply of these services. For instance, a drone service 

provider may wish to introduce its own UTM system and ground -based operating sites , or a drone 

manufa cturer may choose to offer some UTM services. In some forms, these strategies have already been 

applied in the drone sector, and to an extent they may be necessary to foster the economic and technical 

advancement of this young industry. However, in the lon g run, some types of vertical integration of supply 

chains may bring about anticompetitive effects. This is because they may enable firms to exercise market 

power or to exclude competitors. 2. DRONES FOR TRANSPORT: POTENTIAL MARKET AND ECONOMIC IMPACTS OF DRONES FOR TRANSPORT 

24 READY FOR TAKE -OFF? INTEGRATING DRONES INTO THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM © OECD/ITF 2021 

> Solutions for other means of transport

To reduce the risk of natur al monopolies developing, g overnments have increased market regulation, 

including price controls. For instance, airport services have regularly been subject to laws on user charges 

(Directive 2009/12/EC). Further, specific access rules may apply to critica l infrastructure, especially where 

they are subject to capacity or environmental constraints. Well -known examples of such policies in aviation 

are the allocation of slots at airports among air operators ( Council Regulation (EEC) 95/93) or the 

guaranteed no n-discriminatory access to some parts of ground -handling equipment at airports ( Council 

Directive 96/67/EC). 

In several network industries (e.g. telecommunication), lawmakers have explicitly introduced 

requirements for technical interoperability to ensure third -party access (Directive (EU) 2018/1972). 

Regulation can also ensure the unbundling of activities related to infrastructure management and 

operating services. For instance, unbundling of infrastructure and services has been introduced for rail 

(Direc tive (EU) 2016/2370), while airlines have traditionally been separated from airports and Air Traffic 

Management (ATM ) services. 

Where necessary, natural -monopoly problems may also be addressed through public service obligations 

(obligation s imposed on an organisation by legislation or contract to provide a service of general interest )

or universal service regulations (a combination of regulations on price, regularity, quality and user access).   

> What can policy makers do?

A fully developed dro ne industry may require a sound economic policy that promotes competition. 

However, at the current stage, regulatory action on competition may be premature. Overregulation of a 

newborn industry could be harmful for market growth and technological developme nt. At this stage, policy 

makers should therefore :

 Be aware of common competitive issues and of specific regulatory tools to address them .

 Recognise that local authorities may positively or negatively affect competition through their 

policies in areas such as UAM/AAM, if franchises or restrictions are applied. 

 Carefully monitor the expansion of the drone industry as critical components of drone 

infrastructure could be susceptible to competition concerns – in particular, UTM syst ems and 

ground -based equipment such as drone charging stations or vertiports. More specifically, 

o With regard to UTM, some forms of competition policy may be helpful to secure the 

technical interoperability of drone -related facilities or services; 

o With reg ard UTM systems data , there may be a need to build appropriate mechanisms 

and institution in order to regulate the data economy; and 

o With regard to ground -based equipment and UTM, there may be a need to develop and 

define the role of public ownership, as s ome authorities may be interested in public 

investments in drone -related infrastructure , especially where the private sector shows 

no interest in providing these facilities . (See Chapter 5 for more details.) 

 Consider sector -specific oversight where genera l antitrust laws do not adequately address the risk 

of monopolies and abuse of market power. 

When taking any regulatory actions with respect to drone activities , policy makers must also be aware that 

transport of people and goods by air has been regulated for years. Under the Chicago Convention 2. DRONES FOR TRANSPORT: POTENTIAL MARKET AND ECONOMIC IMPACTS OF DRONES FOR TRANSPORT   

> READY FOR TAKE -OFF? INTEGRATING DRONES INTO THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM © OECD/ITF 2021

25 

framework (1944) , as a matter of economic policy, international air carriage is handled distinctly from 

trade in the goods and services of other industries. Commercial and recreational drones are “civil aircraft ”,

which implies that their international operation would be governed by the Chicago Convention and that 

states may regulate drone services within their borders in the same way they regulate manned aviation. 

Economic regulations for aviation are included i n bilateral or multilateral air services agreements that 

result from the architecture of the convention , although some drone services (often categorised as 

“specialty air services ”) are authorised by trade agreements . The international framework is reflect ed in 

national aviation laws which also may apply to the drone industry. These regimes need to be carefully 

considered by states when enabling new drone operations. 

Article 6 of the Chicago Convention requires operational authorisations for international s cheduled air 

services. Additionally, under most air services agreement s, such authorisations are granted subject to 

ownership and control restrictions – which limit s the ability of foreign investors to participate in the 

aviation industry. Non -scheduled co mmercial flights are exempt from the authorisation requirement but 

may still be subject to any regulations, conditions or limitations that the host State may consider desirable 

(Article 5 of the Chicago Convention). What is more, any unmanned international operations will still 

require special authorisation under Article 8 of the Chicago Convention. Finally, Article 7 of the Chicago 

Convention authorises limitations on “cabotage ” (services between two points within the territory of the 

same State) and many States rely upon that provision to prohibit cabotage (though this is not required by 

the convention). 

These regulations were designed many decades ago for manned aviation and do not take into account 

potential differences in the structure of the drone indu stry versus the traditional airline industry. However, 

the consequence of these restrictions is that the growth of scheduled drone services may be constrained 

by geopolitical considerations that have in many cases constrained the growth and development of the 

manned aviation industry. For the time being, there is significant flexibility in the regime and States may 

choose not to introduce new and unnecessary regulations. 

Impacts on employment 

Automation, in its various stages – from software enhancements to future deployment of machine learning 

and artificial intelligence – is likely to have a multi -faceted impact on employment. In the future, the effects 

may be positive or negative, or likely both, with the balance of economic benefits and employment status 

yet to be determined and dependent upon the state of cooperation between industry and government. 

Drones in transport and logistics applications are expected to enhance productivity by ultimately 

automating many tasks that are currently undertaken by huma ns (see earlier section on the use of drones 

in freight transport). In passenger transport applications, drones are also likely to take on tasks that are 

currently carried out by transport workers. On the other hand, drones will create new tasks that were not 

previously performed and will require new workers to oversee. In any event, the development, 

implementation and oversight of automation will require human intervention and employment of humans 

for the foreseeable future. 

Taking a long view, policy mak ers may wish to consider how drone deployment is likely to result in job 

losses or changes in the transport sector. This will allow them to take action , where appropriate , to 

mitigate risks associated with workforce changes. At the same time, understanding which skills are 

required for a t hriving drone industry will allow policy makers to fill potential skill gaps that may hamper 

the development of the industry and open paths to robust employment in their country. 2. DRONES FOR TRANSPORT: POTENTIAL MARKET AND ECONOMIC IMPACTS OF DRONES FOR TRANSPORT 

26 READY FOR TAKE -OFF? INTEGRATING DRONES INTO THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM © OECD/ITF 2021 

> Impacts of drones

Given the uncertainties around the market potential of drones, their impact on the job market also remains 

highly uncertain. PwC (2018) e stimates that there will be 630 000 jobs in the UK drone economy by 2030; 

however, information on how this might affect the transport sector sp ecifically is not provided in this 

assessment (or any other assessment that could be identified by the authors). 

In general, the interest in drones for transport applications (as for many other applications) comes to a 

large degree from expected productivi ty improvements and cost reductions. These expected impacts of 

drones can be attributed to expected labour cost savings, route optimisation, and access to new customer 

bases resulting from the automation of tasks. If drones become a substitute, rather than a complement ,

for other mobility modes, labour demand in the transport sector, especially with regard to drivers, is likely 

to decrease. On the other hand, drone operations in the transport sector are likely to require work ers . For 

example, staff will be required to operate drones from a distance (where not fully automated) or for 

ground -based passenger - or freight -handling activities at vertiports. Where there might be labour 

shortages, automation could enable continuity of operations and growth to suppor t the existing 

employment base. 

Taking a sceptical view, the amount of new jobs that drones may create in the transport industry may not 

balance job losses in that same industry, especially where drones will replace existing services rather than 

provide ad ditional services. This could occur in drone applications in the transport sector where cost 

reductions are unlikely to increase overall demand for transport to a significant degree. 

However, jobs are likely to be reallocated to other industries, rather t han eliminated (as is a likely scenario 

for the impact of automation across the economy in general ; see IPPR , 2017). In the case of drones, such 

jobs may, for example, be reallocated to drone manufacturing ; to drone operating firms ; to firms 

specialising in maintenance, repair and overhaul of drones or their infrastructure ; or to insurance 

companies. Drones are also likely to open up possibilities for entirely new business activities where new 

job opportunities will arise (Straubinger et al., 2020). Existi ng firms may be able to expand their operations 

due to increased productivity, requiring more workers, or launch new products and services to 

complement existing offerings. Finally, drone delivery applications could also indirectly drive employment 

in the production and distribution of goods by expanding consumer markets. This may be a result of 

increased competition in local markets thanks to improved connectivity and accessibility of such markets. 

Drones providing high -speed passenger transport services c ould potentially expand access to employment 

opportunities, giving companies access to more potential employees, and residents access to more 

suitable employers – thus creating benefits for both sides.   

> What can policy makers do?

The effects on employment due to the increased usage of drones in the transport sector are not yet known. 

To avoid a potential resulting rise of unemployment of traditional transport workers, policy makers should: 

 Create understanding about the skills needed for a thriving drone in dustry that employs humans –

whether the respective skills refer to providing transport services itself (e.g. drone operators or 

traffic controllers), to manufacturing or maintaining the vehicles (e.g. technicians), or to any other 

industry or business act ivity that enables drone services (e.g. insurance providers); 

 Develop program me s to equip the workforce with skills and capabilities needed for the drone 

industry , e.g. via establishing new, or revising or re -focusing existing, educational program me s, 

ran ging from vocational training to post -graduate degree courses; and 2. DRONES FOR TRANSPORT: POTENTIAL MARKET AND ECONOMIC IMPACTS OF DRONES FOR TRANSPORT   

> READY FOR TAKE -OFF? INTEGRATING DRONES INTO THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM © OECD/ITF 2021

27 

 Incentivise the up -skill ing or re -skill ing of displaced workers from the traditional transport industry 

to mitigate the risk of unemployment in that industry. This may, for example, include the 

provision of educational loans or financial support for educational leave, either for employees or 

employers, or both, etc. 

Taking these actions will also enhance the attractiveness of the local market for the development of the 

drone industry as the demand for required skills may be better met than in other markets. This, in turn, 

can boost overall employment opportunities in the drone industry in the respective market. 

The proposed actions are in line with general best practice in the broader conte xt of how to manage 

potential shifts and changes in the employment market due to the uptake of new technologies – whether 

in the transport sector or elsewhere. 

Impacts on property/land value 

Drones and droneport s are expected to have a range of positive and negative impacts on land use and 

property values. Jurisdictions will have to plan carefully to integrate drones and drone infrastructure into 

existing land use plans. Where drones are perceived to be an annoyance (e.g. due to noise, visual 

disturbance or privacy concerns), property values close to droneport s or close to drone activity may 

decrease; conversely, where drones are perceived to provide benefits (e.g. enhanced access to goods or 

services, or enhanced access and co nnectivity to opportunities), property values are likely to increase. 

Policy makers should take the impacts of drones on property values into account when deciding on the 

build of drone infrastructure and/or possible drone routings. This will help anticipa te and mitigate 

potential opposition to drone developments – be it because of property or land value losses, or because 

of the potential secondary effects of value gains, such as gentrification effects. 

> Impacts of drones

Traditional transport infrastructur e has been shown to have varying effects on property and land values. 

For example, the literature on airport noise and housing prices (e.g. Cohen and Coughlin, 2008) shows that 

in areas close to airports, land is up to 20% cheaper than in comparable locati ons that do not suffer any 

noise disturbance. In contrast, literature on train stations shows that proximity to a train station increases 

housing prices, even though proximity to railways has a negative impact due to noise (Debrezion, Pels, and 

Rietveld, 2 011). This suggests that proximity to infrastructure increases land rents if the infrastructure 

benefits residents on a regular basis and/or does not have a negative impact (e.g. noise from a railway or 

subway). On the other hand, if an individual uses the infrastructure infrequently but suffers from noise or 

visual pollution, transport infrastructure can have a negative impact on land rents. 

To understand whether drone activity and droneport s are likely to have a positive or negative impact on 

land value, it is essential to assess :

 the potential accessibility gains that they might offer the neighbouring communities – this can be 

done by (a) identifying target markets for drone services and (b) considering expected pricing 

schemes, service quality and drone -network design aspects; and 

 the extent to which residents (a) might object to noise or visual disturbance or (b) have privacy 

concerns due to flights in proximity to (or directly above) their premises. 

This will allow policy makers to better judge the t rade -off between the positive and negative effects of 

drone activity on land and property value s.2. DRONES FOR TRANSPORT: POTENTIAL MARKET AND ECONOMIC IMPACTS OF DRONES FOR TRANSPORT 

28 READY FOR TAKE -OFF? INTEGRATING DRONES INTO THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM © OECD/ITF 2021 

However, increased accessibility thanks to drone deployment may also result in indirect land and property 

value losses. This may be the case where improved a ccessibility levels result in businesses or residents 

choosing to move away from denser areas rather than remain ing close to infrastructure and services 

(Rothfeld et al. , 2019). Similarly, an increased access to goods thanks to drone deliveries may reduce the 

desire of many to live close to dense areas. (See Chapter 3 for a discuss ion of the impacts of drones on 

accessibility and the associated risk of urban sprawl) .

It is also important to consider that land value gains, not only losses, can lead to a back lash against drone 

deployment. This may be the case where land value gains result in gentrification effects (i.e. a displacement 

of the less affluent) that have been documented as results of transport infrastructure developments (e.g. 

Lagadic, 2019). 

> Solut ions for other means of transport

Policy makers usually strive to anticipate the effect that the building or upgrade of traditional transport 

infrastructure or services may have on property and land values. In the case of traditional transport 

infrastructu re, impacts on land or property value can typically be assessed thanks to empirical studies of 

the impacts of similar infrastructure or service developments in the past. Such assessments then allow 

policy makers to define whether the neighbouring community should be compensated (in the case of value 

loss), or whether there are grounds for so -called “value capture ” policies that can bring new funds to the 

public purse (in case of value gains). 

In the case of value loss, some laws allow or require affected p roperty or land owners to obtain financial 

compensation. The exact level of compensation will usually have to be determined based on a case -specific 

assessment of the adverse impacts that the new infrastructure or service has on the specific household 

clai ming compensation (Highways England, 2015). 

In the case of value gains, policy makers have a range of value capture options to choose from (OECD, 

2020 ). For example, property tax rates, tax rates for businesses, or purchase tax rates for property/land in 

the vicinity of the new developments may be increased (where these are not already dependent on the 

value of the property/land – for example, where they are defined as a flat fee). Policy makers may also 

allow direct development above or around new infrast ructure (e.g. public transport stations) and sell 

development rights to capture the value gains of land owned by public authorities prior to the 

infrastructure development (or its announcement) (TfL, 2017). Monetary streams resulting from value 

capture pol icies could, for example, finance the new infrastructure or the services being developed, or 

compensate for environmental (or other) adverse effects that the new developments may bring.   

> What can policy makers do?

To avoid a potential backlash against dron e deployment due to changes in property values in/around drone 

infrastructure or drone activity, policy makers should: 

 Consult with affected property owners and residents to identify concerns and understand future 

development options being considered in w hich drones will be deployed in their communities. 

 Develop a strong understanding of the potential impact of drone infrastructure (vertiports) and 

drone activity on land and property values in surrounding areas before embarking on the building 

of, or appro ving, respective developments. Such understanding may be gained via :

o thorough empirical assessments of the impacts of past transport infrastructure and 

service developments on land/property value in similar settings, and/or 2. DRONES FOR TRANSPORT: POTENTIAL MARKET AND ECONOMIC IMPACTS OF DRONES FOR TRANSPORT   

> READY FOR TAKE -OFF? INTEGRATING DRONES INTO THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM © OECD/ITF 2021

29 

o specific impact assessments th at analyse (a) the likely benefits (e.g. increases in 

accessibility to opportunities and access to goods) and detrimental effects (e.g. noise and 

visual disturbances) of drone infrastructure and services and (b) the resulting location 

choices of residents. 

 Where relevant, consider value capture strategies, e.g. to fund new infrastructure (or to 

compensate for externalities of new services). However, applicable policies must also be assessed 

in light of potential gent rification effects (e.g. the displacement of the less affluent) that often 

come with transport infrastructure and/or service improvements. This could, in turn, drive public 

backlash against drone deployment despite value gains. 2. DRONES FOR TRANSPORT: POTENTIAL MARKET AND ECONOMIC IMPACTS OF DRONES FOR TRANSPORT 

30 READY FOR TAKE -OFF? INTEGRATING DRONES INTO THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM © OECD/ITF 2021 

# References 

Airbus (2020), Website,  https://www.airbus.com/innovation/zero -emission/urban -air -mobility.html 

[accessed 06 /07/ 2020 ].

Air Cargo News (2020), “Wide -body drone set to take -off at Farn borough ”,

https://www.aircargonews.net/region/americas/wide -body -drone -set -to -take -off -at -farnborough 

[accessed 06/07/2020]. 

Aurambout, J. P , K. Gkoumas, and B. Ciuffo (2019) , “Last mile delivery by drones: an estimation of viable 

market potential and access to citizens across European cities” , European Transport Research Review ,

ISSN 1866 -8887 , https://doi.org/10.1186/s12544 -019 -0368 -2.

Booz Allen Hamilton (2018), UAM Market Study – Technical Out Brief , Presentation for the US National 

Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), 

https://ntrs.nasa.gov/archive/nasa/casi.ntrs.nasa.gov/20190000517.pdf .

Chicago Convention (1944), Convention on International Civil Aviation Done at Chicago on the 7th day of 

December 1944 , https://www.icao.int/publications/Documents/7300_orig.pdf .

Cohen, J. P. and C. C. Coughlin (2008), “Spatial hedonic models of airport noise, proximity, and housing 

prices ”, Journal of Regional Science , 48(5), 859 -878 , https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467 -9787.2008.00569.x .

Council Directive 96/67/EC of 15 October 1996 on access to the groundhandling market at Community 

airports ”, Eur -Lex , http://data.europa.eu/eli/dir/1996/67/oj  [accessed 06/07/2020]. 

Council Regulation (EEC) No 95/93 of 18 January 1993 on common rules for the allocation of sl ots at 

Community airports ”, Official Journal of the European Communities , https://eur -lex.europa.eu/legal -

content/EN/TXT/?uri=celex:31993R0095  [accessed 20/07/2020]. 

Debre zion, G., E. Pels, and P. Rietveld (2011), “The impact of rail transport on real estate prices: an 

empirical analysis of the Dutch housing market ”, Urban Studies , 48(5), pp. 997 -1015 ,

https://doi.org/10.1177%2F0042098010371395 .

Directive 2009/12/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 March 2009 on airport 

charges,  http://data.europa.eu/eli/dir/2009/12/oj  [accessed 06/07/2020]. 

Directive (EU) 2016/2370 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 14 December 2016 amending 

Directive 2012/34/EU as regards the opening of the market for domestic passenger transport services by 

rail and the governance of the railway infrastructure,  https://eur -lex.europa.eu/eli/dir/2016/2370/oj 

[accessed 06/07/2020]. 

Directive (EU) 2018/1972 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 December 2018 

establishing the European Electronic Communications Code,  https://eur -

lex.europa.eu/eli/dir/2018/1972/oj  [accessed 06/07/2020]. 

Downing, S. (2019), “7 urban air mobility companies to watch ”, GreenBiz ,

https://www.greenbiz.com/article/7 -urban -air -mobility -companies -watch  [accessed 06/07/2020]. 

Elangovan, N. (2019), “German firm hopes to debut flying taxis in Singapore as early as 2021 ”, Today ,

https://www.todayonline.com/singapore/german -firm -hopes -debut -flying -taxis -singapore -early -2021 

[accessed 06/07/2020]. 2. DRONES FOR TRANSPORT: POTENTIAL MARKET AND ECONOMIC IMPACTS OF DRONES FOR TRANSPORT   

> READY FOR TAKE -OFF? INTEGRATING DRONES INTO THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM © OECD/ITF 2021

31 

Elroy Air (2020), Website,  https://www.elroyair.com/  [accessed 06/07/2020]. 

EU (1993), Council Regulation (EEC) No 95/93 of 18 January 1993 on common rules for the allocation of 

slots at Community airports,  http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg/1993/95/oj  [accessed 06/07/2020]. 

FAA (2019), U.S. FAA Rulemaking Documents , United States Federal Aviation Administration ,

https://www.faa.gov/regulations_policies/rulemaking/recently_published  [accessed 10 /0 9/2020]. 

Memphis International Airport (2019), “Memphis -Shelby County UAS Integration Pilot Program 

(Drones)”, airport website , https://www.flymemphis.com/drones  [accessed 06/07/2020]. 

Fu, M., Rothfeld, R., Antoniou, C. (2019), “Exploring Preferences for Transportation Modes in an Urban 

Air Mobility Environment: a Munich Case Study ”, Tr ansportation Research Record: Journal of the 

Transportation Research Board , https://doi.org/10.1177/0361198119843858 .

Future Travel Experience (2019), “Volocopter completes milestone air taxi flight in Singapore ”,

https://www.futuretravelexperience.com/2019/10/volocopter -completes -milestone -ai r-taxi -flight -in -

singapore/  [accessed 06/07/2020]. 

Hader, M. and S. Baur (2020), “ Cargo Drones: The Future of Parcel Delivery (USD 5.5 billion market 

volume for non -military drones globally )”, Roland Berger Gmbh, 

https://www.rolandberger.com/en/Point -of -View/Cargo -drones -The -future -of -parcel -delivery.html 

[accessed 06/07/2020]. 

Hader, M. (2018), “ Passenger Drones Ready for Take -Off (Urban air mobi lity poised to become a fast -

growing new market )”, Roland Berger Gmbh ,

https://www.rolandberger.com/it/Insights/Publications/Passenger -drones -rea dy -for -take -off.html 

[accessed 06/07/2020] .

Ha yley (2018), “Elios Indoor Drone Bridge Inspection – Case Study ”, Coptrz ,

https://www.coptrz.com/flyability -elios -indoor -drone -bridge -inspection/  [accessed 06/07/2020]. 

Harry, R. (2020), “Sabrewing set for launch of heavy -lift drone aircraft ”, Air Cargo News, 

https://www.aircargonews.net/airlines/freighter -operator/sabrewing -set -for -launch -of -heavy -lift -drone -

aircraft/  [accessed 06/07/2020]. 

Hayley (2019), “Five D rone Surveying Case Studies ”, Coptrz , https://www.coptrz.com/five -drone -

surveying -case -studies/  [accessed 06/07/2020]. 

Highways England (2015), How to claim for the effects on your property of new or altered roads ,

https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/425 

148/M15 0005_Compensation_booklet_v3.pdf .

Hsu, J. (2020), “Sabrewing Cargo Drone Rises to Air Force Challenge ”, IEEE Spectrum ,

https://spectrum.ieee.org/cars -that -think/robotics/drones/sabrewing -cargo -drone -rises -air -force -

challenge  [accessed 06/07/2020]. 

Huang, E. (2018), “China just officially approved drone -based package delivery ”, Quartz ,

https://qz.com/1239192/china -just -officially -approved -drone -based -package -delivery/  [accessed 

06/07/2020]. 

IPPR (2017), "Managing automation: employment, inequality and ethics in the digital age" , IPPR 

Commission on Economic Justice discussion paper,  https://www.ippr.org/files/2018 -01/cej -managing -

automation -december2017.pdf .2. DRONES FOR TRANSPORT: POTENTIAL MARKET AND ECONOMIC IMPACTS OF DRONES FOR TRANSPORT 

32 READY FOR TAKE -OFF? INTEGRATING DRONES INTO THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM © OECD/ITF 2021 

ITF (2020), “Drones in the Era of Coronavirus ”, International Transport Forum COVID -19 Transport Brief ,

https://www.itf -oecd.org/sites/default/files/drones -covid -19.pdf .

Jordan, J. (2019), “Large unman ned cargo aircraft set to take off, despite regulatory challenges ”, Air 

Cargo News , https://www.aircargone ws.net/airlines/freighter -operator/large -unmanned -cargo -aircraft -

set -to -take -off -despite -regulatory -challenges/  [accessed 06/07/2020]. 

Lagadic, M. (2019), "Along the London Overground: Transport Improvements, Gentrification, and 

Symbolic Ownership along London's Trendiest Line ”, City & Community 18, no. 3 (2019), pp. 1003 -1027, 

https://doi.org/10.1111/cico.12414 .

Lilium (2020), Website,  https://lilium.com/about -us  [accessed 06/07/2020]. 

MarketsandMarkets Research (2018), “Drone Package Delivery Market ”,

https://www.marketsandmarkets.com/Market -Reports/dr one -package -delivery -market -10580366.html 

[accessed 06/07/2020]. 

Matternet (2019), “Matternet’s Technology Enabling First FAA -Approved Drone Airline ”, press rele ase, 

https://mttr.net/im ages/Matternet_PR_135_20191001.pdf .

Murphy, K. (2019), “Wing completes first commercial drone delivery flights in U.S. history ”, Interdrone ,

https://interdrone.com/news/industry/wing -completes -first -commercial -drone -delivery -flights -in -u-s-

history/  [accessed 06/07/2020]. 

OE CD (2020),  Building a Global Compendium on Land Value Capture , Organisation of Economic 

Cooperation and Development,  http://www.oecd.org/regional/cities/Land -Value -Capture.htm  [acce ssed 

05/01/2021]. 

Porsche Consulting (2018), The Future of Vertical Mobility , Porsche Consulting,  https://www.porsche -

consulting.com/fileadmin/docs/04_Medien/Publikationen/TT1371_The_Future_of_Vertical_Mobility/Th 

e_Future_of_Vertical_Mobility_A_Porsche_Consulting_study__C_2018.pdf .

PwC (2016), Clarity from ab ove: PwC global report on the commercial applications of drone technology .

Warsaw: Drone Powered Solutions, PricewaterhouseCoopers , https://www.pwc.pl/pl/pdf/clarity -from -

above -pwc.pdf .

PwC (2018), Skies without limits : Drones – taking the UK’s economy to new heights, 

PricewaterhouseCoopers , https://www.pwc.co.uk/intelligent -digital/ drones/Drones -impact -on -the -UK -

economy -FINAL.pdf .

Roland Berger (2018), "Urban air mobility: The rise of a new mode of transportation" , Roland Berger 

Gmbh ,

https://www.rolandberger.com/publications/publication_pdf/Roland_Berger_Urban_Air_Mobility.pdf .

Rothfeld, R, A. Straubinger, M. Fu, C. Al Haddad, and A. Constantinos (2019), “Urban air mobility”, in 

Demand for Emerging Transportation Systems , Elsevier, Amsterdam , pp. 267 -284 .

Sinha, S. (2020), “Drones Prove Their Value In The Battle Against COVID -19 ”, Counterpoint ,

https://www.counterpointresearch.com/drones -prove -value -battle -covid -19  [accessed 18/07/2020]. 

Straubinger, A., R. Rothfeld, M. Shamiyeh, K. Büchter, J. Kaiser and K. Plötner (2020), “An overview of 

current research and developments in urban air mobility – Setting the scene for UAM introduction”, 

Journal of Air Transport Management 87,  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jairtraman.2020.101852 .2. DRONES FOR TRANSPORT: POTENTIAL MARKET AND ECONOMIC IMPACTS OF DRONES FOR TRANSPORT   

> READY FOR TAKE -OFF? INTEGRATING DRONES INTO THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM © OECD/ITF 2021

33 

Stouhi, D. (2019), “London Development to Offer First Dedicated Drone Port in the UK”, Arch Daily ,

https://www.archdaily.com/911950/london -de velopment -to -offer -first -dedicated -drone -port -in -the -uk/ 

[accessed 06/07/2020]. 

Sudbury, A.W. , and E. B. Hutchinson (2016), “A Cost Analysis of Amazon Prime Air (Drone Delivery)” ,

IDEAS , https://ideas.repec.org/a/mts/jrnlee/v16y2016i1p1 -12.html  [accessed 06/07/2020]. 

TfL (2017), Land value capture, Annexes, version 10.0, Transport for London, 

https://www.london.gov.uk/sites/default/files/land_value_capture_report_annexes_transport_for_lond 

on.pdf .

Uber (2016), "Fast -forwarding to a future of on -deman d urban air transportation ", Uber Elevate, San 

Francisco, CA,  https://www.uber.com/elevate.pdf .

Uber (2020), “Elevating the ridesharing experience ”, https://www.uber.com/us/en/elevate/uberair/ 

[accessed 04 /0 1/2021 ]. 

UPS (2019), “UPS Partners With Matternet to Transport Medical Samples via Drone Across Hospital 

System in Raleigh, N.C. ”, UPS Pressroom, 

https://pressroom.ups.com/pressroom/ContentDetailsViewer.page?ConceptType=PressReleases&id=15 

53546776652 -986  [accessed 06/07/2020]. 

Vincent, J., and C. Gartenberg (2019), “ Here’s Amazon’s new transforming Prime Air delivery drone ”, The 

Verge , https://w ww.theverge.com/2019/6/5/18654044/amazon -prime -air -delivery -drone -new -design -

safety -transforming -flight -video  [accessed 04 /0 1/202 1]. 

Wakefield, J. (2020), “The airborne commute - a flight of fancy? ”, BBC, 

https://www.bbc.com/news/technology -50096640  [accessed 06/07/2020]. 3. SOCIETAL IMPACTS AND ACCEPTANCE OF DRONES 

34 READY FOR TAKE -OFF? INTEGRATING DRONES INTO THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM © OECD/ITF 2021 

# CHAPTER 3 

# Societal impacts and acceptance of drones 

Throughout history, there are numerous examples of new transport technologies delivering significant 

societal change. The most obvious example is the motor vehicle. It changed the way people move, how far 

they travel, where they choose to live and how they spend their time. 

The societal impacts of drones are difficult to predict, but they could be equally profound. This chapter 

discusses some of the potential societal impacts of drones, notably impacts on the equity of the transport 

system, on privacy, on connectivity to remote regions and on accessibility in urban or sub -urban 

environments. It also provides recommendations for policy action for each of them. 

Impacts on the equity of the transport system 

The right to travel is a human rights concept that is enshrined in Article 13 of the Universal Declaration of 

Human Rights as the freedom of movement (UN, 2015 ; first published in 1948 ). Functioning transport 

infrastructure and services are the cornerstone to enabling such free movement of people. It is henc e the 

policy makers’ responsibility to provide functioning infrastructure and services and related benefits to all. 

This will provide people with access to opportunities that fulfil their basic needs and aspirations –

regardless of their age, income and po tential special needs (VTPI, 2020). In the same vein, costs and 

externalities of transport infrastructure and services – such as environmental impacts, congestion or 

barrier effects (e.g. delays for non -motorised travellers due to roads or railroads ) – sho uld not affect a

specific population group any more than others. Where this can be achieved, an equitable transport 

system will bring benefits to people in terms of social stability, well -being and economic growth. 

New transport services, such as those offered by drones, should follow this equity principle – especially at 

a time when creating inclusive mobility systems has become an increasingly important objective for policy 

makers around the world (Corwin, 2019; EC, 2019). Policies related to drones could thus seek to ensure 

that the services offered are fair and inclusive, and contribute to the development of a fairer and more 

inclusive transport system overall. If this principle is followed, public acceptance of drone services will 

increase, which, in turn, will support their mass deployment and make it economically easier to provide 

services for all. 

> Impacts of drones

A key challenge with drones for use in passenger services is that (at least) initial services may be priced at 

levels that are appeali ng only to passengers with high incomes instead of to the general public. Drone 

services would then be similar to those of helicopter services that developed in heavily congested 

metropolitan areas such as in Sao Paulo, Mexico City and San Francisco ( Airbu s, 2020). The benefits of such 

services are largely confined to wealthy citizens who can afford them , while their impacts (such as visual 

disturbance and noise – see Chapter 4) affect the general public that lives in the respective areas. Such a 

use case s cenario for drones would be clearly in contradiction with the equity principle for the provision 

of functioning transport services. 3. SOCIETAL IMPACTS AND ACCEPTANCE OF DRONES   

> READY FOR TAKE -OFF? INTEGRATING DRONES INTO THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM © OECD/ITF 2021

35 

Studies have estimated that costs for drone services could substantially reduce over time and provide an 

affordable means o f transport for many people (see Chapter 2). This may allow passenger drone services 

to become an equitable transport alternative, and to contribute to a more equitable transport system 

overall. Drone services may also allow new participants into the aviat ion sector (WEF, 2020). This can 

increase competition and may reduce costs for air -born transport services or transport services further. 

The potential cost reductions for drone services will rely mainly on operators achieving economies of scale. 

These e co nomies of scale will , in turn, depend on the specific business model of the drone operator and 

on the regulatory landscape that will define operator costs – such as potential limitations to landing/take -

off infrastructure, constraints on access to airspace , regulatory requirements that cause costs for 

businesses (UAVAIR, 2020), or potential public subsidies for the provision of drone services. The level of 

public acceptance and resulting use of the drone service will play a decisive role as well ; this will depend 

on the societal concerns discussed in this chapter, as well as on environmental, safety, security , and other 

concerns the public may have and how/when they may be overcome. 

Freight drones will also affect the public. Benefits may, for example, stem from a potentially increased 

accessibility of goods (i.e. increased levels of e -commerce, perhaps in areas that were not previously 

served by other modes) or reduced delivery costs and hence prices for consumers. On the other hand, the 

externalities of freight drones (e.g. noise emissions, visual disturbance or privacy concerns) will also affect 

the public. Depending on their service area an d routing, freight drones may therefore benefit certain areas 

or groups of population more than others. 

> Solutions for other means of transport

Whenever new transport infrastructure or services are established, or the set -up or service level of existing 

one s is revised, transport agencies and respective policy makers should, at least in theory, carry out an 

equity impact assessment. Whether and to what degree such assessments happen in practice will vary 

widely across different jurisdictions, and depend on t he specific infrastructure/service that is being put in 

place or the extent of the alterations that are envisaged (Fan, Guthrie and Van Dort, 2019). 

A factor impeding equity assessments of transport infrastructure and services is that they are inherently 

difficult to carry out and require vast amounts of data – at least where all dimensions of equity are to be 

accounted for (e.g. all types of positive and negative impacts, across all categories of people). Impacts are ,

furthermore , often difficult to quant ify and hard to compare to each other, and measurement units are 

frequently difficult to establish. Often there is also a trade -off between equity objectives and other 

objectives. For example, improving traffic safety for all transport users may reduce eff iciency (e.g. in terms 

of transport speeds) and therefore economic productivity (VTPI, 2020). In such cases, it may not be obvious 

how to value equity impacts against other outcomes. In the case of drones, equity impacts could also be 

overlooked as jurisdi ctions seek to capitalise on the economic benefits associated with being an “early 

mover ”.

Where obvious equity issues of transport services arise, policy makers may choose to intervene. For 

example, financial measures may balance apparent equity concerns . These may, for instance, take the 

form of providing subsidies or discounts for transport user charges/fares (e.g. for the use of public 

transport for certain user groups) or imposing tolls, fees or taxes (e.g. for the means of transport that result 

in re latively more externalities than other transport alternatives). Such instruments have to be used very 

carefully to ensure that they do not have adverse equity effects (e.g. taxes or fees that make transport 

overall more expensive may result in a higher det riment to lower -income groups) (Lawrence and Kornfield, 

1998; Guzman and Oviedo, 2018; Zhao and Zhang, 2019). 3. SOCIETAL IMPACTS AND ACCEPTANCE OF DRONES 

36 READY FOR TAKE -OFF? INTEGRATING DRONES INTO THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM © OECD/ITF 2021   

> What can policy makers do?

The idea and definition of equity are both strongly shaped by a given environment. Different societies with 

different cultural values may judge differently what is appropriate, reasonable or customary in a given 

situation (Young , 199 5). Policy measures targeting equity concerns will therefore be highly influenced by 

the respective societal context. The following proposed policy actions to address potential equity concerns 

may therefore be more or less relevant in different jurisdictions: 

 Assess the potential equity impacts of new drone services that are proposed and see if the 

business model in place allows (at least in the mid -to -long term ) an equitable means of transport. 

These equity assessments should be as comprehensive as possible in terms of the positive and 

negative impacts that are being assessed, and the groups of impacted population that are 

considered. The UTM system could serve here as a crucial tool for providing relevant data for 

such assessments (e.g. on noise levels, human mobility, traffic density) – not least where such 

assessments are carried out following the introduction of new services. It could also provide 

relevant ground traffic data to aid in determining the areas in which drones bring greatest public 

benefits in terms of mobility improvements. 

 Where relevant, consider policy measures , such as financial measures, that have the potential to 

counter inequitable service provisions . For example, governments could consider levying taxes to 

account for externalities of the services, or provid ing (or asking service operators to provide) 

subsidies or discounts for certain user groups. The type of incentives and their potential impacts 

must be assessed thoroughly upfront to avoid any unintended equity impacts. Again, the UTM 

system could play an important role, e.g. by facilitating the charging of drone operators. 

 Enhance the p ublic acceptance of drone services by :

o Addressing public concerns raised in this chapter, especially with regard to privacy, and 

in other chapters of this report. This will help accelerate the mass use of drone services 

while driv ing the emergence of busin ess models that achieve economies of scale. This 

may allow the provi sion of equitable services for “all ” in the mid - to long -term, despite 

potential user charges to compensat e for the externalities of drone services. 

o Engaging the public through “co -creation ” processes that allow both users and non -users 

to actively participate in service and infrastructure design. This will endorse equitable 

services , bringing benefits to all potential user groups. 

o Launching public information/communication campa igns that focus on the benefits of 

drones and promote positive use cases. They should also address risks of drone use and 

specifically how public concerns are being addressed. Campaigns could also inform the 

public about: 

 existing drone research and conti nuous research efforts to close research gaps ;

 how drone use is regulated (i.e. what drone operators are / are not allowed to 

do) and how existing regulation may change in the future ; and 

 how the public can report illegal drone activity and what actions ar e taken to 

enforce the rules .

Such campaigns will provide the public with transparency about how drones are being 

used and how policy issues are being addressed, and foster a sense of trust among the 

public. 3. SOCIETAL IMPACTS AND ACCEPTANCE OF DRONES   

> READY FOR TAKE -OFF? INTEGRATING DRONES INTO THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM © OECD/ITF 2021

37 

 Rais e awareness among drone operators regarding the public’s concerns and how the operators 

could address them – for example, by outlining their necessary qualifications and certifications 

as part of their company’s information, or by informing neighbours or people in the area that a 

drone may be flown .

Impacts on privacy 

The public’s biggest concerns with regard to drones are related to how drones may be mis -used for privacy 

breaches or surveillance (DfT, 2016). The successful uptake and scale -up of drones services will therefore 

heavily rely on wheth er such concerns are adequately dealt with and whether public trust towards the use 

of drones can be established (PwC, 2019). 

> Impacts of drones

Many of today’s technologies allow the surveillance and monitoring of people. For example, CCTV in many 

urban a reas can track people ’s movements, and satellite systems have the potential to monitor people 

around the globe (Antunes, 2018). The specific privacy concern regarding drones comes from the fact that 

drones occupy a space not currently occupied by anything else human -made. Often they also fly at low 

altitudes and have access to airspace not used by larger aircraft. As such, drones are often perceived as 

“intruders ” that have the potential to collect large amounts of data, especially whe n equipped with 

cameras (McNeal, 2014). 

Even drones whose primary purpose is not to take photographs or record videos may use cameras to 

facilitate navigation. In doing so, they can capture data that must be protected. Professional drones may 

also be equip ped with a range of other sensors and data collection devices. This contributes to the public’s 

feeling of being “watched ” when a drone is present. Finally, drones are often perceived as “faceless ”: when 

a drone flies over the park you are sitting in, you may not be able to locate the pilot, and as such, may not 

be able to understand their intentions. 

Existing research (Rice , 2019 ; Bajde et al ., 2017 ; Chang, Chundury and Chetty 2017) finds that privacy 

concerns regarding drones are contextual and depend on 

 the specific drone use case (e.g. concerns are higher when the drone is used by law enforcement 

than when the drone is used by hobbyists – and are especially high when the purpose of a drone 

use is unknown); 

 the frequency of the drone use (e.g. concerns are lower when a drone is known to be used for a 

specific mission, rather than on a continuous basis); 

 the location of where the drone is used (e.g. concerns are less in public places (parks, streets) and 

respectively higher in relation to private spaces , especially where drones offer a direct view into 

dwellings); 

 the speed at which the drone flies – in general, the faster the movement, the lower the privacy 

concern (e.g. concerns are higher if a drone is hovering over one’s dwelling/garden for a longer 

period of time, which may enable the drone to film and take pictures, compared to a drone that 

merely flies by); 

 many characteristics of the drone itself, such as its colour, size, and sound; and 3. SOCIETAL IMPACTS AND ACCEPTANCE OF DRONES 

38 READY FOR TAKE -OFF? INTEGRATING DRONES INTO THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM © OECD/ITF 2021 

 the characteristics of the person or community affected (e. g. women are typically more concerned 

than men). 

Concerns about data collection and misuse by drones are amplified by the fact that drones may easily 

gather information about people who have not engaged in any drone service and who cannot be easily 

made aware of potential drone recordings. 

> Solutions for other means of transport

Privacy concerns in more traditional means of transport have mainly emerged with the use of travel “smart 

cards ” in public transport, which facilitate payment and interchanges between different services. Many of 

such cards allow public transit companies to store users’ private information, such as addresses, next to 

their travel patterns (Dempsey, 2008; Essers, 2012 ). In general, the smarter the card, the more useful it is, 

yet the more intrusive it becomes (Dempsey, 2015). In view of further advancements and increasing use 

of smart cards in (especially urban) transport systems around the world, and increasingly “sma rt ” transport 

systems, privacy issues around the use of transport services is set to increase. Travellers may also be 

recorded via CCTV systems installed in (public transport) stations or vehicles. 

Regulations can protect travellers’ privacy in various wa ys. They may limit the type of information that can 

be gathered; they may limit the persons and/or organisations who have access to it. They may also entirely 

protect information against external dissemination. Information collected can be encrypted, and f irewalls 

built against external access. The information collected can be prohibited from distribution except by court 

order (Dempsey, 2008). 

In Europe, an example of such a regulatory framework is the European Union’s General Data Protection 

Regulation (G DPR) ( see  Box 4). It provides principles relating to data protection and privacy and aims 

primarily to give control to individuals over their personal d ata. In general, personal data can be processed 

under the GDPR only if the data subject gives their explicit consent (however, exceptions exist). In the case 

of CCTV systems, a privacy notice must inform data “subjects ” that they are being recorded. The no tice 

must include information on contact details, the purpose of recording, the existence of data subjects’ 

rights etc. (Champion, 20 18 ). 

Box  4. General Data Protection Regulation principles relating to processing of personal data 

Article 5 of the General Data Protection Regulation stipulates  the following :

1.  Personal data shall be: 

a.  processed lawfully, fairly and in a transparent manner in relation to the data subject 

("lawfulness, fairness and transparency”); 

b.  collected for specifie d, explicit and legitimate purposes and not further processed in a 

manner that is incompatible with those purposes; further processing for archiving 

purposes in the public interest, scientific or historical research purposes or statistical 

purposes shall,  in accordance with Article 89(1), not be considered to be incompatible 

with the initial purposes (“purpose limitation”); 

c.  adequate, relevant and limited to what is necessary in relation to the purposes for which 

they are processed (“data minimisation”); 3. SOCIETAL IMPACTS AND ACCEPTANCE OF DRONES   

> READY FOR TAKE -OFF? INTEGRATING DRONES INTO THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM © OECD/ITF 2021

39 

d.  accurate and, where necessary, kept up to date; every reasonable step must be taken to 

ensure that personal data that are inaccurate, having regard to the purposes for which 

they are processed, are erased or rectified without delay (“accuracy”); 

e.  kept in a  form which permits identification of data subjects for no longer than is necessary 

for the purposes for which the personal data are processed; personal data may be stored 

for longer periods insofar as the personal data will be processed solely for archivin g

purposes in the public interest, scientific or historical research purposes or statistical 

purposes in accordance with Article 89(1) subject to implementation of the appropriate 

technical and organisational measures required by this Regulation in order t o safeguard 

the rights and freedoms of the data subject (“storage limitation”); 

f.  processed in a manner that ensures appropriate security of the personal data, including 

protection against unauthorised or unlawful processing and against accidental loss, 

des truction or damage, using appropriate technical or organisational measures (“integrity 

and confidentiality”). 

2.  The controller shall be responsible for, and be able to demonstrate compliance with, paragraph 1 

(“accountability”).    

> Source: EU Parliament (2016 ).
> What can policy makers do?

To enhance trust in drones operations and eas e privacy concerns, policy makers should :

 Adapt/expand existing legal frameworks addressing data protection and privacy to address drones 

that collect data .

 Advise drone operators on how to mitigate privacy concerns – e.g. by avoiding certain zones like 

private dwellings or property more generally ; or by adapting speeds, frequencies or specific drone 

characteristics .

 Consider static and dynamic no -fly zones above dw ellings or private property, e.g. through the 

provision of UTM geofencing services .

 Consider a requirement for mandatory registration and remote identification of all drones , to allow 

members of the public to assess information about a drone that they might have see n fly by, e.g. 

through the provision of the registration and e -identification services .

 Develop communication strategies to foster public acceptance of drone services in general (see 

previous section on equity for specific recommended actions ).

 For a specific proposed drone service ,

o assess what data a drone is allowed to collect and what specific data collection equipment 

the respective drones are therefore permitted to carry ;

o assess potential privacy concerns and how they may be mitigated , in collaboration with 

the drone operator, e.g. by advising on potential re -routing of the service or on adapting 

frequencies, drone speeds or other characteristics of the drones used ; and 3. SOCIETAL IMPACTS AND ACCEPTANCE OF DRONES 

40 READY FOR TAKE -OFF? INTEGRATING DRONES INTO THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM © OECD/ITF 2021 

o inform members of the public who reside or work in the vicinity of the drone service – or 

the public more largely – about the drone service and its purpose (or require or 

encourage the drone operator to inform the public accordingly) .

Impacts on connectivity to remote regions 

Ensuring sufficient levels of connectivity in rem ote regions is important to governments for economic, 

social and strategic reasons. Residents in sparsely populated regions often have insufficient access to 

goods and essential services such as medicine, health care or education. Also, t hese regions and their 

in habitants frequently suffer from comparatively high unemployment rates, structural weaknesses (e.g. 

reliance on primary industries), isolation and lower wages. Where commercial transport struggles to 

deliver, governments often decide to step in. 

Achieving the transport service levels required to deliver the needed connectivity is , however, often 

difficult. High transportation costs and lack of sufficient demand often deter private -sector providers from 

serving connections to remote are as. Low demand , often subject to seasonality , combined with high 

upfront costs to provid e resilient and reliable transport networks throughout the whole year , make it 

difficult for operators to achieve returns on their investments (ITF, 2021 ). 

Drones may provide a relatively low -cost, effective means of improv ing connectivity to remote regions or 

isolated areas such as island communities. 

> Impacts of drones

Drone services have increasingly shown they are able to supply access to goods in, and connectivity to, 

remote areas and islands . As such, they could potentially reduce the need for both extensive transport 

infrastructure and the investments required to finance it .

For example, in Africa, one -third of the population lives within two kilometres of an all -weather road. 

Providing similar access to the other two -thirds would cost more than USD 50 billion (SAP, 2019). Drone 

services could potentially provide the required access and connectivity for these regions at a fraction of 

such costs if they are used to leapfrog traditional land -based transport operations (OECD, 2019). 

A recent study for the New Zealand Ministry of Transport estimated the economic benefits of drones 

connecting passengers from small communities to larger airports at NZ D 1.4 billion over 25 years. These 

benefits stem from passenger time savings, as well as from resulting changes in trade and airport activity. 

For island communities or communities with poor land -based transport alternatives, the benefits of such 

drone services could be substantially higher (m.e consulting, 2019). Increasing connectivity for such 

remote regions can foster economic growth and might even decrease brain drain in rural region s and 

decrease urbanisation tendencies. 

Many countries now acknowledg e the potential benefit of drone -based services over land -based (or 

traditional aviation services) in this regard , and have begun trial drone services to remote regions and 

islands. For the time being, these operations are often related to humanitarian aid program me s, where 

remote communities are provided with essential medical supplies. Such services have seen a rapid increase 

during the Covid -19 health crisis (see  Box 5), during which “contactless ” deliveries have become 

increasingly important – partly because traditional means of transport have been unable to operate. 

In the longer run, drones may well be used to transport a growing range of products – and potentially also 

passengers – to and from such regions in an effort to connect the regions to bigger economic centres , and 3. SOCIETAL IMPACTS AND ACCEPTANCE OF DRONES   

> READY FOR TAKE -OFF? INTEGRATING DRONES INTO THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM © OECD/ITF 2021

41 

ideally to secure related social and economic benefits. Although this initiative will have its own 

infrastructure requirements ( e.g. droneport s, potential monitoring systems) , they will be significantly less 

than those normally required for traditional transport services. 

However, w hile autonomous drone operators are less reliant on large volumes of passengers to cover 

operating costs, services to remote areas could still be economically challenging compared to services in 

dense urban areas. Hence, drone operators could als o shy away from providing these services, resulting in 

a market failure. Adequate public policies have to be put in place to make respective operations 

economically interesting for drone operators. 

Box  5. Examples of drone trials in  and  to remote regions to deliver medical supplies 

In Africa,  a consortium comprising  logistics company DHL, German drone manufacturer Wingcopter , and 

the German development agency  GIZ recently ran a  pilot  drone -delivery  project  called  “Deliver  Future”  to 

carry medicine and blood samples between a hospital and an island  in Tanzania; thanks  to the success of 

the project, the project partners  have  decided to expand the service area (GIZ, 2018).  Meanwhile, drone -

maker  Zipline has been running drone delivery se rvices in Rwanda to increase the speed of health -related 

deliveries to hospitals (Zipline, 2020). 

Similarly, t he Pacific island country of Vanuatu is working with UNICEF and two drone companies to deliver 

vaccines to rural areas. Vanuatu is composed of 83  islands spread over an area  of  1 600  kilometres . To 

deliver vaccines to rural communities, health workers often have to walk for hours, or drive and take boats 

for days (Moon, 2018). 

In the U nited States , between the  Alaskan  communities of Indian and Hope, the main road connection is 

consistently impacted by avalanches. The Alaska Fairbanks Drone Test Site has begun investigating drone 

“long -haul” operations that could cover the required 160 -kilometre distance between the two 

communities , potentially  deliver ing  much -needed medical supplies between the two communities (Davis, 

2019). 

More recently, i n response to the Covid -19 crisis, the  United Kingdom  has started using  drones to carry 

medical supplies from Hampshire to the Isle  of Wight. The  timing of the  drone trials  was moved up after 

ferry crossings to the Isle of Wight were reduced due to the spread of coronavirus (BBC, 2020).  Similarly, 

in April 2020, the Irish Aviation Authority approved drone operator Manna Aero ’s proposa l to deliver 

crucial medical prescriptions to roughly a dozen households under confinement in the rural town of 

Moneygall (Chandler, 2020). 

Zipline made a concerted effort in spring 2020 to assist the Ghanaian government in its fig ht against 

Covid -19 wher e it has prioritised the connectivity of rural residents. In April 2020 alone, the “contactless 

drone delivery” service collected and transported Covid -19 test samples from 1000 rural health facilities 

to labs in Accra and Kumasi (Reuters, 2020). 

> Soluti ons for other means of transport

Public authorities often decide to use public funds to improve connectivity to/from remote regions or 

islands to stimulate economic and social development in the concerned areas. 3. SOCIETAL IMPACTS AND ACCEPTANCE OF DRONES 

42 READY FOR TAKE -OFF? INTEGRATING DRONES INTO THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM © OECD/ITF 2021 

Public funds may be used to build and maintain relevant transport infrastructure such as roads, railways, 

ports or airports. To ensure connectivity provision by private entities , public support may also take the 

form of either public service provision or subsidies, such as budgetary and tax expenditures, or transfer of 

risk from the private sector to the government (ITF, 2020). 

Governments have adopted different approaches to determine the level of public support for enhancing 

the connectivity of remote and sparsely populat ed regions. Decision -making relies on a variety of factors, 

ranging from value -for -money considerations to requirements to meet specific equity goals or minimum 

access thresholds. For example, Greece assesses the needs and potentials of concerned islands i n a 

connectivity index that provides guidance on what funding should go into which ferry connections 

(Lekakou, 2019); Chile follows a similar approach (Céspedes, 2019). Scotland assesses a long list of 

potential transport infrastructure projects against en vironmental, safety, economic, accessibility, 

affordability and acceptability criteria (among others). The business case of the project has to be clear in 

terms of its alignment with public policy objectives, value for money, commercial viability, financia l

affordability and achievability (Laird, 2019). 

ITF (2020) provides an extensive review of public policies put in place to support the connectivity of remote 

regions, and outlines related challenges.   

> What can policy makers do?

Policy makers who consider s pending public funds on improving the transport connectivity to remote 

regions islands (e.g . because private operators cannot find a viable business model and service levels are 

therefore insufficient) should :

 Consider drone services as a possible alterna tive for providing improved connectivity when 

assessing different options; and 

 Avoid alter ing assessment criteria and appraisal processes already in place to the benefit (or 

detriment) of drone services. This will ensure that funding is allocated for the m ost adequate and 

cost -efficient solution at the required level. 

Policy makers may also consider a system where drone operators are encouraged and i ncentivis ed to carry 

out a mix of transport services in light of the services’ expected profitability . For example, a n existing drone 

operator that operat es a profitable service could be encouraged to operate additional services that are in 

the public interest . Such mechanisms may also be relevant for areas other than remote regions or islands ,

such as within t he same urban area. 

Impacts on accessibility in urban and sub -urban areas 

Adequate access to opportunities (e.g. employment, education, health care, goods, services, family and 

friends) is a fundamental condition for well -being. However, transport policy is often still more focused on 

generating physical movement than in guaranteeing access to opportunities. This has often resulted in 

induced demand (i.e. the phenomenon wherein increasing transport capacity leads to an increase in traffic 

volumes) and rela ted increases in the externalities of transport (e.g. congestion, pollution and greenhouse 

gas emissions). The level of accessibility in, for example, a metropolitan area is a combination of the 

performance of the transport network (i.e. the time required to reach a destination or place of 

opportunity) and the “performance ” of land use (i.e. the proximity of people to destinations) (ITF, 2019a ;

ITF, 2019b). 3. SOCIETAL IMPACTS AND ACCEPTANCE OF DRONES   

> READY FOR TAKE -OFF? INTEGRATING DRONES INTO THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM © OECD/ITF 2021

43 

Drones may have the potential to improve accessibility to opportunities in urban or sub -urban areas by 

increasing the performance of the transport network. However, they may also have an adverse effect on 

land use. 

> Impacts of drones

As with new (public) transport infrastructure and services, drones could open up new possibilities for land 

use and land development in and around urban areas. These new developments could help relax pressure 

on house prices , which have been rapidly increasing in many cities around the world (UBS, 2019) , and 

hence bring a significant societal benefit. This may even happen while maintaining or even improving 

current accessibility levels in and around urban areas, thanks to likely significant travel -speed increases 

when using a drone compared to land -based transport alternatives (Rothfeld et al. , 2019). 

At the same time, however , the new land developments that could be driven by this new, high -speed 

transport mode , combined with the prospect of lower housing prices , could mean an increased risk of 

urban spr awl. Urban sprawl often comes with severe adverse environmental, economic and social impacts .

Because changes usually occur in a gradual manner, they are often not perceived as significant by the 

general public for some time (EEA, 2016). For example, urban sprawl frequently leads to a loss of farmland 

and/or habitats for native species, reduced groundwater regeneration, higher energy consumption and 

GHG and pollutant emissions per capita , and higher light and noise emissions – to name only a few of the 

adve rse environmental impacts. Higher public service costs and higher expenditure per capita for 

construction and maintenance of infrastructure , and greater segregation of residential development based 

on income , are examples of economic and social impacts res pectively (EPA, 2016). 

Drones in urban or sub -urban areas could also alleviate congestion. For example, there are claims that in 

the Australia n Capital T erritory (ACT) , drone delivery services could reduce traffic congestion by up to 35 

million vehicle ki lometres each year by 2030 (AlphaBeta, 2018). Alleviating congestion would come with 

significant benefits for the economy, the environment and, again, society. People would benefit from the 

improved performance of the transport system overall, and hence in creased accessibility levels. 

However, it is not clear that any independent research exists to support such claims. It is also possible that 

virtually -instantaneous delivery by drones may simply change consumers ’ buying habits and have little 

effect on ov erall congestion. With regard to passenger transport, simulation results and mode -choice 

studies suggest that the mode share of drones is unlikely to be high enough to have significant impact on 

road congestion (Balac , Vetrella and Axhausen , 201 8; Fu , Rothfeld and Antoniou, 2019). Besides that, as 

mentioned earlier, literature on transport upgrades or investments typically shows that decreasing the 

flow capacity ratio on roads leads to induced demand rather than decreasing congestion (e.g. Cervero and 

Hansen, 2002). People may also tend to move further away from city centres thanks to travel time gains. 

This, in turn, would again risk urban sprawl, as discussed above. Drones may even put additional pressure 

on urban space and hence traffic, as (public) s pace for the build of physical drone infrastructure (i.e. 

droneport s) will be required (see Chapter 5). 

> Solutions for other means of transport

Reaping accessibility benefits from the upgrade or set -up/introduction of new transport infrastructure 

services h as been a significant challenge for policy makers. The e ffects of urban sprawl that often result 

from new transport services can easily counteract any efforts made, and cause many adverse impacts in

the long term. 3. SOCIETAL IMPACTS AND ACCEPTANCE OF DRONES 

44 READY FOR TAKE -OFF? INTEGRATING DRONES INTO THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM © OECD/ITF 2021 

Several options to mitigate the risk of ur ban sprawl have been identified, largely related to land -use and 

urban planning policies. EPA (2016) provides an overview of possible options for controlling urban sprawl 

and provides best practice example s. For example, policy makers can try limiting the total extent of 

designated building zones ; restrict ing settlements by setting settlement boundary lines ; or set ting targets ,

limits and benchmarks for sprawl. Measures outside the sphere of traditional land -use planning policies 

may also help, such as abol ishing tax deductions for commuting between homes and workplaces or 

introducing road tolls ; this would encourage people to live closer to their work places due to increased 

transport costs. Such measures need to be carefully designed , though, to avoid adve rse equity impacts. 

Transport authorities and planners should give preference to mixed -use developments. Most importantly, 

they should also integrate transport and land -use planning methods to foresee potential urban sprawl due 

to changes in the transport system.   

> What can policy makers do?

Policy makers need t o ensure the deployment of drones results in accessibility benefits, while working to 

avoid potential adverse effects that new transport infrastructure or services have frequently caused, 

especially urban sprawl . With this in mind, they should :

 Follow best policy practices with regard to control ling urban sprawl , as established for traditional 

transport modes and well reported in the existing literature, and adapt them to the specifics of 

drones, if/where required; and 

 Focus on accessibility indicators (instead of sole transport system -based performance indicators, 

such as speed or traffic capacity) when assessing the impact of a new drone service. Th ese will 

be a better measure for assess ing the i mpact of drones on the well -being of the inhabitants in a

given urban area or region. 3. SOCIETAL IMPACTS AND ACCEPTANCE OF DRONES   

> READY FOR TAKE -OFF? INTEGRATING DRONES INTO THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM © OECD/ITF 2021

45 

# References 

Airbus (2020), “ Voom - An on -demand helicopter booking platform ”, Airbus ,

https://www.airbus.com/innovation/zero -emission/urban -air -mobility/voom.html  [accessed 

04 /0 1/202 1]. 

AlphaBeta (2018), “Inquiry into drone delivery systems in the ACT ”, AlphaBeta Advisors, 

https://www.parliament.act.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0010/1318753/12 -AlphaBeta_web.pdf .

Antunes, J. (2018), “Addressing Pr ivacy and Safety Concerns About Drones”, Commercial UAV News ,

https://www.commercialuavnews.com/infrastructure/addressing -privacy -safety -con cerns -drones -

percepto  [accessed 20/07/2020]. 

Bajde, D. , M. H. Bruun, J. K. Sommer and K. Waltorp (2017), General Public’s Privacy Concerns Regarding 

Drone Use in Residential and Public Areas , University of Southern Denmark and Aalborg University, 

https://www.sdu.dk/ -

/media/files/om_sdu/institutter/marketing/imm/general+publics+privacy+concerns+(full+report)+2.pdf .

Bal ac, M., A. R. Vetrella and K. W. Axhausen (201 8), “Towards the integration of aerial transportation in 

urban setting s”, 2018 TRB Annual Meeting Online, Article No. 18 -02015, Transportation Research Board, 

https://doi.org/10.3929/ethz -b-000193150 .

BBC (2020), “Coronavirus: Drones to delivery NHS supplies to Isle of Wight”, BBC News ,

https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/technology -52419705  [accessed 20/07/2020]. 

Cervero, R., and M. Hansen (2002), “Induced travel demand and induced road investment: a 

simultaneous equation analysis ”, Journal of Transport Economics and Policy (JTEP) , 36(3), 469 -490 ,

https://econpapers.repec.org/article/tpejtecpo/v_3a36_3ay_3a2002_3ai_3a3_3ap_3a469 -490.htm 

[accessed 20/07/2020]. 

Céspedes , N. (2019), “Public transport in remote and isolated territories of Chile”, PowerPoint 

presentation from ITF “Connecting Remote Communities ” Roundtable, Ottawa, Canada, September 23 -

24 2019,  https://www.itf -oecd.org/connecting -remote -communities -roundtable  [accessed 20/07/2020]. 

Champion, G. (2018), “CCTV and the GDPR – an overview for small businesses”, IT Governance Blog ,

https://www.itgovernance.co.uk/blog/cctv -and -the -gdpr -an -overview -for -small -businesses  [accessed 

20/07/2020]. 

Chandler, S. (2020), “Coronavirus Delivers ‘World’s First’ Drone Delivery Service”, Forbes ,

https://www.forbes.com/sites/simonchandler/2020/04/03/coronavirus -delivers -worlds -first -drone -

delivery -service/ #e9925449579b  [accessed 20/07/2020]. 

Chang, V., P. Chundury and M. Chetty (2017) , “’ 'Spiders in the Sky’: User Perceptions of Drones, Privacy, 

and Security”, University of Maryland and Princeton University,  https://hci.princeton.edu/wp -

content/uploads/sites/459/2017/01/CHI2017_CameraReady.pdf .

Corwin, S. (2019), “Want a more inclusive society? Start with mobility”, World Economic Forum ,

https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2019/01/want -a-more -inclusive -society -start -with -mobility/ 

[accessed 20/07/2020]. 3. SOCIETAL IMPACTS AND ACCEPTANCE OF DRONES 

46 READY FOR TAKE -OFF? INTEGRATING DRONES INTO THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM © OECD/ITF 2021 

Davis, B. (2019), “Meet the IPP Sites: Alaska tackles BVLOS pipeline flights, package delivery”, Technology 

News , Association for Unmanned Vehicle Systems International (AUVSI ), https://www.auvsi.org/me et -

ipp -sites -alaska -tackles -bvlos -pipeline -flights -package -delivery  [accessed 20/07/2020]. 

Dempsey, P.S. (2008), “Privacy Issues with the Use of Smart Cards”, Legal Research Digest 25, 

https://www.transitwiki.org/TransitWiki/images/7/77/SmartCardLRD.pdf .

Dempsey, P.S. (2015), “Privacy Issues with the Use of Smart Cards”, SSRN Electronic Journal ,

https://www.researchgate.net/publication/314513223_Privacy_Issues_with_the_Use_of_Smart_Cards 

[accessed 20/07/2020]. 

DfT (2016), “Public dialogue on drone use in the UK”, UK Department for Transport, 

https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/sy stem/uploads/attachment_data/file/579 

550/drones -uk -public -dialogue.pdf .

EEA (2016), “Urban sprawl in Europe”, European Environment Agency, 

https://www.eea.europa.eu/publications/ urban -sprawl -in -europe  [accessed 20/07/2020]. 

Essers, L. (2012), “Privacy International warns of public transit card hazards”, IT World ,

https://www.itworld.com/article/2719678/privacy -international -warns -of -public -transit -card -

hazards.html  [accessed 20/07/2020]. 

EU Parliament (2016), “Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 

April 2016 on the protection of natural persons with regard to the processing of personal data and on 

the free movement of such data, and repealing Directive 95/46/EC (General Data Protection 

Regulation)”, EUR -Lex , https://eur -lex.europa.eu/eli/reg/2016/679/2016 -05 -04  [accessed 20/07/2020]. 

Fan , Y. , A. Guthrie and L. Van Dort (2019), Advancing Transportation Equity : Research and Practice ,

University of Minnesota and Minnesota Department of Transportation, 

https://www.dot.state.mn.us/planning/program/advancing -transportation -equity/pdf/CTS%2019 -08.pdf .

Fu, M., Rothfeld, R., Antoniou, C. (2019), “Ex ploring Preferences for Transportation Modes in an Urban 

Air Mobility Environment: a Munich Case Study ”, Transportation Research Record: Journal of the 

Transportation Research Board , https://doi.org/ 10.1177/0361198119843858 .

GIZ (2018), “Tansania – Schnelle Hilfe aus der Luft ”, https://berichterstattung.giz.d e/2018/unsere -arbeit -

weltweit/sicherheit -und -stabilisierung/tansania -schnelle -hilfe -aus -der -luft  [accessed 20/07/2020]. 

Guzman, L. and D. Oviedo (2018), “Accessibility, affordability and equity: Accessing ‘pro -poor’ public 

transport subsidies in Bogotá”, Transport Policy , Vol . 68, 

https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0967070X17304109  [accessed 20/07/2020]. 

ITF ( 202 1), Connecting Remote Communities : Summary and Conclusions , ITF Roundtable Reports , No. 

179, OECD Publishing, Paris,  https://www.itf -oecd.org/connecting -remote -communities  [accessed 

20/07/2020]. 

ITF (2019a), “Improving Transport Planning and Investment Through the Use of Accessibility Indicators”, 

International Transport Forum Policy Papers, No. 66, OECD Publishing, Paris , https://www.itf -

oecd.org/transport -planning -investment -accessibility -indicators  [accessed 20/07/2020]. 

ITF (2019b), “Benchmarking Accessibility in Cities: Measuring the Impact of Proximity and Transport 

Performance”, International Tran sport Forum Policy Paper No. 68, OECD Publishing, Paris ,

https://www.itf -oecd.org/sites/default/files/docs/accessibility -proximity -transport -performance.pdf .

Young, P.H. (1995), Equity in theory and practice , Princeton University Press , Princeton, New Jersey .3. SOCIETAL IMPACTS AND ACCEPTANCE OF DRONES   

> READY FOR TAKE -OFF? INTEGRATING DRONES INTO THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM © OECD/ITF 2021

47 

Laird, J. (2019), “Transport Connectivity for Remote Communities in Scotland”, PowerPoint presentation 

from ITF Connecting Remote Comm unities Roundtable, Ottawa, Canada, September 23 -24 2019, 

https://www.itf -oecd.org/connecting -remote -communities -roundtable  [accessed 20/07/2020]. 

Lawrence, M. and T. Kornfie ld (1998), “Transportation subsidies, economic efficiency, equity, and public 

policy”, Nonrenewable Resources , Vol. 7, pp. 137 -142 ,

https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007/B F02767707.pdf .

Lekakou, M. (2019), “Island transport policy in Greece: The Island Transport Equivalent”, Presentation 

from ITF “Connecting Remote Communities ” Roundtable, Ottawa, Canada, September 23 -24 2019, 

https://www.itf -oecd.org/connecting -remote -communities -roundtable  [accessed 20/07/2020]. 

m.e consulting (2019), Drones: Benefits study , m.e consulting, 

https://ndhadeliver.natlib.govt.nz/delivery/DeliveryManagerServlet?dps_pid=IE43756413 .

McNeal, G. (2014), Drones and aerial surveillance: Considerations for legislatures , Brookings Institute, 

https://www.brookings.edu/research/d rones -and -aerial -surveillance -considerations -for -legislatures 

[accessed 20/07/2020]. 

Moon, M. (2018), “Island nation Vanuatu will use drones to transport vaccines”, Engadget ,

https://www.engadget.com/2018 -10 -31 -vanuatu -drones -vaccines -blood -trial.html  [accessed 

20/07/2020]. 

OECD (2019), Enhancing Connectivity through Transport Infrastructure , OECD Publishing, Paris, 

https://doi.org/10.1787/9789264304505 -en .

PwC (2019), “Building trust in drones - public concerns remain a barrier to drone adoption”, 

PricewaterhouseCoopers , https://www.pwc.co.uk/press -room/press -releases/public -concerns -remain -a-

barrier -to -drone -adoption -pwc -research.html  [accessed 20/07/2020]. 

Reuters (2020), “Ghana Turns to Drones to Enable Faster Coronavirus Tes ting”, The New York Times ,

https://www.nytimes.com/reuters/2020/04/20/world/africa/20reuters -health -coronavirus -ghana -

drones.html  [access ed 20/07/2020]. 

Rice, S. (2019), “Eyes In The Sky: The Public Has Privacy Concerns About Drones”, Forbes ,

https://www.forbes.com/sites/stephenrice1/2019/02/04/eyes -in -the -sky -the -public -has -privacy -

concerns -about -drones/#500596476984  [accessed 20/07/2020]. 

Rothfeld, R., A. Straubinger, M . Fu, C. Al Haddad and C. Antoniou ( 2019 ), "Chapter 13: Urban air 

mobility", Demand for Emerging Transportation Systems , Ed. 1, pp. 267 -284, 

https://doi.org/10.1016/B978 -0-12 -815018 -4.00013 -9.

SAP (2019), “Drones Could Help Overcom e the Poor Transport Infrastructure in Africa”, SAP News ,

https://news.sap.com/africa/2019/09/drones -could -help -overcome -the -poor -tr ansport -infrastructure -

in -africa  [accessed 20/07/2020]. 

UAVAIR (2020), “How much does a ‘drone licence [sic]’ cost?” UAVAIR,  https://uav -air.com/news/uavair -

news/m uch -cost -use -drone -commercial -purposes  [accessed 20/07/2020]. 

UBS (2019), UBS Global Real Estate Bubble Index 2019 , UBS, 

https://www.ubs.com/content/dam/static/emailer/2019/sept/BR -108576/global -real -estate -bubble -

index -2019 -global -version.pdf .

UN (2015), “Universal Declaration of Human Rights”, illustrated edition , United Nations, 

https://www.un.org/en/udhrbook/pdf/udhr_booklet_en_web.pdf .3. SOCIETAL IMPACTS AND ACCEPTANCE OF DRONES 

48 READY FOR TAKE -OFF? INTEGRATING DRONES INTO THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM © OECD/ITF 2021 

VTPI (2020), “Evaluating Transport Equity”, Victoria Transport Policy Institute, 

https://www.vtpi.org/equity.pd f.

WEF (2020), “Aerospace and Drones”, World Economic Forum, 

https://www.weforum.org/communities/drones -and -tomorrow -s-airspace  [accessed 20/07/2020]. 

Zhao, P. and Y. Zhang (2019), “The effects of metro fare increase on transport equity: New evidence from 

Beijing”, Transport Policy , Vol . 74, 

https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0967070X18300180  [accessed 20/07/2020]. 

Zipline (2020), official we bsite,  https://flyzipline.com  [accessed 20/03/2020]. 4. ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS OF DRONES   

> READY FOR TAKE -OFF? INTEGRATING DRONES INTO THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM © OECD/ITF 2021

49 

# CHAPTER 4 

# Environmental impacts of drones 

Existing studies suggest that drones may have the potential to reduce energy use in transport and hence 

CO 2 and other transport -related emissions (Linchant et al., 2015). On the other hand, there are clear 

environmental challenges relating to the deployment of drones. These relate to noise and vibration 

impacts, as well as l ight pollution that will affect humans and wildlife (ITF, 2018). Policy makers need to 

ensure that the deployment of drones comes with environmental benefits for the transport system, and 

that adverse impacts are limited as far as possible. 

This chapter ta ckles the following impacts of drones in turn, and discusses how policy makers may limit 

potential adverse effects while reap ing the potential benefits of each: 

 Noise impacts 

 CO 2 impacts (across the whole life -cycle of drones) 

 Air pollution impacts 

 Wildl ife impacts 

 Other environmental impacts including 

o Visual disturbance 

o Soil sealing 

Noise impacts 

The World Health Organization (WHO) has identified noise from transport as the second -most significant 

environmental cause of ill health in Western Europe, aft er air pollution (WHO, 2010) . Noise exposure can 

lead to annoyance, stress, sleep disturbance, poor mental health and well -being, impaired cognitive 

function in children, and negative effects on the cardiovascular and metabolic system (Fons -Esteve, 2018). 

If not managed adequately, drones will contribute to the problem of noise pollution in urban areas and 

elsewhere. 

> Impacts of drones

Drone noise characteristics depend on a variety of factors , including a drone’s design and size (both of 

which define the engine power required ) and its propeller configurations and spinning speed (Intaratep et 

al., 2016). Most currently available drones have moderate to quiet noise levels in the range of around 20 -

70 decibel s (Intaratep et al., 2016). In comparison, the nois e level of a typical busy road is around 80 

decibel s. The noise frequency of drones, and especially of smaller drones, is typically higher than that of 

road traffic , meaning the noise is higher -pitched ; the n oise characteristics of larger drones are still 

uncertain and remain largely unexplored (Uber Elevate, 2016). Noise is considered vibration if it is mainly 

transmitted through ground and buildings at frequencies below 200 Hz (Leventhall, Pelmear and Benton, 

2003). The frequency spectrum of typical drone s show s peaks at multiples of the blade passing frequency 4. ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS OF DRONES 

50 READY FOR TAKE -OFF? INTEGRATING DRONES INTO THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM © OECD/ITF 2021 

above 200 Hz (Cabell, Grosveld, and McSwain, 2016). Therefore, drones, and especially small drones, are 

not expected to contribute to vibrational emissions. 

However, the perception of noise is ofte n very different to actual noise levels. For example, perceived 

noise levels vary with the sound source, the characteristics of the person exposed to the noise and the 

noise environment. As such, parameters like the type of noise (consistent vs. fluctuatin g), frequency of 

noise (high vs. low), sources of noise (nature vs. human activities), time of noise (day vs. night; weekday 

vs. weekend), surroundings of the noise source (residential area vs. industrial zone) or the information 

content of noise (e.g. chi ldren crying vs. cars honking) will influence the perception of noise. The 

characteristics of the person exposed to the noise (e.g. familiarity with, and attitude towards, the sound 

source ; general or current mood) will also influence how a noise is perceived (BEP A, 2019). Noise 

propagation is further highly dependent on factors such as weather, wind, temperature and the built 

environment near the sound source (Hannah, 2006a; Hannah 2006b). 

As a result, perceived noise levels of drones diverge from th eir actual noise levels. Recent studies on the 

societal acceptance of drones (e.g. Eißfeldt and Vogelpohl, 2019) show that drone noise is one of the main 

concern s of the public regarding drone applications besides violation of privacy, misuse and transport 

safety . A study by NASA Langley found that people perceive small drone noise as more annoying than the 

noise of cars in residential neighbourhoods (Christian and Cabell, 2017). This may be due to the noise 

characteristics of drones (such as their high pit ch ), but also due to peoples’ lack of familiarity with, and 

acceptance levels of , some drone applications. Potential differences between (the perception of) the noise 

of a single drone and the cumulative impact of multiple small drones remain largely unexp lored so far. 

Ambient noise levels can make the noise of drones less noticeable. For example, in cities, ambient noise 

levels of conventional vehicles may make drone noise less apparent. However, drone noise may be a 

specific challenge in such areas given the proximity of dense residential areas. Further, the increasing (or 

envisaged) uptake of electric, automated and shared vehicles as well as of active travel in cities is expected 

to make conventional traffic more efficient and hence silent. Many cities a re also developing sustainable 

urban management plans with the specific objective of reduc ing noise levels to improve health and quality 

of life. The urban land - and soundscape in the city of the future may therefore be very different to today’s. 

It is lik ely that such developments will put increasing challenges on noise levels of drones where deployed 

in urban environments. 

Overall, it is likely that drone noise levels will give rise to opposition to drone operations – even where 

operations replace and are not louder than, for example, conventional package delivery operations 

(Christian and Cabell, 2017). This is because drone noise levels may be perceived as louder and /or more 

annoying than they actually are. Similarly, passenger drones will need to be significantly quieter than, for 

example, current helicopters to gain accept ance in urban environments (Uber Elevate, 2016; Porsche 

Consulting, 2018; Roland Berger, 2018 ) – not least because the latter are often banned from operating in 

urban environments due to their noise levels. 

> Solutions for other means of transport

Noise from transport is a recognised issue and has been tackled in different ways . For example, noise fro m

ground transport is often mitigated by noise barriers (e.g. on motorways or railway lines), speed 

limitations, noise emission standards or vehicle use bans (e.g. during the night). The latter measures are 

particularly relevant for dense urban areas, wher e physical noise barriers are usually not practical. Noise 

from aircraft is one of the main issues that the sector is facing. It is particularly challenging around airports 4. ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS OF DRONES   

> READY FOR TAKE -OFF? INTEGRATING DRONES INTO THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM © OECD/ITF 2021

51 

and is tackled by measures such as noise standards for aircraft (e.g. standards tha t encourage 

manufacturers to deploy low -noise engines, operating restrictions, improved ground operations, and noise 

protection walls and land -use management around airports (e.g. Regulation (EU) No 598/2014 ). 

In the EU, the Environmental Noise Directive (END) is the main instrument used to monitor and tackle 

land -based noise emissions from road, rail and air traffic, and from sites of industrial activity. EU member 

states are obliged to assess noise levels and provide action plans for areas where noise th resholds are 

surpassed. With regard to aviation specifically, EU Member States are also required (by Directive 2002/30) 

to limit noise emissions by: 

 reducing aircraft noise levels (e.g. via low -noise engines) and limiting sound propagation (e.g. via 

noise protection walls around airports), 

 planning and managing land use to prevent airport locations near densely populated areas, and 

 providing noise -reducing flight routings for approaches and departures to airports (e.g. bypassing 

villages or approaching wit h a steeper descent). 

Further, Member States are also required to assess noise levels, determine noise level maps and provide 

actions plans for areas with high noise levels. These requirements are closely monitored and, where 

required, further regulation, such as restrictions on night operations, is put in place.   

> What can policy makers do ?

In general, policy makers should assess the potential of existing noise reduction measures that have been 

implemented to alleviat e noise emissions from conventional mea ns of transport. Many of them have 

proven to be effective and are likely directly applicable to drones as well. More specifically, policy makers 

should envisage the following measures to mitigate noise impacts of drones: 

 Support further research on actual and perceived drone noise emissions and their propagation, 

related annoyance levels , and drone -noise reduction measures. This may, for example, include 

research on technical solutions that reduce noise levels and/or change characteristics of drones’ 

noise emissions (such as their frequency). Such research will support both the establish ment of 

strategic noise maps and the defini ng of adequate noise mitig ation measures for policy makers 

(Eißfeldt and Vogelpohl, 2019; Bakx and Nyce, 2016). 

 Put in place adequate drone -noise monitoring and reporting procedures to enable regulators to 

define appropriate means to reduce noise to an acceptable level. This should include :

o Defining a process that measures actual drone noise levels, 

o Defining acceptable drone noise levels, while accounting for differences in local 

surroundings and resulting differences in perceived drone noise levels (accounting for 

the national an d local stakeholder groups), 

o Establishing strategic noise maps (similar to noise level maps required from airports, and 

specifically for urban areas) to identify the number of people exposed to noise emissions 

from transport or industrial activities, and 

o Implement ing an ambient -drone -noise measurement and reporting system to be able to 

influence and monitor emerging noise peaks. 4. ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS OF DRONES 

52 READY FOR TAKE -OFF? INTEGRATING DRONES INTO THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM © OECD/ITF 2021 

 Stimulate low -noise flight procedures and drones by 

o publishing respective information for drone operators and manufacturers, and/ or 

o implementing noise emission standards 

o implementing drone restrictions or registration fees that are dependent on a drone’s 

noise emissions. 

 If any jurisdictions decide to regulate flight based on the results of this defined process, they 

should ensur e that the decision -making process accords with national laws and balances 

economic risks and benefits. With this principle in mind , they could define drone operating 

restrictions , where required, based on the results of strategic noise maps . Such restrict ions could 

take the form of time and/or space restrictions. They may also depend on drone noise levels 

and/or differentiate between drone landing/take -off operations and drones in flight mod e. For 

example, no -drone zones (where drones are entirely prohibit ed) or drone corridors (where 

drones are allowed to operate) could be defined. 

 Support a staged approach to drone integration , in which regular drone flights are first planned 

on routes with low annoyance levels. Based on experience and acculturation with this new 

technology in the course of time, drone volumes and routes could be gradually expanded to meet 

market demands (see Chapter 3 for further recommendations on how to carry out the integration 

of drones in stages ). Any staged approach will have to consider the political and cultural context 

of area where the drones are to be deployed. 

CO 2 impacts 

Decarbonising transport remains a major challenge for mitigating climate change in the decades ahead. 

Fuel combustion from transport is responsible for around one -quarter of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions 

globally; the sector remains dependent on oil for 92% of its energy demand. The ITF’s “current ambition ”

scenario projects that the sector’s CO 2 emissions, the main GHG in transport, will grow by 60% between 

2015 and 2050. This is despite all present and currently foreseeable future mitigation efforts (ITF, 2019). 

Drones, a new means of transport that has the potential to reduce the use of more conventional vehicles, 

may be able to reduce CO 2 emissions from transport. This will, however, depend on many factors. 

> Impacts of drones

Most currently available drones run on electricity. As such, they do not emit any tailpipe emissions. A 

meaningful comparison of the CO 2 impact of drones with that of other means of transport should therefore 

rely on a so -called “well -to -wheel ” analysis (or “generator -to -propeller ” analysis in the case of drones) –

regardless of their energy supply or the service they provide. This type of analysis accounts for both the 

emissions caused during the vehicle -use phase and those caused by the production, transportation and 

distribution of the electricity or transport fuels. 

A full life -cycle assessment (LCA) for a drone, from “cradle ” to “grave ”, is als o required to account for the 

emissions impacts of the vehicle itself. An LCA accounts for CO 2 emissions that stem from the extraction 

of resources required for manufacturing the vehicle ; for CO 2 emissions from producing, recycling (or 

disposing of) and transporting the vehicle (and its battery, where applicable) ; and for CO 2 emissions caused 

by vehicle maintenance and service activities. Also , the emissions resulting from the construction and use 

of enabling drone infrastructure, or from the potential ne ed to replace a battery during the life cycle of a 4. ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS OF DRONES   

> READY FOR TAKE -OFF? INTEGRATING DRONES INTO THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM © OECD/ITF 2021

53 

drone , need to be accounted for (Stolaroff et al., 2018; Asaithambi, Treiber and Kanagaraj, 2019; Dai et 

al., 2019). The energy efficiency of a drone is the main determinant of a drone’s CO 2 emissions duri ng its 

use phase . Measured either in gCO 2 per vehicle -kilometre (vkm) or gCO 2 per tonne -kilometre (tkm ), this is 

typically the most relevant factor for determining the total life -cycle emissions of a drone (Bachmann, 

Hidalgo, and Bricout, 2017). 

When comp aring the life -cycle CO 2 emissions of drones with other means of transport, it is also important 

to consider that the distances travelled (e.g. in vkm or tkm) will vary across the different means of 

transport. For example, a drone will often use more direc t routes than a delivery truck, and thus use fewer 

vkm or tkm to reach its destination. At the same time, a delivery drone, which is often limited by range 

and payload, may require more return trips to a base for recharging and/or reloading than a delivery van. 

Further, the energy consumption of a drone is, for example, higher for take -off or landing operations than 

for cruising operations. As such, the energy consumption of a drone’s trip will greatly depend on the 

number of landing operations it has to ca rry out in the course of a return trip to its base. Comparisons 

between different means of transport need to account for such differences. This may be done by defining 

a meaningful unit of comparison, such as CO 2 emissions per delivered package (Goodchild and Toy, 2018; 

Figliozzi, 2017; Stolaroff et al., 2018; Kasliwal et al., 2019). 

Figliozzi (2017) compare the well -to -wheel (or “generation -to -propeller ”) energy use and CO 2 emissions of 

delivery drones with those of diesel vans, electric vans and electric tricycles for different delivery scenarios. 

Results indicate that, on a per -distance basis, drones are more CO 2-efficient for small payloads than 

conventional diesel vans. More specifically, in the scenario of one -to -one deliveries (i.e. a single delivery is 

made with one return trip), a drone is around 47 times more energy -efficient and 1000 times more CO 2-

efficient than a diesel van (assuming that the drone emits around 23 times less emissions per energy unit 

used). Drastically different results are obtai ned when customers can be grouped in a delivery route (i.e. in 

a one -to -many route setting). Here the higher payload of vans (assumed to be 380 times more than 

drones) allows for more efficient deliveries. A lthough a drone is eight times less energy -effici ent than a 

typical U.S. van, it is still almost 2.8 times more efficient in relation to CO 2 emissions. Electric trucks and 

vans are much more efficient than a conventional van ; a s a result, a drone is not more efficient than electric 

ground -based vehicles in delivery scenarios with more customers per route. 

Figliozzi (2017) also assess es the life -cycle emissions of drones, accounting for emissions from materials 

extraction and processing, manufacturing, distribution, and vehicle disposal or recycling. Resu lts show that 

such emissions are significant for drones and must be taken into account. Drones have more processors, 

sensors, electronics, and other aircraft materials that are more energy intensive to produce and recycle 

than the materials needed for grou nd -based vehicles. Considering such life -cycle emissions, an electric 

tricycle is likely to be more CO 2 efficient than a drone. Hence, in dense urban areas, where tricycle 

deliveries are economically feasible, tricycles are likely to outperform drones in terms of both energy 

consumption and life -cycle CO 2 emissions. Overall, drones appear to cause less CO 2 emissions than ground -

based vehicles only in sparsely populated areas with a low number of customers where payloads are 

relatively small. 

Stolaroff et al. (2018) compare the life -cycle CO 2 emissions from two different types of drones (a small 

quadcopter designed to carry load s up to 0.5 kg and a large oc tocopter that can carry up to 8 kg) with 

those of trucks (running on diesel, natural gas or electricit y), vans and passenger cars (running on gasoline 

or electricity). All vehicles are assumed to be used for the final delivery of goods in an urban area. The 

analysis provides results for GHG (greenhouse gas) emissions per package delivered. It includes emis sions 

from fuel production and combustion, as well as from battery production and electricity production 

required for transportation and warehousing. The range of the emissions intensities of electricity in the 4. ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS OF DRONES 

54 READY FOR TAKE -OFF? INTEGRATING DRONES INTO THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM © OECD/ITF 2021 

United States is represented by comparing res ults from low -carbon California to relatively high -carbon 

Missouri. The study assumes that drones require additional infrastructure in the form of warehouses 

because of their limited range, increasing the energy consumption and related emissions for the wh ole 

delivery system. Results show that small quadcopter drones have lower life -cycle GHG emissions than 

conventional trucks (powered by diesel and natural gas ) and electric vehicle (EV) trucks in most regions. 

Large octocopters have lower GHG emissions tha n diesel and natural gas vehicles , but only when charged 

with low -carbon electricity. However, improving technology for delivery trucks and vans will reduce 

emissions per package for such ground -based delivery services and influence the life -cycle emission s

comparison between such vehicles and drones. 

Chiang et al. (2019) investigate the sustainability impact of pairing drones with traditional delivery vehicles 

into a last -mile delivery routing model. The authors find that if the introduction of drones is carefully 

planned and the routing and coordination of vehicles and drones are controlled properly, drones have the 

potential to realise environmental benefits. 

Kasliwal et al. (2019) compare the well -to -wheel energy use and related GHG emissions for passe nger 

drones with conventional and electric cars. They find that a point -to -point service for one passenger is 35% 

more GHG -efficient than a conventional car, and 28% less GHG -efficient than an electric car. Higher load 

factors would increasingly favour dro nes compared to the car alternatives. Overall, they find that drones 

might be a more sustainable transport solution when replacing ground vehicles that operate on congested, 

indirect routes or that face other geographical barriers. Drones might therefore h ave a niche role in the 

mobility system, especially for travellers with a willingness to pay for predictability and time -saving. 

Overall, reviewed studies show that CO 2 emissions comparisons between drones and other modes of 

transport depend on many facto rs. They include the drone technolog ies and their respective energy 

efficienc ies , the assumed load factors of the vehicles, the specific transport service s being assessed, and 

the carbon -intensity of the energy power ing the vehicles. Because a comparison w ill also depend on the 

technological development of alternative modes and their carbon footprint s, the r esults of such 

assessments will be subject to change over time (Park, Kim, and Suh, 2018). A generic conclusion that 

applies to all drones and their app lications cannot be made. So far, available assessments mostly focus on 

electric drone s used for delivery applications. How the (CO 2) efficiency of passenger drones or larger 

freight drones (that may not be able to rely exclusively on electricity) compare to more conventional 

transport services remains to be explored. 

Finally , as with any other new means of transport or technology , it is important to consider that drones 

bear the risk of creating additional travel demand ( as discussed in Chapter 3 ). Where t his happens, drones 

cannot possibly reduce emissions from transport. On the other hand, drones may help reduce overall 

travel demand (in pkm or tkm) as direct connections (e.g. to remote areas) can be established, and as the 

detours required by other means of transport can be avoided. 

> Solutions for other means of transport

Transport is a major contributor to global CO 2 emissions. As such, efforts across the sector to reduce CO 2

emissions have recently increased , with solutions being sought and developed by policy makers and 

industry alike (see ITF (2020) for a non -exhaustive overview of such measures). 

The so -called Avoid -Shift -Improve framework allows such efforts to be classified (e.g. SUTP, 2011). The 

avoid and shift categories comprise measures designed to do two things: (a) reduc e transport demand, 

e.g. through land -use management measures or technology that can help to reduce travelling overall (tele -

presence , web -conferences etc.) ; and (b) to encourag e people/companies to use more su stainable, i.e. 4. ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS OF DRONES   

> READY FOR TAKE -OFF? INTEGRATING DRONES INTO THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM © OECD/ITF 2021

55 

more (CO 2) efficient, transport modes. The improve category of measures aim s at enhancing the CO 2

efficiency of a specific transport alternative itself (or the infrastructure it uses) – for example, by making 

the vehicle (i.e. its use or ot her stages of its lifecycle) more efficient, by switching to more sustainable 

fuels, by increasing its utilisation rate (load factors) and/or by optimising its routes. 

Regarding improve measures, clear policy intervention has proven to be necessary to ens ure that vehicle 

manufacturers and operators pursue the production and use of more (CO 2) efficient vehicles and fuels. 

This is mainly because upfront development or investment costs for such measures may surpass potential 

cost savings or competitive advant ages in the short or even longer term for vehicle manufacturers and 

users alike, if an adequate policy landscape is not put in place. A well -known example of a policy measure 

designed to encourag e efficiency improvements of road vehicles is the vehicle eff iciency standards (or CO 2

emission standards) that have been put in place around the world (Yang, 2018). These standards typically 

prescribe minimum energy -efficiency levels (or, inversely, maximum CO 2 emissions levels) for vehicles. In 

the case of aircraft, standards will apply to new aircraft type designs globally from 2020 (ICAO, 2017a). So 

far, such standards have typically been based on the energy -efficiency of use phase of the vehicles (and 

their respective tailpipe emissions). G iven the uptake of electric vehicles in road transport (and potentially 

aviation), more -holistic approaches to standard -setting (e.g. based on life -cycle assessments) will be 

increasingly relevant in the future. Policy intervention is less critical concern ing the other mentioned 

improve measures, i.e. the increase of utilisation rates (load factors) and the optimising of routes. This is 

because such efficiency improvements are in the clear interest of transport providers. They can help 

reduce costs and can therefore help increase the competitiveness of a transport provider. 

Economic measures – such as the uptake and gradual increase of a carbon tax, the inclusion of transport 

operations into an emissions trading system , or a carbon -offsetting scheme (like t he Carbon Offsetting and 

Reduction Scheme for International Aviation, CORSIA ) – are a means of encourag ing actions across all three 

avoid , shift and improve categories . They also contribute to establishing a level playing field across different 

transport m odes and alternatives. This is achieved by relating the costs of transport (and hence for the 

user) to the carbon footprint of transport operations. In the road transport sector, well -known examples 

of economic measures also include road taxes or congestio n charges that can be based on the CO 2

performance of the vehicles.   

> What can policy makers do?

To improve the CO 2 efficiency of drones and their operations, policy makers can revert to measures that 

have been put in place for more traditional means of tran sport and for other industries . For example, they 

should :

 Consider introduc ing drone efficiency standards that are made increasingly stringent over time. 

These could be similar to standards that have been introduced for other means of transport (e.g. 

passenger vehicles, heavy -duty freight vehicle s or aircraft). However, they should account for 

vehicle life -cycle emissions. In this context , ideally new life -cycle -based standards, including 

relevant measurement process es, would be established for all means of transport, to facilitate 

the compar ison of transport alternatives on a like -for -like basis. Lessons learnt from existing 

efficiency standards for transport vehicles (such as loopholes in the regulation or potential 

perverse effects regarding vehicle weight developments) should be taken into account when 

designing such standards (ITF, 2020). The introduction of efficiency standards requires the set -up 

of respective efficiency measurement procedures and related vehicl e testing facilities. 

 Consider introduc ing CO 2-based charges for airspace use that drone operators must pay in order 

to access airspace. This could be managed via the UTM system and rely on drones’ CO 2-efficiency 4. ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS OF DRONES 

56 READY FOR TAKE -OFF? INTEGRATING DRONES INTO THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM © OECD/ITF 2021 

values (which would also need to be determ ined for setting up drone efficiency standards – see 

above). 

Further, policy makers should :

 Where resources allow, carry out (or require certified) CO 2 assessments of proposed drone 

operations and/or proposed drone corridors – similar to the environmenta l impact assessments 

that are often carried out for (transport) infrastructure projects. Such assessments should 

account for the life -cycle emissions of the drones and their operations, consider the impact of 

potential alternative transport options , and ev aluate the extent to which the specific drone 

service might create additional transport demand that would undermine any potential CO 2

emissions reduction of the proposed service. 

 Consider whether CO 2-relat ed polic ies for drones should be part of an economy -wide policy 

framework that encourages the mitigation of transport CO 2 emissions . This way, all transport 

modes will compete on a level playing field regarding their environmental performance. 

Air pollution impacts 

Some 3.8 million premature deaths annually are attributed to outdoor (ambient) air pollution. According 

to WHO’s most recent survey of 4300+ cities worldwide, only 20% of the urban population surveyed live 

in areas that comply with WHO air quality guidelin e levels for PM2.5. Average particulate air pollution 

levels in many developing cities can be 4 -15 times higher than WHO air quality guideline levels, putting 

many at risk of long -term health problems (WHO, 2020). Fuel -powered d rones will contribute to air 

pollution. 

> Impacts of drones

In general, drones have great potential to alleviate air pollution in urban areas. This is especially the case 

where they operate on electricity, as most of the currently available drones used or tested for freight 

transport i n urban areas do (Chiang et al. , 2019; Goodchild and Toy , 2018). As such, they do not cause any 

local air pollution. Where such electric drones replace the use of more conventional, fuel -based means of 

transport, drones will help alleviate air pollution in urban areas. Larger drones, such as those used for 

(urban) passenger transport services or larger freight movements, may at least partly rely on more 

conventional fuels. In these cases, they would contribute to local air pollution.    

> What can policy makers do?

To avoid the aggravation of air pollution problems in urban areas, policy makers should 

 Consider prohibitions and/or high fees for the use of drones running on fossil fuels in urban areas 

(e.g. similar to low emissions or vehicle restriction zones tar geting road -based vehicles that are 

increasingly deployed in cities across the world). As suggested above regarding the charging of 

use of airspace, respective fee collections or prohibitions could be facilitated via the UTM system. 

 Consider air -pollutant -specific emission standards that define the acceptable limits for exhaust 

emissions of new drones that burn fossil fuel . These standards should be inspired by, and meet at 

least, the stringen t criteria currently in place for ground -based vehicles (e.g. tho se defined in the 

“Euro ” series of exhaust -emissions standards in the European Union). Respective emissions -test 

procedures for drones would have to be developed. Energy -efficiency (or CO 2) standards that 4. ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS OF DRONES   

> READY FOR TAKE -OFF? INTEGRATING DRONES INTO THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM © OECD/ITF 2021

57 

encourage a reduction in fuel use (as described in the section above) will also contribute to 

limiting tailpipe emissions of air pollutants. 

Wildlife impacts 

Wild animals mixing with any form of transportation leads to confrontations that can be fatal to both 

human and animal. Several recent studies indi cate that wildlife -vehicle collisions are a serious problem in 

many of the OECD member states (Colino -Rabanal et al., 2012; Neumann, 2012; Markolt et al., 2012). The 

consequences are profound and include significant socio -economic, traffic safety and environmental costs. 

The Traffic Injury Research Foundation (TIRF) in Canada found not only that wildlife collisions result in 

death and serious injuri es, but also that certain species have become endangered and are at risk of 

disappearing altogether, which is a threat to biodiversity (TIRF, 2012). Traditionally, wildlife strike 

prevention has focused on keeping birds off airport perimeters. Bird strikes mostly happen during take -off 

or landing, or during low -altitude flight in airspace below 3000 metres (McKee et al., 2016). Therefore, 

options to expand the horizon of wildlife strike prevention beyond airport boundaries are currently being 

investigated ( Hale , 2017 ; Metz et al., 2019) . Alt hough birds try to avoid aircraft, the high speed of planes 

can cause a delayed reaction that makes it too difficult for the bird to react and avoid the aircraft in time 

(DeVault, et al., 2014; DeVault, et al., 2015; Dopp ler et al., 2015; Blackwell et al. 2016). 

Because most drones will operate at low altitudes , they will therefore also interfere with the natural 

environment, in the form of disturbing wildlife or risking collisions with wildlife (Mulero -Pazmany et al., 

20 17). 

> Impacts of drones

Wildlife reactions to drones will depend on both the vehicle’s attributes (esp ecially drone size, flight 

pattern , and engine type ) and the characteristics of the animals themselves (animal type, life -history stage ,

and level of aggre gation). For example, fuel engines – which are generally noisier than electric engines, 

especially when combined with changes in noise intensity (e.g. caused by speed or trajectory changes or 

wind alterations) – will disturb wildlife. Larger drones will im pact wildlife at higher altitudes than smaller 

ones, as the size of the threat increases an animal’s perceived risk and the probability of detecting it. 

Quieter drones, on the other hand, or drones operated at higher altitudes (e.g. over 100 m eters above 

ground level), where noise is attenuated, may not be heard by wildlife and are therefore likely to be less 

distressing. 

Among different animal types, birds, especially in larger groups, are the most sensitive to drones. Flightless 

birds and large birds are more likely to be disturbed than smaller ones. Terrestrial mammals are overall 

less reactive to drones than birds. Given the low altitude at which small drones operate, drones may also 

interact with local fauna, generating a new type of anthropogenic dist urbance that has not yet been 

systematically evaluated (Mulero -Pazmany et. al., 2017). 

> Solutions for other means of transport

Measures to increase a bird’s ability to detect and avoid an aircraft have been demonstrated to enhance 

the chances for a success ful escape and thus to prevent a collision (Lima et al., 2015; Bernhardt et al. ,

2010). For example, pulsing light on aircraft has been shown to reduce the risk of bird strikes (Blackwell 

and Bernhardt, 2004; Blackwell et al., 2009; Blackwell et al., 2012) . Similar results can be achieved by 

applying patterns to the propellers of turboprop aircraft (FAA 1978; Aas and Johansen, 2016). Aircraft with 4. ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS OF DRONES 

58 READY FOR TAKE -OFF? INTEGRATING DRONES INTO THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM © OECD/ITF 2021 

a higher contrast to the sky experience fewer bird strikes (Fernández -Juricic et al. , 2011). In ground -based 

tr ansport, measures like flashing road signs that warn car drivers about wildlife crossings or sensors inside 

cars that enable the detection of wildlife in the direct vicinity have proven effective. Overall, different 

species of animals react differently to vehicle encounters on the ground and in the air, making very 

dedicated counter -measures necessary (Lima et al., 2015).   

> What can policy makers do?

In line with findings from Hodgson and Koh (2016) and Mulero -Pázmány et al. (2017), the following 

recommendati ons for policy makers can be drawn to limit the disturbance of wildlife due to drones: 

 Enable local authorities to react immediately when wildlife becomes significantly affected , for 

example by defining additional no -fly zones or restricting access to spec ific areas; 

 Publish information on bird concentrations, bird movements, seasonal animal movements etc .

together with associated guidelines for drone operations in those areas; 

 Publish recommendations for drone operations in sensitive areas to produce the lowest possible 

levels of noise, vibration and light pollution; 

 Introduce requirements for drones to be equipped with additional lights and visual patterns on the 

propellers to help birds see and avoid drones; and 

 Publish technical and operational guidelin es on how to use drones in the vicinity of wildlife , such 

as 

o prefer straight flight paths over unpredictable flight manoeuvres, 

o favour quiet drones over noisier drones (e.g. electric propulsion), and 

o position ground stations at an appropriate distance fro m wildlife habitats. 

In urban areas, dedicated urban infrastructure measures (e.g. fences, acoustic warnings or pulsing lights) 

can help avoid disturbance of, or collision with, birds. They can also prevent birds from entering drone 

hubs or interacting with ground infrastructure like antennas or surveillance systems. 

Other environmental impacts 

> Visual disturbance

Drones can cause visual disturbance which may impact people’s well -being and health. Similar to noise 

emissions, perceived visual disturbance may be different to actual visual disturbance. Studies originating 

from different fields indicate that perceived disturbance is often strongly correlated with the uncertainty 

related to the actual situation. In this context, drones may more often be perce ived as disturbing when 

their purpose, flight legitimacy or estimated height and distance are uncertain. Research shows that a 

drone that flies sufficiently far away and has a clear and legitimate purpose does not cause people to 

interrupt their activities , and is not seen as problematic (Bakx and Nyce, 201 6). On the other hand, a drone 

that hovers over public or residential areas with no visible legitimi sation will most likely be perceived as 

disruptive or intrusive. Similarly, drones that access areas tha t are considered either private (e.g. 

residential areas, schools, kindergartens), sensitive (e.g. industrial, governmental or military buildings) or 

protected (e.g. natural reserves, historical places and buildings) are more likely to cause distraction and 

distress (Lidynia, Philipsen, and Ziefle, 2017). 4. ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS OF DRONES   

> READY FOR TAKE -OFF? INTEGRATING DRONES INTO THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM © OECD/ITF 2021

59 

Policy makers should consider the following measures to reduce the general public’s uncertainty about 

drones , and thereby reduce (perceived) visual disturbance ( see Chapter 3 for further recommendations 

on how to improve the public perception of drones): 

 Implement drone e -registration and e -identification processes and make information on drone 

flights available to the general public , who could then instantly verify the drone’s origin, 

destination and purpo se .

 Where appropriate, define no -fly zones above private or sensitive areas and require drone 

manufacturers to equip their vehicles with appropriate geofencing and remote identification 

technologies to effectively enforce such zones .

 Improve public percep tion and awareness of drones , e.g. by launching awareness campaigns that 

highlight the opportunities presented by drones .

 Support further research on tolerance levels with regard to visual disturbance of drones to identify 

further measures for mitigating s uch disturbance. 

> Soil sealing

The term soil sealing describes the problems related to large -scale sealing of natural soil – that is, the 

covering of the ground by an impermeable material . A major amount of soil sealing can be attributed to 

the construction of housing, office and industr ial buildings. Transport infrastructure also contributes to soil 

sealing , and droneport s may eventually contribute to soil sealing in a future scenario of mass deployment 

of drones. 

Soil sealing prevents rain fro m draining into the soil and thus lowers the overall ground water level. At the 

same time, surface drains can cause local sewers to overflow and ultimately contribute to river floods. 

Further, sealed soil cannot carry plant life , which has negative effects on the microclimate such as 

overheating effects in summer. Soil sealing also reduces animal diversity, both on the surface and 

under ground ; and it can play a role in climate change by hindering natural CO 2 absorption by soils. Efforts 

to renature sealed s oil require huge amounts of technology and money and often leav e contaminated soils 

behind (Umweltbundesamt, 2019 ; European Commission, 2013). 

The amount of soil sealing that may be attributed to drone traffic will largely depend on the drone 

application scenario. In principle, drones will not require sealing of significant amounts of soil ; they do not 

require sealed traffic areas like railways or roads , and they can take -off and land in smaller, confined places 

requiring only minimal surface area. Passeng er drones used for urban air mobility applications may imply 

the construction of air hubs similar to bus terminals . However, especially in urban areas, existing roof tops 

or legacy industry or traffic infrastructures may be used for this purpose. Thus, in urban areas the impact 

on soil sealing is expected to be low. In sub -urban and rural areas , drone delivery and cargo applications 

may require the construction of separate logistics infrastructure to couple drone traffic to other modes of 

transport. Each sp ecific drone use case will require a different degree of soil sealing and , to a greater or 

lesser extent , may revert to already existing infrastructure. 

Policy makers should keep the issue of soil sealing in mind when planning future urban landscapes or d rone 

operations in general. Where possible, they should ensure that drone operations make use of soil already 

sealed by existing built infrastructure or buildings, instead of requiring additional soil sealing. 4. ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS OF DRONES 

60 READY FOR TAKE -OFF? INTEGRATING DRONES INTO THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM © OECD/ITF 2021 

# References 

Aas, C. K. and B. Johansen (2016 ), “ Con spicuous pied propellers - what are the latest results?” 

Presentation at the Bird / Wildlife Strike Prevention Conference in Amsterdam, The Netherlands. 

Asaithambi, G., M. Treiber, and V. Kanagaraj (2019), “Life Cycle Assessment of Conventional and Electric 

Vehicles”, in M. Palocz -Andresen et al., eds., International Climate Protection , Springer ,

https://doi.org/10.1007/978 -3-030 -03816 -8.

Ba chmann, J., C Hidalgo, and S. Bricout (2017), Environmental analysis of innovative sustainable 

composites with potential use in aviation sector - A life cycle assessment review ”, Science China 

Technological Sciences , Vol., 60 , pp. 1301 -1317,  https://doi.org/10.1007/s11431 -016 -9094 -y.

Bakx, G. and J. Nyce ( 201 6), “The safe integration of military UAS in the (inter)national airspace: some 

underlying processes”, Cognition, Technology & Work , August 2016 , Volume 18, Issue 3, pp. 465 -477 ,

DOI: 10.1007/s10111 -016 -0377 -z.

BEPA (2019), Umweltwissen -Lärm (German), Bavarian Environmental Protection Agency, 

https://www.lfu.baye rn.de/buerger/doc/uw_34_laerm_messen_bewerten.pdf 

Bernhardt, G. E., B. F. Blackwell, T. L. DeVault, and L. Kutschbach -Brohl (2010), “Fatal injuries to birds 

from collisions with aircraft reveal anti‐predator behaviours”, International Journal of Avian Scie nce , Vol .

152, Issue 4, https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1474 -919X.2010.01043.x .

Blackwell, B.F. and G. Bernhardt (2004), “Efficacy of aircraft landing lights in stimulating avoidance 

behavior in birds”, Journal of Wildlife Management 68(3), pp. 725 -732 , https://doi.org/10.2193/0022 -

541X(2004)068[0725:EOALLI]2.0.CO;2 .

Blackwell, B., E. Fernández -Juricic, T. Sea mans, and T. Dolan (2009), “Avian Visual System Configuration 

and Behavioural Responses to Object Approach”, Animal Behaviour , Vol . 77, pp. 673 -684 ,

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.anbehav.2008.11.017 .

Blackwell, B. F., T. L. DeVault, T. W. Seamans, S. L. Lima, P. Baumhardt and E. Fernández‐Juricic (2012), 

“Exploiting avian vision with aircraft lighting to reduce bird strikes”, Journal of Applied Ecology , 49(4), pp. 

758 -766 , https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365 -2664.2012.02165.x .

Blackwell, B.F., T.L. DeVault, E. Fernández -Juricic, E.M. Gese, L. Gilbert -Norton and S.W. Breck (2016), 

“No single solution: application of behavioural principles in m itigating human -wildlife conflict”, Animal 

Behaviour , Vol. 120, pp. 245 -54 , https://doi.org/10.1016/j.anbehav.2016.07.013 .

Cabell, R., F. Grosveld, and R. McSwain (2016), “Measured noise from small unmanned aerial vehicles”, in

Inter -Noise and Noise -Con Congress and Conference Proceedings , Vol. 252, No. 2, pp. 345 -354, Institute 

of Noise Control Engineering , https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/Measured -Noise -from -Small -

Unmanned -Aerial -Vehicles -Cabell -McSwain/957b528ba011ec32fc3065620e9708e60d31e357  [access ed 

20/07/2020]. 

Chiang, W.C., Y. Li, J. Shang, and T.L. Urban (2019), “Impact of drone delivery on sustainability and cost: 

Realizing the UAV potential through vehicle routing optimization”, Applied Energy , Vol. 242 , pp. 1164 -75. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2019.03.117 .4. ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS OF DRONES   

> READY FOR TAKE -OFF? INTEGRATING DRONES INTO THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM © OECD/ITF 2021

61 

Christian, A.W. and R. Cabell (2017), “Initial Investigation into the Psychoacoustic Properties of Small 

Unmanned Aerial System Noise”, 23rd AIAA /CEAS Aeroacoustics Conference, AIAA AVIATION Forum 

(AIAA 2017 -4051) , https://doi.org/10.2514/6.2017 -4051 .

Colino –Rabanal, V.J., Bosch, J., M.J. Muñoz, and S.J. Peris (2012) , “Influence of new irrigated croplands on 

wild boar (Sus scrofa) road kills in NW Spain ”, Animal Biodiversity and Conservation , Vol. 35 , pp. 247 -52 ,

http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc /download?doi=10.1.1.855.9844&rep=rep1&type=pdf .

Dai, Q., J.C. Kelly, L. Gaines, and M. Wang (2019), “Life Cycle Analysis of Lithium -Ion Batteries for 

Automotive Applications”, Batteries , Vol. 5, 48,  https://doi.org/10.3390/batteries5020048 .

DeVault, T. L., B. F. Blackwell, T. W. Seamans, S.L. Lima, and E. Fernández -Juricic (2014). “Effects of 

vehicle speed on flight initiation by turkey vultures: implications for bird -vehicle collisions ”, PLOS ONE ,

9(2), e87944 , https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0087944 .

DeVault, T. L., B. F. Blackwell, T. W. Seamans, S.L. Lima, and E. Fernández -Juricic (2015), “Speed kills: 

ineffective avian escape resp onses to oncoming vehicles”, Proc eedings of the Royal Society B, Vol. 282, 

No. 1801, p. 2014 -88) , https://doi.org/10.1098/rspb.2014.2188 .

Dolbeer, R.A. (2006), “Height Distribution of Birds Recorded by Collisions with Civil Aircraft”, Journal of 

Wildlife Management , , vol. 70, pp. 1345 -50 , https://doi.org/10.2193/0022 -

541X(2006)70[1345:HDOBRB]2.0.CO;2 .

Doppler, M. S., DeV ault, T. L., B. F. Blackwell, and E. Fernández -Juricic (2015), “Cowbird responses to 

aircraft with lights tuned to their eyes: Implications for bird –aircraft collisions”, The Condor , 117(2), pp. 

165 -77 , https://doi.org/10.1650/CONDOR -14 -157.1 .

Eißfeldt, H. and V. Vogelpohl (2019), “Drone acceptance and noise concerns – some findings”, 20 th 

Symposium on Aviation Psychology, ISAP 2019, Dayton, Pennsylvania,  https://aviation -

psychology.org/wp -content/uploads/2019/10/ISAP_2019_Proceedings.pdf .

European Commission (2013), “Hard surfaces, hidden costs – Searching for alternatives to land take and 

soil sealing” , European Commission, doi:10.2779/16427, 

https://ec.europa.eu/environment/soil/pdf/SoilSealing -Brochure_en.pdf .

FAA (1978), “Conspicuity Assessment of Selected Propeller and Tail Rotor Paint Schemes ”, No. FAA -AM -

78 -29, U.S. Federal Aviation Administration , Washington, 

https://www.faa.gov/data_research/research/m ed_humanfacs/oamtechreports/1970s/media/AM78 -

29.pdf .

Fernández -Juricic, E., J. Gaffney, B.F. Blackwell, and P. Pamhardt (2011), “Bird strikes and aircraft 

fuselage color: a correlation study”, Human -Wildlife Inter actions 5(2), 224 -234 ,

https://digitalcommons.unl.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=2290&context=icwdm_usdanwrc  [accessed 

20/07/2020]. 

Figliozzi, M. A. (2017), “Lifecycle modeling and assessment of unmanned aerial vehicles CO 2 emissions”, 

Transportation Research Part D: Transport and Environment , Vol. 57, pp. 251 -61 ,

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trd.2017.09.011 .

Fons -Esteve, J. (2018), “Analysis of changes on noise exposure 2007 — 2012 — 2017”, European Topic 

Center on Air Pollution and Climate Change Mitigation, European Environment Agency ,

https://www.eionet.europa.eu/etcs/etc -atni/products/etc -atni -

reports/eionet_rep_etcacm_2018_14_noiseexposuretrends2007 -2017  [accessed 20/07/2020]. 4. ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS OF DRONES 

62 READY FOR TAKE -OFF? INTEGRATING DRONES INTO THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM © OECD/ITF 2021 

Goodchild, A. and J. Toy (2018), “Delivery by drone: An evaluation of unmanned aerial vehicle technology 

in reducing CO 2 emissions in the delivery service industry”, Transportation Research Part D: Transport 

and Environment , Vol. 61, pp. 58 -67.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j. trd.2017.02.017 .

Hale M. R., Stanley R. (2017), “Evaluating the Design and Suitability of the Wildlife Surveillance Concept”, 

in Integrated Communications Navigation and Surveillance Conference , IEEE , Herndon, Va. , USA, 

doi:10.1109/ICNSURV.2017.8011926. 

Hannah, L. (2006a), “Ground, Terrain and Structure Effects on Sound Propagation”, New Zealand 

Acoustics: Factors Affecting Outdoor Sound Propagation (Volume 20, No. 3), Massey University, New 

Zealand ,

https://www.acoustics.org.nz/sites/www.acoustics.org.nz/files/journal/pdfs/Hannah_L_NZA2007_c.pdf .

Hannah, L. (2006b), “Ground, Wind and Temperature Effects on Sound Propagation”, New Zealand 

Aco ustics: Factors Affecting Outdoor Sound Propagation , Vol . 20, No. 3, Massey University, New Zealand ,

https://www.acoustics.org.nz/sites/www.acoustics.org.nz/files/journal/pdfs/Hannah_L_NZA2007_a.pdf .

Hodgson, J. and L. Koh (2016), “Best practice for minimising unmanned aerial vehicle disturbance to 

wildlife in biological field research”, Current Biology , Vol . 26, Issue 10, pp. R404 -R405, 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2016.04.001 .

ICAO (2017a), “ICAO Council adopts new CO 2 emissions standard for aircraft”, International Civil Aviation 

Organization,  https://www.icao.int/newsroom/pages/icao -council -adopts -new -co2 -emissions -standard -

for -aircraft.aspx  [accessed 20/07/2020]. 

ICAO (2017b), “2 008 -2015 Wildlife Strike Analyses (ibis)”, Electronic bulletin, International Civil Aviation 

Organization,  https://www.icao.int/safety/IBI S/2008%20 -

%202015%20Wildlife%20Strike%20Analyses%20(IBIS)%20 -%20EN.pdf .

Intaratep, N., W.N. Alexander, W. Devenport, S. Grace, and A. Dropkin (2016), “Experimental Study of 

Quadcopter Acoustics and Performance at Static Thrust Conditions”, 22nd AIAA/CEAS A eroacoustics 

Conference , 30 May - 1 June, 2016, Lyon, France , https://doi.org/10.2514/6.2016 -2873 .

ITF (2019), ITF Transport Outlook 2019 , OECD Publishing, Paris,  https://doi.org/10.1787/transp_outlook -

en -2019 -en .

ITF (2018), (Un)certain Skies? Drones in the World of Tomorrow , OECD Publishing, Paris, 

https://doi.org/www.itf -oecd.org/sites/default/files/docs/uncertain -skies -drones.pdf .

ITF (2020), Transport Climate Action Di rectory , International Transpo rt Forum,  https://www.itf -

oecd.org/tcad  [accessed 20/07/2020]. 

Kasliwal, A., N.J. Furbush, J.H. Gawron, J.R. McBride, T.J. Wallington, R.D. De Kleine, H.C. Kim, and G.A. 

Keoleian (2019), “Role of flying cars in sustainable mobility”, Nature Communications , Vol. 10, No. 1555 ,

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467 -019 -09426 -0.

Leventhall, G., P. Pelmear, and S. Benton (2003), A review of published research on low frequency noise 

and its effects , UK Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (DEFRA) , London, 

https://doi.org/EPG1/2/50 .

Lima, S.L., B.F. Blackwell, T.L. DeVault, and E. Fernández -Juricic (2015), “Animal reactions to oncoming 

vehicles: a conceptual review”, Biological Reviews, Vol. 90, pp. 60 -75.  https://doi.org/10.1111/brv.12093 .

Lidynia, C., R. Philipsen, and M. Ziefle (2017), “Droning on About Drones —Acceptance of and Perceived 

Barriers to Drones in Civil Usage Contexts”, in Savage -Knepshield P. and J. Chen (eds .), Advances in 4. ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS OF DRONES   

> READY FOR TAKE -OFF? INTEGRATING DRONES INTO THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM © OECD/ITF 2021

63 

Human Factors in Robots and Unmanned Systems . Advances in Intelligent Systems and Computing, vol 

499. Springer, Cham,  https://doi.org/10.1007/978 -3-319 -41959 -6_26 .

Linchant, J., J. Lisein, J. Semeki, P. Lejeune and C. Vermeulen (2015), “Are unmanned aircraft systems 

(UAS s) the future of wildlife monitoring? A review of accomplishments and challenges ”, Mammal 

Review , Vol. 45 , pp. 239 -52 , https://doi.org/10.1111/mam.12046 .

Markolt, F., L., Szemethy, R., Lehoczki, M., Heltai (2012), “Spatial and temporal evaluation of wildlife -

vehicle collisions along the M3 Highway in Hungary”, North -Western Journal of Zoology 8: 414 -425 ,

http://biozoojournals.ro/nwjz/content/v8n2/nwjz.121402.Markolt.pdf .

McKee, J., P. Shaw, A. Dekker, and K. Patrick (2016), “Approaches to wildlife management in aviation”, in 

F. M. Angelici (ed.), Problematic Wildlife , pp. 465 -488 , Springer , Cham , Switzerla nd ,

https://doi.org/10.1007/978 -3-319 -22246 -2.

Metz , I., T. Mühlhausen, J. Ellerbroek, D. Kügler and J. Hoekstra (2019), “What is the Potential of a Bird 

Strike Advisory System?”, in Proceedings of the 13 th USA/Europe Air Traffic Management Research and 

Development Seminar 2019, ATM 2019 , Vienna, Austria .

Mulero -Pazmany M., S. Jenni -Eiermann, N. Strebel, T. Sattler, J.J. Negro and Z. Tablado (2017), 

“Unmanned aircraft systems as a new source of distu rbance for wildlife: A systematic review”, PLoS ONE 

12(6): e0178448.  https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0178448 .

Neumann, W., G., Ericsson, H., Dettki, N., Bunnefeld, N.S., Keuler, D.P., Helmers and V.C., Radeloff 

(2012), “Difference in spatiotemporal patterns of wildlife road -crossings and wildlife -vehicle collisions”, 

Biological Conservation 145: 70 -78.  https://doi.org/10.1016/ j.biocon.2011.10.011 .

Porsche Consulting (2018), The Future of Vertical Mobility , https://fedotov.co/wp -

content/uploads/2018/03/Future -of -Vertical -Mobility.pdf .

Park, J, Kim, S. and Suh, K. (2018), “A Comparative Analysis of the Environmental Benefits of Drone -Based 

Delivery Services in Urban and Rural Areas ”, Sustainability , Vol. 10 (3), p. 888; 

https://doi.org/10.33 90/su10030888 .

Regulation (EU) No 598/2014 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 April 2014 on the 

establishment of rules and procedures with regard to the introduction of noise -related operating 

restrictions at Union airports within a Bal anced Approach and repealing Directive 2002/30/EC, Official 

Journal of the European Union , https://eur -lex.europa.eu/legal -

content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:32014R 0598&from=EN .

Roland Berger (2018), ”Urban air mobility: The rise of a new mode of transportation”, 

https://www.rolandberger.com/publications/publication_pdf/Roland_Berger_Urban_Air_Mobility.pdf  .

Sodhi, N.S. (2002), "Competition in the air: birds versus aircraft", The Auk , 119 (3): 587 -595 ,

https://doi.org/10.1642/0004 -8038(2002)119[0587:CITABV]2.0.CO;2 .

Stolaroff, J.K., C. Samaras, E.R. O’Neill, A. Lubers, A.S. Mitchell, and D. Ceperley (2018), “Energy use and 

life cycle greenhouse gas emissions of drones for commercial package delivery”, Nature 

Communications , 9: 409 , https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467 -017 -02411 -5.

SUTP (2011), “Avoid -Shift -Improve (A -S-I)”, Sustainable Urban Transport Project, 

https://www.sutp.org/publications/sustainable -urban -transport -avoid -shift -improve -a-s-i [accessed 

20/07/2020]. 4. ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS OF DRONES 

64 READY FOR TAKE -OFF? INTEGRATING DRONES INTO THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM © OECD/ITF 2021 

TIRF (2012), “Wildlife -vehicle collisions in Canada: A review of the literature and a compendium of 

existing data sources”, Traffic Injury Research Foundation , https://docplayer.net/2395858 -Wildlife -

vehicle -collisions -in -canada -a-review -of -the -literature -and -a-compendium -of -existing -data -sources -the -

knowledge -source -for -safe -driving.html  [accessed 20/07/2020]. 

Uber Elevate (2 016), “Fast -Forwarding to a Future of On -Demand Urban Air Transportation”, Uber, 

https://www.uber.com/elevate.pdf .

Umweltbundesamt (2019), “Soil Sealing” (“Bodenversiegelung” in German), Umweltbundesamt, 

https://www.umweltbundesamt.de/daten/flaeche -boden -land -oekosysteme/boden/bodenversiegelung 

[accessed 20/07/2020]. 

WHO (2020), “Air pollution”, World Health Organization , https://www.who.int/sustainable -

development/cities/health -risks/air -pollution/en/  [accessed 17/03/2020]. 

WHO (2010), Health and Environm ent in Europe: Progress Assessment ”, World Health Organization ,

http://www.euro.who.int/document/E93556.pdf .

Yang, Z. (2018), “Overview of Global Fuel Economy Policies”, presentation given at 2018 APCAP Joint 

Forum and Clean Air Week , International Council on Clean Transportation, 

https://theicct.org/sites/default/files/Global -Fuel -Economy -Policies -

Overview_ICCT_ZYang_20032018.pdf .5. INFRASTRUCTURES FOR DRONE DEPLOYMENT: DRONEPORTS AND UNMANNED AIR TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT   

> READY FOR TAKE -OFF? INTEGRATING DRONES INTO THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM © OECD/ITF 2021

65 

# CHAPTER 5 

# Infrastructures for drone deployment: Droneports 

# and Unmanned Air Traffic Management 

Thi s chapter will address the infrastructures needed for widespread drone deployment as well as potential 

governance and funding models for those infrastructures. 

In the context of drones, both physical and digital infrastructures are relevant. Drones will require physical 

spaces to land and take off (called “ droneport s” throughout this document), which , depending on the 

type s of drone s using them , may also include facilities to connect passengers and cargo to their 

destinations. Digital infrastructure, like new Unmanned Air Traffic Management (UTM) systems , which 

co -ordinate and monitor drone flights, will also be needed. These UTM system s will need to be closely 

linked with existing Air Traffic Management (ATM) systems to ensure safety and to monitor adhere nce to 

other policies and regulations. 

Upgrades and additions to both the ground infrastructures and air navigation services will be necessary: 

 New drone stations and droneport s, as well as changes to existing airports and heliports, must 

be able to seam lessly connect drones and their passengers/cargo to their destinations and other 

transport modes. 

 UTM systems, which co -ordinate and monitor drone flight activity, must become a part of Air 

Navigation Services and be closely linked with Air Traffic Managem ent (ATM) systems to ensure 

safety and the ability to monitor adherence to policies and regulations beyond safety (Deloitte, 

2019). 

 Both physical and digital drone infrastructures require governance and funding models that are 

integrated with manned aviat ion and the transport system overall. 

The chapter concludes with recommendations for policy makers regarding drone infrastructure. 

Ground i nfrastructures – The future of droneport s

Ground infrastructure may pose a significant challen ge to widespread drone adoption (Deloitte, 2019) .

Requirements may include adequate space to safely land and take off, the capacity to load/unload 

passengers and cargo in compliance with legal protocols (i.e. customs), adequate space and resources for 

maintenance and stora ge, access to other modes of transport , and connection to communication 

networks. 

Similar to other transport infrastructure s, the location, size, and shape of drone ground infrastructure may 

be influenced by the scope of drone activity (i.e. passenger s an d/or cargo, small or large drones) , the 

physical conditions of land, proximity to other transport networks, density (i.e. urban vs. rural), land 

regulations (i.e. zoning), price, and the nature of land ownership (public vs. private). These factors will 

lik ely also determine where and how sites are procured and maintained. However, the comparatively small 

size and potential Vertical Take -Off and Landing (VTOL) capabilities of drones may allow for more spatial 5. INFRASTRUCTURES FOR DRONE DEPLOYMENT: DRONEPORT S AND UNMANNED AIR TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT 

66 READY FOR TAKE -OFF? INTEGRATING DRONES INTO THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM © OECD/ITF 2021 

flexibility and a smaller footprint than traditio nal airports and helipads. The global drone industry is 

currently exploring designs for droneport s atop residential buildings, along highways, in parking lots and 

atop skyscrapers. 

> How will droneports be designed?

An aerodrome can be defined as an “area on land or water (including any buildings, installations and 

equipment) intended to be used either wholly or in part for the arrival, departure and surface movement 

of aircraft” ; they comprise ground infrastructures for aviation , such as airports and helip orts , of all sizes 

and purposes (ICAO, 2018). Today there are approximately 42 000 airports (CIA Factbook, 2016) and 6 500 

heliports (CIA Factbook, 2013) worldwide, ranging from international commercial hubs to small rural 

installations. 

Most airports are currently designed as a vast movement area extending from a runway, along taxiways 

and onto an apron. Today ’s large , modern aircraft require a more exacting design of these facilities. 

Specifications for their physical characteristics (e.g. width, surface slope and separation distances from 

other facilities ) form a principal part of the Chicago Convention’s annexes. Specifications for facilities (e.g. 

runway end safety areas, clearways and stopways ) are all articulated. Terminal buildings an d maintenance 

facilities are required to enable adequate processing of passengers/freight transport and provide energy 

servicing. 

Regarding ground infrastructure for helicopters, most heliports in the United States (home to 81% of the 

world’s heliports) a re privately owned and poorly documented by the Federal Aviation Administration 

(FAA), and many are located on the rooftops of valuable real estate in the central business districts of 

urban areas (Walker, 2019). Due to the smaller size and VTOL abilities of helicopters compared to 

airplanes, heliports require less surface area – allowing them to be closer to city centres and reducing 

travel time in many cases, but increasing the complexity of traffic management. 

Drones are likely to require smaller and sim pler ground infrastructure than airplanes or helicopters, 

allowing for some flexibility in the design and location of droneport s, particularly if they serve drones with 

VTOL capabilities. However, drones will still need a sufficient surface area, as well a s being positioned at a

suitable distance from other structures after factor ing in wind and trajectory. Droneport s will also require 

charging/fuelling capacity for drones that run on battery, hybrid and/or conventional propulsion energy. 

Adequate spaces fo r security processing, loading/unloading, and lounge/storage are necessary for both 

passengers and cargo as well (Deloitte, 2019). Provisions for connections to other modes of transport ,

including pedestrian and surface modes, will be important considerati ons. 

Light drones with low payload are likely to require less intensive servicing at ports . Thus, depending on the 

cargo and local regulations, a “port ” for a small drone could just be a demarcated space on a rooftop or 

parking lot or a small drone statio n similar to other urban furniture, e.g. like the Matternet (2020) drone 

station. However, ports that exclusively service small drones may still require a certain economy of scale 

as a port that can only process one small drone at a time may be too expensi ve to maintain, especially in 

high -land -value areas. 

Midsiz ed passenger drones designed to carry 1 -5 passengers could potentially still be accommodated on 

existing urban infrastructure , including rooftops and other surfaces located near transport hubs and places 

of interest ( e.g. central business districts). However, locating droneport s in urban areas will require 

adherence and/or adaptation to zoning regulations and airspace restriction s stipulating e.g. noise levels or 

minimum distance from adjacent buildings. Rooftops retrofitted as droneport s may require broader 

changes to a building’s infrastructure and security as well. Additionally, permission procedures must be 5. INFRASTRUCTURES FOR DRONE DEPLOYMENT: DRONEPORTS AND UNMANNED AIR TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT   

> READY FOR TAKE -OFF? INTEGRATING DRONES INTO THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM © OECD/ITF 2021

67 

established for non -residents to use a residential building for drone services. Existing helipads may serve 

as examples of how to design, manage and regulate urban passenger droneport s. Midsized passenger 

drones could also cover the first and last miles of a rural/urban commute, while midsized cargo drones are 

well -suited to serv ing low -access areas with sparse population, poor transport infrastructure and/or 

difficult terrain. 

Rural droneport s might be more feasible in the near term, considering that land is more affordable and 

low density means less conflict with other infrastructure. Whereas the premium on space in urban areas 

might translate to more limited use cases in the near ter m, the potential cost -savings and additional space 

of droneport s in less dense regions could more easily allow for well -equipped facilities there. 

Large drones the size of a small conventional aircraft without VTOL capabilities will likely require 

dronepo rt s that resemble small conventional airports. It is possible that the most feasible ground 

infrastructure for large drones already exists – in the form of traditional airports that can be updated to 

provide the types of services needed to support a fleet of large drone s. 

> Governance of ground infrastructures: airports, heliports and future droneport s

Currently the governance of civil aviation ground infrastructure varies widely depending on the legal 

jurisdiction. There has historically been a “lack of cle ar guidance within the aviation industry or for 

governments on ownership and operating models for airports, and the appropriate regulatory framework 

to govern them” (IATA , 2018 ). Generally, the selected model for ground infrastructure is determined by 

the regulatory parameters and property law in force in each jurisdiction. In some cases, a public entity may 

own land and develop transport infrastructure there as a public good. In others , states may exert eminent 

domain and acquire private land in order to d o so. Regulatory tools, such as zoning, limiting the size (i.e. 

height, density) and function (i.e. manufacturing, residential) of ground infrastructure may be established 

by governments at the municipal, regional, or national levels, depending on context. 

Under Article 28 of the Chicago Convention (1944), States are primarily responsible for the provision of 

airport and air navigation facilities and services to facilitate international air navigation. As such, countries 

are ultimately responsible for safe ty, security and economic oversight of airport and air navigation 

operations. However, this international obligation does not necessarily need to translate into direct 

provision of the se facilities and services by governments. The following aims related to the establishment 

of autonomous infrastructure operators in aviation can be identified :

 Reduce the financial burden on governments; 

 Increase efficiency and service quality; 

 Encourage commercial development, th rough a focus on revenues and expenses, quick er 

decisions and market forces; 

 Establish a clear separation between regulatory and operational functions; and 

 Enable access to private capital markets and encourage private investment. 

Although government or public ownership and control of airports was on ce a common form of 

organi sation , many countries have established autonomous or publicly -chartered entities in order to 

separate the provision of airport services from strictly governmental functions. Furthermore, public sector 

priorities such as financial sustainability, maximised financial gains, access to new sources of private 

finance, and more efficient management have led to an increase in public -private partnerships (PPPs) or 

outright privatisation for airports around the world. Accordingly , the numb er of airport entities with 5. INFRASTRUCTURES FOR DRONE DEPLOYMENT: DRONEPORT S AND UNMANNED AIR TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT 

68 READY FOR TAKE -OFF? INTEGRATING DRONES INTO THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM © OECD/ITF 2021 

private participation has grown in all regions of the world in recent decades: the proportion of passenger 

traffic handled by airports with private sector participation has reached 75% in Europe, 60% in Latin 

America and 45% in Asia -Pacific (Graham, 2020) .

The International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) has recommended that the public sector consider PPP 

models in order to optimise airport performance, but also clarifies that “States are ultimately responsible 

for safety, s ecurity, and economic oversight ” over aviation ground infrastructure (ICAO, 2012). The 

International Air Transport Association (IATA) recently outlined the trade -offs of various governance 

models for such infrastructure, ranging from public to non -profit t o fully private. The choice of governance 

model typically depends on the preferences, goals and resources of the government involved , i.e. whether 

the airport is envisioned as a global, regional or local hub in an established or emerging market (IATA, 

2018 ). 

A massive proliferation of private drone fleets will require additional infrastructure and real estate for 

landing, take -off and servicing. This need may result in a race to acquire rights to rooftop spaces in urban 

areas, affecting real estate markets and creati ng incentives for firms to exclude rivals. For example, a 

start -up in the U nited Kingdom named Skyport has already bought the rights to 15 rooftops in London that 

it plans to convert to droneport s, with plans to purchase 85 more in the near futu re, plus expand to Los 

Angeles and Singapore (Deloitte, 2019). 

In some area s the potential high costs of outfitting urban space for drone use – including real estate 

acquisition, construction and engineering – may necessitate the engagement of the private sector. Indeed, 

the cost, ownership and location of droneport s will likely have a direct impact on governance structure. 

In the absence of any regulation, exclusively private ownership and operation of droneport s could 

complicate transport policies and un dermine public authorities’ likely preference that drone service 

remains available to a wide range of the population as a public good. Without proper public planning, real 

estate intended for droneport s could, in theory, be exploited by private real estate speculators, or 

purchased and developed by firms that limit port use to their own fleet s. While the former model could 

result in the selling of slots, the latter could lead to monopolistic practices which might undermine public 

sector goals for equitable access and deployment of drones. Jurisdictions should weigh these factors in 

their policy making. 

Depending upon how the market develops, it might ultimately become necessary to legally unbundle the 

vertical integration of upstream services, i.e. separate the fleet management from providing droneport s. 

Regulations concerning third -party access and technical interoperability of ground infrastructures may also 

be welcome (see also Chapter 2 ). Manned civil aviation standards may point to other possible regula tory 

solutions for the drone industry. At the global level, regulators and industry stakeholders have developed 

best practices regarding the levying of services for use of aviation infrastructure. These best practices were 

refined on the basis of feedback from operators and regulators, and officially adopted as ICAO’s Policies 

on Charges for Airports and Air Navigation Services (ICAO, 2012). These key charging principles include 

transparency, consulting with users, non -discrimination and cost -relatedness. 

> Funding for ground infrastructure

The history of airport development, operation, and governance offers lessons for what can be expected 

for drone infrastructure. In particular, decisions made regarding the governance of aviation infrastructure 

are often deeply related to issues of funding. 

Potential sources of funding for aviation infrastructure vary from country to country. Traditionally, the 

main source of funds for airport development has been government s, including both direct government 5. INFRASTRUCTURES FOR DRONE DEPLOYMENT: DRONEPORTS AND UNMANNED AIR TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT   

> READY FOR TAKE -OFF? INTEGRATING DRONES INTO THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM © OECD/ITF 2021

69 

funding and f unding from government -owned or -sponsored institutions. Airports also generate around 

40% of their revenue from non -aeronautical activities such as concessions, rent and parking (ACI, 2019). 

IATA attributes the transition towards some level of privati sati on of ground infrastructures to a shift in 

public sector priorities, chiefly those related to the pursuit of financial stability for both governments and 

the aviation industry they overs ee . These priorities included financial sustainability, economic 

diver sification, maximised financial gains, access to new sources of private finance and technical expertise, 

and more efficient management (IATA, 2018). 

Though there is little information available on public or private efforts to develop droneport s so far, pu blic -

private partnerships that “utilise a range of cost -sharing and revenue -sharing models may lower cost 

barriers and provide a balanced approach to development ” (Deloitte, 2019). The range of airport 

governance models described by IATA (Figure 2 ) could serve as a template for policy makers, who must 

then adapt th e models to their local context ( e.g . zoning restrictions, urban/rural, existing infrastructure). 

Figure 2. Airpor t o wnership and operation options 

> Source : I ATA, 2019 .

The consistent increase in PPPs, commerciali sation , and outright privatisation of airports around the world 

has yielded both success stories and cautionary tales. The decision to incentivise the private sector to 

invest needed funds in aviation infrastruct ure in exchange for the rights to profits has yielded “efficiency 

gains associated with greater speciali sation in the airport industry, access to new sources of private sector 

investment, and stimulation of aviation -driven economies ” (IATA, 2018 ). Without competition and/or 

regulatory oversight , h owever, an over -reliance of the State on private funding can lead to abuse of market 

power. 

At least part of the funding for the ground and airspace infrastructure needed for mass drone deployment 

is likely to com e from the private sector. For example, Google, Amazon and other leading firms have 

already invested significantly in the development of drone technology, including ground infrastructure 5. INFRASTRUCTURES FOR DRONE DEPLOYMENT: DRONEPORT S AND UNMANNED AIR TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT 

70 READY FOR TAKE -OFF? INTEGRATING DRONES INTO THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM © OECD/ITF 2021 

design. Similarly, other private firms have demonstrated interest in developing droneports: Uber has 

identified development of drone infrastructure as having “significant cost advantages ” over conventional 

transport (Uber Elevate, 2016). 

Overall, t he private sector may be willing to cover a significant portion of upfront c osts by way of 

investment. A recent report estimated that bringing drone infrastructure to 74 cities would cost USD 32 

billion, but could produce revenues of more than USD 244 billion. Considering recent trends , plus the 

anticipation of both expensive upfr ont infrastructure costs and highly profitable market opportunities, a 

significant private sector role in the funding of drones is likely (eVTOL , 2019). 

To date, governments have not invested resources in creating ground infrastructure for drones. Deloitte 

(2019) found that “neither government agencies nor private sector firms —in engineering, procurement, 

and construction —are widely discussing how to proceed with ground infrastructure .” If the private sector 

creates and funds this infrastructure it may do s o for their own exclusive use, or they may control access 

to ground infrastructure in a manner that limits access to the airspace. As mentioned above, regulators 

may need to address these concerns. 

While it is logical for the public sector to leverage the financial and technological resources of the private 

sector, it may want to heed the lessons of commercialisation of traditional infrastructure and ensure that 

the benefits won by early -adopting private actor s are passed on to the public at large. 

In addition, policy makers should note that any straightforward application of airport governance and 

financing models to drone ground infrastructures may prove to be inadequate. Drone technologies, 

applications, op erational standards and value chains are still under development and may ultimately 

require customis ed policies and approaches to address economic concerns. 

Unmanned Air Traffic Management (UTM) systems 

New digital infrastructures for unmanned aviation a re just as crucial to establish drone economies at scale 

as novel ground infrastructures: drones must be able to communicate with both manned and unmanned 

aircraft while occupying airspace. New digital systems that are interoperable with all other systems are 

necessary to avoid collisions, ensure the smooth flow of drone traffic, allow for identify ing unauthorised 

drones and/or use of airspace, and avoid social disturbances. 

The current air traffic management (ATM) system is defined by ICAO as the manageme nt of airspace and 

air traffic in order to facilitate safe, economic and efficient aviation practices through collaboration and 

integration with all airborne and ground -based parties. The main objectives of air traffic control services 

are to prevent colli sions between aircraft and with other potential obstructions, and to maintain a fast but 

orderly flow of traffic (ICAO, 2016). 

Considering the trends toward private participation in the governance of both ground and airspace 

infrastructure, plus the early interest in UTM system development demonstrated by major tech and 

mobility firms, the governance of such infrastructures for drones will likely depend on significant public 

and private collaboration. While the public sector is directly responsible for ove rseeing aviation safety, the 

private sector has more resources and expertise concerning the technological aspects of UTM 

development. 

There is certainly no “one -size -fits -all” solution for governance of future drone infrastructure ; d ifferent 

States have di fferent approaches to governance of existing aviation infrastructure. However, the 

fundamental principle is that, regardless of the governance model adopted, States are ultimately 5. INFRASTRUCTURES FOR DRONE DEPLOYMENT: DRONEPORTS AND UNMANNED AIR TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT   

> READY FOR TAKE -OFF? INTEGRATING DRONES INTO THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM © OECD/ITF 2021

71 

responsible for the ensuring safety and security of the aviation system. In addition, market access and non -

discrimination will be important considerations. Players that are willing to become infrastructure service 

providers should be accommodated as long as they meet critical safety, security, and efficiency 

requirements. 

In prac tical terms, this may mean that governments at various levels will need to adopt regulatory 

parameters and standards for UTM services used by drones that private industry must comply with . If so, 

lawmakers will need to ensure that those private actors will have sufficient freedom to pursue innovative 

applications of drone use. 

> Development of Unmanned Air Traffic Management (UTM) systems

Unmanned Air Traffic Management (UTM) systems are envisioned as a part of ATM systems to manage 

drone operations safely, economically and efficiently through the provision of facilities and a seamless set 

of services in collaboration with all parties and involving airborne and ground -based functions. 

Although consistent systems -level requirements for UTM systems have not ye t been established, core 

principles that exist in the current ATM structure remain applicable for the development of UTM services. 

These may include: 

 Oversight of the service provision remains the responsibility of the regulator for both ATM and 

UTM. 

 Exist ing policies for aircraft prioriti sation , such as aircraft emergencies and support for public 

safety operations, should remain applicable , and practices unique to UTM should be compatible 

with these policies. 

 Access to the airspace should remain feasible and equitable, provided each aircraft is capable of 

meeting the appropriate conditions, regulations, equipage, and processes defined for the specific 

airspace in which operations are proposed. 

 The drone operat or should be appropriately qualified to meet the established normal and 

contingency operating procedures defined for the specific class of airspace in which operations 

are proposed. 

 To meet their security and safety oversight obligations, States should hav e unrestricted, on -

demand access to drone operators and the position, velocity, planned trajectory and 

performance capabilities of each drone in the airspace through the UTM system. 

In order to enable drone transport at scale, UTM services may include: act ivity reporting; aeronautical 

information; airspace authori sation ; registration service; flight planning; separation (including strategic 

deconfliction, tactical separation and conflict advisory/alert); tracking and location; and weather. This 

scope of sug gested services is consistent with the approach national governments have already taken in 

their concepts of UTM operations , e.g . the Swiss U -Space Concept of Operations (FOCA, 2019). 

> Managing access to airspace, drone identification and registration as pa rt of UTM

Recent reports of unidentified drones above a small town in Colorado, as well as in the airspaces of Gatwick 

Airport and Los Angeles International Airport (LAX) , have frightened communities, disrupted major 

transport arteries, and confounded authorities. In Colorado, Nebraska and some residential areas, citizens 

and officials alike have been unable to identify the operators of the disruptive drones (Smith, 2020). The 

drone sighting near Gatwick resulted in hundreds of flight cancellations (CANSO, 2019). Despite observing 5. INFRASTRUCTURES FOR DRONE DEPLOYMENT: DRONEPORT S AND UNMANNED AIR TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT 

72 READY FOR TAKE -OFF? INTEGRATING DRONES INTO THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM © OECD/ITF 2021 

over 200 drones near LAX since 2016, officials have managed to identify and contact the operator of only 

one. 

In order to monitor access to airs pace and address non -compliant drone activity , administrative and 

technical tools to register and identify drones must be developed and implemented. For this purp ose ,

UTMs will have to rely on electronically defined/transmitted identification techniques, w hich can 

incorporate a range of tools to decode and share this information, whil e respecting the need for security 

and personal data protections. 

Box 6. Access to airspace 

Currently, the sky is divided into different regulatory sections of “air space cla sses”, each  of which  is 

accompanied by obligations and entitlements overseen by air traffic control (ATC). This system of airspace 

management is based on a complex and decades -old regulation enshrined in an international treaty, the 

Chicago Convention.  Adopted in 1944,  the  treaty established a delicate balance of power between 

different forms of manned aviation, the respective air volume, and the designated service provider  –

normally a dedicated  air navigation service provider  (ANSP) within a given terr itory deriving its 

authorisation from the respective government. 

In most countries, d rones can fly at low altitudes in the uncontrolled airspace , C lass G . By contrast , Class 

A, B, C, D and E airspace is all controlled airspace and includes airspace near a irports and airways. Small 

drones currently primarily operate within Class G airspace. From an economic standpoint, there is great 

value in capitali sing  on the largely unused airspace at low altitudes. In the future, drones are expected to 

operate within o ther classes of airspace as they become larger and fly at higher altitudes. Already today, 

military drones such as the “Global Hawk” use the services of Air Traffic Management  (ATM)  in controlled 

airspace to get to their cruising altitude in  Class A. 

Figur e 3. Airspace  classes in the United States     

> Source :FAA (2017) 5. INFRASTRUCTURES FOR DRONE DEPLOYMENT: DRONEPORTS AND UNMANNED AIR TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT
> READY FOR TAKE -OFF? INTEGRATING DRONES INTO THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM © OECD/ITF 2021

73 

Several aviation groups, led by the Civil Air Navigation Services Organisation (CANSO), have argued that 

drones should be integrated into common airspace with other aircraft rather than be con fined to a 

segregated section of the sky, which they believe would undermine drones’ impact. In order to achieve 

this, the aviation partners have called for  “a consistent flow of information between all actors who may 

need to use the airspace ”, as well as  between ATM and UTM systems (CANSO, 2019). 

The allocation of airspace will continue to be an important issue in aviation as more diverse users take to 

the skies. Drones must be incorporated into the existing airspace system in a way that is safe, efficien t, 

sustainable and equitable. As a new form of airspace use, drones will either  continue to  occupy airspace 

below the current minimum flight height or be integrated into existing airspace classes used by manned 

aviation. 

International aviation law , i.e. Article 21 of the Chicago Convention , already requires States to maintain a 

registry of all aircraft registered in their State. In most cases , th ese registr ies ha ve not been yet expanded 

to include small unmanned aircraft, but the existence of the re quirement provides a foundation on which 

to base drone -related registration law s.

However, any updates should consider technological advances already made, as well as potential future 

changes. This may include flexibility regarding the nature of data acce ss and sharing – i.e. application 

programming interfaces ( APIs ) and Mobility as a Service ( MaaS) – as well as the potential implementation 

of machine -readable law (i.e. geofencing). A possible solution for drones includes the creation of an 

encompassing ai rcraft registration network to connect national registries in order to facilitate voluntary 

exchange of information. 

Seamless communication between drones, other aircraft and ATM and UTM systems via interoperable 

digital infrastructure will be essential t o a safe and equitable allocation of airspace.   

> UTM systems and governance models currently being developed

States remain ultimately responsible for the provision of airports and air navigation services in their 

respective territor ies (Chicago Convention, 194 4). The ownership and management of airports and air 

navigation services (ANS) may be delegated to the private sector, but delegation of ANS to the private 

sector has different implications than for airports. 

First, unlike airports, which are locali sed , air navigation services often extend over the territory of entire 

countries, or even beyond such national territory. Second, by reason of each country’s sovereignty over 

its airspace (as articulated in Article 1 of the Chicago Convention), air navigation services have national 

defence and external relations implications, which is mostly not the case for airports. Third, in many 

countries, air navigation services are provided by a single entity, traditionally the national civil aviation 

administration. 

His torically , air navigation service provider s (ANSPs ) have been integrated within the governmental 

structure, but governments around the world are increasingly commercialising their ANS (IATA, 2020). 

More than 40 countries have done so, including Australia, Canada and the U nited Kingdom . Yet the 

United States has kept ANS within the public sector. The nature of ANS governance can have a major 

impact on aviation, including costs, service quality, and competition. While IATA, and the airlines it 

represents supp ort greater autonomy for ANSPs for the sake of more efficient management it also warns 

that commercialisation “can have a negative outcome when the principal objective is to maximise 

shareholder profits ”, and that some past attempts have caused an increase in ANS costs without any 5. INFRASTRUCTURES FOR DRONE DEPLOYMENT: DRONEPORT S AND UNMANNED AIR TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT 

74 READY FOR TAKE -OFF? INTEGRATING DRONES INTO THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM © OECD/ITF 2021 

corresponding improvement to efficiency. IATA recommends that any commercialisation is precipitated 

by independent regulation and government oversight that clearly establishes the authority of all 

stakeholders and the applicable financial models (IATA, 2020). Further, any ANSPs granted monopolistic 

service status must provide full transparency. 

The current system of airspace control do es not have the capabilities to cover very low altitude airspace, 

where drones will likely operate most frequently. Moreover , the integration of drones into other airspace 

already occupied by existing aircraft remains an outstanding challenge. Considering that drone traffic in 

urban air space is expected to increase rapid ly , and airspace capacity is finite, a framework must be 

established to govern and manage low -level airspace. 

At the same time, emergent UTM systems must strive to be interoperable with existing ATM systems , thus 

minimi sing the burden placed on the incumbent system and improving safety and economic outcomes .

Regulators may want to facilitate the formation of consortia with UTM and ATM operators and other 

private firms in the tech, aviation, and security sectors in order to establish a fast, pragmatic approach, as 

is being done in Singapore ( Box 2 in Chapter 2 ). IATA’s proposed guidelines for the responsible 

commercialis ation of ANS with public sector oversight could guide the governance decisions of UTM as 

well (IATA, 2020). 

In the absence of any universal UTM system , which is unlikely, various UTM systems are currently being 

developed. Those developments are often driven by private firms - which may lead to disparate UTM 

designs. 

Some private UTM developers are agnostic as to who will be the future UTM operator (be it a state agency, 

an ANSP , a region or metropolitan area, etc.) and basically aim to sell the technical capabilities to the entity 

vested with this authority. Others are proprietary systems which are intended to remain privately -owned 

systems specifically catering to the fleet of a specific entity and also including additional functionalities 

such as fleet management. Large companies such as Amazon or Google , for example, are known to be 

work ing on their own UTM systems. 

In Rwanda, the State has traded prescriptive regulations on drone operation that stifled their development 

for performance -based r ules that ensure drone operators meet the necessary safety standards (WEF, 

2019). By making this change, authorities have given operators the space to experiment with technologies 

more rapidly (rather than precluding development based on equipment specific ations ), thereby 

accelerating drone integration and deployment. Though not specifically focused on UTM, Rwanda’s 

regulation requires integration and compliance while allowing private sector innovation. This type of 

approach can serve as a model for other U TM developments. 

In Singapore, the Civil Aviation Authority and Ministry of Transport have formed the Future Flight 

Consortium, which brings together tech industry and academic leaders to establish a “connected urban 

airspace management system for unmanned aircraft ” (Deloitte, 2019). This UTM system would ensure that 

any operator in Singapore wanting to fly a drone can communicate with all relevant airspace operators. 

However, the limitations of this system underscore the need for wider UTM development. A U TM system 

such as Singapore’s would only ensure interoperability and enforcement within the city, meaning that 

unauthorised drones could still enter the airspace without compliance. Conversely, compliant drones 

would no longer be able to rely on the intero perability of the UTM system once outside Singapore. This 

may not be a grave risk in the near term, as drones are most likely to operate over short distances. 

Nevertheless , this question needs to be anticipated, as longer -range drones are likely to emerge in the 

future. 5. INFRASTRUCTURES FOR DRONE DEPLOYMENT: DRONEPORTS AND UNMANNED AIR TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT   

> READY FOR TAKE -OFF? INTEGRATING DRONES INTO THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM © OECD/ITF 2021

75 

The U.S. FAA has proposed “wide -sweeping regulations that would require all but the tiniest drones [to] 

incorporate technology that would enable them to be tracked at a ll times while flying in United States 

airspace ” (Murphy, 2020). The reg ulation would require certain digital infrastructure compliant with FAA -

compliant systems to be incorporated into drones, including remote ID technology so that authorities are 

able to identify drones flying within their jurisdiction. The proposed regulati on may partly be in response 

to increased drone complaints across the United States – which , while the drones “may be perfectly legal ”,

currently lack the digital infrastructure to be identified either by concerned citizens or authorities (Smith, 

2020). 

Similarly, the European Commission has launched the U -Space initiative, which aims to establish regulatory 

policy for drones across Europe (CANSO, 2019). Such a regulatory framework could increase safety and 

equity for both airspace operators and citizens on the ground by ensuring – among other things –

interoperability of drone data and communication systems. In order to implement its U -Space initiative ,

the European Commission is developing a UTM regulatory framework, which it describes as “a set of new 

services and specific procedures designed to support safe, efficient and secure access to airspace for large 

numbers of drones ” (SESAR JU, 2017). The services will require a high level of digital infrastructure capable 

of automated functions, integrated int o both drones themselves and corresponding ground infrastructure. 

The UTM services proposed through the U -Space framework are not intended to replicate ATM functions, 

but rather to ensure interoperability between UTM and ATM systems that service unmanned a nd manned 

aircrafts respectively. 

U-Space has identified the establishment of basic digital infrastructure as the first step to safe drone 

deployment that is interoperable with both existing ATM systems and other UTM systems for drones. That 

digital infra structure includes e -registration, e -identification, and geofencing (SESAR JU, 2017). Likewise, a 

group of 19 European and international aviation associations ranked the integration and open exchange 

of data as the number one principle for successful drone regulation. Interoperable data exchanged 

between drones and conventional aircraft via ATM and UTM systems is essential to create “a common and 

shared picture of the airspace, and any operations taking place within it at any given time ”, in order to 

guaran tee safety and security (CANSO, 2019). 

In a similar ve in, various governments are, cooperating through the ICAO, to develop Standards and 

Recommended Practices (SARPs) supporting instrument flight rules (IFR) operations for drones in 

controlled airspace a nd at controlled aerodromes. ICAO’s SARPs are currently focused on airworthiness, 

operations, operator certification, air traffic management, detect and avoid (DAA), safety management 

and security. For those unmanned aircraft which are not expected to be o perated internationally in IFR –

which is, for the moment, the majority of drones guidance material is available to help States begin their 

regulatory processes (ICAO, 2019). 

Any future airspace management will either need to accommodate a multitude of the se UTM providers 

within a given territory ensuring a real -time exchange between these systems or establish one sole UTM 

system used by all airspace users like today’s system based on officially designated air navigation service 

providers as stipulated by t he Chicago convention (1944). 

While the public sector may prefer the private sector’s pursuit of UTM solutions given the latter’s 

technological and financial advantages, states may nonetheless want to adopt regulations that guarantee 

interoperability betw een independent UTM (and existing ATM) systems. A few governments have already 

taken steps in this direction. 

Considering the trend in many regions toward private sector commercialisation already apparent in 

aviation infrastructure, as well as demonstrate d private sector interest in the drone industry from major 

tech firms, governments should be prepared for the proliferation of drone operators. Gone unplanned or 5. INFRASTRUCTURES FOR DRONE DEPLOYMENT: DRONEPORT S AND UNMANNED AIR TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT 

76 READY FOR TAKE -OFF? INTEGRATING DRONES INTO THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM © OECD/ITF 2021 

potentially unregulated, these private UTM may deny fair access to other market participants a nd refuse 

to share necessary information with key stakeholders (i.e. ANSP). Such practice would prevent the 

development of a robust drone market, undermine competition, and increase the risk of airspace 

accidents. Policy makers must therefore adopt clear r egulations that require private firms’ UTM systems 

to be interoperable with other UTM, any existing ATM systems operated by ANSPs as well as any national 

and local civil aviation authorities ’ systems .

Thus, considering the likelihood of several private UT M systems operating simultaneously, one main 

challenge for establishing clear digital infrastructure governance will be to clarify what information UTM 

systems must provide to other UTM systems and to the ANSP or any other involved aviation authority. On 

the other hand, private UTM systems must have access to any information from local or national entities 

on restricted flight zones and events that might impact or be impacted by drone traffic. While the 

regulation of airspace is the authority of civil aviat ion authorities, the establishment of no flight zones will 

involve a variety of state actors such as defence forces (next to military bases), ministries of justice (next 

to prisons or penitentiaries), ministries of foreign affairs (next to embassies), mini stries of interior (next to 

police stations) and more. Other concerns may arise, including updating definition of highly populated 

versus scarcely populated areas in consideration of drone -related risks — for example, the “ground risk” 

of a person being st ruck by a drone in case of malfunction is severely higher in metropolitan areas (JARUS, 

2017). 

Europe’s proposed U -Space framework may also provide some guidance in this area. It is intended to 

enable a “clear and effective interface to manned aviation, A TM/ANS service providers, and authorities ”,

not just for the lowest airspace but for “the smooth operation of drones in all operating environments, 

and in all types of airspace ” (SESAR JU, 2017). Rather than insisting on exclusively public governance of 

UT Ms or relinquishing regulatory authority to private UTMs, the U -Space framework recommends 

regulations that ensure the integration and interoperability of data between all stakeholders. 

In practice, this would likely mean a public -private partnership that establishes a universal set of standards ,

so that drones and conventional aircraft can communicate with both public regulators and private 

operators in any airspace. The initial step may be to form a consortium that , informed by private expertise ,

develops these standards and enshrines them in public regulation. For its part, U -Space recommends that 

the foundation to an integrated airspace that supports open , clear data exchange between all parties is 

the establishment of electronic registration, e -identification and geofencing systems for all airspace users. 

This would require transparency from the private sector, and technical capabilities from the public sector. 

It is possible that authorities may need to use regulation to “force ” data transparenc y – much like what 

has been happening in the private e -scooter industry , where authorities have required scooter operators 

to provide location data of their scooter fleets (Hawkins, 2019).   

> Funding air space navigation services for drone fleets

There are m ajor differences between airports and airspace navigation infrastructures with respect to 

funding and financing models. As organi sation s within governments, air navigation system providers 

(ANSP s) have historically been funded by the government, sometimes from taxation revenues. An 

additional feature is that the ANSP service provider may be exempt from taxes. 

As with airports, air navigation services (ANS) have been continually commerciali sed around the world over 

the last 40 years , with mixed results. Mutu ally beneficial and sustainable commerciali sation of ANS is 

possible, but requires a well -defined commerciali sation policy agreed upon by customers, a robust 

institutional environment, clear roles for all stakeholders, a clear financial model, full transpa rency for 5. INFRASTRUCTURES FOR DRONE DEPLOYMENT: DRONEPORTS AND UNMANNED AIR TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT   

> READY FOR TAKE -OFF? INTEGRATING DRONES INTO THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM © OECD/ITF 2021

77 

operators (especially ANSP monopolies), a systematic performance review process, and alignment with 

international agreements and ICAO policies (IATA, 2020). 

When ANSP commerciali sation has been implemented accordingly, the subsequent increase in autonomy 

has led to more efficient operation s. Proper execution of ANS commerciali sation has been pivotal, 

considering its financial impact on the aviation sector. However, there are many models of 

commerciali sation , and the specific needs of a given regulator may dictate the type of model chosen 

(Button and McDougall, 2006) . A major lesson has been that private funding for airspace infrastructure (in 

exchange for profit -sha ring ) poses challenges without clearly defining mechanisms of responsibility, 

evaluation and outcomes. Th is lesson might usefully inform thinking on how to approach funding models 

for UTMs. 

The same holds true for the provision of UTM services. If UTM syst ems are operated by private entities, it 

will be important to identify a framework for the allocation of the fundamental public resource at issue –

the airspace. Some private UTM developers, such as Google, might offer UTM to the public, but also intend 

to deploy their own fleets of drones for package delivery or other functions at low altitudes. If a private 

entity has the capability to allocate and control the access to the airspace while being able to handle its 

own unfettered access, there is a risk of unbalanced access to airspace. 

The key players in this arena – ANSPs, regulators, UTM providers – must also collaborate with other 

entities. That may include local authorities (particularly if they have passed their own laws governing drone 

operations at low altitudes), military, law enforcement and national security agencies. 

UTM services may cover two aspects: 

 Public duties , like flight authorisation and the safe integration of drones into the existing airspace 

while considering other airspace users ; an d

 Other services related to drone operations, such as fleet management, flight software, and 

accounting. 

While the price for services provided by a private operator should be charged competitively, some 

countries may wish for the price for public duties to be set by the regulator. In this case, UTM providers 

act like an ANSP in the airspace the drone is using and are not competing with respect to these minimum 

requirements. Any “race to the bottom” should be prevented. 

Options for covering UTM costs 

The costs for a future UTM could be covered in several ways, for example :

 Costs are borne by the users of drones or those who benefit from the use of drones. 

 Costs are borne by regional or national governments , which see drones and the accompanying 

infrastructure wholly or partly as a public, socially desirable good. 

The first option, where drone users or those who benefit from the service (e.g. a person who ordered a 

parcel delivered by a drone) , will be the most likely in the near future . Nevertheless, for operations with a 

social aim, like transporting medical goods, governments could provide funding, perhaps via national 

health care systems. 

Cost -recovery mechanisms 

In terms of cost -recovery mechanisms , the key charging princip les of transparency, consultation with 

users, non -discrimination and cost -relatedness (ICAO, 2012) provide a set of guiding principles, which have 

been developed and refined over decades of experience by regulators, service providers and users. The 5. INFRASTRUCTURES FOR DRONE DEPLOYMENT: DRONEPORT S AND UNMANNED AIR TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT 

78 READY FOR TAKE -OFF? INTEGRATING DRONES INTO THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM © OECD/ITF 2021 

most re levant cost -recovery mechanisms which can also be applied to UTMs currently seem to be the 

following: 

1. Non -recurring costs for infrastructure like operating sites and air traffic control (ATC) are borne by 

the providers, be they governments, private compani es or a combination of both. The providers 

can recoup (part of) these costs by adding a supplement to user charges or, in the case of 

governments, taxes or fees . Fees can be levied for possession of drones ( either a single payment 

when someone buys a drone or a yearly fee ); if this is done , a drone registration system must also 

be set up. This registration system may in any case be necessary to allow ANS to identify drones 

and track down offenders. Different mechanisms for recovering the cost of providing 

infrastructure may be envisaged. The c osts of setting up registration systems will have to be 

addressed and covered , depending on the governance model adopted for such infrastructure. 

2. Recurring costs like providing handling and ANS can be borne by the users in the form of, for 

example, a rate based on flight time. They can also be borne by the government for certain classes 

of drones, if drones are seen as an essential public good or if the cost of collecting fees is not worth 

the effort. The latter can also be an argument for private service providers. It may be the case, for 

example, that recreational drones make so little use of UTM services that the provider decides to 

cover these costs via an increase in rates for professional users. When recurring costs are levied 

on users, this can be done on the basis of the number of flight movements, flight distance , duration 

of use of ANS services, maximum take -off weight of the drone, the number of ANS areas crossed 

during the flight, the type of service provided ( e.g. ground handling). Drone operators can then 

choose whether to pass on the costs to their clients. 

The above mechanisms are not substantially different from those used in manned aviation. The main issue 

may be the greater number and variety of users, wi th their variety of service and quality requirements and 

buying power. It may be wise to look at other mass consumption goods and services besides aviation when 

developing business models. Based on the above, key questions when developing business models a re: 

 Identification of recurring and non -recurring costs ,

 Deciding to what extent to pass on costs to users (drone operators) ,

 Deciding whether to pass on non -recurring costs as a supplement to rates for recurring costs , and 

 Deciding which criterion to use as a basis for rates ( e.g. number of flight movements, distance). 

For large drones to be fully integrated into the existing aviation system for international flights in a manner 

comparable to commercial airlines, existing practices serve as references. The traditional charging method 

for en -route services is based on aircraft weight and distance overflown, “or other commonly agreed 

distances” (ICAO, 2012). Th is has worked well for regular airline operations. However, it may be more 

challenging to apply this method to flights by unmanned aircraft , which often fly circular routes or do not 

follow direct tracks from A to B. In that case, charging would perhaps be better based on flight time and 

on airspace congestion.   

> What can policy makers do?

Unmanned Traff ic Management (UTM) systems will be an essential part of the drone ecosystem. UTMs 

enable deconfliction of air traffic  and  real -time identification of drones in flight, and can identify the most 

efficient route for a given flight based on its origin and destination, weather, other air traffic, and a number 

of other factors. 5. INFRASTRUCTURES FOR DRONE DEPLOYMENT: DRONEPORTS AND UNMANNED AIR TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT   

> READY FOR TAKE -OFF? INTEGRATING DRONES INTO THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM © OECD/ITF 2021

79 

In the future, UTMs  may also become an  important tool for managing the environmental impacts of drones 

(allowing flight  planning  to take into account restrictions on noise or visual disturbance ) as well as 

equitable access to take -off and landing areas in areas of high demand. Regulators and p olicy  makers 

around the world will need to work closely with industry and other stakeholders to establish performance -

based standards for UTMs that are interoperable and interact with existing air traffic control system s. 

Integration of drones into governm ent policy 

 Governments should ensure that the infrastructure required for drone deployment is resilient 

and should consider drone operations to be an integral element of all government policy. 

 Governments should ensure that all drones are part of a UTM sys tem that is able to communicate 

autonomously with air navigation service providers (ANSP s) that govern controlled airspace for 

manned aviation , as well as all UTM systems used by other drones. In order to ensure full 

interoperability between different ATM and UTM systems, UTMs “will require highly reliable and 

available communication, predictable and consistent navigation, and accessible and trusted 

surveillance ” systems (Deloitte, 2019) .

Cooperation and consultation processes for drone infrastructure 

 Governments and industry should continue cooperating at the global level to develop operational 

solutions, regulatory standards and guidance for drone infrastructure, especially for UTM 

systems . They should also support the safe and co -ordinated implementa tion of aviation activities 

at very low altitude, particularly in urban and suburban environments. 

 Governments should support the creation of specific consultation mechanisms for address ing the 

development, governance and funding of unmanned aviation infra structure – convening different 

levels of government and industry stakeholders as appropriate, and taking into account national, 

regional and local characteristics. To facilitate public acceptance, new mechanisms should be 

defined , with city -level authorit ies involv ed in the decision -making. 

Promotion of business opportunities associated with drones 

 Governments may wish to take more proactive measures to develop unmanned aviation, such as 

funding research and development ( R&D ), supporting start -ups that dev elop new drones and 

applications, invest ing in dr one infrastructure , and promoting the use of drones for commercial 

applications . Where applicable they might also act as “launch customers ” (i.e. the first recipient 

of a new drone ).

 Governments, when planning for infrastructure governance and financing, should take into 

account existing manned aviation best practices, but should also be aware of the economic and 

technical distinctiveness of the drone industry 

 Governments should ensure that service prov iders apply management best practices and seek 

efficiency and cost -effectiveness in the provision of an appropriate quality of facilities and 

services. 

 Governments should also take note of the emergence of large drones – as the applications for 

these aircr aft, which have payloads upwards of hundreds of kilograms, have the potential for 

considerable economic growth and societal impacts. 5. INFRASTRUCTURES FOR DRONE DEPLOYMENT: DRONEPORT S AND UNMANNED AIR TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT 

80 READY FOR TAKE -OFF? INTEGRATING DRONES INTO THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM © OECD/ITF 2021 

 Governments should collect and share information regarding very -low -altitude operations ,

including on UTM systems. States, ANSPs and industry stakeholders should co -operate with a 

view to collecting and analysing relevant data regarding financial charging practices for existing 

unmanned aircraft flights. 

Development of registration systems for drones 

 As a matter of priority , governments should support the development of registration services that 

allow drone operators to register their drone s. Such systems should also provide a query function 

allowing authoris ed stakeholders (e.g. regulator s, police services) to request regist ration data .5. INFRASTRUCTURES FOR DRONE DEPLOYMENT: DRONEPORTS AND UNMANNED AIR TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT   

> READY FOR TAKE -OFF? INTEGRATING DRONES INTO THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM © OECD/ITF 2021

81 

# References 

ACI (2019), Airport Economics Report , Airports Council International, 

https://store.aci.aero/product/airport -economics -report -2019/ .

ARE Corp (2019) , Official Website , https://are -corp.com  [accessed 23 /08/ 2019]. 

Amazon Prime Air (2019) , Official Website , https://www.amazon.com/Amazon -Prime -

Air/b?ie=UTF8&node=8037720011  [accessed 23 /08/ 2019]. 

K. Button and G. McDougall (2006), “Institutional and structure changes in air navigation service -

providing organizations ”, Journal of Air Transport Management , vol. 1 2. 

Uber Elevate (2016), “Fast -Forwarding to a Future of On -Demand Urban Air Transportation ”, Uber, 

https://www.uber.com/elevate.pdf .

Uber Elevate (2019) , Official Website , https://www.uber.com/us/en/elevate/  [accessed 23 /08/ 2019]. 

Baur, S., Schickram, S., Homulenko, A., Martinez, N. and Dyskin, A. (2018) , Urban Air Mobility – The rise of 

a new mode of transportation , Roland Berger Focus Study. 

CANSO (2019), “We are ALL ONE in the Sky - Aviation partners agree joint principles for safe integration 

of drones”, Press release, Civil Air Navigation Services Organisation , https://www.canso.org/we -are -all -

one -sky -aviation -partners -agree -joint -principles -safe -integration -drones  [accessed 24/07/2020]. 

Chicago Convention (1944 ), Convention on International Civil Aviation Done at Chicago on the 7 th day of 

December 1944 , https://www.icao.int/publications/Documents/7300_orig.pdf .

CIA Factbook (2013 ), The World Factbook , “Heliports ”, https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the -

world -factbook/fields/382.html  [accessed 24/07/2020]. 

CIA Factbook (2016 ), The World Factbook , “Airports ”, https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the -

world -factbook/fields/379.html  [accessed 24/07/2020]. 

Deloitte (2019), “Infrastructure barriers to the elevated future of mobility, Are cities ready with the 

infrastructure nee ded for urban air transportation?”, Deloitte Insights , Deloitte, 

https://www2.deloitte.com/us/en/insights/focus/f uture -of -mobility/infrastructure -barriers -to -urban -air -

mobility -with -VTOL.html  [accessed 24/07/2020]. 

Donecle (2019) , Official Website , https://www.donecle.com/use -cases/#usecases  [accessed 

23/08/ 2019]. 

Duvall, T., A. Green, M. Langstaff and K. Miele (2019) , “Air -mobility solutions: What they’ll need to take 

off ”, Our Insights, McKinsey,  https://www.mckinsey.com/industries/capital -projects -and -

infrastructure/our -insights/air -mobility -solutio ns -what -theyll -need -to -take -off  [accessed 23 /08/ 2019]. 

ERTRAC (2019) , Connected Automated Driving Roadmap , European Road Transport Research Advisory 

Council , htt ps://www.ertrac.org/uploads/documentsearch/id57/ERTRAC -CAD -Roadmap -2019.pdf .

eVTOL (2019), “NEXA Completes Landmark Urban Air Mobility Study, Focuses on Infrastructure ”, The 

Electric VTOL News , https://evtol.news/news/nexa -completes -landmark -urban -air -mobility -study -

focuses -on -infrastructure .5. INFRASTRUCTURES FOR DRONE DEPLOYMENT: DRONEPORT S AND UNMANNED AIR TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT 

82 READY FOR TAKE -OFF? INTEGRATING DRONES INTO THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM © OECD/ITF 2021 

FAA (2017), Aeronautical Information Manual - Official Guide to Basic Flight Information and ATC 

Proc edures , Federal Aviation Administration, 

https://www.faa.gov/air_traffic/publications/media/AIM.pdf . [accessed 08/01/21]. 

FAA (2020), “Classes of Airspace, Types of Controlled Airspace, ALC -42: Airspace, Special Use Airspace 

and TFRs ”, Federal Aviation Administration, 

https://www.faasafety.gov/gslac/alc/course_content.aspx?cID=42& sID=505&preview=true  [accessed 

24/07/2020]. 

FOCA (2019), “U -space”, Swiss Federal Office of Civil Aviation, 

https://www.bazl.admin.ch/bazl/en/home/g ood -to -know/drones -and -aircraft -models/u -space.html 

[accessed 24/07/2020]. 

Graham, A. (2020), “Airport privatisation: A successful journey?”, Journal of Air Transport Management ,

https://doi. org/10.1016/j.jairtraman.2020.101930 .

Grandl, G., S. Doppler , M. Ostgathe, J. Salib, J. Cachay and H. Ross (2018 ), The Future of Vertical Mobility ,

Porsche Consulting , https://fedotov.co/wp -content/uploads/2018/03/Future -of -Vertical -Mobility.pdf .

Hall, J. D., Palsson, C. and Pricec, J. (2018) , “Is Uber a substitute or complement for public transit? ”, 

Journal of Urban Economics , Vol . 108, November 2018, pp. 36 -50 ,

https://www.economics.utoronto.ca/public/workingPapers/tecipa -585.pdf .

Hawkins, A.J. (2019), “New startup aims to bring controversial scooter tracking system to more citi es”, 

The Verge , https://www.theverge.com/2019/9/23/20872421/lacuna -startup -mds -scooter -tracking -ladot -

data -collection  [accessed 24/07/2020 ]. 

Hwang, J. and Griffiths, M. (2017) , “Share more, drive less: Millennials value perception and behavioral 

intent in using collaborative consumption services ”, Journal of Consumer Marketing , Vol. 34 Issue: 2, 

pp.132 -146, doi: 10.1108/JCM -10 -2015 -1560. 

ICA O (2012), ICAO’s Policies on Charges for Airports and Air Navigation Services , Doc . 9082, Ninth Edition, 

International Civil Aviation Organization, 

https://www.icao.int/publication s/Documents/9082_9ed_en.pdf .

ICAO (2016), Procedures for Air Navigation Services : Air Traffic Management , Doc . 4444, 16th ed. ,

International Civil Aviation Organization,  https://ops.group/blog/wp -content/uploads/2017/03/ICAO -

Doc4444 -Pans -Atm -16thEdition -2016 -OPSGROUP.pdf .

ICAO (2018), “Aerodromes : Volume I , Aerodromes Design and Operations ”, Annex 14 to the Convention 

on International Civil Aviation , 8th ed. , International Civil Aviation Organization, 

https://www.bazl.admin.ch/dam/bazl/de/dokumente/Fachleute/Regulationen_und_Grundlagen/icao -

annex/icao_annex_14_aerodromesvolumei -

aerodromedesignandoperations.pdf.download.pdf/an14_v1_cons.pdf .

IATA (2018), Airport Ownership and Regulation , IATA Guidance Booklet, International Air Transport 

Association and Deloitte, 

https://www.iata.org/contentassets/4eae6e82b7b948b5837 0eb6413bd8d88/airport -ownership -

regulation -booklet.pdf .

IATA (2019), Airport privatization, Careen, N., IATA, IATA Annual General Meeting and World Air 

Transport Meeting,  https://www.iata.org/en/iata -repository/pressroom/media -kit/airport -privatization -

presentation ---agm -2019/  [accessed 24/07/2020]. 5. INFRASTRUCTURES FOR DRONE DEPLOYMENT: DRONEPORTS AND UNMANNED AIR TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT   

> READY FOR TAKE -OFF? INTEGRATING DRONES INTO THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM © OECD/ITF 2021

83 

IATA (2020), Commercialisation of Air Navigation Service Providers , International Air Tr ansport 

Association, 

https://www.iata.org/contentassets/4eae6e82b7b948b58370eb6413bd8d88/commercialisation -

ansps.pdf .

ICAO (2019), “UTM - A Common Framework with Core Boundaries for Global Harmonization”, Edition 2, 

International Civil Aviation Organization,  https://www.icao.int/safety/UA/Pages/UTM -Gui dance.aspx 

[accessed 24/07/2020]. 

JARUS (2017), JARUS guidelines on Specific Operations Risk Assessment (SORA) , JAR -DEL -WG6 -D.04, Joint 

Authorities for Rulemaking of Unmanned Systems , http://jarus -rpas.org/sites/jarus -

rpas.org/files/jar_doc_06_jarus_sora_v1.0.pdf .

MaaS Alliance (2019) , Official Website , https://maas -alliance.eu/homepage/what -is -maas  [accessed 

23 /08/ 2019]. 

Matternet (2019), Official Website , https://mttr.net/ [accessed 23 /08/ 2019]. 

Matternet (2020), “The New Matternet Station”, Matternet Channel, You Tube ,

http s://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ewemfbksK8s&feature=emb_logo  [accessed 24/07/2020]. 

Murphy, H. (2020), “The F.A.A. Wants to Start Tracking Drones’ Locations”, The New York Times ,

https://www.nytimes.com/2019/12/26/business/drones -faa -tracking.html?smid=nytcore -ios -share 

[accessed 24/07/2020]. 

Standing, C., S. Standing and S. Bi ermann (2018) , “The implications of the sharing economy for 

transport ”, Transport Reviews , Vol . 39 , No. 2, DOI: 10.1080/01441647.2018.1450307 .

SESAR JU (2017), U-Space : Blueprint , Single European Sky ATM Research (SESAR ) Joint Undertaking, 

European Union, Eurocontrol, Publications Office, doi:10.2829/335092 .

Smith, M. (2020), “‘It’s Creepy’: Unexplained Drones Are Swarming by Night Over Colorado”, The New 

York Times , ht tps://www.nytimes.com/2020/01/01/us/drones -FAA -colorado -nebraska.html  [accessed 

24/07/2020]. 

Walker, G. (2019), “No one knows where America’s helipads are, except this neural network”, Medium ,

https://blog.insightdatascience.com/no -one -knows -where -americas -helipads -are -except -this -neural -

network -26324d9af12e  [accessed 24/07/2020]. 

Wikipedia (2020), “Infrastructure ”, Wikipedia,  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Infrastructure  [accessed 

24/07/2020]. 

WEF (2019), “What the world can learn from Rwanda's approach to drones”, The World Economic 

Forum,  https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2019/01/what -the -world -can -learn -from -rwandas -approach -

to -drones  [accessed 24/07/2020]. 6. DRONES AS PART OF THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM 

84 READY FOR TAKE -OFF? INTEGRATING DRONES INTO THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM © OECD/ITF 2021 

# CHAPTER 6 

# Drones as part of the transport syste m

The emergence of drone technology offers an opportunity for a planned integration of this new mode of 

transport with existing modes, which can lead to better, more efficient, higher -quality transport services. 

By introducing drones into transport networks, they will increasingly interact with other modes of 

transport . This could unveil positive effects since drones may be complementary to other forms of 

transport if they offer a solut ion for currently unmet mobility needs, both for goods and people. In order 

to leverage the positive aspects of competition (such as the substitution of more -sustainable transport 

options through drones ) while avoid ing conflicts , it is important to review the context and ongoing 

developments of mobility systems. 

Existing relationships between transport modes 

Improving the intermodality of urban transport and thus promoting public transport and non -motoris ed 

modes (walking and cycling) is an effective measure for tackl ing the challenges of congestion , low 

accessibility, climate change, high energy consumption , and poor local air quality while working towards 

more sustainable mobility (Cervero, 2013). Pourba ix (2011) project s that daily trips in urban areas by 

private cars will increase by 80% from 3.5 billion in 2005 to 6.2 billion in 2025, with a big share of this 

growth occurring in developing countries. According to Cervero (2013), fostering sustainable m obility in 

future will require a paradigm shift that compels a re -ordering of priorities to promote inherently 

resourceful forms of mobility, frames investments in more holistic (and less mobility -focused) terms, and 

– importantly –seizes opportunities to integrate transport infrastructure and urban development when 

and where they present themselves. The potential of drones in this respect lies in filling gaps that currently 

cannot be addressed by existing services due to technical or economic limitations. For instance, air travel 

is currently less available for domestic interurban journeys under 300 km (European Commission, 2016). 

Transport modes operating in a similar market and level of service compete for customers , passengers and 

freight (Teodorovic an d Janic, 2016) based on several factors such as travel costs and time, safety 

standards, comfort level, capacity, frequency and reliability of the service , and accessibility of the terminals 

(Prussi and Lonza, 2018). Fearnley et al. (2018) demonstrate that bus services compete with both rail on 

longer trips and light rail on shorter trips. Depending on the particular service and market, drone 

operations can attract passengers and/or cargo away from public transport, private cars, taxis and ride -

share servic es, and to a lesser extent from traditional air travel, thus adding a new level of competition. 

The estimate d operation range for air taxis is illustrated in  Figure  4, which shows they would mainly 

compete with cars on journeys of 80 -130 km, with railway service on journeys of 130 -220 km , and with 

aircraft on journeys of 220 -340 km (Sun, Wandelt and Stumpf , 2018) . Fostering transport interoperability 

and shifting away from modal split and competition to a system -wide transport solution can support the 

introduction of drones as a complementary mode. 6. DRONES AS PART OF THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM   

> READY FOR TAKE -OFF? INTEGRATING DRONES INTO THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM © OECD/ITF 2021

85 

Figure 4. Competition of transport modes as a function of travel distance  

> Source: Sun , Wandelt and Stumpf (2018) .

To better plan the integration of drones into a transport system, one must consider the implications of its 

current evolution with respect to new services, such as on -demand mobility services. Ride -hailing services 

provided by companies such as Uber and Ly ft have emerged as a strong option for urban transport of 

people. Their introduction has influenced people’s mobility behaviour and their usage of other modes of 

transport , raising the question of how on -demand services either complement or act as a substi tute for 

public transit (Hall , Palsson and Pricec , 2018). On the one hand, on -demand mobility services can be seen 

as competing with more sustainable transport modes, such as walking, cycling and public transit, by 

providing a higher level of comfort and e fficiency ( Rayle, Dai, and Chan, 2016). On the other hand, on -

demand services can also increase the reach and flexibility of transit’s fixed -route, fixed -schedule service s

and could help to meet the rising and evolving demands placed on the region’s networ ks (Hazan et al., 

2019). 

The us e of drones can also contribute to the increasing popularity of shared mobility , which includes 

services such as ride -sharing, bike and scooter sharing, and car sharing. While people have long prioritis ed 

ownership, millennia ls and younger generations are more willing to pay for access and have a preference 

for collaborative consumption that is also reflected in the growing shared economy (Hwang and Griffiths, 

2017). This form of consumer behaviour is facilitated through ongoi ng digitali sation (Standing, Standing 

and Biermann, 2018). There are numerous drivers of sharing related to transport for participants and 

providers such as reduced costs, convenience, environmental friendliness, the appeal of engaging with 

non -traditional companies , and higher independence. There is potential to improve mobility as 

collaboration can reduce the number of vehicles on the road while decreas ing congestion, demand for 

parking , and car ownership rates in cities (Santi et al., 2014). 

Going forward, Mobility as a Service (MaaS) can offer added value through the use of smartphone 

applications to provide access to mobility, with a single payment channel instead of multiple ticketing and 

payment operations (MaaS Alliance, 2019). Drones and air t axis can be integrated into MaaS application s.

In addition to the usage of drones as an on -demand , point -to -point service (similar to current ride -share 

services for cars ), such integration will allow drones services to be combined with other modes of 

tran sport . This would allow the full range of drone service advantages to be achieved by supporting more 

flexible trips, filling transport gaps, and avoiding disjointed mobility chains (Roland Berger , 2018) . The 

framework of MaaS can support the introduction o f drone services as it creates a level playing field through 

the definition of mandatory standards for different operators to compete (Hensher et al ., 2020). Se e Box 7

for an exampl e of how Maas has helped integrate and improve mobility services in Helsink i. 6. DRONES AS PART OF THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM 

86 READY FOR TAKE -OFF? INTEGRATING DRONES INTO THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM © OECD/ITF 2021 

Box 7. Mobility  as  a Service : The Helsinki  example 

Mobility  as  a Service  (MaaS ) is designed to provide riders with mobility solutions based on their 

personal travel needs at the exact time the service is needed. It is also possible to combine different 

modes of transport along a travel chain , and the mostly app -based services are convenient to book 

via smartphones. 

For example, t he start -up MaaS Global has developed the app Whim  (https://whimapp.com ). Whim 

is a meta -portal through which most of the mobility services in the greater Helsinki area can be 

booked via a smartphone. In addition to public transport, taxis, rental cars and bike -share operators 

are integrated within one app. 

For route selection , all trans port alternatives are displayed. After selecting their preferred choice, 

users can pay via the app ; a n internal algorithm determines the price of the available alternatives. In 

addition, various flat -rate payment models are offered via Whim. 

The entire app  is cloud -based. In Finland, all transport companies, taxi operators and car -sharing 

services are obliged to disclose relevant mobility data  such as  timetables  and the real -time  location 

of buses and available taxis. There is also an obligation for open pr ogramming interfaces to enable 

riders to purchase tickets or to make payment for trips through a single window. 

Drone operators expect that one key  factor driving  a wide acceptance of drones or air -taxi  services 

will be their  integrat ion  into MaaS environm ents . This would  enabl e drones to become part of 

multimodal journeys to get from point A to point B , while  giving  the user an experience that is as 

simple as taking a bus or booking a shared car (Karpowicz, 2018). 

Potential impacts of integrating drones with other transport modes 

The impact of drone operations on other transport modes depends on the specific setting, e.g . urban or 

rural transport, and competing transport modes along the intended route. The introduction of drones in 

the transport system co uld lead to conflicts with overall transport policy goals, including economic 

prosperity, environmental protection, climate impact, and equity. For instance , drones could replace other 

transport modes with a lower environmental impact or even increase flow s of motoris ed individual traffic 

(for persons as well as for goods) instead of reducing traffic flows, as is the overall aim, especially in densely 

populated cities (Sun, Wandelt and Stumpf, 2018). For trips up to 35 km, where cars have a high modal 

shar e, passenger drones have higher energy consumption and GHG emissions than ground -based vehicles 

(Kasliwal et al., 2019). However, trips beyond 35 km , where drones are more sustainable than conventional 

cars , account for only a small fraction of total trips travelled on the ground, e.g. less than 15% of all vehicle 

trips in the United States (Oak Ridge National Laboratory, 2017). Passenger drones could allow cities to 

use their existing resources more efficiently by sharing and pooling trips (Martinez and Vi egas, 2017), and 

by integrating them in MaaS applications (Kasliwal et al., 2019) . Drones may be a part of a passenger’s 

multimodal trip, executing the first/last mile of their journey and connecting them e.g. to transport hubs 

like airports or train stati ons. With the proper integration, passenger drones can serve as “feeders ” to the 

“trunk ” systems of mass transit while offering a congestion -free commute (Kasliwal et al., 2019) .

Drones will likely compete with traditional air transport, for instance, in the application of domestic 

interurban journeys. For interurban operations, however, drones can also help to overcome poor 

integration between two separated urban mobility systems (e.g. traveling from Brooklyn to Jersey City in 6. DRONES AS PART OF THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM   

> READY FOR TAKE -OFF? INTEGRATING DRONES INTO THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM © OECD/ITF 2021

87 

the New York area ), thus adding value by mitigating weak spots in existing transport networks. Similar to 

the function of ferries that cross urban rivers, the use of drones to over fly waterways can be more 

advantageous in terms of time, and convenience and reduced infrastructural footprint (Whyte, 2020). For 

instance, a drone conveyed Covid -19 samples from Estonia’s second -largest island, Hiiumaa, for testing in 

Tallinn (Threod Systems, 2020). Whereas a ferry journey would have taken over an hour, the drone 

accomplished it in 27 minutes. 

Drones and the traditional aviation sector share some of the same capacity limitations , both in the air and 

on the ground. Until now, helicopters have distinguished themselves from airplanes by their flight f lexibility 

and their ability for vertical take -off and landing. Drones not only have similar capabilities , but have the 

advantage of being smaller and are expected to be more cost effective. The future might see airlines 

incorporat ing drone services into t heir networks. Airlines already have experience and know -how in 

aircraft operations, safety management and logistics, which gives them a natural competitive advantage 

in adopting drones in to their service portfolio and diversifying their businesses (PwC, 2 016).    

> Data -driven planning methods for integrat ing drones into the transport system

Since it is expected that most drones will not be individually owned (Grandl et al. , 2018), the strategic 

decisions for data collection, analysis and exchange should build on and align with regulation and 

standardi sation developments of MaaS in general, as well as with automated driving. Digitali sation and 

data integration should be in the focus as they are the basis for efficient and safe interaction between 

modes and contr ibute towards seamless multimodal trips. U -space (SESAR, 2019) has also highlighted the 

importance of cooperation and exchange of data between the various service providers for multiple 

simultaneous drone operations in all classes of airspace. A digital in frastructure capable of exchang ing data 

between drones and a UTM will be an important element of drones’ safe integration into the air space. 

Transportation planners should leverage data analytics and predictive models to better understand , for 

instance, which routes or mobility services can be more effectively covered or replaced by drones and 

where to invest in transport infrastructure. A recent example is presented by Rothfeld , Fu and Antoniou 

(2019) using the open -source multi -agent transport simulatio n tool MATSim (Horni , Nagel and Axhausen ,

2016) to investigate future drone -usage scenarios in the Munich metropolitan region. The applicability of 

drones should be assessed within the larger mobility network to ensure interoperability and scalability, 

and should include the time required for drone -related passenger or parcel processing. Effective demand 

management can ensure that drones are restricted to a supporting role for more sustainable transport 

modes, and that coordination with air traffic manageme nt is feasible. 

An early integration of drone transport in to the design of MaaS services and platform s should be 

considered , as the development of drone -related services can benefit from the ability first to easily link to 

various modes of transport , and then to select the mode that is most optimal for the given situation. 

Embedding drone services into MaaS in advance of their wider introduction to the market could facilitate 

a more successful adoption. MaaS integration would allow drones to be come part of a single -use platform 

providing universal access to modal options, payment , and relevant on -board trip information. Policy 

makers could also consider establishing a regulatory framework that requires passenger drone operators 

to disclose relevant mobility data (e.g. timetables and real -time location data ) in order to share it with 

MaaS platforms. The regulatory framework should also address the payment channel and respective 

interfaces. The overarching goal of MaaS is the creation of a single window as a one -stop shop for riders. 6. DRONES AS PART OF THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM 

88 READY FOR TAKE -OFF? INTEGRATING DRONES INTO THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM © OECD/ITF 2021 

> Intermodal transport for seamless connectivity

Equitable access to drone mobility services should be provided for all users. This requires a reimagining of 

physical connections in the trans port system to support seamless trips and transfers and standards for key 

last -mile delivery infrastructure (NASA, 2018). This may include adaptations to existing infrastructure , such 

as droneport s on buildings and transport hubs (Airbus UAM, 2018; Airbus, 2020; Volocopter, 2018; Fairs, 

2018) as well as the construction of new edifices such as drone hubs (Matternet, 2020; H 3Dynamics, 2020). 

Due to their small size and limited weight, drones could potentially be integrated into an existing mobility 

network a nd the broader built environment without causing a significant disruption (Thipphavong et al., 

2018). Building on the concept of integrated, multi -modal networks, Choudhury et al. (2020) present a 

scalable framework for multi -drone delivery linked to a gro und -based public transit network as temporary 

modes of transport to conserve energy and increase effective travel range. 

Drones have the potential to improve connectivity between major transport hubs such as airports or train 

stations. For instance, Voloco pter and Fraport are work ing towards linking existing urban transport 

junctions with one another to provide connections to and from Frankfurt Airport (Fraport, 2019). Careful 

consideration is required of air space integration and the location of strategic drone ports at airports and 

at areas of interest such that they are easily accessible for travellers (Roland Berger, 2018). An initial focus 

on incorporating drone services into existing infrastructure could lower obstacles to implementation, 

allowing for p ilot program me s that can be studied for impacts. In particular , integrating drones into 

existing transfer hubs could facilitate their inclusion into the broader mobility network, expanding travel 

options and providing passengers with seamless connections ( Roland Berger, 2018). Adding drones to the 

suite of mobility options offered at existing transport hubs may also reduce environmental impacts, 

reducing the need to build new , separate drone facilities. At -grade, or ground -level, drone infrastructure 

will i deally require limited modifications to the transport stations and stops in already existing in networks. 

However, this depends to a high amount on the future requirements for drone landing areas as well as the 

amount of drone operations. The addition of droneport s to existing infrastructure not related to transport 

could reorient foot traffic and increase pressure on nearby mobility options. Properly co -ordinated in a 

user -centred planning process ( Nisenson , 2017), these ports could be strategically placed to encourage 

the distribution of mobility activity more evenly around a city. 

With any addition of drone access to existing infrastructure, changes must be made to enable passengers 

to enter and exit the building in a timely manner. A tight transfer link between metro and drone is not 

beneficial to mobility users if they cannot afford the latter. Both physical and financial accessibility must 

be addressed in order to reap the benefits of drone integration, including a higher dispersal of ridership 

across modes that reduces congestion. Without this stipulation, drone fleets may be benefiting from public 

transport infrastructure without serving public transport users. 

Wait times for passenger journeys and in logistics supply chains are another concern (Deut sche Bahn, 

2019). Times between trips may be longer for drones than for other modes of transport, especially at first 

when fleet sizes are small and on/off -boarding processes are in flux. But with time to learn from pilot 

program me s and with sufficient competition, urban air mobility via drone may become more viable and 

accessible. Accurate time synchroni sation of drone departures and arrivals by fleet managers or artificial 

intelligence ( AI ) based systems will be critical in order to meet demand and est ablish dependability 

(UNECE, 2009). 6. DRONES AS PART OF THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM   

> READY FOR TAKE -OFF? INTEGRATING DRONES INTO THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM © OECD/ITF 2021

89 

> The potential impacts of drones on existing mobility ecosystems

The impact of drones on mobility will be largely determined by the nature of public sector involvement in 

their development and deployment. Given the invest ments already made in drones by the private sector, 

regulators have an opportunity to harness that excitement by encouraging drones to be deployed in use 

cases that address shortcomings in current mobility networks and serve broader policy goals. Policymak ers 

can also use their regulatory tools to promote interoperability between existing mobility options and 

drones, as discussed in the context of Mobility as a Service (MaaS) platforms. 

Alternatively , a laissez -faire regulatory approach to drone integratio n could lead to chaotic and inequitable 

results that are bad for both the drone industry and mobility sector at large. 

Without efforts at integration shepherded by the public sector, the drone industry might develop isolated 

from other mobility modes. Thi s could result in a failure to plug gaps in the transport ecosystem that would 

contribute to broader sustainable transport goals, instead providing a service that caters exclusively to the 

affluent. This type of issue has already emerged for the urban heli copter industry in New York. Mobility 

firms Uber and Blade charge around USD 195 for direct helicopter flights between Manhattan and John F. 

Kennedy Airport, and up to USD 1 400 for flights to the remote wealthy enclave of Southampton (Barron, 

2019). City authorities have been inundated with official helicopter nois e complaints, which rose from 

1 309 in all of 2018 to 2 602 from January to November 2019. The scrutiny has prompted several US 

Congress members representing New York City to propose a ban on non -essential helicopter use in the 

city, which is supported by the mayor and several local officials (Dorn, 2019). While some externalities 

from increased air traffic are to be expected no matter what, drones may be more tolerable for average 

citizens if the y also provide improved mobility services for all. Regulators can enforce certain routes on 

drones in order to minimise quality -of -life disturbances, but indirect routes may lengthen travel time and 

raise costs, which may undermine the potential benefits o f drone service from the outset .

By engaging with the quickly growing drone industry and setting certain legal parameters, policy makers 

can encourage drone developers to bring novel solutions to mobility problems that cannot be found in 

other modes of tr ansport. Instead of overregulating drone use based on technological specifications that 

restrict innovation, officials can adopt performance -based standards that restrict noise levels, flight 

patterns, operation times and fuel sources. A version of this ty pe of performance -based regulatory 

framework for drones has been implemented in Rwanda (WEF, 2019). 

There is also the risk of “induced demand ”, where the option of using drones for delivery or short -range 

travel leads to more drone trips but not less groun d transport trips. For example, if a commuter who would 

normally take a ride -share service to the airport instead opts for a passenger drone, the other ride -share 

user who cannot afford a drone ride may still take the car trip. This change leads to an addi tional drone 

trip, but does not decrease the number of cars on the road. Similarly, m ore -efficient drone technology 

leading to savings in energy, cost or traffic space bears the risk of rebound effects, i.e. inducing additional 

parcel and passenger transpo rt (Kellermann , Biehle, and Fischer ., 2020), which has to be accounted for 

during policy making. 

Mobility sector research should therefore conduct detailed quantitative analyses of existing mobility 

networks before develop ing data -driven approaches to dron e deployment and integration. Likewise, 

transport authorities should approach drone regulation by first establishing the mobility sector’s needs 

and priorities from the public sector perspective, then explor ing how drones can support them. 

Collectively, th is research may produce detailed insights into the cause -and -effect relationships between 

investments and impact, in order to inform how a city should invest in improving its transport system. 

Decision -making must be able to rely on defined key performance indicators (KPI s) that directly reflect 6. DRONES AS PART OF THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM 

90 READY FOR TAKE -OFF? INTEGRATING DRONES INTO THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM © OECD/ITF 2021 

transport sector concerns such as congestion, externalities, modal share and energy consumption. These 

impact assessments should also take into account local contexts pertaining to geography, culture, existing 

infra structure, and political climate. 

> Regulations and exchange

Successful drone regulation will likely require some basic universal guidelines at an international level, 

which can be expanded on as seen fit by governments at the national, regional, and local levels. More -

specific regulation will be most effective when grounded in research that explores the local context in 

order to identify mobility and broader societal needs where drones can bes t contribute. Basic international 

drone standards , including technical standardisation mutually beneficial to all governments , might include 

a taxonomy of drones by weight, size and use; universal design for chargers, batteries and docks; and data 

systems that ensure interoperability between different fleets and networks (especially across borders ) and 

avoid monopolies. 

At the national and subnational levels, regulation might focus on registration, geofencing , punitive 

measures for rogue drone use, and cle ar restrictions on authorised use. Registries can be established to 

ban drone activity in certain areas, including military bases, airports, schools and parks. This registry would 

ideally include machine -readable GPS data that is interoperable with drone o peration, to automatically 

enforce geofencing . An emergency response plan that also defines the responsibilities, relevant 

stakeholders, and protocols for drone operators and potential victims can also ensure proper 

preparedness in case of accidents. 

As di scussed in the previous section, performance -based drone regulation may be the best way to prevent 

intrusive uses while permitting innovation. Regulation that specifies the volume, size, flight altitude and 

parameters, and use of drones can ensure that cit izens’ concerns are respected while still allowing 

companies adequate freedom to experiment without restrictions on technology or equipment. However, 

as the concepts of MaaS and combined mobility modes continue to gain traction in both the public and 

priva te sector s, regulators can additionally require emerging modes like drones to provide semi -open data 

in order to guarantee interoperability. As shown in  Box 7. Mobility as a Service : The Helsinki example 

7 earlier in this chapter, Finland has implemented such a regulation to ensure basic interoperability 

between all transport modes in the country. Decisions for data collection, analysis, exchange should bu ild 

on and align with regulation and standardi sation developments such as MaaS. 

Another new mobility technology to emerge in the MaaS era, the electric scooter, has provoked a similar 

regulatory requirement for data -sharing and fleet monitoring. Initiated by the Los Angeles Department of 

Transportation (LADOT) in 2018 in response to the influx of shared e -scooters on their streets, Mobility 

Data Specification (MDS) has now been adopted by over 80 cities around the world. MDS establishes a 

data standard that legally requires data interoperability between mobility operators and regulators via 

open application programming interfaces (APIs) (GitHub, 2020; Zipper, 2019; LADOT, 2018). This not only 

grants regulators access to information on mobility fleet location and performance, but empowers them 

to adjust and update mobility policy based on concrete data. By increasing their visibility into mobility 

trends, policy makers can identify dangerous traffic zones, target certain areas for protected lanes and 

parking, implement geofencing , and more. Establishing an MDS -type requirement is foundational for 

regulators who want to ensure that innovative mobility solutions serve the needs of the city as a whole. 

Though the impetus for MDS was the e -scooter, it has been desi gned in anticipation of the need to 

incorporate other modes, including drones (Pyzyk, 2019). 6. DRONES AS PART OF THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM   

> READY FOR TAKE -OFF? INTEGRATING DRONES INTO THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM © OECD/ITF 2021

91 

The sudden proliferation of dockless shared e -scooters around the world in 2018 can help inform 

regulators on how to approach drones for another reason. Authoritie s were caught off guard by the 

overnight emergence of e -scooters on their streets and sidewalks, and were forced to scramble to 

understand their benefits and risks. Some cities have sought to understand them as supportive of MaaS -

style alternatives to priv ate car use, allowing them to operate within minimal regulatory parameters, while 

other cities like New York have banned them completely (O’Kane, 2019).   

> What can policy makers do?

Instead of waiting for the drone industry to  go into overdrive  and inundate  some  regions overnight, policy 

makers at all levels should be proactive about  integrating drones into the wider transport system and 

shaping respective regulation. More specifically, policy makers should: 

 Establish the mobility sector’s needs and priorities from the public sector perspective, and then 

explore how drones can support them. This could be done by leveraging data analytics and 

predictive models to assess, for instance, which mobility service gaps may be covered by drones, 

or which services can be more effectively carried out by drones . Such assessments will also help 

identify where investments in transport infrastructure are required .

 Ensure the interoperability and scalability of drones within the larger mobility network . This may 

include 

o Establishing a concept for droneport s on/at intermodal hubs, on relevant buildings within 

the city environment and in suburban areas, while ensuring interoperability for different 

operators and suitable access for users; 

o Considering a regulatory fr amework that requires passenger drone operators to disclose 

relevant mobility data to share it with MaaS platforms; 

o Developing integrated policies that facilitate coordination and coherent decision making 

where multiple agencies are involved. 

 Ensure consum ers and non -consumers (e.g. pedestrians, property owners) are protected and have 

fair access to the market. This may include: 

o Establishing regulation s for geofencing , punitive measures for rogue drone use, and 

restrictions on authorised use to ensure prote ction of sensitive areas and to hold drone 

users accountable ; and 

o Developing procedures and defining responsibilities , relevant stakeholders, and protocols 

for drone operators in case of accidents .

 Adopt performance -based standards i nstead of overregulatin g drone use based on technological 

specifications that restrict innovation. 

 Conduct small -scale drone pilot program me s where both public and private se ctors participate. 6. DRONES AS PART OF THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM 

92 READY FOR TAKE -OFF? INTEGRATING DRONES INTO THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM © OECD/ITF 2021 

# References 

Airbus (2020), “Infrastructure : A new dimension to city planning ”,

https://www.airbus.com/innovation/zero -emission/urban -air -mobility/infrastructure.html  [accessed 

20/07/2020]. 

Airbus UAM (2018), Airbus Urban Air Mobility,  https://www.mvrdv.nl/projects/421/airbus -uam  [accessed 

20/07/2020]. 

Nisenson, L., (2017), “Sidewalks: The New Planning Frontier ”, Alta Planning + Design ,

https://blog.altaplanning.com/sidewalks -the -new -planning -frontier -74c85f2d6101  [accessed 

20/07/2020]. 

Barron, J. (2019), “That Noise? It’s the 1%, Helicoptering Over Your Traffic Jam ”, The New York Time s,

https://www.nytimes.com/2019/08/01/nyregion/helicopter -nyc -airports -hamptons.html  [accessed 

06/07/2020]. 

Cervero, R. (2013), Transport Infrastructure and t he Environment: Sustainable Mobility and Urbanism ,

2nd Planocosmo International Conference, Bandung Institute of Technology, 

https://www.econstor.eu/bitstream/10419/92377/1/77074 7167.pdf .

Choudhury, S., Solovey, K., Kochenderfer, M.J., Pavone, M. (2020), Efficient Large -Scale Multi -Drone 

Delivery using Transit Networks , IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 

Department of Computer Science and Department o f Aeronautics and Astronautics, Stanford University, 

https://arxiv.org/abs/1909.11840  [accessed 20/07/2020]. 

Deutsche Bahn (2019), “Deutsche Bahn boosts rail from the sky ”, Press release, 

https://www.deutschebahn.com/en/presse/press_releases/Deutsche -Bahn -boosts -rail -from -the -sky -

4635698  [accessed 20/07/2020]. 

Dorn, S. (2019), “Brooklynites drowning in helicopter noise since Uber Copter, Blade launch ”, New York 

Post , https://nypost.com/2019/12/07/brooklynites -drowning -in -helicopter -noise -since -uber -copter -

blade -launch/  [accessed 06/07/2020]. 

European Commission (2016), Fifth report on monitoring developments of the rail market ,

https://ec.europa.eu/transport/sites/transport/files/swd -2016 -0427.pdf .

Fairs, M. (2018), London rooftops snapped up for "vertiports" as drone travel moves closer, Dezeen 

Magazine , https://www.dezeen.com/2018/08/23/skyports -barr -gazetas -london -rooftops -vertiports -

drones -technology/  [accessed 20/07/2020]. 

Fearnley, N., G. Currie, S. Flügel, F. A. Gregersen, M. Killi, J. Toner and M. Wardman (2018), “Competition 

and substitution between public transport modes, ” Research in Transportation Economics , Vol. 69, 

September 2018, pp. 51 -58,  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.retrec.2018.05.005 .

Fra port (2019), Mobility of the Future: Fraport and Volocopter Are Developing Airport Infrastructure and 

Passenger Processes for Air Taxi Services, Press release,  https://www.fraport.com/en/newsroom/press -

releases/2019/q1 -2019/mobility -of -the -future --fraport -and -volocopter -are -developing -ai.html  [accessed 

20/07/2020]. 

Rothfeld, R., M. Fu, and C. Antoniou (2019), “Analysis of Urban Air Mobility’s Transport Performance in 

Munich Metropolitan Region ”, International Scientific Conference on Mobility and Transport 6. DRONES AS PART OF THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM   

> READY FOR TAKE -OFF? INTEGRATING DRONES INTO THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM © OECD/ITF 2021

93 

(mobil.TUM2019), Munich, Germany , https://webarchiv .typo3.tum.de/BGU/mobil -

vt/fileadmin/w00bqi/www/mobilTUM2019/Sessions/1A/6061_abstract.pdf 

GitHub (2020), “Mobility Data Specification ”, https://github.com/openmobili tyfoundation/mobility -data -

specification  [accessed 06/07/2020]. 

Grandl, G., S. Doppler, M. Ostgathe, J. Salib, J. Cachay and H. Ross (2018), The Future of Vertical Mobility ,

Porsche Consulting , https://fedotov.co/wp -content/uploads/2018/03/Future -of -Vertical -Mobility.pdf .

H3Dynamics (2020), Official website,  https://www.h3dynamics.com .

Hall, J. D., C. Palsson and J. Pricec (2018), “Is Uber a substitute or complement for public transit? ”, 

Journal of Urban Economics , Vol . 108, November 2018, pp. 36 -50, 

https://www.economics.utoronto.ca /public/workingPapers/tecipa -585.pdf .

Hazan, J., N. Lang, A. K. Wegscheider and B. Fassenot (2019), On -Demand Transit Can Unlock Urban 

Mobility , https:// www.bcg.com/publications/2019/on -demand -transit -can -unlock -urban -mobility.aspx 

[accessed 30/11/2019]. 

Hensher, D.A., C. Mulley, C. Ho, Y. Wong, G. Smith and J.D. Nelson (2020), Understanding Mobility As a 

Service Maas: Past, Present and Future , Elsevier, 

https://www.sciencedirect.com/book/9780128200445/understanding -mobility -as -a-service -maas 

[accessed 06/07/2020]. 

Horni, A., K. Nagel and K. W. Axhausen , eds., (2016), The Multi -Agent Transport Simulation MATSim, 

Ubiquity Press, London,  https://elib.dlr.de/105730/2/multimodal_full.pdf .

Hwang, J. and Griffiths, M. (2017), “Share more, drive l ess: Millennials value perception and behavioral 

intent in using collaborative consumption services ”, Journal of Consumer Marketing , Vol. 34 , Issue 2, pp. 

132 -146,  https://doi.org/10.1108/JCM -10 -2015 -1560 .

LADOT (2018), “Mobility Data Specification ”, Information Briefing, Los Angeles Department of 

Transportation,  https://ladot.io/wp -content/uploads/2018/12/What -is -MDS -Cities.pdf .

Johns Hopkins University (2017), Operational Evaluation of Unmanned Aircraft Systems for Crash Scene 

Reconstruction , Operational Evaluation Report, Version 1.0, 

https://nij.ojp.gov/library/publications/operational -evaluation -unmanned -aircraft -systems -crash -scene -

reconstruction  [accessed 20/07/2020]. 

Karpowicz, J. (2018), “What Does it Mean to Build and Enable MaaS ( Mobility as a Service)? ”, Commercial 

UAV News,  https://www.commercialuavnews.com/infrastructure/maas -mobility -as -a-service  [accessed 

06/07/2020]. 

Kasliwal , A., N.J. Furbush, J.H. Gawron, J.R. McBride, T.J. Wallington, R.D. De Kleine, H.C. Kim and G.A. 

Keoleian (2019), “Role of flying cars in sustainable mobility”, Nature Communications ,

https://doi.org /10.1038/s41467 -019 -09426 -0.

Kellermann, R., T. Biehle and L. Fischer (2020), “Drones for parcel and passenger transportation: A 

literature review ”, Transportation Research Interdisciplinary Perspectives , Vol. 4, March 2020, 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trip.2019.100088 .

MaaS Alliance (2019), Official Website , https://maas -alliance.eu/homepage/what -is -maas/  [accessed 

23/08/ 2019]. 

Martin ez, L.M., Viegas, J.M. (2017), “Assessing the impacts of deploying a shared self -driving urban 

mobility system: An agent -based model applied to the city of Lisbon, Portugal ”, International Journal of 6. DRONES AS PART OF THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM 

94 READY FOR TAKE -OFF? INTEGRATING DRONES INTO THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM © OECD/ITF 2021 

Transportation Science and Technology , Vol. 6, Issue 1, pp. 13 -27, 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijtst.2017.05.005 .

Matternet (2020), “Matternet Unveils the New Matternet Station ”, Press release, 

https://mttr.net/images/Matternet.New_Station_Unveil.2020.03.10.pdf .

NASA (2018), Urban Air Mobility (UAM), Market Study , Nasa Urban Air Mobility, Crown Consulting INC., 

As cension Global, Georgia Tech Aerospace Systems Design Lab, McKinsey & Company, 

https://www.nasa.gov/sites/default/files/atoms/files/uam -market -study -executive -summary -v2.pdf .

Oak Ridge National Laboratory (2017), National Household Travel Survey , Technical 

Report,  https://nhts.ornl.gov  [accessed 20/07/2020]. 

O’Kane, S. (2019), “Electric bikes and scooters will stay illegal in New York thanks to Governor Cuomo ”,

The Verge , https://www.theverge.com/2019/12/26/21038257/electric -bikes -scooters -veto -illegal -new -

york -andrew -cuomo -ban  [accessed 06/07/2020]. 

Pourbaix, J. (2011), “Towards a smart future for cities: urban transport scenarios for 2025 ”, Public 

Transport International , 60(3), pp. 8 -10, 

https://www.researchgate.net/publication/283879525_Towards_a_smart_future_for_cities_Urban_tran 

sport_scenarios_for_2025  [accessed 06/07/2020]. 

Prussi, M. and Lonza, L. (2 018), “Passenger Aviation and High Speed Rail: A Comparison of Emissions 

Profiles on Selected European Routes ”, Journal of Advanced Transportation , pp. 1 -10, 

https://doi.org/10.1155/2018/6205714 .

PwC (2016), Clarity from above : PwC global report on the commercial applications of drone technology ,

https://www.pwc.pl/pl/pdf/clarity -from -above -pwc.pdf .

Pyzy k, K. (2019), “Los Angeles' mobility data specification unlocks potential for data management ”, Smart 

Cities Dive , https://www.smartcitiesdive.com/news/los -angeles -mobility -data -specification -dockless -

rideshare/546692/  [accessed 06/07/2020]. 

Rayle, L., D. Dai, and N. Chan (2016), Just A Better Taxi? A Survey -Based Comparison of Taxis, Transit, and 

Ridesourcing Services in San Francisco , https://escholarship.org/content/qt60v8r346/qt60v8r346.pdf .

Roland Berger (2018), Urban Air Mobility – The rise of a new mode of transportation , Roland Berger 

Focus Study ,

https://www.rolandberger.com/publications/publication_pdf/Roland_Berger_Urban_Air_Mobility.pdf .

Santi, P., Resta, G., Szell, M., Sobolevsky, S., Strogatz, S.,H., and Ratti C. (2014), Quantifying the benefits 

of vehicle pooling with shareability networks, PNAS , 111 (37), pp. 13290 -13294, 

https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1403657111 .

SESAR (2019), Initial view on Principles for the U -spa ce architecture , Single European Sky ATM Research ,

https://www.sesarju.eu/sites/default/files/documents/u -space/SESAR%20principles%20for%20U -

space%20architecture.pdf .

Sun, X., S. Wandelt and E. Stumpf (2018), “Competitiveness of on -demand air taxis regarding door -to -

door travel time: A race through Europe ”, Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and Transportation 

Review , Vol. 119, November 2018, pp. 1 -18,  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tre.2018.09.006 .

Standing, C., S. Standing and S. Biermann (2018) , “The implications of the sharing economy for 

transport ”, Transport Reviews , Vol. 39, No. 2,  https://doi.org/10.1080/01441647.2018.1450307 .6. DRONES AS PART OF THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM   

> READY FOR TAKE -OFF? INTEGRATING DRONES INTO THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM © OECD/ITF 2021

95 

Teodorovic, D., and M. Janic (2016), Transportation E ngineering , 1st ed. , Butterworth -Heinemann ,

https://www.elsevier.com/books/transportation -engineering/teodorovic/978 -0-12 -803818 -5.

Thipphavong, D.P., Ap aza, R.D., Barmore, B.E., Battiste, V., Burian, B.K, Dao, Q.V., Feary, M.S., Go, S., 

Goodrich, K.H., Homola, J.R., Idris, H.R., Kopardekar, P.H., Lachter, J.B., Neogi, N.A., Ng, H.K., Oseguera -

Lohr, R.M., Patterson, M.D., Verma, S.A. (2018) , “Urban Air Mobility Airspace Integration Concepts and 

Considerations ”, 2018 Aviation Technology, Integration, and Operations Conference , National 

Aeronautics and Space Administration,  https://doi.org/10.2514/6.2018 -3676 .

Threod Systems (2020), “Threod supports local hospital with first ever drone flight carrying coronavirus 

samples ”, https://threod.com/news/drones -fighting -covid -19/  [accessed 20/07/202 0]. 

UNECE (2009), “Multimodal freight transportation is defined as the transportation of goods by a 

sequence of at least two different modes of transportation ”, Illustrated Glossary for Transport Statistics ,

https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/fr/web/products -manuals -and -guidelines/ -/KS -RA -10 -028  [accessed 

06/07/2020]. 

Volocopter (2018), “Volocopter Presents Air Taxi Services at Scale : Infrastructure to Integrate a nd Scale 

Air Taxi Services in Cities ”, https://press.volocopter.com/index.php/volocopter -presents -air -taxi -services -

at -scale  [accessed 20/07/2020]. 

WEF (2 019), “What the world can learn from Rwanda's approach to drones ”, World Economic Forum ,

https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2019/01/what -the -world -can -learn -from -rwandas -approach -to -

drones/  [accessed 06/07/2020]. 

Whyte, A. (2020), “First ever drone flight carrying coronavirus patient sample in Estonia ”, err.ee news ,

https://news.err.ee/1081652/first -ever -drone -flight -carrying -coronavirus -patient -sample -in -estonia 

[accessed 20/07/2020]. 

Zipper, D. (2019), “Cities Can See Where You’re Taking That Scooter ”, Slate ,

https://slate.com/business/2019/04/scooter -data -cities -mds -uber -lyft -los -angeles.html  [accessed 

06/07/2020]. ANNEX: WORKING GROUP PARTICIPANTS 

96 READY FOR TAKE -OFF? INTEGRATING DRONES INTO THE TRANSPORT SYSTEM © OECD/ITF 2021 

# Annex: Working Group participants 

Working G roup participant affiliations were provided at the time of their participation in meetings. 

Richard CROSS (chair)  New Zealand Ministry of Transport, New Zealand 

Laura PONTO (initial chair)  Hogan Lovells, United States 

Nathanel APTER  Swiss Federal Office of Civil Aviation (FOCA), Switzerland 

James BELL  Department for Transport (DfT), United Kingdom 

Franziska BIERMANN  City of Hamburg, Germany 

Ryan COATES  Transport Canada 

Dagi GEISTER  German Aerospace Center (DLR), Germany 

Tomáš HABAN  Czech Transport Research Centre (CDV), Czech Republic 

Jaehyun HAN  Korea Transport Institute, Korea 

Hans HEERKENS  University of Twente, Netherlands 

Peter IRVINE  US Department of Transport (DoT), United States 

Yeon Myung KIM  Korea Institute of Aviation Safety and Technology, Korea 

Adam KLECZATSKY  Czech Technical University, Czech Republic 

Anders LINDSTROM  Swedish N ational Road and Transport Research Institute (vti), Sweden 

Iain MACBETH  Transport for London (TfL), United Kingdom 

Frederic MALAUD  International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) 

Adam MARTIN  Department for Transport (DfT), United Kingdom 

Tale ØRVING  Norwegian Centre for Transport Research ( TØI) , Norway 

Henry PAK  German Aerospace Center (DLR), Germany 

Andreas RICHTER  City of Hamburg, Germany 

Katja SCHECHTNER  International Transport Forum 

Michael SCHEIBENREIF  Austro Control, Austria and UNICEF 

Stefan SEER  Austrian Institute of Technology (AIT), Austria 

Anna STRAUBINGER  Bauhaus Luftfahrt, Germany 

Jan WALULIK  University of Warsaw, Poland 

Elisabeth WINDISCH  International Transport Forum 

Stefan ZAß  Ger man Ministry for Transport and D igital Infrastructure, Germany Ready for Take-Off? 

# Integrating Drones into 

# the Transport System 

This report presents policy options 

for the successful integration of 

drones into the transport system. 

How can countries reap the benefits 

of drone transport while limiting 

risks? The report examines concerns 

about the acceptability, efficiency 

and sustainability of drone transport. 

The analysis covers passenger 

and freight drones with different 

payloads and ranges, and also 

addresses other drone uses that 

support the transport sector.
