Title: AI Robot for Home: 1X Unveils NEO Gamma, Plans Mass Production

URL Source: https://mikekalil.com/blog/1x-neo-gamma-home-robot/

Published Time: 2025-02-22T03:33:22+00:00

Markdown Content:
1X Technologies says its AI-powered humanoid robots are on the verge of entering homes at scale.

The well-funded startup just unveiled the second major iteration of its NEO robot, designed specifically for household tasks. 1X Technologies, founded in Norway and headquartered in Silicon Valley, just unveiled its next generation android called the NEO Gamma.

In a short video, the robot is seen assisting at an upscale home, retrieving items, carrying groceries, and cleaning up before resting. According to 1X Head of Growth Dar Sleeper, the actors in the promo are from the company.

The introduction comes 6 months after 1X generated significant buzz with its NEO Beta humanoid robot. 1X calls the Gamma edition a major step toward a Jetsons like world with robots autonomously performing chores at homes.

Founder Bernt Bornich said the iteration brings the project into the engineering sample stage. The upcoming third iteration will presumably be the mass production-ready Alpha NEO.

The new robot features and overhauled design and enhanced artificial intelligence. It features a minimalist, Japanese-inspired design with so-called emotive earrings that provide real-time visual feedback for better communication. 1X designers intended for the Gamma to appear approachable and blend seamlessly into home aesthetics.

Source: 1X Technologies

The startup says the hardware is 10x more reliable and 10 Db quieter than the previous model. According to 1X, NEO Gamma has an improved walking gait and is better at object manipulation. The humanoid can squat to pick up items and sit in a chair almost like a normal person.1X didn’t specify its walking or running speed, but the NEO robot could reportedly walk at a pace of 4 lm/h (2.5 mph) and maxed out at 12 km/h (7.5 mph).

Like the Beta model, the NEO Gamma has five-fingered hands that can handle fragile items like wine bottles. The robot runs on an in-house developed language model that converts natural conversations into actions.

Source: 1X Technologies

A day before the unveiling, fellow Sunnyvale robotics firm Figure announced its self-developed AI model called Helix. Like 1X, Figure says its technology will enable autonomous humanoid robots to enter homes at scale. Figure shared demo footage showing two Figure 2 humanoid robots teaming up to put away groceries after verbal instructions. Like Figure, 1X has ambitious goals for mass producing its humanoids.

The startup plans to deploy a limited number of robots in households in 2025 and scale production in 2026. They’re aiming to manufacture 100,000 humanoid robots by 2027 and millions of units in 2028. While Figure initially focused on industrial applications, founder Brett Adcock says the foundational technologies will be repurposed for home use in the coming years.

1X has been focused on robotics for homes since it introduced NEO.

The Gamma robot enhances safety with a soft covering intended to prevent injuries to people and pets. The robot’s knit suit and shoes are made from 3D printed soft nylon. Made using a Japanese Shima seiki knitting machine, the fabric is designed to conform to the robot without affecting performance.

The robot captures audio with four microphones featuring beam forming and noise cancellation technology. For audio output, NEO features a three-speaker system. Its chest speaker is for AI voice interactions, while two outward-facing speakers in the pelvis are for sound effects and music.

On the X social media platform, Eric Jang, 1X’s head of AI, said the new and improved robots have been doing chores at the homes of 1X employees for a weeks. Bornich said Gamma humanoids will soon head to the homes of select early adopters who sign a non disclosure agreement.

1X also recently acquired the quirky robotics startup Kind Humanoid. Christoph Kohstall, a former Google robotics engineer who founded the startup in a Palo Alto garage, has joined 1X as a creator.

Financial terms were not disclosed.

In 2024, Kind Humanoid teamed up with industrial design firm fuse project to create an AI-powered robot for versatile tasks in healthcare and homes. The surrealistic art-inspired Kind Humanoid featured a visor displaying animations of clouds and skies, with floating eyes to express intent and emotion.

1X’s NEO robot had its first big public appearance in March 2024 when a prototype stood alongside creations from major robotics players like Boston Dynamics, Figure, Unitree Robotics, Apptronik, Fourier, and Sanctuary AI during Jensen Huang’s keynote at Nvidia’s GTC AI conference.

The startup’s first-generation robot, EVE, also garnered significant attention last year after popular Twitch streamer Kai Cenat bought a pair of them for 50 thousand dollars. The content proved popular, and clips of the wheeled humanoid interacting with celebrities like Snoop Dogg, Benny Blanco, and Chris Brown went viral.
