Title: Real-Time Brain-Computer Interface Control of Walking Exoskeleton with Bilateral Sensory Feedback

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00219

Markdown Content:
Authors:Jeffrey Lim, Po T. Wang, Won Joon Sohn, Derrick Lin, Shravan Thaploo, Luke Bashford, David Bjanes, Angelica Nguyen, Hui Gong, Michelle Armacost, Susan J. Shaw, Spencer Kellis, Brian Lee, Darrin Lee, Payam Heydari, Richard A. Andersen, Zoran Nenadic, Charles Y. Liu, An H. Do

View PDF HTML (experimental)

> Abstract:Invasive brain-computer interface (BCI) technology has demonstrated the possibility of restoring brain-controlled walking in paraplegic spinal cord injury patients. However, current implementations of BCI-controlled walking still have significant drawbacks. In particular, prior systems are unidirectional and lack sensory feedback for insensate patients, have suboptimal reliance on brain signals from the bilateral arm areas of the motor cortex, and depend on external systems for signal processing. Motivated by these shortcomings, this study is the first time a bidirectional brain-computer interface (BDBCI) has demonstrated the restoration of both brain-controlled walking and leg sensory feedback while utilizing the bilateral leg motor and sensory cortices. Here, a subject undergoing subdural electrocorticogram electrode implantation for epilepsy surgery evaluation leveraged the leg representation areas of the bilateral interhemispheric primary motor and sensory cortices to operate a BDBCI with high performance. Although electrode implantation in the interhemispheric region is uncommon, electrodes can be safely implanted in this region to access rich leg motor information and deliver bilateral leg sensory feedback. Finally, we demonstrated that all BDBCI operations can be executed on a dedicated, portable embedded system. These results indicate that BDBCIs can potentially provide brain-controlled ambulation and artificial leg sensation to people with paraplegia after spinal cord injury in a manner that emulates full-implantability and is untethered from any external systems.

Comments:Main text of pre-print and supplementary information included
Subjects:Neurons and Cognition (q-bio.NC); Human-Computer Interaction (cs.HC)
Cite as:arXiv:2505.00219 [q-bio.NC]
(or arXiv:2505.00219v1 [q-bio.NC] for this version)
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2505.00219

arXiv-issued DOI via DataCite

Submission history
------------------

From: An Do [view email] 

**[v1]** Wed, 30 Apr 2025 23:37:19 UTC (33,097 KB)
