Title: L.A. Mayor Who Is Definitely Not Running For President Hits Another Swing State

URL Source: https://laist.com/news/garcetti-on-the-trail

Published Time: 2017-06-23T06:00:00Z

Markdown Content:
This is an archival story that predates current editorial management.

This archival content was written, edited, and published prior to LAist's acquisition by its current owner, Southern California Public Radio ("SCPR"). Content, such as language choice and subject matter, in archival articles therefore may not align with SCPR's current editorial standards. To learn more about those standards and why we make this distinction, please click here.

Published Jun 22, 2017 11:00 PM

Mayor Eric Garcetti signing Executive Directive No. 20 in Lincoln Heights this March. (Photo by Julia Wick/LAist)

()

Los Angeles Mayor Eric Garcetti, who is definitely not laying the groundwork for a potential presidential campaign in 2020, hit another swing state on Friday, attending a conference of city leaders from around the country in Florida.

Garcetti won a landslide reelection victory in March, but that hasn't kept his name out of frenzied speculation for a number of higher offices (the is-he-or-isn't-he conjecture about a potential gubernatorial 2018 bid has been going on for years). Back in June 2016, Garcetti's name was leaked as potentially being on a Hillary Clinton shortlist for VP, and since it became clear that Clinton won't, uh, be running for reelection in 2020, Garcetti's name has also entered the presidential fray.

In May, the New York Times put our Instagram-loving mayor on a list of potentials for 2020, quoting some unnamed "allies" of the mayor who "acknowledged that national donors had broached the subject of 2020 but said that was the extent of his attention to the race."

That speculation kicked up another notch earlier this month when Garcetti headed to Wisconsin, a state that definitely wasn't pivotal to the outcome of the 2016 election, to keynote a democratic convention. Yusef Robb, a spokesperson for the mayor, told LAist at the time that Garcetti had been initially invited to the event by a former staffer on his 2013 mayoral campaign who now works in Wisconsin politics.

"He's not running for anything," Robb said. "During these crazy political and rapidly-changing economic times, Mayor Garcetti wants to help his party and share ideas to make people's lives better."

See you in Iowa!

At LAist, we believe in journalism without censorship and the right of a free press to speak truth to those in power. Our hard-hitting watchdog reporting on local government, climate, and the ongoing housing and homelessness crisis is trustworthy, independent and freely accessible to everyone thanks to the support of readers like you.

_But the game has changed:_ Congress voted to eliminate funding for public media across the country. Here at LAist that means a loss of $1.7 million in our budget every year. We want to assure you that despite growing threats to free press and free speech, LAist will remain a voice you know and trust. Speaking frankly, the amount of reader support we receive will help determine how strong of a newsroom we are going forward to cover the important news in our community.

**We’re asking you to stand up for independent reporting that will not be silenced.** With more individuals like you supporting this public service, we can continue to provide essential coverage for Southern Californians that you can’t find anywhere else. **Become a monthly member today to help sustain this mission.**

Thank you for your generous support and belief in the value of independent news.

Chip in now to fund your local journalism

(

LAist

)

*   The study found recipients spent nearly all the money on basic needs like food and transportation, not drugs or alcohol. 
*   Kevin Lee's Tokyo Noir has become one of the top spots for craft-inspired cocktails. 
*   A tort claim obtained by LAist via a public records request alleges the Anaheim procurement department lacks basic contracting procedures and oversight. 
*   Flauta, taquito, tacos dorados? Whatever they’re called, they’re golden, crispy and delicious. 
*   If California redistricts, the conservative beach town that banned LGBTQ Pride flags on city property would get a gay, progressive Democrat in Congress. 
*   Most survivors of January's fires face a massive gap in the money they need to rebuild, and funding to help is moving too slowly or nonexistent.
