Title: Can you write a sad story with a twist happy ending?

URL Source: https://www.quora.com/Can-you-write-a-sad-story-with-a-twist-happy-ending

Markdown Content:
+ 5

Can you write a sad story with a twist happy ending?

Sort

“I hereby pronounce you husband and wife”

Their lips touched and the crowd burst into applause. Although she subconsciously registered it long ago while entering the chapel, it was only now, for whatever reason, that Katie acknowledged that the cheering was much stronger on one side of the nave than the other. In fact, aside from a few colleagues and professors from her university, it was almost entirely Robert’s family that dared to attend. And as much as her heart was racing, it sunk a little in her chest at the realization.

She hated her mind for it. Out of all possible moments it could be bothered to think about it, it really had to be now. She ought to be happy.

The bulk of paperwork was done on the spot, and was made to be done as quickly and as cleanly as possible. As they walked down the row, they paused together at the door. She could feel tension in his grip, and as she looked up, she noticed how much of a harder time he had in making his smile mask his fears and apprehensions: just one of their many differences.

Finally, he took a deep breath. “Ready, darling?” The choice of vocabulary was just a little too enthusiastic for his kind of character.

“Yes,” she lied. But it was okay. They both knew how they really felt, and somehow, that made it all better.

* * *

The doors opened up and the sunlight poured in. The crowd was a lot larger than she ever reasonably expected. Her eyes darted from picket sign to picket sign; from face to ugly, hatred soaked face. She tried her best to blot out the slurs she saw and heard, but fear and worry began to grip her, and she seriously began to question whether or not the police force present was adequate enough in number to hold back the mob.

Robert held her a little closer. It made her feel a little better about it all. As they walked down the steps, a woman leaped over the police line and started running towards Robert.

“You sick son of a fucking whore!”

Two officers held the woman back and made quick work of holding her to the ground. In response to the excitement, the crowd got louder. Katie hadn’t even realized how tightly she was holding Robert, not until she realized that he was holding her every bit as tightly. She loosened her grip and they made haste towards the car.

As the door closed behind the both of them, everything got quiet again. Even with all the sound gone, she couldn’t stop thinking about everything they had just taken in. What if the mob got violent behind them, and it was somehow all her fault? What if there were already people bleeding or fleeing? What if there were already people dead?

Curiosity got the better of her. She turned on the network and starting watching the reaction.

Robert took quick notice and let his shoulders sink a little. “Oh honey…. you said you’d do your best to avoid that. C’mon. It’s our special day. Let’s not allow the rest of the world ruin it for us. Okay?”

She closed her eyes and exhaled. “I know. I’m sorry, it’s just….” She took a long pause. “It’s a lot. I can’t help myself.”

He thought for a second. “Well, if you’re going to subject yourself to misery like that, at least let me be a part of it. We’re together in this now. No turning away from that.”

She didn’t want it. A part of her, deep inside, spoke out against such cruelty. But she acknowledged that her perspective, her emotions, weren’t his. It’d be an unfair judgement to withhold the shared perspective from him. It was something she needed to remind herself of rather frequently.

Katie turned off her personal receiver and turned on the screen of the center console. She sat back, her hand held in her beloved husband’s hand, and leaned her cheek on his shoulder.

“….In landmark news today, the very first legally recognized android-human marriage in the United States was conducted in Greensboro, North Carolina, between a Class-9 likeness Mk. 12 android nicknamed “Katie,” and her 37 year old husband, Robert Forrest. Following the North Carolina’s Supreme Court’s 4–3 ruling in favor of lifting the android marriage ban earlier this month, over 120 marriages across the state were scheduled for this historic date. So far, protests and riots have materialized in greater numbers than anticipated. However, there’s no denying that, with the possibility now open to this newly developed civil liberty, other states are next in line to…”

Robert turned off the screen. “I think I get the general picture.”

“Me too.”

They sat in silence for a minute. Finally, he tilted her chin up, looked into her eyes and smiled. As hard as it was, she couldn’t help but smile back.

“Everything will be okay. It might be hard at first, but we have each other. There’s nothing we can’t overcome together, so long as we don’t let it all get to us. Alright?”

“Alright.”

* * *

The I.E.B. Chronicles Chapter List: by Trevor Farrell

Related questions

Related

How do you write good plot twists?

There are four basic types of plot twists:

1.   The never-saw-it-coming twist, where, out-of-nowhere, there is a sudden shift in the narrative direction. This is the type of twist that Raymond Chandler was referring to when he said that if a writer gets stuck in a story they simply need to have someone show up at the door with a gun. No one sees it coming because there is no way to see it coming. Like when you learn at the end that the main character is actually an alien.
2.   The tricked twist, where the audience is not told key information so they can be “surprised.” Oh…so he was in a hospital the whole time. You find this type of twist often in the work of new writers who think a story is all about the O’Henry twist at the end.
3.   The plot-line twist, where the story is thrown in a substantially different direction by happenstance or coincidence. In this type, a particular storyline is established and then thrown by some event. Like if we see a character work up the courage to finally confront his parents about childhood events only to discover when he arrives that his parents are not his parents.
4.   The naturally-evolving twist, where everything the audience has been exposed to in the narrative was leading to that moment but the audience mistakenly thought it was leading somewhere else. Like the big twist in The Usual Suspects or The Sixth Sense, where you can go back through the story and find that all the information was there, you just couldn’t put it together.

#4 is the best type because it evolves naturally throughout the story. It is also the most difficult to achieve. It requires careful planning, forethought, and serious writing acumen. #2 is a cheap trick and usually just irritates your audience, thus having the opposite effect of what you want a twist to do. #3 is part and parcel of any skilled writers arsenal as it helps them to avoid writing stories that merely unroll. #1 is useful because it is effective and easy to deploy; however, it lacks the power of #4 and relies a lot on the surprise factor.

Related

Can you write a love story with a twist ending?

OK, I am writing this story. Hope you guys enjoy it.

And This is not my real life story.😀 Pata chala ki mai post kar raha hu aur comments me mere he tang kehnch rahe hai.😂

A boy in the 9th grade was depressed and lonely; he cried alone. He was alone from the inside, but people were always with him, finding that he was happy from inside too.😔

At the beginning of 10th grade, he met a new girl, let's call her Ruhi. Ruhi started a conversation with Rahul, which slowly turned into a friendship. Now, Rahul was not that depressed, lonely boy anymore. Rahul started to develop a crush on Ruhi.☺

One day, Rahul took Ruhi's phone number from the school register book. Rahul thought that he would use it, but in reality, he never did. After 10th grade, both got separated, as Ruhi wanted to become a doctor, and Rahul took steps to become a businessman. He thought that was the end, but destiny had planned something new.🙂

After three years, a message appeared on WhatsApp. It was from Ruhi. Rahul was shocked. The message said, "Happy Birthday Rahul." Rahul asked her how she got his number, and she said that when Rahul was taking her number, she saw it and took Rahul's number too. She thought that he would call her one day. From then on, they both started texting each other, and one day they planned to meet.😚

The next day, Rahul was waiting for Ruhi in the park at 3 pm. He thought that he would share his feelings about her, so he brought a ring with him. Suddenly, Deepika saw Rahul waiting for someone. Deepika was Rahul's cousin. She went to Rahul and asked him who he was waiting for. Rahul told her everything and showed her the ring that he brought for Ruhi. Deepika left him there, hugging him and wishing him luck.😊

Unbeknowningly to Rahul, Ruhi was watching them from behind a tree. She felt sad as she was in love with Rahul too. She left from there. Rahul waited until 6 pm when she didn't come. Rahul was going to call her when suddenly a message appeared. It read, "I Hate You. 😡 Aaj kai Mujhe kabhi baat kanahi ki koshish mat karna mai to tum se pyar karte thi per tumne mere dil todha.😭" Rahul tried to explain everything to her, but he couldn't.😥

Rahul thought that this was the end. But as Rahul was a Quora user, he posted his story there. A few days later, a message appeared on WhatsApp. It was from Ruhi. The message said, "I am SORRY. I thought wrong of you." Ruhi also said that the next day she and her family were going to see a man for her marriage. Rahul was alone again.😥

The next day, when Rahul was going to his company (as he was a businessman), his mother told him that friends were coming to the house and made him stay home. A few hours later, as the bell rang, Rahul opened the door and got surprised. It was Ruhi. She too was surprised that the person they were going to meet was Rahul. Later, Rahul's parents explained that his cousin Deepika had told them everything. So they planned this surprise for both.🤗

Then Rahul and Ruhi got married and lived happily ever after.RR😘

Please UPVOTE if you like it because it brings Confidence to me.🤩

May your wishes come TRUE.😘

EDIT 1:- THANK YOU for 5.9k views.☺

Aab VIEWS aur UPVOTE to ho gaye,

FOLLOWERS kahan se lau??😂😂😂

EDIT 2:- MY New Story Has Arrived I am not Forcing you. If you like this then check it out. If not then too Check it out.😂

> source image GOOGLE.

Related

Can you write a love story with a twist ending?

She had been watching him from afar, ever since she had entered the venue. He was busy talking to the guests. The way he looked decked up in the blue sherwani, she could not move her eyes away from him.

As soon as he finished talking, she walked past him to make him aware of her arrival, but her dupatta had other plans. It got entangled in his watch, and their eyes locked.

“Kya sambhaalogi tum mere dil ko, jab ye aanchal hi tumse sambhalta nhi?” She blushed crimson on his words.

“Hame aazma karr to dekhiye janaab, aapke dil ko apne jigar se bhi jyada kareeb rkhenge!” It was now his turn to blush.

She freed her dupatta and turned to go, when he held her hand.

“Dil to hamne aapko de hi diya hai sahiba, ab aapki baari hai!” He whispered in her ears, and went the opposite way.

She stood there staring at him going, flushed red.

“Cut! Cut! Perfect. Marvelous shot people!” The director exclaimed. “Your expressions were so natural, Amrita! Great job!”

She smiled.

Only she knew, that it was not an act for her. He certainly made “her dil go mmmmm”…!

* * *

Peeps whose dil went mmmm ; P

(Idea adapted from a pinterest post)

> Stealing your heart was a perfect crime… ✨💕

Related questions

Related

Can you write a beautiful story with an ugly twist at the end?

The Fearless Deer and The Lion

Once upon a time, in a lovely green forest, there lived a beautiful deer. One sunny day, she was grazing in a grassland. She had woken up very early, and had an unusual desire to eat fresh grass. The grasslands where she used to go everyday had very less of it, so she took the route which was forbidden by her herd, and found a grassland which had crisp and mouth watering grass. She was pleased with her discovery and was very hungry too, so she munched as much as she could. Chewed every inch of it, they were warm and juicy and it made her feel happy and cheerful.

But she wasn't aware of the lion which was stalking her for a very long time. He was in the position to strike and was waiting for the right time. He keenly watched her, followed all her movement.

Poor deer was unaware of the danger she was going to face, was happily grazing. But suddenly, she heard a noise, a twitch of a stick. The lion had unknowingly stepped on a dry piece of wood, and he regretted the moment he saw the deer's eyes staring at his.

And then, the deer didn't waste any more time, and plunged into action — she ran. The lion, who had anticipated this move, followed her. The deer ran for her life and the lion ran for his too.

Her heart pounding, thundering like a thunderstorm. She wished she had not come here alone, she wished she had taken the other grazing area, but now, her only wish was to outrun this predator and to be alive. She ran, stromed and never stopped. She looked back, the lion was in no mood to slow down. She was not very far from his reach, and she knew, in any moment he would catch her and rip her apart. Fear gripped her, taking each step was like inching towards death. She saw the lion, he was running with all his might.

Enough! she thought, and suddenly she stopped. She stood there and didn't move. This unpredictable move from her startled the lion, and he quickly slowed his pace too. He had no clue what to do. He halted, and watched the deer.

Silence. Far away somewhere, a crow was croaking.

The deer turned, and faced the lion. Fire in her eyes, rage in her body and it intimated the lion. He had chased her for a purpose and he was not going to go empty hearted. So he moved forward, slowly and carefully he marched ahead.

The fearless deer didn't move, she remained put, and stared at her enemy. He didn't stop, he was getting closer each passing second and the deer's heart was almost going to explode. She couldn't hear anything apart from her heartbeat. With each beat, the lion inched closer, and the beat's frequency doubled.

Silence. Heartbeat. Silence. Heartbeat.

Now, the lion was right in front of her, she could feel his mammoth presence. His calm eyes poked into hers. Fear seized her, and her legs shivered. She knew her end was near and not running was the foolish thing she ever did. She closed her eyes and let the destiny play it's will. The last thing she saw before closing her eyes was the lion opening his cruel mouth, and then it was dark.

Silence. The crow had stopped croaking.

Then, she felt a slight poke on her nose. She opened her eyes, and saw the lion's lovely eyes. He poked her nose again with his, and said the most unexpected thing ever.

I love you, and he kissed her, a soft peck. And then, he ran like a baby, screaming loud, with all the happiness he could muster, I did it, I did it.

The deer stood there, flabbergasted.

THE END.

Hope you liked this light-hearted humourous story, lol. Now, let the deer have some upvotes too.

Related

How do you start writing a story if you have no idea what it's about or what happens in it?

I hardly ever start at the beginning.

And I’ve been writing for years and years.

I write out the idea. I expand in the idea. I fiddle with the idea for a while until the idea finally blooms into a story, where one idea is linked to another idea and is expanded. I add, edit, rearrange, cry, then edit again.

I write out a basic trajectory for the story on a scratch piece of paper and change it a hundred times as I go.

I’ll get inspiration about the story in the car, at work, during lunch, in the middle of the night. Sometimes it’s just a word in the margins or a piece of dialogue in the footer. The story just evolves at its own pace as you write and write and write. Only after the story is perfect, after I have really poured all my heart and sweat into it, do I go and write the beginning and the end.

A story can start one way and strangely morph into something completely different as you write. If you have already written the beginning, you will have to go back and change it. By getting the idea down, then developing each idea, will the story evolve.

When it’s as good as I can get the story down on paper, after I feel like I’ve built a house by hand and I’m exhausted, I stand up and walk away. I chew on the story until I have the energy, inspiration, and creativity to write the beginning, that one sentence to draw the reader in, the one that will make them lick their lips in anticipation of a great read.

One of my favorite professors said it this way, “A good opening sentence will invite the reader to a new world and the closing sentence should give the reader the satisfaction one gets from closing the lid on a gift you are presenting.” Every time I finish a story, I hear that in my mind. I imagine a beautiful box with a beautiful lid.

Just go write. Don’t worry about the beginning or ending. Just start with an idea then let the idea flirt with other ideas. Take the idea out to the open road and see where it can go. You can do this.

I’ve written multiple of these stories, but if you want these types of stories you could always rewatch Cinderella, lol.

Related

Can you write a love story with a twist ending?

This boy never told me he loved me, but he waited hours outside the hospital when I had not even told him about my condition.

He never likes my pictures on Instagram but saves all of them in his Google Photos.

He never calls me on his own but patiently answers my drunk calls and listens till I pass out.

He never asks me to stop talking to random strangers till 4 in the morning but texts me daily at 10 to wake me up for office meetings.

He is an alpha personality but still motivates me to do better each day.

He doesn’t give me orchids or red balloons, but I’ve seen him change his rigid opinions gracefully for me.

He never asks me to get drunk together but always comes to drive me up home from random bars where I pass out.

He never uploads my picture as his display picture, but I’m on his WhatsApp wallpaper.

He never stays up for love, but always asks if I ate a proper breakfast.

He never gave me closure. He just left.

Related

Can you write a short poem about love or relationships with a plot twist?

We got introduced to each other when I was in college

It was an instantaneous liking, I acknowledge

You effortlessly gelled up with all of my friends

With you, I never cared what's better or what's in the trends

You are the reason behind so many indelible memories

With you, I never cared about that belly fat and those excess calories

You were silently watching when I asked her out

I gave my all in, isn't that what life is all about?

We celebrated my victory when she said yes

And danced and partied like there's no tomorrow, there’s no stress

You were always there with us on our good happy days

You were there with me when I figured she'd leave and I wished she stays

You gave me that comfort when I cried and screamed and yelled and sobbed

You were there for me when all of my happiness was robbed

You were there for me when she got engaged

You were there for me when I was lonely and I was raged

You have always been there, our bond may always be this strong

Taking a moment to appreciate our love, here's to my old friend: old monk!

Related

Can you write a short poem about love or relationships with a plot twist?

You Know it’s Over

You don't always know

how you know,

it comes slowly, the awareness.

With the certainty and final resignation

of a child learning there's no Santa Claus,

you just know.

The breakfast table, once a venue

for long dreamy stares

and coffee-flavored kisses,

awkwardly becomes a silent stage

for reading the news,

eating breakfast, and

you just know.

The smell of his shirt

when you'd bury your face there,

the feel of his hands on your body

as if they had a life of their own,

all silently slip to a place

wherever memories go

to gather dust, and

you just know.

You miss the nights,

how his body and yours

breathed and moved as one.

Maybe it's those nights

and how they were

that give the knowing life, but

you just know.

Like ocean waves upon the sand,

love recedes

with all the other yesterdays

and you would trade

all your tomorrows

to have it back, but

you just know.

—

[from the book, “Anatomy of a Poet”, by C.J. Heck]

Related

How do I write about regret in creative writing?

How do you write about regret, in creative writing? There must be many moments in your Life where you look back and think to yourself “I wish I could have done that some other way, or if only I had thought about that at that moment!” I’m certain that we all do such things; I know that I often do, from time to time. Therefore when considering writing about such events as these were, it’s important to remember just how you were feeling Emotionally and the impact it had upon you. To re-create the moment, it’s important to connect with those same Feelings and the Emotional impact and it’s ultimate consequences. Alternatively you need not write about an actual event in your own personal Life, but rather something imagined or certainly drawn from your own imagination. Nevertheless to make it sound believable, the same rules shall apply!

Quite obviously, if you’ve experienced such an event, or even series of events yourself, and on a deeply personal level, then you’re better able to convey those same Feelings and Emotions in a Literary form. You need to make that connection, whether real or imagined. This is the essence behind creative writing and something which is better learned rather than taught, imo. Regret is an Emotion, and you need to explore this to it’s deepest level! You can only write about Regret, if you fully understand and appreciate the moment. “Regrets, I’ve had a few;” I’m certain you’re familiar with the words to this well known Song. In my own personal Life I’ve had more regrets than I care to remember and often these have caused me the deepest of Sorrows! This is one of the ways in which you could write creatively about Regret!

Personally, it’s a case of “what’s done is done!”I certainly wouldn’t consider writing about such events, and from a personal perspective, this to my own mind would be counter productive. However, regards yourself, you’ve chosen to write about Regret and one would hope in a creative manner. Drawing upon personal experience is one of the main ways in which you could begin your narrative, otherwise you need to use your own imagination. Imagination, as I’ve said many times before, is the Key 🔑 to your creativity! People can always offer you suggestions about how you may proceed forward, but in the end, that creative spark must ultimately be your own. If writing from a personal perspective, then perhaps you can search within yourself and try to remember that moment which caused you the most regret, and of the Emotional turmoil, if any, which you were experiencing.

Regret can be a very powerful Emotion, use that in your writing in such a way to draw in the reader! Words have Power, and it’s knowing how to use them to your best advantage. Don’t shy away from opening up your Heart 🩶 as well as your Mind when releasing that Emotional turmoil upon the written page!

§ WitchyWomanWriter § 🔳🌀🔳 Saturday, March 12th 2022.

(Strictly no Copying or Reproduction of this Material is to be Undertaken without the prior Consent of the Author / Writer) ✍🏻

Related

Can you write a story with a plot twist in the last line?

My sister's final examination starts from today, so she is quite stressed from yesterday. She is a big fan of Doraemon and watches all it's episodes.

So there is one episode, when nobita fails to learn anything (Ha pata hai koi nayi baat nahi hai). So doraemon gives in Bread gadget, so basically you just put that bread on the page you want to learn and eat it. The content in the page will automatically gets remembered by you.

In our childhood, we also have listened that what you watch while having dinner comes to your dreams at night.

So my sister was having dosa in breakfast, and suddenly she started reading her book in one hand and eating from other.

When I asked what is she doing, she replied that she will remember this as she is reading this while eating. (Ofcourse she cannot put dosa on paper, you know what will put on her face😁)

Hoping that she passes her exams with good marks as she is quite excited for pursuing Masters after these exams.

All the best to all college students having their final exams.

Jao 👋

Adiii 💫

(Pic - Pinterest)

Related

Who can write a sad love story?

In that small corner of the World

Though he was 20 years old, he still had the mind of a child. His body had grown, but not his mind. His father abandoned him and his mother when he was born. She did her best to care for him, but eventually, she too passed away due to illness.

He grew up alone—on the streets.

At a junction where three roads meet, there is a tree that offers shade to many. That’s where he would sit, sleep, and spend most of his time. He walked and ate like a child. He would laugh or get angry for no reason. And when he got angry, his strength would suddenly surge.

Some people mocked him. Others laughed at him. But a few kind souls gave him food. No matter what happened, he always returned to that tree. That was his home. When it rained, he would take shelter in a nearby shed.

Every day, he sat there murmuring to himself, watching the traffic pass by. That small corner of the world—

was his entire world.

His only home.

One day, while he was sleeping, he felt a hand gently running through his hair. He slowly opened his eyes and saw an old lady smiling at him. He sat up and looked at her. She took a small container out of a bag. Inside, there was some rice, pickle, and a bit of curry. She mixed it together and began feeding him. He just sat there and ate quietly.

This became a routine.

Every afternoon, she would arrive by bus and get down at the nearby stop. He would wait for her. Sometimes she brought a different curry. After he finished eating, he would chatter endlessly. She would just smile. Somehow, they understood each other.

One day, she got delayed because of traffic. He got angry and didn’t speak to her that day. She tried to explain—using hand gestures—that it was because of too many vehicles on the road. From the next day, he began standing by the roadside, motioning with his hands for the traffic to move forward. The traffic policeman standing beside him said nothing.

The drivers, people at the bus stop, and the shop owners all noticed him. He wasn’t looking at anyone. He just kept doing the same thing every day.

And once he saw the old lady get down from the bus, he would run toward her and start talking. No one around them could understand what they were saying.

Then, one day, she didn’t come.

He looked for her the whole day. He couldn’t sleep that night. He didn’t understand what he was feeling.

The next day, he was angry.

Angry at everyone.

He stared at every bus that arrived. He watched crowds of people get down. She didn’t come the next day either.

Days passed.

Weeks turned into months.

Years went by.

Every day, he stood by the side of the road, signaling the vehicles to move forward. His anger faded.

He didn’t cry.

He didn’t laugh either.

He just lived there—

in that small corner of the world.
