Title: The “Happy Ending” — a truly sad story

URL Source: https://medium.com/@blank101.mit/the-happy-ending-a-truly-sad-story-1a137a82a876

Published Time: 2023-08-08T17:03:24Z

Markdown Content:
6 min read

Aug 8, 2023

**_Written by Samyukta Nandan for Blank 101_**

What if Prince Charming didn’t ask for Cinderella, or what if the shoe fit someone else? What if the Beast didn’t turn into a prince? What if Tony Stark couldn’t snap his finger or create a time machine?

We’ve all encountered stories throughout our lives in the form of books, movies, audio, etc. Cast your mind back to the moment you were almost towards the end of the story. How did you want it to conclude? I don’t think we would need any fortune-teller to be able to predict the response. All of us prefer a resolution of the crisis, protagonists overcoming their hardships, successful completion of quests, lovers reuniting, judgment in favour of the _good,_ and the antagonists defeated, or, in other words, all problems solved! Despite having different stories of our own, there is one thing that unites us — how we all seek a solution.

Get Blank 101’s stories in your inbox
-------------------------------------

Join Medium for free to get updates from this writer.

We meet so many people on a daily basis, and with every interaction begins a new story. Some people stay and leave a remarkable memory, while others simply leave. Now recall any one of such countless stories and focus on how it ended. Did it end with a resolution where you had answers to all your questions? Did it end on a positive note? Were you happy when it concluded? Or, in simple words, did it have a _happy ending_?

> **The classical idea of happy endings has been nurtured in us since we were young, with fairy tales and folklores ending with “…and they lived happily ever after”.**

Russian stories, however, were slightly more advanced in this matter. A typical Russian version of a fairy tale would end with “they lived long and happily and died together on the same day”. An interesting extension indeed! The concept of happy endings tends to set a norm or impression that increases our expectations of life, and suddenly, when reality knocks on the door, it shatters this world of illusions. We end up at a crossroads where we can neither bear the pain of betrayal to our morals nor deny what was taught to us as the eternal truth! This often affects us emotionally, and we are left with one question, why is it that we run behind happy endings when it is something highly impractical and only a game of chances?

A conclusion is considered satisfactory when the protagonist remains alive, neglecting the death of any number of supporting characters. But we tend to ignore the numerous unfinished tales and focus only on the heroic journey of our lead character. Roger Ebert, renowned film critic, comments in his review of Roland Emmerich’s _The Day After Tomorrow_, “Billions of people may have died, but at least the major characters have survived. Los Angeles is levelled by multiple tornadoes, New York is buried under ice and snow, the United Kingdom is flash-frozen, and much of the Northern Hemisphere is wiped out for good measure. Thank god that Jack, Sam, Laura, Jason and Dr Lucy Hall survive, along with Dr Hall’s little cancer patient.”

Press enter or click to view image in full size

Image from Collider

In Steven Spielberg’s version of _War of the Worlds_, which shows the story of a divorced longshoreman Ray Ferrier and how he and his family manage to survive an alien invasion, the happy ending consists of three distinct elements; the protagonists all survive the countless perils of their journey, humanity as a whole survives the infiltration and the protagonist’s father regains the respect of his estranged children. It’s a no-brainer that this plot was constructed to satisfy its audience in all emotional aspects.

Studies at Cambridge University also show that people focus so much on the conclusion that they fail to assess the experience. Beautiful romantic novels like “The French Gardener” by Santa Montefiore or “Me before you” by Jojo Moyes have failed to muse the deserving audience due to a lack of appreciation for the flaws of reality. The unmatchable love stories were buried under the grave of one lover. We often try to seek refuge from our daily problems and find mental peace in seeing our favourite characters or the protagonists of the story happy in the end. It gives us a ray of hope that things may not seem to work out at the moment, but like the character, if we don’t quit and fight, things may become better over time.

Press enter or click to view image in full size

Image from Total Film

An evident circular logic behind this can be identified. We know what it looks like because we see it repeatedly, and we know we are seeing it because we know what it looks like. Thus, most movie-makers and writers prefer to mould their stories in a way which fits the idea of a “happy ending”, avoiding the risk of experimenting to ensure a positive response from its audience. Creators of movies like the famous Marvel “Avengers” franchise have even brought their protagonists back to life or travelled back in time to mend bridges with the aid of some miracle or science that is synonymous to magic in a fairytale because the audience cannot accept the death of their heroes. Disney wouldn’t have let Eric actually marry Vanessa or allow Shan Yu to kill the emperor and rule over China. This puts the whole process in a vicious cycle, and we end up setting a typical convention for a conclusion. At times these “happy endings” are forced, unearned and unimaginative. For example, a happy ending would be completely inappropriate for _One Flew Over the Cuckoo’s Nest_, _Of Mice and Men_ or _Use of Weapons,_ whereas a tragic ending would be inappropriate for _Bridget Jones’s Diary_.

Happy endings may create fake impressions, but as an avid reader and cinephile, I find myself so lost in the story, often bringing the characters to life! Sometimes I become empathetic and relate to the character so much that I consider their struggles as my own. It functions as an escape from reality, which I believe is true for most. Thus, I find myself in a state of contentment as I return to bed at night just because my protagonist is happy. Placing my bets on the hope that the _good_ will eventually conquer the _bad_ provides a sense of relief that there is light at the end of darkness.

While I personally believe it will be more comforting to see all loose ends tied neatly into a nice, big, satin bow, I can understand why a realist would be more in favour of the protagonist choosing their purpose over love. Life is not a fairy tale, they say, but until we die, life is just a series of beginnings; good or bad are choices provided to every individual. So, maybe next time, instead of a tragic conclusion portraying pessimism, if we broaden our conception of ideal endings and focus on the positive attributes of the resolution, we can witness a major breakthrough in this convention and may even begin to accept the beauty of realistic stories.
