Title: “We all have a sad story and no one cares” is a phrase I hear often. We do care, what’s your sad story and how has it affected your life?

URL Source: https://www.quora.com/We-all-have-a-sad-story-and-no-one-cares-is-a-phrase-I-hear-often-We-do-care-what-s-your-sad-story-and-how-has-it-affected-your-life

Markdown Content:
I have many sad stories unfortunately all of which have had an impact on me, however I know people care, it just gets to the point where they can’t solve the impact on my life for me, I have to do that alone which is what I struggle with. The impacts of my sad stories are that I form anxious attachments with people, and I need them to be upfront with me at all times. I can cope with anything but when I am unsure about someone’s feelings or thoughts I overthink and go into self blame mode. i don’t quite know how to get over the way I get attached and to be more go with the flow. With friendships I have no problem but with romantic relationships much more. I know this stems from my ex husband having an affair with my ex best friend, and then following that being in a three year relationship with someone that abused alcohol in terms of binge drinking for weeks on end, and ultimately each time blaming me for causing the drinking sessions, when I know realistically I did not such thing. So in short those two sad stories have impacted other relationships.

I am a person with simple needs. I want to be in a relationship that is equal and committed, but I get it wrong each time because now I panic and worry constantly instead of just enjoying it. If anyone has advice I will happily read and absorb. I’ve been through therapy, I live in the uk where what I need is not available and I don’t have funds to self source. All I want is to feel happy alone so that when I find someone I can see my true worth and not fall foul to games and getting it wrong and being hurt again. I’ve lost myself and readily admit it. I am a giver and give too much for too little in return and get hurt.

Related questions

Related

What is your sad story in life?

Loneliness is the saddest part of my life.

My parents’ marriage never worked out. They were mostly busy fighting with each other, till I grew up. And my father has extra-marital affairs with multiple women, including my maternal aunts, paternal aunts, random women.

He has left us some years back and is in a live-in-relationship. He doesn’t talk to me, doesnt finance any of my expenses, doesnt show us his face.

All our cheap class and selfish relatives dont talk to us anymore because my father has slept with almost each of them. My father satisfied their lust for sex and money. And still keeps doing that. So why will they talk to us, who can give them nothing except love.

Because of this my mother, who somehow brought me up (she works, so finances are generally not an issue for us) has become lonely in her life. Everyone who comes at our home says to me, “See beta, take care of your mom.” Nobody ever says, “Take care of yourselves also beta”. Often I have to understand my mom as if she were my child and not me hers. I know my mom cares for me, but she is bound by circumstances.

Also, I am gay. Yes, you hear it right.

I am lone child of my parents. How I wish I had a sister or a brother, with whom I could have shared my deepest feelings and secrets in life. I could have shared my sorrows and joys with him/her.

Since my childhood, I felt ignored. I couldnt learn to socialize. I never had any friends in my childhood, have very few friends now.

I know I will be forever alone. No dad, no relatives, hardly any friends. Will never have a wife, will never have a children, will never have a family. I know I am gonna die alone.

Thats why, I consider this whole earth as a family. I tend to love and get attached very soon to anyone, because I feel so lonely. I know there will be none of my relatives to lit my pyre when I die. I just want to make social service in every way I can, so that when i die, at least some of the people whom I helped in life, to overcome loneliness, poverty, adverse situations, etc. would lit my pyre and put my soul to rest in peace.

I will never commit suicide. I know, the life I am living is still a dream for millions. I am lucky to have a good mother, financially self-sufficient. I am lucky to have a disease free and healthy body, I look good, I am intelligent, I love to help others, I am lovable.

Related

What is the saddest experience you have ever had?

I was raised with one sister, Anne Marie. She was almost 3 years older than I. We were opposites. She was blond, petite, popular and beloved. I was brunette, spoiled, sensitive and artistic. And I adored her. Our mother died soon after my birth and our Sicilian grandparents raised us. By 27 she had married and had two children, a boy and a girl. She was deeply in love with her husband and together they had just purchased a home in the hills where we grew up.

I struggled with immaturity and irresponsibility and she made it her goal to guide me into adulthood, to help me mature. She brought me into her home and helped me to find a wonderful job, brought me to her church and had the congregation pray for me, over me, with me. Her faith in me was infallible and I dared to hope that one day I too could have the stability that came so easily to her.

My nephew was two and a half and my niece was 11 months old. My sister had me sleep in their bedroom and each night I would lift my niece from her crib so we could cuddle with my nephew on his bunk. Beneath the warm blankets, surrounded by stuffed animals, I would softly sing the Sicilian lullabies their mother and I had learned in childhood until they drifted off to sleep.

“Oh, veni, sonnu, di la landa mia. Lu me figghiolu muta mi vurria.”

“Oh, come to me sleep, in my heath. My small boy wants us to be quiet.”

With every ounce of my soul I loved those babies. My sister would watch as they ran to me when I walked in the door, screaming with happiness and laughing as I lifted them high or brought them close for kisses. “You know, they are your babies too, Susan.” she told me. That was her way, to share all she had, all she loved, with her little sister. I would look at her, my gratitude and love for her filling my eyes with tears. I didn’t know how to speak of my emotions, but somehow I always knew she understood.

One sunny day as we sat in her living room she scooped up my niece and headed for the door. She was off to pick up my nephew from a play date across town and asked if I wanted to come along. I was about to respond when suddenly, I was filled with ‘una premonizione’, a premonition so strong that I began to tremble and found I couldn’t look her in the eye. “What is it? What’s wrong?” she asked. But I remained silent, sitting on her couch, not understanding what was happening. It was as though a cold cloud of darkness had draped itself across my heart and I sat frozen, terrified. My immaturity worked against me and I couldn’t formulate the words to express my fear. She thought I was angry and quietly, lovingly, she whispered to me as she headed for the door with the baby on her hip, “Oh, don’t be angry. I love you, Susan.”

As the door closed behind her I stood up and watched her through the front window as she secured the baby in her car seat then walked around to the driver’s side of the car. Anxiety and nausea ripped through my stomach and I stood mute as I watched her drive away, my hands pressed against the cool glass pane, tears streaming down my cheeks.

The coroner arrived at the door two hours later. When I saw him, a calm washed over me and the terror and darkness that had engulfed me for hours disappeared. Finally, I understood, and a sadness so deep, so complete, filled my soul. I opened the door and saw he had Anne Marie’s driver’s license on a clipboard and it had splatters of blood on it. I led him to the living room and asked him to give me a moment before he spoke. I walked the long hall to my sister’s kitchen and in the middle of the bright, warm room I fell to my knees. I couldn’t think of Anne Marie, I knew in my heart she was gone, so I rose from the floor and walked back into the living room, focused only on her children.

The coroner said a wrong-way drunk driver had killed all three, my sister and her children, but instantly I said, “No. The children are alive.” He thought I was in shock, humored me as I said I wanted to see the babies, now. We arrived at the hospital and I was brought to the morgue. The children I was shown were not my sister’s. We called another hospital and drove there and when I walked into the ER I saw my niece, broken and bloody but alive, and they placed her in my arms gently, tenderly. She stared at me silently, in shock, and I held her close to me, careful of her wounds, to feel my heartbeat, and began to sing in the softest voice…”Oh, veni, sonnu, di la landa mia…” Slowly she grew calm and rested against me, her eyes never leaving mine.

They led me to my nephew, my niece still in my arms, and as they pulled back a curtain I saw him lying strapped to a gurney. In days to come he would have a body cast and use a walker. He stared at me, his beautiful huge dark eyes pleading. “Where is Mummy, Auntie? I want Mummy,” he whispered. I leaned over and kissed his cheeks softy, careful not to move him, touching his face just as I did when we sang at bedtime and whispered “She’s sleeping, mio angelo. She sent me to be with you.” It was exactly what I said to him the night before. He calmed down, and I stroked his cheek and sang to him softly until we had to transfer to another hospital. The paramedics secured us in an ambulance with my niece strapped to my chest and my nephew on a gurney beside me. After the EMT stepped out, before closing the ambulance doors, he asked gently, “Is there anything else you need?” I shook my head ‘no’ but silently my heart cried out, “My sister. I need my sister.”

________________

Two days after her death I was in my car, parked in the lot of the church we grew up in, when the whole of her passing hit me. I couldn’t breathe for the weight of the pain and sat behind the wheel weeping for hours. I thought my soul was dying, so deep was the despair. Suddenly, a butterfly, white as snow, flew into my car and alighted on the steering wheel. I watched it, so exhausted I could hardly move, as its wings fluttered slowly, so slowly, inches from me. I’d never seen a butterfly so still, so unafraid, and I sat mesmerized by its delicacy and gracefulness for a very, very long time. As the sun began to set, the weight of the pain lifted from around my heart long enough to allow breath, allow thought, and I watched as the butterfly rose from the wheel and slowly flew out of the window and into the night.

My sister had stopped to say goodbye.

________________

It was my sister’s faith that led her to bring me into her home just before her passing. To place me in the children’s room so they grew to know my voice in the darkness, to trust that I would be there to soothe them. When tragedy struck, when she was suddenly gone, her children, her babies, alone and injured in the hospital, heard the familiar voice that had lulled them to sleep in the nights before and were held close and wrapped in the loving arms of a woman who loved them second only to their mother.

“They are your babies too, Susan.” she had told me two days before. She knew what was to be, somewhere in her heart, and did all she could to protect her beloved children. If my only purpose on earth was to be there for them at that single moment in time, I will consider my life well lived.

_________________

The children healed, grew into fine adults and had families of their own. And although the day my sister left was long ago, her love continues to influence and guide my life daily.

Related

Can you tell us your sad life story?

My son married a girl that I sincerely liked. I tried to make her feel welcome into our family. Several of my friends and family did not trust or like this person very much. I constantly defended her actions. She has an alcoholic father and lived with a very emotionally distant mother who also suffered from cancer most of this girls life. Her mother died when she was in her early twenties. I lost my mom, who was a wonderful woman, to cancer when I was in my twenties. I thought we had something in this that could bond us at some level.

My husband and I paid the majority of their wedding and all of their honeymoon which was exactly what they wished for in location. I did everything to be a good MIL and friend. Once married, I believe parents have to give their children space. I wasn’t one of those who called daily or interfered. I told my children when they had a fight with their spouse to work it out. I didn’t want them to come to me complaining and putting negativity in my mind. Because I knew they would most certainly make up and I would be left with this negative feeling/image. I had Sunday evening dinner for any of my three sons and their spouse or girlfriend IF they had time and could make it. I told them early in the week if we were definitely doing it, because it wasn’t set in stone. I told them the planned menu and all I asked was to let me know by noon on Saturday if they could make it. I wanted to have enough food, but not too much. I also ASKED after they were married if they would like for me to cook them a birthday dinner on the Sunday close to their BD and if so they got to chose the menu and dessert. I also got them a gift. My usual spending limit was $50.

About two years into this sons marriage he and his spouse told me that “I” didn’t have boundaries and that I was not to ask them ANY personal questions. If there was something I needed to know, they would tell me. I will add here, that I am not the kind of person who asks “when are you going to get pregnant” or anything at all of a private nature. MY questions were more general in the manner of “How was your week?” Or “How are your migraines?” My DIL seemed to suffer from those frequently and I was concerned.

About five years into their marriage I started having seizures and became very ill. I have been suffering a variety of symptoms and had gone to several specialists. It was about this time I was finally diagnosed. I was extremely sick and unable to drive for almost two years. First due to the seizures and then to debilitating anxiety and panic attacks. All my life I have battled major chronic depression. This too, along with medical issues became worse.

Instead of being supportive and calling to check on me (to my husband, other two sons or other DIL), they just started saying horrible things about me. I have worked since I was 14 and when this happened I had a successful insurance agency. I was accused of being a pain pill or opiate addict. I told them on multiple occasions that yes I did have prescriptions for pain medication because I was in extreme pain, but I did not take full doses or as often as I could because I was scared of the possibility of addiction! I had a small amount built up and locked in a safe at that time. I and my husband offered to show them. They didn’t need to see it. They just simply chose to believe a lie.

Then about eight months ago I got two letters. One from my DIL and one from my son accusing me of all kinds of horrible and hurtful things. I read them over and over and over. I began to question myself. I “thought” I had always been a good mom. But this made it sound like I was the worst ever. I was accused of talking about them to my friends and family. I had only ever defended her. So after three weeks of almost non stop crying and coming to the point of a nervous breakdown, I called my two sisters and my closest friends. All of who know me as a mom and a friend. I let them read the letters only after they promised to tell me the truth. I was beyond devastated. My son and I were always so very close. They were all shocked at how I had been attacked. My family and friends have all been informed of these actions and it just breaks my heart.

The saddest thing is knowing that a psychotic narcissistic person (who has been working on a psychology degree for ten years) has been working the last ten years to slowly, methodically and purposefully to make my son forget how wonderful his family is. Not perfect by any means. But supportive, loving and a real family. He thinks these things have been his idea. By these things I mean cutting off all communication with me, his father and his brothers. He has no one around him except who she allows. But she has gaslighted or brainwashed him so well and so slowly that he really believes it’s reality. She wants him to believe that she and her very dysfunctional family and the very few friends she allows are enough. It’s sad because my son is highly educated. But all those degrees mean nothing if you wake up one day and realize you’ve missed years with the people who love you.

I have developed heart issues because of the physical pain and anguish. My cardiologist was confused at some of my tests. I don’t have high BP or bad cholesterol and yet I was having abnormal readings. I go in Friday for a heart procedure. I pray my son opens his eyes before it’s too late and he has to live a life filled with the guilt of knowing what he’s done.

I have sent him several messages, even though he’s not spoken to me in eight months. I tell him that I love him, I miss him and I will always be here to support him. I wrote him a letter in case something does happen to me letting him know that I forgive him. I know he is smart but I know that years and years of lies and twisting the truth will become anyone’s reality. I’m just sorry it happened to him and he had so much of his world stolen. He really is missing so very much. This is the saddest thing I can imagine any mother going through.

I love my son more than life. The really sad thing is, if my DIL was sincerely sorry and remorseful I would take her back into our family and love her too. I guess I’m the fool. But I can’t help having a big heart and caring.

Related questions

My story is that I’ve been used my whole life and don’t know how to act around others. My family never paid/pays attention to me and ppl I meet, they always come in and leave after I helped them get on the right track. I don’t even believe in love because so many ppl have hurt me that I don’t trust anyone. I sometimes want to escape and stop having to feel trapped but no one understands how I feel so they try to make me stay. I sometimes think about giving up on life and jumpin off a bridge but I know that isn’t going to fix the whole thats in my heart or the pain that runs through my body and has since I was 5. I write stories because it’s easier for me to make up characters and explain my pain through them; but no one questions me. They just say that my stories or poems are amazing and I have a creative mind. I used to cut and tried to drown myself but my friend saved me before anything can happen. I just wish.. ppl who come in my life either stays or don’t leave any damage or even have someone love me so I’ll at least experience what love is. Most importantly, I just want to be free…

Related

What is your sad story in life?

Trigger Warning: Self harm, suicide, mentions of bullying, body shaming, bulimia, sexual assault, and starving.

I only got to be innocent until I was four, I don't wanna talk about what happened when I was five but it hurt alot.

When I was 6 my dad got arrested, I had an experience with sexual assault, not the end of the world.

When I was 7 I hung out with my cousin alot and she abused me, sometimes she was nice, sometimes she'd hurt me physically or mentally.

When I was 8 I would scratch my skin with safety clips, I had a full understanding of self harm but it scared me so much.

When I was 9 I stopped trying to be anything I was depressed for whatever reason (probably quarantine) I hurt myself again but I hid it better (it was only once.) I think this is when I started becoming a bad person

When I was ten I went back to school, I was friends with a couple people, this one girl had an accent she was from PR so was I, we got along well. She had an accent that she would get bullied for I didn't. I could never relate so I never helped her not even when I they were fat shaming her behind her back. I didn't eat lunch because of guilt. My very best friend was this Mexican girl, we were walking around in circles at recess and i asked her who she liked and she said it was me. I felt bad so I said I liked her back even though I've always known I was straight. she taught me a lot of things about sex which made me kinda uncomfortable, I always pretended to know just as much as she did. One day she asked me to come with her to the school bathroom where she tried to touch me. She asked me all sorts of weird questions like if I would stab her in the eyes with needles if she asked me to.

When I was 11 I got to be homeschooled again I was really happy, I took it for granted and stopped trying. I barely passed 6th grade but I did it. I was so lazy and disgusting, I started gaining weight (nothing wrong with that but I was unhealthy and still am because of it.) I started thinking about all the sexual things I was forced to do. I started lying a lot and I just wasn't a good person. I think I had some sort of mental I had extreme delusions about food and I still do. This was the worst year of my life and I'm so glad it's over . I got choked by someone but I'm not gonna say who. I was useless and has no purpose as a human being. I had passion I wanted to pour my heart out into things but I never did. I lied about very terrible things I don't wanna say. My two best friends made me choose between them. One of them is my ex girlfriend she said she wanted to kill herself one time because I didn't let her send me nudes. She was so depressed all the time and I hate go say it but I was sick of helping her. She never helped me. The other friend is a good friend but she's dismissive, we were never really the type of friends who talked about everything. I had a wake up call at the end of this year, I kept thinking “if I die this way I'm not gonna be happy with who I am.” There's so much that happened but I don't wanna talk some of it. I self harmed a couple times and made myself throw up. I had really horrible nightmares that carried on during the day I thought of suicide but I couldn't do it. I honestly can't remember half of this year because I didn't do anything good. I think I also derealized alot and tried to starve myself (I thought this and throwing up would make me healthier, I was stupid.) I was so jealous of my half sister for spending time with my oldest sister

I'm twelve now and still recovering from everything that happened when I was Eleven, really none of it could hurt more then knowing that my dad wouldn't be proud of me. My family doesn't know about any of this really. I've been doing a lot of self reflection and I'm trying to lose weight and be healthier physically and mentally. My mother never needs to know, neither does my dad. I have family issues I don't wanna talk about. My mom and sister fight a lot. My sister also criticizes me from time to time but not on purpose. I thought twelve would feel better and it has but I still have extreme guilt because of things I've done. I'm still not very productive but I'm trying, I wanna cry but it's not fitting into my schedule. I'm trying to be happy but sometimes it's harder then I want it to be. Tomorrow is different then today, 13 will be different from 12 but probably not what I'm hoping it is. All I can do is hope my sister finds a husband that is gonna give her the life she deserves and make her happy so that I can be happy. I wanna talk to someone but I don't know how. Can't wait for 7th grade. I'm gonna do better. I have a second chance most poeple don't get after torturing themselves and most likely having nervse damage in their fingers because of it. I feel bad, I feel alone but it's not the end end of the world. I'm not gonna let anyone belittle me. I'm not gonna ruin myself anymore. I'm gonna take care of my bod. I'm gonna try to be happy even if I can't do it I can say that I tried even if trying isn't good enough.

Related

What is your sad story in life?

I was born into a lower middle class family in Tamil Nadu, India. Highly introverted. My parents were like decided everything for me. FYI I am FEMALE.

3 years: School. Always traveled around 50 kilometers to and fro to school. Mother takes me in bus. drops me off goes to work. Routine follows.

6 years: Same routine mom dad very busy. All they do care is they want me to learn. I was showed with academics. What i wanted, did at school, friends, outing nothing mattered.

10 years: Mom dad busy with work. I as usual wid books always feeling lonely and wanting someone to talk to. My mom wanted me to learn dance and i was joined a class just because SHE WANTED.

11 years:I am lonely, start avoiding people, do not talk at all. Mom dad never exist in my life except for school fees and daily dropping off. No humor or any encouragement. Only scorns wen i get low marks.

My cousin stayed at my house owing to family issues. I am just 11 and here comes child abuse. I was sexually assaulted almost daily, I was in pain. But I never trusted my parents and I had no one to share. I simple avoided him and at last he left to his own house.

I was torn apart, felt betrayed, used by everyone., Parents use me to fulfill their dreams like dance, 1st marks, etc.... I hated them there for not listening to me and all they wanted was to earn more and grow in status. Yes they were not to blame but i was a kid i wanted love.....

The same sexual abuses as a child at various places. When alone in my aunts house a neighbor, in bus were guys grope at you . OMG I was just at the start of 11.

14 years: I stop talking at home and start avoiding parents. My parents always made phone calls to friends and teachers behind my back to check on my performance at school.

Once my friend tells me that my mom called her asking what i do in school... I was shattered, i lost confidence, self-respect. Am i a criminal to be spyed by own parents,.

I avoid everyone no single friend I start reading books and become a rigorous reader. My parents start objecting to me reading something other than academics.

16 years: I catch one of parent eyeing me through the keyhole. My soul is ripped apart,. I start recoiling from everything. stop reading, sit motionless for hours, cannot read or do well in academics. Cry all day but got no reasons to validate my tears.

I stop eating and start lying like no tuition today, test papers did not arrive, etc,. My parents somehow find the truth as I am a poor liar.

I am taken to a psychiatrist and is branded with depression. The truth is I WAS DEPRESSED.

17 years: My teen age had no fun, no parties, no boys, I was just depressed. I attempt for suicide. Take in a couple of my anti-depressants and try swallowing acid. In hospital for 2 days .

Come back home tear all my books apart and shout wildly. I was nothing not a sane person.

My dad gets mild heart attack and has an angio. I am blamed for his condition.

18 years:score low marks in board exams. My parents again worried. I was asked to lie to all of my mothers colleagues about my marks, just because it was low. I was ashamed and felt rejected.

I join engineering and start staying in college hostel.

19 years: I meet my girl friend. Yes I am attracted to her and she comforts me understands me, makes me laugh, wipes my tears.... I realize I am a lesbian. I hide the truth and we have a secret relationship.

My past torments me I am insecure and afraid if my relationship will be known to others, I am afraid that she would leave me, I know strange fears start engulfing me. Rather than accepting her I hurt her fearing she would leave me.

20 years:Entire of my coll is looking at me strangely for now my being a lesbian is some what spread as rumors. We break up and I hurt her even more....

She has good parents, aim, a life and i felt i was a hurdle. But i wanted her and did not want her at the same time. We stayed as friends but i was jealous when she talked to guys.

I wanted to challenge her and so got myself a boyfriend acted straight and tried to act normal.

result DISASTER,.

21 years: Final year of engineering. I cannot resist my feelings for her and I confront her with my submission to her. We spend the last 10 days of coll in love, sleep together have fun. But she was changed cuz i have hurt her more. She wanted a life, a man, a future with kids. we parted much to her joy and to my despair.

I tell the truth to my boyfriend and he breaks down. I hurt him even more and stop talking to him.

Am 22 now, have finished engineering almost 10 months from now. Avoid my boyfriend even though he still waits for me.

Get nightmares and cannot forget my girl.

Afraid to talk to people or trust them. I cannot go outta my house and when i step outside I feel that i am being stared and so always stay indoors.

Hate my parents to the core,. I know they have struggled hard with me but I cant help it. Sometimes i even get the urge to kill them but I simply run into the wash room and cry.

Every single day I cry but i dont know why i am crying. I laugh heartily when something humorous occurs(thats a rarity around me) but end up crying with a heavy heart.

Have got thoughts of suicide but afraid to commit one. I now comfort myself with books, quora, games, my pet dog and telivision.

But what ever i do I have this feeling of emptyness. I hate my family, friends, nation,everything.

I know not what i should do in life. I cannot decide what i need. I cannot talk to a single person. I cannot face my parents.....

And the fact of being a lesbian again torments me. I have not come out to anyone except my boyfriend. He never understands and treats it like a disorder.

I dont know what my future holds but for now i am just living with suicidal thoughts and books as the only savior.

Related

What is your sad story in life?

It’s not a sad story; it’s just a “STORY”.

So, after 2 months of college, one of my friends, Manish, who’s in Electrical Engineering—we call him Mani—joined NCC. I was very fond of NCC and always wanted to go into the army. (My childhood dream)

One day, we were sitting in the college bus, and I asked him, “Bhai, how did you join NCC?”

He answered, “I saw on the first day that our college has NCC, so I talked to the sir.”

I knew the sir personally as he took our graphics class at that time.

* * *

The next day, I went to the NCC office. I knocked on the door, and when he saw me, he asked me to come inside.

He asked, “How are you, Aayush?”

I said, “I’m good, sir……. Sir, I wanted to join NCC.”

He said, “It’s good but I’m going out now. So, come at 12 and take the form.”

I said, “Okay, sir,” and left, excited.

* * *

At 12 pm, I went to the office. Another sir was also there. He gave me the form and said to fill it out and get a medical checkup as it’s necessary for joining. Outside the office, Mani was there.

He asked, “What did sir say?”

I said, “Nothing much, just to fill out the form and submit it.”

There were only 5 blanks left—3 for my father and 2 for the doctor (I still remember).

I asked Mani, “Which hospital should I go to for the checkup?”

He said, “I got mine done at the government hospital. You should go there too; the doctor arrives by 9:30.”

I made a plan for the next day: I would reach the hospital by 9:30 and catch the college bus from there at 10:30. What a plan, but I didn’t know that I would ruin it myself.

* * *

The next day, as per my plan, I reached the hospital at exactly 9:30, but the doctor who checks haemoglobin arrived late, so I went for the eye checkup first.

After the eye checkup, the doctor signed the slip. Then, I had to get the haemoglobin checkup and another doctor will do signature on the form.

I went to the haemoglobin doctor. I sat on the chair, and he pricked something sharp on my finger and put my finger on a machine.

* * *

After a few minutes, he came back and said, “You can’t join NCC,” and started explaining what happened for 5 minutes continuously. I was in a situation where his only word ‘can’t’ were echoing in my ears.

As he stopped, I asked again, “Can I join NCC?” He said, “No, Aayush, I can’t recommend you after seeing your health.” I just said, “Hmmm.” I looked at my watch; it was 10:17.

I said, “Thank you, doctor,” and extended my hand to shake his. He shook my hand and said, “Take care.”

* * *

I came out of the hospital, saw an auto, sat in it, took out my bottle, and drank water.

My mother called, “Did you get the signatures?”

I said, “No,…. I’m thinking of not joining NCC; it will disturb my studies.”

She said, “Okay.”

She talked to me for a few minutes and then hung up.

* * *

Buses were going to the college. I just sat there for 3 hours in that auto, watching the patients coming and going continuously. I don’t know what I was feeling, I just watching them continuously. But I know that till now I have kept that form…….

~Maatrishya

Related

What is your life story?

I tell this story to myself, whenever I feel helpless or feel that I cannot do a certain task.

I am born and brought up in a village. A typical Indian village with no water, no roads, no good schools, no resources to do anything in general. Life in a village is somehow both peaceful and painful at the same time.

I was born in a lower middle class family. Six months after that, I lost my leg because a RMP (Regular Medical Practitioner - These are the guys who provide basic medical services in villages, since there are no doctors there) did not know how to treat a sickness I had at that time. So I grew up a little differently. By the time I got into 6th standard, everywhere I had people reminding me that I was not the same as the other kids. I still remember how I used to go to my mom to cry and say "I did not do anything wrong, Why me?" - every time a bully caused me some trouble or teased me for my disability. My mom used to console me and say "They are stupid. You should shut them up by being the topper of the school, the most intelligent kid in the village."

There was only one school in the village. In fact this was the only school in 20KM radius. So kids from other near-by villages used to come to the school in my village. The school had only 4 rooms and we were about 600 students overall. So some of us had to sit outside the rooms, in the verandah or sometimes under the tree next to the school. Do you know what the best thing about this arrangement? Every time it rained, we got a holiday!

I remember our teacher writing the (a plus b) squared formula on the wall of the school with a piece of charcoal, for there were no boards and not even a piece of chalk. There were few very good teachers but given the number of students, there was a severe shortage of teachers. Well-read youth from the village (The guys who finished their 12th standard successfully) used to volunteer to teach us kids. I always focused on what my mom said to me and it was my mission to be the topper of the class in all the tests. Luckily, I was the topper throughout my school. There used to be a small 10ft by 10ft Library in my village. That small room was my best friend. I knew that library in and out. I know where every book went. I used to read at least 8 news papers every day. I used to borrow the keys to the library, not the books and I used to spend most of my Sundays in that little room. Not once did I have a meal without a book in my hand.

Then the X standard board exam came. It is a big deal for students in India. Like most of my friends, I had studied for that exam like there is no other important thing in the world. The results were out and I was some district ranker. (It's supposed to be a big thing, as you are competing against all the kids in your administrative district)

From my reading of newspapers, I came to know about this machine called a "desktop computer". I knew all about it, the CPU, the memory, the wonders that city-people would do with that machine but I have never seen one. That's when I told myself that there was no future for me if I live in the village. I had to move out. I went to a college in Hyderabad, because they have agreed to admit me for free based on my performance in Class X. All through school (i.e. From class I to class X) I had studied Telugu, my mother tongue as the medium of my instruction. I was not yet ready to change it, so I did my +1, +2 (Class XI, XII) also with Telugu as the medium of instruction. This was the first time I got out of village and this college in Hyderabad had several kids like me.Somehow I managed to get a state rank this time and got a seat in a very good engineering college.

First day of college, I was surrounded by rich kids and was very nervous. The lecturer asked how many of us were from a village/ did not go to a great school. I was the only one to raise my hand. I knew my position in the class immediately. I knew I had to work really hard. Then I saw the Engineering Physics text book. It was one of the most frightening moments of my life, I think. It was HUGE! It was the first time I saw a book written in English, that big. None of the terms mentioned in the book made sense to me. (Viscosity what?) Meanwhile, my family's financial position got worse and I had to cut down on many of my expenses. I remember walking for 10Km(6miles) to save 5 rupees(10 cents). I maintained an account of all my expenses and still have those papers with me. I managed an entire month with 26 rupees once.

Somehow over time, I managed and landed up a job offer with an IT company. I read and translated the entire offer letter to my mom. Later that night, I heard my dad say" The kid is just 20 years old and he already earns more than me." My monthly salary was almost equal to my dad's annual salary. I worked for two years there and it really improved my financial position.

Then I decided to appear for CAT. Based on my score, I got into one of the premier management institutes in India. Graduated, doing well so far. Bought my mom a home in Hyderabad. The house is designed in a way to give her big enough kitchen, that she always wanted.

PS: As you now know, English is not my primary language, so please excuse any grammatical mistakes.

What you state is a farce reality, because no one in this world cares. If it were true, progress would have been made.

It is a dog-eat-dog world right now beyond any means of improvement. No one has a pot to shit in anymore, because everything in life has become unaffordable and unattainable.

Stop promoting the good will of others, it hasn’t happened in decades, or our country would not be in despair of homelessness, famine, and poverty.

Stop using the excuse that there are still generous people in the world, because that generosity has only become the standard of lining their own pockets to take care of themselves.

Show me a miracle story that some billionaire used all of their fortune to rebuild a community to ensure that society doesn’t live on the streets as a result of being houseless or goes hungry from starvation.

Fiction is not facts. 🙏✌️

Sponsored by MEDvi Prescription Weight Loss

Why does Tirzepatide shed fat 2x as fast as Ozempic?

Ozempic is made for diabetes. Tirzepatide is specifically for weight loss. It starts at $179/month.

I never opened up to anyone except for my dad.he was my entire world when I was a child.however, we barely get time to spend with each other because he was always busy working as a doctor in abroad and I always wished he could be there for us.seven years later he came back and I was literally over the world but I never thought my happiness was soon going with the wind. He suddenly got sick and was taken for treatment in abroad but he never came back.

My dad's sudden death felt me a blow such that I began having constant nightmares where everyone was suddenly disappearing from my life. My nightmares got worse as I grew up and I started developing fears of losing my loved ones. I started to believe that maybe I will be at ease if I stay away from everyone around me and I began isolating myself from everyone.but the worst of all was that I never shared my problems with anyone and I never thought that my life will change completely after that incident

Related

What is your sad story in life?

Okayy..!!

The runner up..!

Recently, we had a debate competition and I was the second option for the teachers for the team (yup, not a big deal)

Since, the girl (who was the first option) participated in some other competition, I was selected. Here comes my debatemate, a person with the most attitude!

The strongest and the person with most attitude broke down one day..! The day our debate competition held, and those results kinda shattered us..

> We ended being the runner up.. But the hard work, efforts, bunked classes, added rumours, the trust that our teacher had on us!? All in vain..!

This is one of the saddest part of my life because of the trust and hope we had..

(Maybe we over expected)

Can we just flip the coin now..?!

The debate mate, I got, was the boy whom I didn't like. I didn't know why, but the perspectives of others towards him, and the people's POV affected mine.. (That guy felt the same)

> And yeah, I judged a book by its cover..

We gradually became friends, we're good friends now.. We both understood we've had a completely wrong perspective on each other.

Het told me about the gossips, he would hear about me.. He told all my classmates (except 7–10 students) hated me to the core. Yeah, I agreed..

> Wrong perspectives, POVs and ofc rumours!

But, my friend told me not to change my character, and I'm good the way I am..!

On the other side, I got a good friend and good memories to cherish!

There's something good in every thing! Even a sad story has a happy corner! Concentrate on that..!

•

The sad, but ironically the most interesting part:

My debatemate found that I'm having a curse (may or mayn't be true 😅)

The curse of being no.2

I the 2nd topper in my school, the deputy head girl, the second born child, the second option for this debate competition and a lot more! Hence, we ended up in the second position in debate too 🤧

(You may think this is silly, no it is not)

> After 5 years, when looking back we would laugh at this incident. But at present, it is definitely a sad one.

We're all blessed

~MERAKI

~P~

Related

What is your sad story in life?

Lonliness and guilt flood my life today.

As a child I was always a shadow. My older sister was always great at what she did-and of course I was expected to follow. At first I wasn’t as good as she was so every time we went to a friends house or cousins house, she would get all the attention and everyone would want to play with her while I was alone. Of course, the little child I was I cried and that made everyone hate me more. As I grew older I became cold and unforgiving because of the lonely childhood I had. (My parents relationship was also pretty bad so they were always yelling at each other). I hated life so much because of the bad things it gave to me as if I hadn’t t received enough-Cancer, braces, problem with ears, ingrown toenail. This eventually backfired and people started hating on me so I created a whole new fake personality that was lovable. On the outside I was a nice girl but inside I was so full of hatred my head couldn’t exploded.

Here comes the bad part about guilt. I don’t know why, and I never will but for some reason I started to watch …. (If you don’t get it that’s fine). Now I hate myself for doing that so much that im not allowing myself to enjoy life at all-always degrading myself. I also hate myself for taking up too much money from my family as I said before-a lot of money was spent on my teeth, my health and many other things.

My life has been lonely since the very beginning and I think that it always will be. Sorry for ranting, I just needed a place to vent where people could hear me. I’m sorry for living.
