Title: If you grew up in Festus, MO. you remember when...... | You Had to See it to Believe It-You Had to Live it to Love it | Facebook

URL Source: https://www.facebook.com/groups/137524019668809/posts/3955073527913820/

Markdown Content:
If you grew up in Festus, MO. you remember when...... | You Had to See it to Believe It-You Had to Live it to Love it | Facebook

===============

Log In

Log In

Forgot Account?

Growing up in Festus, Missouri in the 1940s and 1950s

Summarized by AI from the post below

If you grew up in Festus, MO. you remember when...... · 

Join
--------------------------------------------------------------

Stan Davis

 · April 16, 2021 · 

You Had to See it to Believe It-You Had to Live it to Love it

I think that every generation that lives to old age thinks back on his or her Salad Days with fondness. Years and days that seem golden in their minds. Years when they were young and easy to look at. Years when the whole world was their oyster, or so it seemed. At least I hope that most all people can think back on their youth with that type of fondness. I have run into a few that cannot, and I think that to be the saddest of things. 

The logical thing is to think or to expect that as your life enters the Tag End of Time that it is easier, and progress has made life really worth living, and not that we are all poor fools that struts and frets our hour upon the stage, and then is heard no more. Our life is a tale told by an idiot, full of sound and fury, Signifying nothing. But that is often the case, or so it seems, down to dust we go, and after a very short span of time—we are remembered no more. What we saw, what we did. Who we loved, is all lost? All carried away by the ages.

A sad thought it would seem, but it is still a fact that has happened to every person since the beginning of time. Still, I am not content with that knowledge that I shall die, and all I have known will be lost. Even though I know that is probably going to be the fact, I struggle to leave something behind. I am not rich and I am not famous. There will never be a statue of me outside the stadium like Stan Musial has, or of the Marines raising the Flag on Iwo Jima…nor, do I deserve one or want that. It’s not that I wished to be remembered, but it is that what I have known, what I have seen, what I lived through I wish others to know. I want those who cannot know, because what I have seen has long disappeared into dust. And without seeing or without at least hearing about them…how can they ever appreciate them?

Where to start? Well, let us start at the beginning. I was born before America entered WW2 before the Japanese bombed Our Pacific Fleet at Pearl Harbor. No satellites in the sky to look down, and see the Japanese Fleet, not much in the way of radar. No jet planes, only propeller-driven planes. In 1940 our population was 132,164,569 people, and by 1945 we had put 16 million in uniform. The civilian population that worked on the war effort was about the same size. This is the era that I was born into. A time when we had approximately 1/3rd of the population we have today, which is: 332,639,000 million. A time when we were still struggling to recover from The Great Depression that affected the entire world. 

We won that war and became the preeminent nation on the face of the earth—our power, unquestioned, our economy the strongest, our morals and ethics much superior to what we see today, IMO. We had built the American Empire without realizing it or desiring it. But, 1946 found Europe and Asia still suffering from the effects of war with nowhere near our ability to produce and manufacture goods, and services that the world needed. And, we responded, we responded with lend-lease and with loans of money that we even eventually had to forgive. We were that Shining City on a Hill and millions and millions wanted to come to America.

Those people, the ones that fought in the war, the ones that fought here in support of the war—those people that built the strongest economy the world has ever seen, and along the way fought in the Korean Conflict—those people were my HEROES. They were my parents, my teachers, my doctor, the Pastors of our church’s, and they surrounded me every day of my life while growing up. You could find these heroes in Festus or Crystal or Desoto, or Herculaneum, in fact, they lived all through small-town America—come to think of it, they WERE America.

Take a look at your village or city—chances are if it hasn’t lost population in recent years, then the odds are it is more than twice as big as it was in my time, and maybe even three times as big. My town of Festus, Missouri has a population today of 11,602 in 2010 but in 1940 it was only 4,620, and I’m guessing you have added at least 400 people with births or people fleeing St. Louis. So, for every house, I saw you now see at least 3 more.

Were you ever held up at a railroad crossing while 172 cars slowly rolled past you—I have been, and so has most of my generation? Did you ever see a horse-drawn Ice wagon deliver ice to your house because we all had Ice-boxes and NOT refrigerators? How about an Ice-pick? We had our milk delivered to our front porch as did almost every family in Festus and Crystal City in the ‘40s, ‘50s, and into the ‘60s. and maybe into the 70s, but I’m not sure about that. Can you picture a time when you pulled into a gas Service station and one and sometimes 2 people came out to fill you up, check tire pressure, oil and antifreeze, and wash your windows—all for 19 to 25 cents per gallon? 

Can you imagine a time when you went to the movies and saw a Double Feature, a cartoon, and possibly a Travelogue, all for 35 cents—75 cents by the time I was a senior? Can you, in your wildest imagination picture letting your 10-year-old ride their bike all over Festus and Crystal with the only admonition was “Be home for supper?” that was fairly common in my day.

Would you like to see a movie where two people eventually fall in love—get married, and then make love…the caveat being you don’t really get to see them make love. What you might see is the wife shyly entering the bedroom and looking at the bed, both apprehensively and anxiously—knowing what is about to happen. Then the camera pans slowly away, as her husband embraces her, to the window where a rainstorm is beating furiously against the pane, and you can see the trees swaying gently back and forth. The rainstorm represents the furious passion that is growing within these two people, and the trees swaying in rhythm represent the couple finally swaying in rhythm. You didn’t need a degree in psychology to understand the symbolism. That’s the kind of movies I was raised on, as were all of my friends. We didn’t need to see two nude bodies smashed together, sweaty and grunting to enjoy a well-made show. And, I contend America doesn’t need to see it today either, especially if the show is well made. But, recognizing that Hollywood and Pornography seem to be synonymous these days I expect we will never see that change.

Something that we did have starting in the ‘50s that is superior to anything that came before it, and to anything that seems to be prevalent now, is CARS. Long, low, lovely, luxurious cars---[pay attention to that alliteration—I’m kind of proud of that] cars that came with lots of chrome, generally two-tone in color, with Continental Kits on the back, and Fender Skirts, White walls, maybe even Running Boards, and feelers mounted on the fenders so you wouldn’t scratch the car or the Whitewall. We even had a Hardtop that would automatically fold into the trunk of the car and therefore turning it into a convertible. We had no foreign cars because they were still recovering from the war and producing for their own people.

Most people in the late ‘40s and into the ‘50s were still a one-car family---but we were rich in bikes. All most every kid had a bike. And the more serious bikes had mud flaps with red and green and blue, even yellow reflectors attached to the flaps. We had handlebar struts that attached to the handlebars close to the grips and ran to the front axle. The struts also were littered with reflectors up and down, as were the spokes of both tires. Lots of money could be tied up in reflectors and other accessories. Mine had two rear side baskets and a front basket---great for newspaper carriers, and I was one.

I just named a couple of things that were so different and are now gone from the scene. I still have a lot of things to tell you and I will in later posts—if The Good Lord tarries and the creek don’t rise. Things like how the Blacksmith Wiley Canapa, who had that old run-down building on the corner of Main and South Mill cured my Poison Ivey with nothing more than a barrel of quenching water with when Dr. Rutledge and Dr. Bolgar, both could not rid me of it. But, that is for another time.

All reactions:

37

14 comments

Like

Comment

Share

Most relevant

Sharon Knobloch Butler

Another good one, Stan. This makes page 15 of my collection of "Stan's Stories" We were blessed weren't we?

*   4y 

2

Martin Susan Keathley

Your saddest statement is "our morals and ethics were much superior to what we have today". That is one of the main faults of our current society and I don't know how to correct it.

Please give us more info on the quenching water from Mr. Camera

 I use… 

See more

*   4y 

2

Martin Susan Keathley

It changed Mr. Canepas name, sorry.

*   4y 

View more comments

3 of 12

See more on Facebook

See more on Facebook

Email or phone number

 

Password

 

Log In

Forgot password?

or

Create new account
