Title: Plant Tissue Analysis

URL Source: https://spectrumanalytic.com/services/analysis/plants.html

Markdown Content:
Why Test? | Available Tests | Sampling Guide| Submittal Forms | Example Reports

**Crop nutrient uptake** is influenced by many factors other than the soil test. Soil testing and plant analysis are designed to work together. Soil testing identifies the soils nutrient reserves and predicts the nutrient needs, while plant analysis identifies the actual nutrient uptake.

Why Test Plants?
----------------

A plant's ability to take up adequate nutrients is influenced by many factors such as soil fertility level, soil temperature, soil compaction, soil moisture, nutrient balance in the soil, fertilizer applications, plant genetics, and many other factors. A chemical soil test cannot accurately account for all of these factors. A producer must use plant analysis if he expects to identify and understand the nutrient efficiency and needs of his crops and soils. Only plant analysis can tell us the actual nutrient status of the crop. Plant analysis can be used to detect low nutrient levels in plants before they are seen by the human eye. Once visual symptoms are visible, top yields and quality have already been compromised. Plant analysis is an important part of planning future fertility programs.
Tests Available
---------------

Proper interpretation of a plant analysis requires that the agronomist has complete nutrient information. There are many nutrient interactions in a plant that should be considered to accurately identify the cause of a disorder. Analyzing only one or two elements would be like reading only one or two chapters in a book — you do not get the whole story. For this reason, we offer only one plant analysis option, which is a complete nutrient analysis.
Sampling Guide
--------------

Our plant sampling guide contains information on most plant species. If you need furthur assistance, contact the lab for specific information on your crop.

Information Form
----------------

*   Plant Sample Information Form

Example Reports ---------------
*   Plant report - Plant and accompanying soil analysis results, with normal ranges, with agronomist's comments on a single page.
