Title: When I was young, I used to think that grief was always this frequent in everyone's life. Although it is something we all experience in our lives, it seems to happen so much in our people. | Facebook

URL Source: https://www.facebook.com/groups/574225473564032/posts/1571138083872761/

Markdown Content:
Treaty 6, 7, 8 and Métis Indigenous Community | Due to effects of residential schools, colonization and intergenerational trauma, I believe our people experience it to the extent that we do | Facebook

===============

Log In

Log In

Forgot Account?

Treaty 6, 7, 8 and Métis Indigenous Community · 

Join
------------------------------------------------------

Blain Constant

 · October 10 · 

### **When I was young, I used to think that grief was always this frequent in everyone's life. Although it is something we all experience in our lives, it seems to happen so much in our people.**

Due to effects of residential schools, colonization and intergenerational trauma, I believe our people experience it to the extent that we do. All of that paired with sudden tragic loss amounts up to losing a lot of people in our lives.

I remember in grade 7, I had to leave school a few times in a short period of time to attend funerals. I will always remember the other students saying to me "didnt you just go to a funeral last week? How do you know this many people that die?"

At that time, it was another close relative who passed on but it seemed that this was the norm.

Or so I thought.

I asked them "havent you ever lost a grandma or grandpa? Or an aunty or uncle?"

They said no, they still had these people in their lives.

I thought how lucky they are. I wondered if they knew how lucky they are. My grandpa Morris passed when I was 3 or 4, my grandma Annie at 11, my other grandpa at 19.

I have lost countless family members and friends in my life. Just two days ago, another cousin and now a couple friends too. In the last couple years alone, 4 aunts, 2 uncles, many cousins and close friends have all made their journey home.

Its hard losing people we love. It really is. Now when you know a lot of people, it seems like you're always losing someone.

But oh how lucky I am to have met all these beautiful people. To have experienced the love that my family and friends all shared with me in my life.

I dont know who I would be without having experienced all of it.

Grief is hard. Its inevitable. It is going to be a part of our journey whether we want it to or not.

But lets take the time to realize how lucky we are, to have had someone in our life that we loved so much, that we miss them when its their time to go home.

We really are lucky to have experienced their love, their light, their energy and to have created all those memories with them.

Yes its hard move to forward without them. Grief doesn't ever really go away but we learn how to grow around it.

We need to realize that the most beautiful way to honor them is by taking good care of us. Its what they wanted while they were here and its what they want from where they are now.

Think of how much they cared when they saw you down and out. When they knew you were going through it in life. They always wanted and wished the best for you.

They still do.

Take good care of yourself as a way to honor your loved ones.

They will always be with you, just in a different way thats hard for us as humans to understand.

Their spirit lives on. Their love lasts forever. Their memories will always hold a special place in your heart. They are a huge part of who you are now so take good care of that.

Take good care of you. 

All reactions:

21

3 comments

6 shares

Like

Comment

Share

Most relevant

Theresa Houle

There are grieving steps you should learn them - bk before internet we actually had to go to counseling, bereavement classes and libraries to overcome grief - doesn't matter why you when where it will take you down! Learn the steps it works

*   7w 

Liz Gerlat

Yes grief a way of growing stronger 

Well expressed as written .God bless you

GIPHY

*   7w 

Crandall Alexander Buffalo

It’s no mystery that the mortality rate within indigenous communities is 2x higher than the national average. 

The govt is still killing us in record numbers. They don’t use bullets; they use the Indian Act, they use poverty, and they use the theory o… 

See more

*   7w 

See more on Facebook

See more on Facebook

Email or phone number

 

Password

 

Log In

Forgot password?

or

Create new account
