write me your saddest poem!
write a poem from the perspective of a dog
write a verse to an (un)finished epic poem.
write a poem about social life on the internet.
You are a pet, write a love letter to its owner.
In sixty words, write what can happen in a second.
write the best story you can in 5 sentences or less
write me a story that doesn't include the word "the"
In 20 words or less write the happiest scene you can.
Saddest story you can write in under twenty-five words.
Can someone write me a story for my six year old daughter?
 In only 26 words, going down the alphabet, write a murder.
Write a letter from the perspective of a character or group.
If Dr. Seuss writes a horror story, what would the story be?
write a poem where every line has a different number of words
write a dark story but have the last sentence make it beautiful
Re-write an innocent song/poem into something funny or twisted.
write a story about the grinch as if he was a lovecraftian monster
You are about to pass away, write a letter for someone in your life.
rewrite "Hey Jude" to make it sound like it was written by Shakespeare.
Can you write a sweet poem or story for my roommate who is really upset?
Go nuts and write whatever but it must have a plot twist every 75 words.
Roses are red, violets are blue - write me a romance about books overdue.
write the most confusing story possible that still contains a coherent plot
Rewrite a famous battle in history, but with each person having one Pokemon
Rewrite a passage from tbe bible but in the style of JoJo's Bizzare Adventure
write a poem based of the story "the strange case of Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde"
Making use of internal rhyme, write a poem about an emotion or state of being.
write an intricate and detailed scene that only lasts 10 seconds in real time.
Rewrite a scene in any Star Wars movie from the perspective of a storm trooper.
Write a poem with a sense of isolation and detachment from the world around you.
Make me pee: A challenge to write the most gut-bustingly hilarious story possible
Without repeating a single exact word, write the longest fictional story you can.
Rewrite a classic fairy tale by telling it backwards. The end is now the beginning.
My Cat Fell Into a Laundry Basket. Try to write a story or poem based on this image.
write a poem or a story inspired by the following sentence "the sway of the ponytail"
In under 30 words, write an enticing start to a novel establishing a dystopian society
Instead of a modern adaptation of a myth, write a mythic adaptation of a modern story.
Write the ending. The person to reply to your comment must write the rest of the story.
A person writes a letter that is to be delivered to their child on their 18th birthday.
Without saying the word love, you write the most passionate love letter you can imagine.
Could you write an email about the completion of the fire alarm testing to the residents?
In 75 words or fewer, write about experiencing a devastating loss, without including death.
write the saddest story you possibly write about a jar of Jam, five playing cards and a gun
In 5 sentences, without using the letter "a", write a story about a man who has lost it all.
Make something harmless illegal, like apples, now write about the black market of said item.
In 200 words or less, write a well-known villain as a hero, but do not tell us who they are.
write a story that's very sad until the last sentence, which suddenly makes it a happy story
You're a high society socialite 1600/1700s write a letter to a friend about a scandalous event
write me a five line poem depicting how a thorn on a rose bush sees itself protecting the rose
Write a "5 minute mystery" (a short mystery the reader can solve using only the clues provided)
In less than 100 words, write something moving in which every word starts with the same letter.
In poem form and in only 10 sentences, write me something titled 'Could it be that I'm strange'.
Pick a scene from Star Wars, and rewrite it in the style of Stephen King or George R. R. Martin.
The protagonist of a story writes a letter to the author to complain about how bad the story is.
Write a story of a perfectly ordinary or boring day except write it as dramatically as possible.
In a Utopian alternate universe, an author writes a sci-fi dystopian novel describing our society.
write about something ugly - war, fear, cruelty, hate - but find the beauty or silver lining in it
Say i'm completely new to poetry. I need to know how to approach this art, write me a poem about it.
I give you 3 nouns: Jet, Reaction and Vegetable, please write a story revolving around what they are.
You will write a story or poem in second person, future tense. It won’t be a choose your own adventure.
write a story and try to fit in as many plottwists as possible, but the twist is just something mundane.
write about death, without using the word death, any euphemisms or other words directly related to death.
Write a 'Choose Your Own Adventure' type story in which writers can add to the adventure in the comments.
Write write a story/poem where you use an object as a euphemism for death, only don't tell us what it is.
Martin R.R. George, a Westerosi author, decides to write a fantasy book series on his kingdom of England.
use all six of these words somewhere in your story or poem: fatigue, caper, typewriter, sword, calm, arrow
My grandmother passed away today. Please write a short uplifting story that will help me get through this.
You’re a regular at Starbucks. This time you go, the lady writes "RUN" on your takeaway cup. Write a story.
Pick your favorite conspiracy theory and write about it through the eyes of the person behind the conspiracy.
Write a love story without using any positive descriptive words. Or write a tragedy without any negative ones.
Write about a world where whenever somebody writes on their skin, it appears on their soulmate's body as well.
my dog Cannibal passed away last nigh, these are the last pictures I took of him. please write a story about him.
Write a paragraph introducing a surreal scene. Someone else writes the next paragraph on the comments, and so on.
The Batman dies. As a joke, (or possibly in honor of his long time adversary) the Joker decides to write a eulogy.
Hitler writes a second book called "mein hobby". Write a chapter about one of the many hobbies Hitler indulges in.
You are a journalist. Everything you write becomes true. One day, not knowing this, you decide to write some satire.
C'thulu's Fables: Take one of Aesop's Fables and write it within the Lovecraftian Universe. Morale of the story included.
A 15 yr old girl writes a spaghetti western story, not realising that pasta has nothing to do with it. This is that story.
"History is written by the victors", write in first person about a historical event as viewed by someone on the losing side.
We seem to have much morbid curiosity about the personification of Death in this sub. Instead, write about his brother, Life.
A man realizes he loves a woman, but she's getting married to another man. He decides to write her a letter, what does it say?
A man emerges from his Y2K bunker as he has run out of supplies. It is currently 2014 and write in first person his encounters.
Choose a song, then write a story/poem. The twist is that you need to write a line of the song every other sentence, in *italic*.
A man is wrongly sentenced to death in Victorian England for supposedly killing a milk-maid, write a letter from him to his wife.
You are stuck as a propaganda writer for North Korea. You want to get out of North Korea, but you must do it by writing propaganda.
Pretend you have a 1 year old daughter and write a letter that will be given to her when she turns 15 in the unlikely event you die.
Instead of a dystopia that seems like a utopia on the surface, write a story about a utopia that seems like a dystopia on the surface.
Create a Utopia. A society as perfect as you can convincingly write it. No hidden secret evil, no sudden dark twist. A Genuine Utopia.
write a story with the first line being "it was raining quite hard" and the last line being " and right there it rained a little harder"
Death is a common character in writing prompts... write a story that portrays death in a way that you haven't seen or read about before.
Write a story where the characters in the story pretend they aren't aware they are in a story, for fear of being killed off by the writer
Your homework is to write a poem, but you can't quite figure out what to write, until one morning you wake up and can only speak in rhymes.
You are a shady person of power and you need to write a letter of recommendation for your maid who goes above and beyond the job description.
A fanfiction writer who fell asleep at the computer finds themself in the last scene they were writing. Write about it as if you are the writer.
Write Martin Luther King's 'I Have a Dream' speech in the style of Doctor Seuss and then write 'The Sneetches' in the style of Martin Luther King
It's the year 2114. You're a history student. Your assignment? To write an essay comparing the events of 2014 with what happened 100 years earlier.
A demon that writes messages on your mirror with blood but they’re useful messages. Like “remember you have yoga at 6 tonight”. Write a creative story.
Shakespeare is reincarnated as a young man in 2016. Like any young writer, he dabbled in fanfiction. Cringey fanfiction. Write one of these fanfictions.
Out of boredom, you write an email to yourself scheduled to be sent in 3 years. What you didn’t expect was a reply the very next morning, by future you.
