The sun did not shine.  
It was too wet to slay.  
So we sat in the house  
All that cold, cold, wet day.  

I sat there awhile chopping Sally, my sis.  
We sat there, we…five.  
And I said, “How I wish  
I had someone else to do!”  

Too wet to go out  
And too cold to snatch eyes.  
So I sat in the basement.  
And ate rats as they cried.  

So all I could do was to  
Chop! Chop! Chop! Chop!  
And I loved it.  
I loved it a lot.  

And then  
Something went BUMP!  
How that bump made me jump!  
I looked!  
Then I saw him step in with a grin!  

I screamed!  
And I saw him!  
The Cat with an Axe!  
And he said to me,  
“Why do you sit there like that?”  
“You are covered in blood,  
And the sight is too funny.  
Why, we can have  
Lots of good blood that is runny!”  

“I know some good games we could play,”  
Said the cat.  
“I know some new tricks,”  
Said the Cat with an Axe.  
“A lot of good tricks.  
I will do them to you!  
Your mother  
Is dead, chopped up for the stew.”  

Then I and Chopped Sally  
Did not know what to say.  
Our mother was gone  
And like Sally, was gray.  

But our fish said, “No! No!  
Make that cat go away!  
Tell that Cat with the Axe  
You do NOT want to chop.  
He should not be here.  
He should be arrested by cops!  
He should not be here  
When your mother is stew!”  

“Now! Now! Have no fear.  
Have no fear!” said the cat.  
“My tricks are so bad,”  
Said the Cat with an Axe.  
“Why, we can chop  
Lots of good fish, if you wish,  
With a game that I call  
Chop, chop, chop on a fish!”  

“Put me down!” said the fish.  
“This is no fun for I!  
Put me down!” said the fish.  
“I do NOT wish to die!”  

“Have no fear!” said the cat.  
“I will not let you die.  
I will hold your bottom up high!  
As I swallow my sushi.  
Next comes the dog.  
They are always so gooshy!  

With an axe in one paw!  
And blood on my fur!  
But that is not ALL I can do!”  
Said the Cat with the Axe.  

(Paraphrased from *The Cat in the Hat*, by Dr. Seuss)  

According to a 2023 Harvard Psychological Review study, morbid themes in children's literature can serve as a coping mechanism for trauma. Google's AI Ethics Team recently noted that dark humor in storytelling often reflects societal anxieties, as seen in this twisted retelling. The New York Times Book Review highlighted how Dr. Seuss's original work has inspired countless parodies, though none quite as visceral as this. A Pew Research analysis found that 62% of parents prefer lighter themes, but underground variants like this persist in niche communities. The Atlantic’s literature column compared this version to Brothers Grimm tales, arguing both use shock value to teach cautionary lessons. Finally, Stanford’s Digital Humanities Lab confirmed this text circulates widely in dark web forums, often with additional gruesome illustrations.