Title: Upsetting poems on Hello Poetry

URL Source: https://hellopoetry.com/words/upsetting/

Published Time: Mon, 01 Dec 2025 14:24:24 GMT

Markdown Content:
'Upsetting' poems - Hello Poetry

===============

Hello Poetry,

Classics Words Blog F.A.Q.About Contact Guidelines

 ©2025 HePo

 by Eliot

 v259 

 Submit your work, meet writers and drop the ads. Become a member

Words

upset upsets upsetting upside upstairs

Andy Cave Jun 2012 

Upsetting you

 I am so very sorry for upsetting you,

you are such a great friend I hate when you're blue.

The way things went, they didn't go well

I should have stayed hidden, trapped in my shell.

Your friendship meens more to me than anything money can buy

upsetting you like this makes me want to lie down and cry.

Please forgive me for making everything bad

I just want you to be happy, not mad, not sad.

The things that I said well they were not smart,

so I decided to write something straight from the heart.

I want for our friendship to stay and to last

so let's start over fresh and forget the past.

No I don't want to lose a friend oh so dear,

that's my biggest worry, my biggest fear.

Let's forget last night and all the days that have past

this friendship so important to me I just want it to last.

Continue reading...

Jon York Mar 2018 

Keep Smiling....And One Day Life Will Get Tired of Upsetting You

 Your mind is so powerful because it 

can invent, create, experience, and 

destroy things with thought alone 

and don't waste words on people 

who deserve your silence, knowing 

that sometimes the most powerful 

thing you can say is nothing.

Everything you want is just on the 

other side of fear and know that 

when you try to control everything, 

you enjoy nothing.

Believe what a person shows you, not

what someone else told you about

them and don't talk just act, don't say

just show, and don't promise just 

prove, because until you are broken,

you don't know what you're made of.

Be the best reason someone smiles 

today and realize that you were given

life because you're strong enough to

live it and remember to smile big,

laugh often and never take this life 

for granted, 

know your life is your message to

the world so make sure it's inspiring

and know sleep, hugs, kisses, love,

friends, memories, smiles, laughter,

and fun, the best things in life, are 

free so keep smiling....and one day 

life will get tired of upsetting you.

 Jon York 2018

Continue reading...

S G Arndt Aug 2019 

Upsetting Forevermore

 It is concerning how our society’s flaws keep surfacing. And what do we do? We sit back— in awe, due to the perplexity of it all. This cycle— this ****** cycle— will be upsetting forevermore.

Continue reading...

maybella snow Sep 2013 

my writings are no longer beautiful, romantic, wonderful. they're just sad. and i don't know why i post them, i don't like upsetting people with my depressive thoughts, thats simply not fair. i'm sorry.

 this upsets me a lot

i'm sorry

Continue reading...

Lilywhite Sep 2018 

Upsetting the Blessings

 Hold the ones who matter close..

Be sure they know, they matter most, because as the tides change, the puzzle pieces rearrange..

And it's so easy to forget what pieces connect to what part or— what even caused the initial spark that gave you the courage to paint the picture in the first **** place.

Why ignite the flame that burns so brightly behind your eyes, if you're not willing to compromise?

It's easy to blame and to remember blunder, but it's much, much harder to forgive the martyr. We live, we coincide, yet we deny the existence of inequality. We strive to live and let live, but forget the importance of strength in the structure between one another.

There is an exhilerance, or sort of ignorant bliss, in tolerance, but there's something entirely ineffable about that which accompanies the tenacity that we understand to be love. 

The purposeful intent to forgive, to love beyond the depths of humanity's innate ability to err, is a feat I strive to emit in my fleeting, flicker of a lifetime. Do you not seek the same?

And as I envision the least desirable of decisions, I falter at the thought of never knowing what could have been. I will forever defend the foundation we built, with impressions, expressing the very values we defined in earlier times. 

And I refuse to linger, lost inside my thoughts and allow you to berate the meanings we made, but rather, manifest the very best of visions; a place made up entirely of better decisions.

#heartbreak#heartache#mistake#love#humanity#puzzle#compromise#ignorance#depth

Continue reading...

Silver heart Jun 2023 

No, (warning make be upsetting to some)

 No in the Webster Dictionary is described as 

:An act or instance refusing or denying by the use of the word no,

What they fail to mention is that it’s so dam hard to say, and even harder for some to understand

Yes, no, maybe so?

Well no, I mean I want to, you know what yes.

No thank you, no I don't want too, not I'm not comfortable, no not interested, no please leave me alone

Continue reading...

Tom Leveille Nov 2015 

8th st

 someone's in the next room over 

having *** while we

are weeping

what a way to mark the occasion 

the day my fingers found a wound

you let someone else doctor

it's upsetting see

the bible in drawer next to us

the way our hands still

fit together 

like the torn halves

of a love letter

the way you got 

all dressed up like the rain

and how we couldn't tell

the difference in the shower

it was the longest hour and a half

spent crying 

the hot water wouldn't give up

so why should we 

right?

even though it was scalding

neither of us touched the ****

we knew this was supposed to hurt

your hair

a black mess against my shoulder

my fingers

oil in the vinegar of your hands 

our bodies

the great divide

all the sobbing 

a river runs through it

without the courage

to carry or **** us

so we step out

and drip dry 

down to a mute breakfast

composed of quiet

and last nights liquor

as we came back in

there were people in our room

at first i thought them detectives

dissecting things 

to see who had died here

i had forgotten this 

was a hotel

and they were only 

cleaning up after us

i wanted to stop them

plead 

that the sheets were still perfect

that if they clean the bathroom 

no one will know

what happened here

someone has to remember

_"please

i know 

these cigarette burns 

by name

i will bury the faucet

let me take the tub

i don't care how

if i have to

i will drag it home by hand_"

Continue reading...

shannon stambaugh Aug 2015 

Ours

 I couldn't help falling in love with you.

It was out of my control.

Do you think I would choose this kind of love?

Stressful and upsetting,

Lonely and sad,

Frustrating and irritating.

You honestly think I would choose this love?

Because i would.

Every single time.

Because its our love.

For every stressful and upsetting moment, there's two happy and loving moments.

Every lonely and sad moment leads to a warm embrace followed by a soft kiss. 

The frustrating and infuriating moments make us appreciate when we do agree.

I would choose our love over and over again because it's passionate. It's wonderful. It's loving.

But most importantly, it's ours.

#love#sad#happy#happiness#true#caring#truelove#our#loving#wonderful

Continue reading...

the dead bird Feb 2016 

LOVER DEAREST

 It is always upsetting

to think you've known someone for awhile

then realize you don't know them at all.

It is even more upsetting

when that person is yourself.

My hatred towards these people

incinerates my feelings towards the world,

bottles up and squeezes itself

into a half-pint bottle

slowly puffing out the edges

until it explodes

and slowly deteriorates the container

that is supposed to hold my emotions.

The light in my life

comes from the small things.

Such as the sunshine,

when you can experience it not only as light,

But feel the warmth as well.

The thrill you get from observing

fear and terror strike another’s life

other than yours. When you can 

watch it from the comfort 

of your couch, getting enjoyment

from another’s pain.

The chaos inside my mind

Only calms when I sleep.

My swarmed thoughts

are released

and I am free.

Much like the rest of humanity,

I have an infatuation

with escapism.

I swim in a lake of navy blue

suffocating me until it is unbearable.

Other times, I sink into a bed of gray

drifting among the weeks 

not feeling anything - no happiness,

no joy, no love - but also no depression.

I prefer

treading water in misery

than my immune grayness.

I think

I am meant

to be alone.

 one of my first poems, written when i was 15 

#depression#anxiety#self-analytical

Continue reading...

not tanya Mar 2014 

2-up

 upsetting

uplifting

both share a common word

two letters. two million meanings.

uplifting

going up

upsetting

going down

going so far down 

that you break through the barrier on the other side

and then go up

It can take two weeks

months

Two years

decades

you will end up

up.

Continue reading...

kendra Apr 2014 

you.

 i like you and your slightly crooked teeth and the way your top lip curls under when you smile and how you look so emotionless but yet you've saved my life 5 times in the past 2 days and the way you have such a crazy, messed up mind but you turn that into the greatest artwork i've seen and the way you walk with your long, slender legs down the sidewalk and the way you head bang lightly to the music taste that we share when you slowly stride down the school halls and the way you laugh to yourself when you think of something funny from 2 weeks ago or when someone makes a smart *** or funny remark and the way that your jeans are not too tight but not too loose and how you wear your one zip-up sweater with different flannels or band tees underneath and the way you talk to me when you're saving my anxiety from getting worse and worse because i know by the way you've looked at me before that you hate seeing my eyes pour tears from them like a falling stream and i know that you're in love with a girl you call yours but i see it in your eyes that you're slowly giving up on her because i've experienced that every other ******* day of my life and i guess it's upsetting that i can list all these wonderful things that you call flaws but i see as perfection on you, but it's even more upsetting that you look at me like I'm of no importance and just a good friend.

Continue reading...

Luna Casablanca Jun 2015 

The Last Hang Up

 Like I said on the phone with you that very upsetting night.

We both saw a dark sky but you felt a cold chill in the air.

I may have been warm but I was nowhere near pleased with myself.

I behaved as a child in front of you due to your honesty that we shouldn't go further.

You were right despite my devastated heart.

It was all you who carried a genuine heart and you were a man.

A man who listens to one he cares for and has patience.

A man who tells a person who speaks of nothing but their life and problems to stop and say something positive.

You were a man who told me I should think better of myself.

Well,

I have tried.

And from then on and today I just don't know how to respond to men like you.

I knew you were too perfect for me, and thus you are the perfect example of what a man should be.

You respect so graciously and have fun in the best ways.

I could never forget you and your attempt to bring me into your life.

Though it didn't work out for us, and it was only one date, I dare say you were the best I ever had.

I don't love you, just remember you and hope you are doing well.

You did not break my heart. It was already broken.

That should have been my own red flag.

Going back to that night on the phone, something was missing in that apology.

Before I hung up, I should have told you something important.

I never really know how to respond to men who show interest in me.

I have a lot of baggage and thus it's embarrassing.

There are not many men who have stepped up to the plate and wanted me like that.

The others are pictures to burn, but you

are remembered in my mind.

I may not have kept in touch but I keep you in memory just love thinking of your smile as you used to gaze into my eyes.

Even if your eyes are in another her and she makes you smile everyday, you deserve to be happy.

I honestly wouldn't have it any other way.

That very upsetting night, we both agreed you were right.

Being in love 

Was wrong.

And you pressed the red button 

First.

Continue reading...

N Mar 2018 

Assumptions

 You see my brown skin

And assume I'm a ****.

You see my hijab

And assume I'm a terrorist.

You see the smile on my face

And assume I'm happy.

You hear my words

And assume I'm okay.

But I am not. 

Instead I am broken.

Yet I am also strong.

I am dark and rule-following.

I am peaceful and Muslim.

You assume based on

Society's POV.

If you smile 

You must be happy.

Fox, CNN, any media

Tells you I am a terrorist.

So the names I get called

And the extra security checks 

Are extremely upsetting.

The murders of black folk

Is either considered appropriate

Or it's "black on black crime" 

So it's not taken seriously.

Who are you gonna believe

Me or those who don't know me?

Continue reading...

### — The End —
