Title: If Dr. Seuss wrote a horror book, how would it go?

URL Source: https://www.quora.com/If-Dr-Seuss-wrote-a-horror-book-how-would-it-go

Markdown Content:
+ 5

If Dr. Seuss wrote a horror book, how would it go?

Sort

The sun did not shine.

It was too wet to slay.

So we sat in the house

All that cold, cold, wet day.

I sat there awhile chopping Sally, my sis.

We sat there, we….five.

And I said, “How I wish

I had someone else to do!”

Too wet to go out

And too cold to snatch eyes.

So I sat in the basement.

And ate rats as they cried.

So all I could do was to

Chop! Chop! Chop! Chop!

And I loved it.

I loved it a lot.

And then

Something went BUMP!

How that bump made me jump!

I looked!

Then I saw him step in with a grin!

I screamed!

And I saw him!

The Cat with an Axe!

And he said to me,

“Why do you sit there like that?”

“You are covered in blood,

And the sight is too funny.

Why, we can have

Lots of good blood that is runny!”

“I know some good games we could play,”

Said the cat.

“I know some new tricks,”

Said the Cat with an Axe.

“A lot of good tricks.

I will do them to you!

Your mother

Is dead, chopped up for the stew.”

Then I and Chopped Sally

Did not know what to say.

Our mother was gone

And like Sally, was gray.

But our fish said, “No! No!

Make that cat go away!

Tell that Cat with the Axe

You do NOT want to chop.

He should not be here.

He should be arrested by cops!

He should not be here

When your mother is stew!”

“Now! Now! Have no fear.

Have no fear!” said the cat.

“My tricks are so bad,”

Said the Cat with an Axe.

“Why, we can chop

Lots of good fish, if you wish,

With a game that I call

Chop, chop, chop on a fish!”

“Put me down!” said the fish.

“This is no fun for I!

Put me down!” said the fish.

“I do NOT wish to die!”

“Have no fear!” said the cat.

“I will not let you die.

I will hold your bottom up high!

As I swallow my sushi.

Next comes the dog.

They are always so gooshy!

With an axe in one paw!

And blood on my fur!

But that is not ALL I can do!”

Said the Cat with an Axe.

Paraphrased from: The Cat in the Hat, by Dr. Seuss

Related questions

I will tell you tale, yes a tale I will tell

Of the little girl Olive, who went down a well.

Young Olive was spry. Young Olive was glee.

She would play in the garden all blithe and carefree

She would play with her dolls. She would play with her toys.

She would play with her Quin-dimple-chumpledee-quoys.

She was playing one day, with her Tin-tan-septumpus

when it started to fly, up the hill to Mount Pumpus!

It flew and it flew. Flying straight toward the sky.

So Olive gave chase; being nimble and spry.

She ran and she ran yes she chased it she did!

And while chasing it she ran right into a kid.

This kid’s young round head, his cranial sphere

It just popped right off, cut from front to rear.

His head spilled about, all detached from his body.

It bounced and it rolled like a tumble-dee toddy.

His blood it did squirt - in and out, to and fro.

It ran and made puddles, from wounds it did flow.

It flowed from his neck, and it sprayed all about.

The blood covered Olive, and she began to shout.

She SHOUTED! She SHOUTED!! Till someone did hear.

And as Olive turned ‘round, a young man did appear.

This man was distressed. This man was quite shaken.

For this young man’s child’s life; Olive had just taken.

This man was now angry. This man was distempered.

This man grabbed at Olive, as Olive’s voice whimpered.

“Please no!!” Olive said, as he snatched at her neck.

He tore and he tore till her clothes were a wreck.

He knocked Olive down and he drooled on her face.

He slapped her and threw her all over the place.

He then tied her up and he climbed to Mount Pumpus

To the top there beside Olive’s Tin-tan-septumpus.

He placed Olive down on a surgical table.

He tied all her limbs down with surgical cable.

He made sure her body was surgically stable.

As this man, himself, was quite surgically able

To rend Olive’s nimble, spry parts limb from limb.

He used scalpels and saws and a sharp Klim-Pan-Klim.

He used Beezles and Bumples and tall Flazzon Flails.

He used Applegong tondrils and Klippy Klop Tails.

As Olive she screamed and she yelled for some helps.

This young able surgeon just laughed at her yelps.

As Olive kept hoping she was only dreaming.

He skinned her alive as Olive lay screaming.

In the end this young surgeon, this Dr. Psychotic

He stared at young Olive’s dead corpse; quite erotic.

Then this deranged, demented, wacko, crack-hack -

This psychotic, surgeon - this unstable quack

This non compos mentis, disturbed, insane Doc

He took Olive’s skin and wore it like a smock.

But that wasn’t all, no ’twas not, I confess.

This insane physician had to clean up his mess.

He gathered her organs, (those he’d not digested)

And placed them in bags, so they’d not get infested

With meal bugs and pill bugs and snipple-fong shuggetts

Or ripple-roog wreckers that chew on your nuggets.

Then he took her remains, with her still breathing life

Yes he took her and dressed her in clothes as his wife.

While her skin he did wear, as she sat in a pile

Of living detritus he mustered a smile.

Then a large laughing grin came over his face

And uproarious laughter did fill up the place.

He danced and he danced and he bounded with joy

For Olive’s remains were his new playing toy.

For years this young crazy, loop-loco physician

with Olive’s remains danced a happy rendition.

He loved every moment. Each tiddle. Each jot.

Until Olive’s remains, they started to rot.

So in sadness he gathered his map and his compass

And started the climb to the top of Mount Pumpus.

For atop this high mount, a dry well it did stand.

’Twas the oldest and highest dry well in the land.

So he climbed and he climbed till this well he did reach.

And from there what he did, of that I shall preach.

What he did with young Olive, oh this I shall tell

Her young dead remains, he dumped down that well.

(with all due respect to “Green Eggs and Ham”)

Red Knife for Sam

I am Sam. I am Sam. Sam I am.

That Sam-I-am!

That Sam-I-am! My father tells me Sam-I-am!

Do you like a Red Knife for Sam?

I really like it, Sam-I-am.

I really like a Red Knife for Sam.

Would you like it here or there?

I would like it here or there.

I would stab it anywhere!

I really like a red knife for Sam.

I really like it, Sam-I-am.

Would you kill him in a house?

Would you kill him with his spouse?

I really like it in a house.

I really like it in his spouse.

I really like it here or there.

I really like it anywhere.

I really like a red knife for Sam.

I really like it, Sam-I-am.

Would you stab them in box?

Would you shoot them with Glocks?

Yes in a box! Yes with Glocks!

Yes in a house! Yes to his spouse!

I would stab them here and there!

I would shoot them anywhere!

I really like a red knife for Sam.

I really like it, Sam-I-am!

Would you? Could you? Bleed them dry?

Stab them! Stab them! Here they are!

I would, I could, bleed them dry.

I would like that. You will see!

I would never set you free!

He already did.

The butter battle book is already terrifying.

Effectively the book details two warring factions that engage in an arms race over the trivial issue of how they butter their bread.

It ends with a small child looking up at the "Bitsy Big-Boy Boomeroo” bombs (pretty much atomic bombs even if it isn't called that) wondering which side will drop theirs first.

Related questions

One child! Two childs!

Red child, blue child!

Run child, rue child—

dead child, chew child.

No, wait! One child

Left for un-child

”Let’s have fun, child!

Help cook done child.

Boiled in water

Leaves the taste mild

Roast with pepper

Makes the taste wild!”

One child, one child

watching un-child

on the floor tiled

chopping done child

Oven fired!

One child tired

Runs — tripwired!

Legs all mired!

“Wouldn’t you like

to eat with me?

I had some pike!

But now — let’s see

there’s nothing left

my stomach wild

I guess you’ll have

to eat that child.”

One child, two childs

Cry child, chew child

Waiting to be-

-come a stew child

Un-child finish

with the child chow

If you hated this

how now brown cow?

Happy Birthday to You ( Two )

“Today you are you!

That is truer than true!

There is no one alive who is You-er than You!”

A wry straitjacket like laugh emerges from the cloud of cigarette smoke like crawling lightening.

Phantom-like and eerie,

light failing ,

swinging above!

His face chews on raw nothingness cold.

The Grinch!

Slow and steady understated laughing,

spinning and turning like light from a disco ball

yet deep in the gut,

like creeping thunder hidden.

Monsters calmly calling,

Splintering ancient glass shattered,

he looks into thee!

He postures with a sneer and dogs growl then attacks like a confused dog seeing his demon in the dark.

A slow mad man's mumble bounces around in the dark.

He stumbles amongst the shards and wounds in his mind.

All the while, the tormenting mirror torturing with a glee and taunting.

another meaningless notch,

nothing more!

Sorry to say, and sad to report, the monster’s not green, just a neighbor named Mort. He gets up at five, to begin his weed-whacking. It might wake you up, but he’s got to get cracking. Then, since you’re up, might just shop; not a lot. But when you get back this guy’s parked in your spot! Later you go get the mail—it’s not there…who’s got it, your neighbor, because he would dare! Again, he is burning his leaves in a fire, right next to your fence, with the flames getting higher! His music’s so loud, well, that’s just how it goes; get some sleep if you can, before his rooster crows…~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~Jane Lee Holmes

Sponsored by CDW Corporation

Do your power solutions meet the needs of a modern IT landscape?

Find comprehensive power solutions you can trust to protect your critical workflows at Eaton and CDW.

As the clock struck 11 at this 7–11, the old cashier Bill counted the day’s earnings from the till.

The air was filled with silence, nothing could quite match its omnipresence, except perhaps for the darkness, which surrounded Bill’s loneliness.

After seven years of doing this, this was the first time he felt unnerved by it, the absence of sound gave way for possibilities infinite. What if a voice came from it? What if the lights were to quit? He felt as though something paranormal was in the midst, but all of his life he has been a skeptic.

He shrugged off the feeling and closed the register, then he grabbed a broom and started sweeping up the store.

20 minutes later when he was done, a knocking on the glass made him jump.

When he looked over he was surprised to see ten men, all eager to get in. “We’re closed, my friend. Come back at seven.”

They all put on their masks, painted in black. Bill ran for the phone fast. He picked it up to find the line was disconnected, and the strangers at the door have already came in.

“Out!” Bill shouted with bravery. “Out before I make you sorry!”

The men pulled out their knives which were full of blood, all Bill could do was reach for the gun.

“I’m warning you!” Bill tried to threaten, but the mindless men just kept coming.

Shot after shot, the gun was as loud as a cannon. Bill’s shot was spot on, and there remained ammo in the gun, but nonetheless Bill stopped firing. His mouth dropped to the ground when he saw the first man still standing after he took four rounds.

Blood gushed from the hole in his throat as he spoke, “We’re here to take your soul and turn your body to smoke.”

It'd look something like this

Related

If Willy Wonka & The Chocolate Factory was rewritten unto a horror movie, how would it go?

It already has elements of a horror film.

This was not a kids movie.

Example 2

Was he wrong?

Example 3

He was ultimately working for Wonka.

We are told that the characters will be okay, but we never see what really happens to Augustus Gloop

nor Violet Beauregard

nor Verruca Salt

nor Mike TeeVee

not even Mr. Salt.

Yes I get it the film does have a happy ending but Grandpa Joe didn’t help either.

Horror films excel when characters make dumb choices and nearly every character in this film makes bad or greedy choices.

Mrs. Bucket is a positive role model to Charlie even though she’s dirt poor and yet Charlie picked his grandfather rather than her to go to the factory, so once more the story worked better and with Charlie choosing to return the Everlasting Gobstopper he did the right thing, because it was the right thing thing to do.

You could even say Wonka knew all along because the vehicles conveniently got smaller

The boat only had room for 8 Guests,

Source or reference points

https://www.reddit.com/r/MovieDetails/comments/6rz4n5/in_willy_wonka_and_the_chocolate_factory_1971_the/
later the films after 4 characters”drop out” the car only had room for 4 guests.

Oh yeah here’s one more example of horror when Mrs. Curtis husband is kidnapped.

Is that comedy or a kids movie when this character delays her decision about Chocolate over her Husband’s life? I think not.

Take it easy with rage comments it’s just a certain point of view that the movie is part Horror.

I have always said the movie is Musical/Comedy/Horror/Fantasy movie

Yes it’s part fantasy, see the Glass Elevator below.

Thank you for reading.

“You’re going to love it, just love it”

Related

How would Dr. Seuss’s books read if they were written by George R.R. Martin?

One sword, Two sword, Red sword, Ice sword,

Black sword, Blue sword, Old sword, Slice Sword.

This one gave a little scar.

This one was made from a little star.

Say! What a lot of swords there are.

Yes. Some are red, and some are blue.

Some are old and some are new.

Some are sad, and some are mad,

And some are very, very bad.

Why are they sad and mad and bad?

I do not know, go ask that lad.

Some are thin, and some are fat.

The fat one makes men go splat.

From there to here,

From here to there,

Deadly things are everywhere.

There are some that like to kill.

They drill to kill by their own free will.

Oh me! Oh my! Oh me! oh my!

All men must die.

Some kill boars and some kill whores.

Some are deadly to the core and covered in gore.

Where do they come from? I can't say.

But I bet they have come a long, long way.

we see them come, we see them go.

Some are roughcast. Some even glow.

Some make men cry. Some even give the death blow.

Not one of them is like another.

Don't ask me why, go ask the Others.

Related

If Willy Wonka & The Chocolate Factory was rewritten unto a horror movie, how would it go?

For starters, the place would be Lovcraftian in nature. A beautiful sight to behold, but host of unimaginable terrors.

Charlie’s Poverty would be taken more seriously and the other kids’ flaws would be way worse than even Dahl, Stuart and even Burton could come up with. Maybe some off hand mentions of siblings dying in Charlie’s case.

Agustus would probably not just still be a glutton, but also have the complications that come with it. Such as heart failure and diabetes.

Veruca would basically be more spoiled and would react more violently if her way isn’t met. Even go so far as killing her pets, so she can get new ones.

Violet’s competitive nature would be taken up to eleven. Even have her go so far as push the other kids every time they’re in her way.

Mike would probably be zombified by his addiction to screens.

Willy Wonka would look fancy, but also look like he took copious amount of drugs. Most likely modeled after characters like Whaetley and Nyarlathotep. But he’d still be well meaning to balance out his mania.

As for how the story goes, it would be roughly the same, but with a few horror elements. The ticket race would be more violent almost Purge-Like. When Charlie does win, he’d almost get torn limb from limb. When Slugworth makes his offer, he’d make it clear that should Charlie refuse or fail in anyway, he’d kill him.

The factory entrance goes like normal and the door scene would be more trippy, but not scary at first, mainly to build up tension. The Chocolate Room would be relatively the same, only instead of just scenery being edible, there’d be bugs and other small creatures made of candy. Some of which scary looking even if they get eaten. Especially if they get eaten. The Oompa Loompas would also be eldritch like, but relatively the same. The tunnel scene would be 10x scarier, even showing people getting killed. Of course, everyone’s wanting to know the best part. The kids’ demise.

Augustus would go relatively the same way. Stuck in a pipe and headed for the Fudge Room. However rather than simply take his mother there to rescue him, she becomes fudge like him as well.

Violet would inflate like usual, but it’d be a more painful than comical. When her father comes with her, to the ju...
