Title: Sci Fi writers group | Trying to get some advice and/or ideas how to represent a very short amount of time passing, such as only a few nanoseconds, but as if it's taking muc... | Facebook

URL Source: https://www.facebook.com/groups/30011735728/posts/10160035981445729/

Markdown Content:
Sci Fi writers group | Trying to get some advice and/or ideas how to represent a very short amount of time passing, such as only a few nanoseconds, but as if it's taking muc... | Facebook

===============

Log In

Log In

Forgot Account?

Conveying a short time period as long in writing

Summarized by AI from the post below

Sci Fi writers group · 

Join
-----------------------------

Tobin Woodlee

 · September 14, 2022 · 

Trying to get some advice and/or ideas how to represent a very short amount of time passing, such as only a few nanoseconds, but as if it's taking much much longer, from the readers and some of the characters perspective, like it seems it's taking several minutes or even hours , purposely drawing this time period to seem like perspectively time is slowing down, but actually isn't at all. In this particular instance one of my characters is reaching out for something, just barely out of their reach, and as they're trying to there's all kinds of things going through their head. Then when they finally manage to barely touch what they're reaching for, this causes a whole flood thoughts, feelings, memories and visions, and such to flash through their head. So one way I've thought of portraying and implying this to the reader that the moment is supposed to seem like it's very long and take forever, while understanding only a very short time is actually passing, is describing some of the various things going through their mind at the time and what they're "seeing". But I of course don't want to write out a whole bunch of lengthy or a lot of different descriptions of memories, feelings, and thoughts to express the perspectively long period of time, because that would negate the rhythm and flow that it's actually happening in only a short period of time. So the if anybody has any advice or ideas that might be helpful I would appreciate any suggestions, especially if you've ever written anything similar in this manner, on how I might write this well and succinctly to express both the simultaneous perception of time flowing slowly, but the actual perspective is that it only happens in a very short time.

10 comments

Like

Comment

Share

Most relevant

Steve Bowers

Iain M Banks wrote a segment describing a conversation between two AI Minds which happened in the pause between two words in a sentence spoken by a human. You could describe the stream of AI consciousness that occurs between two ticks of a clock, for instance.

*   3y 

Mark Pettersen

I would describe it as something like... A flood of snapshots: a dog barking, a child crying, a tender embrace, a first kiss, grief... it's concise and conveys that there is a torrent going on in the mind of the character.

*   3y 

Shane Simonsen

Any reason you couldn't insert a high accuracy atomic clock as a marker of progression of time? Or some other reference action like the vibrations of an atom?

*   3y 

View 1 reply

View more comments

3 of 9

See more on Facebook

See more on Facebook

Email or phone number

 

Password

 

Log In

Forgot password?

or

Create new account
