Title: sad – 50-Word Stories

URL Source: http://fiftywordstories.com/tag/sad/

Markdown Content:
Nobody tells you how much parenting you’ll do on stairs. (And, me, scared of heights.) From tying shoelaces, to exploring Souter Lighthouse, to throwing socks at one another.

Now I sit on the stairs outside your room, waiting for the WhatsApp message that’ll say you’re not coming over this weekend.

* * *

James Whitman writes from Sunderland. There are twenty-six stairs in his home, and he has parented on every single one of them.

Under desks, grit grinds into bare knees. The teacher whispers, this is practice, remember. Somebody’s phone vibrates, a familiar hymn. In the darkness, Jamir passes a cough drop to a crying first grader, palm to palm like communion. After, in the light, nobody mentions it. We line up, unbelievably gentle.

* * *

Brandon McNeice is a Philadelphia-based writer and educator. His work has appeared or is forthcoming in SmokeLong Quarterly, Plough, Front Porch Republic, Beyond Words, The Rush Magazine, and Flash Frog.

The headaches – some days I can’t even focus, let alone work.

Squad medics didn’t care. “Compulsory invalid discharge” – military speak for “useless,” “fired.”

Ever since that day, when they had us hunting those droids, and that old man waved his hand and my mind wasn’t my own.

It still isn’t.

* * *

William Mitchell lives in East Sussex in the South of England. He is an award-winning author, having had early success with various Horror and Science Fiction publications before winning the Writers of the Future contest in 2012. His first novel, CREATIONS, came out in 2014 with John Hunt Publishing.

On my last visit, Granny fretted. Were the aliens treating Grandpa right? Until now she’d opined that if aliens could do space travel, they shootin’-sure could do the wash and fix a proper dinner. A blessing Grandpa wasn’t fussy about his meals or collars. Her faith in Him remained unshakable.

* * *

Miriam N. Kotzin writes fiction and poetry. She is the author of five collections of poetry, two collections of short fiction, and two novels—most recently the novel Right This Way (Spuyten Duyvil). Her 50-word stories have been published in 50-Word Stories, 50 Give or Take, and Blink Ink. She teaches literature and creative writing at Drexel University.

My Mother’s Day card read: _IloveyousooooomuchmummyyourthebestbestbestandyoumakemehappeesloveloveloveexraloveBeeee!_

I smiled, then frowned and got to work.

I drilled my daughter daily on word spacing and punctuation.

I instructed her on the capitalization of proper nouns.

I cautioned against repetition and hyperbole.

The next year:

“Dear Mother, Enjoy Mother’s Day. Sincerely, Beatrice.”

Success!

* * *

Mother to two teens, Joanna Norland feels nostalgic for the early years of creative spelling and free form punctuation. She is a playwright and writing coach based in East Sussex, UK and blogs about combining writing and parenting at mumswrite.com.

Mother read that story with the crumbs and the kids. So when she sent me into the forest, she gave me some bread.

I’d have crumbled it if there were witches, or bartered with wolves. But because my monster was the one sending me out, I ate it up instead.

* * *

Chelsea Utecht is an American abroad in Tbilisi, Georgia where she teaches literature and writing. A recent participant in the renowned Iowa Writers’ Workshop, she has been previously published in Fifty-Word Stories and her work is forthcoming in Shooter Literary Magazine.

The cracked window casts a rainbow on the wall, beautiful like the fairy-queen in the discarded picture-book by the bed. The little girl watches it through the numbness of fever.

“Have you fled the sky?” she smiles. “Are you sick, too?”

But neither fairy nor mortal last through that night.

* * *

Larissa Martins Costa writes short stories to escape from her hopelessly long novels-in-progress. She may be reached on instagram at @mcostalarissa

Joseph finishes reading War and Peace, all of its 587,286 words, and places the book on an empty bed.

A thick silence fills his small room.

He has kept his promise to read every word of the book to his wife. She, however, could not keep her promise to listen.

* * *

K.G. Song discovered the joy of creative writing, especially crafting flash fiction, during the pandemic lock down and that became his favorite hobby. He resides in California with his wife and a parrot. They do their best to keep K.G. out of trouble, not always successfully.

One day before she died, Anna watered peonies and sent a letter to her son. A rare bright November day, crimson leaves scattered on sidewalks. Anna shook her head at a scurrying squirrel. Because, she knew, there were some things—like your body failing—that you could not prepare for.

* * *

Erin Jamieson (she/her) holds an MFA in Creative Writing from Miami University. Her writing has been published in over eighty literary magazines, including a Pushcart Prize nomination. She is the author of a poetry collection (Clothesline, NiftyLit, Feb 2023). Her latest poetry chapbook, Fairytales, was published by Bottlecap Press. Follow her on Twitter at @erin_simmer.

I made dinner: spaghetti, her favourite. Set the table, the spoons placed just the way she liked (left from centre). Then let Kenny G fade into the night’s demise.

It’s been 3 years 4 months and 12 days since she promised to come back home.

I still wait up, anyways.

* * *

Mahathi Sathish wrote this story.

Posts navigation
----------------
