Title: What is the saddest story you can come up with in two sentences?

URL Source: https://www.quora.com/What-is-the-saddest-story-you-can-come-up-with-in-two-sentences

Markdown Content:
What is the saddest story you can come up with in two sentences? - Quora

===============

Something went wrong. Wait a moment and try again.

Try again

Skip to content

Skip to search

Sign In

Fiction

Loss, Grief, Bereavement ...

Journaling Prompts

Creative Writing

Sadness

Human Stories

Human Feelings and Memory

Short Stories

Stories

+ 5

What is the saddest story you can come up with in two sentences?

All related (100+)

Sort

Recommended

Anonymous

11y

She grew steadily stronger inside of me for seven months, and then the moving stopped. I was only given an hour to say goodbye to a lifetime of made up memories.

Upvote · 

999 237

9 6

Promoted by Grammarly

Grammarly

Great Writing, Simplified

·Updated 3y

How can I effectively edit my own writing?

So, you think you’ve drafted a tweet, an email, a short story, or even a novel. These are different forms of communication, but the process of bringing them to fruition has a necessary, sometimes overlooked step: editing! Unless you’re a professional writer, it’s unlikely that you have an editor who can review your writing regularly. Here are some tips to help you review your own work.

1.   Give your writing some space. Have you ever felt a mix of pure relief and joy when you’ve finished a draft of something? Don’t downplay that feeling and the ability to walk away from your work before you start ed

Continue Reading

So, you think you’ve drafted a tweet, an email, a short story, or even a novel. These are different forms of communication, but the process of bringing them to fruition has a necessary, sometimes overlooked step: editing! Unless you’re a professional writer, it’s unlikely that you have an editor who can review your writing regularly. Here are some tips to help you review your own work.

1.   Give your writing some space. Have you ever felt a mix of pure relief and joy when you’ve finished a draft of something? Don’t downplay that feeling and the ability to walk away from your work before you start editing it. You may need minutes, hours, or days, but once you sit back down with what you originally had on the page, you’ll have the thrill of looking at it with fresh eyes. You’ll notice errors you may not have seen the first time. You’ll come to new realizations about its overall tone and structure. If it’s a text or email, maybe you only need a few minutes away from it. If it’s a story or essay, perhaps you’ll need longer. Regardless of what type of work it is, it will help your writing tremendously.
2.   Don’t use overachieving synonyms. Looking at your work for the second, third, or fourth time around may inspire you to spice up your language with longer, more uncommon words. There’s nothing wrong with having a thesaurus nearby, but try to limit the repetition of long, pretentious-feeling words so your work flows well and doesn’t feel too bogged down. At the end of the day, you want it to feel true to you and the message you’re conveying.
3.   Remember who the reader is. Don’t forget your own voice as the writer—but don’t forget who your reader is. Many writers get too close to their work; editing is a chance to try to get out of your own head. Who is your ideal reader? What do you want them to take away from the writing? It’s a unique time to step in their shoes, to make sure your communication is as effective as you’d like it to be.
4.   Kill your darlings. Don’t be scared to remove chunks of your work, even if it feels precious to you. If it’s a passage that’s really tough to part with, try saving it somewhere else, so you can return to it later in your piece or for another work.
5.   Use Grammarly. Last but not least, Grammarly has countless resources for editing your work. Our writing assistant helps you find areas of your writing that are unclear or too wordy, as well as help you find mistakes you might not have caught.

Editing may feel tedious, but it’s just as important as writing itself. For an extra pair of editing eyes on everything you write, download the free Grammarly for Windows and Mac today.

Upvote · 

1.1K 1.1K

999 229

99 33

Related questions

More answers below

What is the saddest experience you have ever had?

What is the best love story people can come up with in two sentences?

What's your best story in one or two sentence?

What is the saddest thing you've ever seen?

Can you write a story ending with the sentence “feeling so much pain she left without a word”?

Sarat Chandra

Made 27 rotations around the sun so far.

·11y

While walking down the street, I heard an old man say "I've been in love with the same woman for almost 50 years now."

I was touched until I heard him say "I wish she knew."

Upvote · 

999 518

9 7

Jaskaran Singh

I try to be a creative creature. · Author has 77 answers and 372.9K answer views

·Updated 10y

I asked a 14 year old boy working at a cycle repair shop how much he earns in a month and how much money he sends to his parents. Apparently, both the questions had the same answer .

Upvote · 

999 101

9 1

Barry Hampe

Retired author and freelance writer for hire · Author has 15.4K answers and 31.3M answer views

·Updated 10y

Standing before the altar, I watched the woman I have loved all my life walk slowly down the aisle, beautiful in her wedding dress, her eyes sparkling with love. That was the day I was best man at my best friend's wedding.

Upvote · 

2K 2K

99 32

9 1

Related questions

What is the saddest experience you have ever had?

What is the best love story people can come up with in two sentences?

What's your best story in one or two sentence?

What is the saddest thing you've ever seen?

Can you write a story ending with the sentence “feeling so much pain she left without a word”?

What's the saddest thing you experienced with pets?

What is the saddest story you can write with only one word?

Can you write an emotional story with the first line “I really don’t like feelings.”?

What smart person has the saddest story?

What are the saddest "wife betrayed "stories?

What is the best sentence I can use to start a story?

What is your big story told in two little sentences?

Can you complete this story(200 words)?

What's the saddest story you made up for a competition?

What are some examples of last sentences to end a sad story?

Related questions

What is the saddest experience you have ever had?

What is the best love story people can come up with in two sentences?

What's your best story in one or two sentence?

What is the saddest thing you've ever seen?

Can you write a story ending with the sentence “feeling so much pain she left without a word”?

What's the saddest thing you experienced with pets?

Advertisement

About · Careers · Privacy · Terms · Contact · Languages · Your Ad Choices · Press · 

© Quora, Inc. 2025
