Title: If you could rewrite one scene from the Star Wars sequels to fix a logic issue, what would it be and how would you change it?

URL Source: https://www.quora.com/If-you-could-rewrite-one-scene-from-the-Star-Wars-sequels-to-fix-a-logic-issue-what-would-it-be-and-how-would-you-change-it

Markdown Content:
If you could rewrite one scene from the Star Wars sequels to fix a logic issue, what would it be and how would you change it? - Quora

===============

Something went wrong. Wait a moment and try again.

Try again

Skip to content

Skip to search

Sign In

Star Wars Universe

Film Analysis

Science Fiction Movies

Logic Problems

Rewriting Narratives

Star Wars Movies

Movie Scene

Movie Flaws

Movie Theories

+ 5

If you could rewrite one scene from the Star Wars sequels to fix a logic issue, what would it be and how would you change it?

All related (31)

Sort

Recommended

Matthew Cook

Youth Worker (2017–present) · Upvoted by 

Stephane Dreyfus

, MBA Movies, University of California, Santa Cruz

·Updated 5y

Related

How would you fix the Star Wars sequel trilogy?

By using the sequel trilogy that was already perfect, already loved and 100% better.

Seriously this is the trilogy we deserve and it should have been made back in the 80s/90s as a film trilogy. Timothy Zahn is arguably the best Star Wars writer and created arguably the best legends character… Thrawn

Bye bye Kylo Ren, hello the greatest non sith villain in Star Wars.

Why is this better?

Because it makes sense, it has a brilliantly written story with brilliant characters. It flows better than the Disney trilogy. It has a villain that is menacing!!!!! Thrawn is scary because he is right!! He can see

Continue Reading

By using the sequel trilogy that was already perfect, already loved and 100% better.

Seriously this is the trilogy we deserve and it should have been made back in the 80s/90s as a film trilogy. Timothy Zahn is arguably the best Star Wars writer and created arguably the best legends character… Thrawn

Bye bye Kylo Ren, hello the greatest non sith villain in Star Wars.

Why is this better?

Because it makes sense, it has a brilliantly written story with brilliant characters. It flows better than the Disney trilogy. It has a villain that is menacing!!!!! Thrawn is scary because he is right!! He can see the threats that the galaxy will have to face. We get to see the new Republic, we see Leia and Han as a couple with children (instead of apart with a screaming man child). Tallon Karrde and Mara Jade, Noghuri! There is so much to see in this trilogy that would have made it incredible.

I get that when Disney got around to it the actors were too old (again it should have been made in the 80s/90s) but that does not excuse the sloppy poorly written mess we end up with. I would prefer an adaptation of this story than having to watch JJ Abrams and Rian Johnson squabble over a broken story.

Edit:

Thank you so much for 1000 upvotes, I have loved being able to discuss this in the comments.

Upvote · 

1.4K 1.4K

999 119

99 10

Promoted by ComparisonAdviser

Carl Madden

Finance Security Expert

·Sep 12

What secret about your industry can you share now that you don’t work for them anymore?

Oh boy, where do I even start? After 8 years as an auto insurance agent, I have zero loyalty left to protect these companies.

We Had "Loyalty Lists" Every month, I'd get a report of customers who hadn't shopped around in 2+ years. These were our golden geese - we could raise their rates aggressively because they'd proven they wouldn't leave. One customer I remember was paying $3,200 annually for coverage that should have cost $1,800. She stayed for 5 years.

The "File and Use" Scam Here's something most people don't know: in many states, insurance companies can raise your rates immediately and ju

Continue Reading

Oh boy, where do I even start? After 8 years as an auto insurance agent, I have zero loyalty left to protect these companies.

We Had "Loyalty Lists" Every month, I'd get a report of customers who hadn't shopped around in 2+ years. These were our golden geese - we could raise their rates aggressively because they'd proven they wouldn't leave. One customer I remember was paying $3,200 annually for coverage that should have cost $1,800. She stayed for 5 years.

The "File and Use" Scam Here's something most people don't know: in many states, insurance companies can raise your rates immediately and justify it later. We'd implement 15-20% increases across entire ZIP codes, knowing regulators would take months to review. By then, we'd collected millions in extra premiums.

Claim Frequency Was Irrelevant Your rates weren't really based on how often you'd claim - they were based on how likely you were to shop around. A customer with 3 claims who got quotes every year paid less than a claim-free customer who never compared rates. It was pure price discrimination.

We Loved Policy Confusion Complex policy language wasn't an accident. The more confusing your coverage, the less likely you'd comparison shop effectively. We'd change terminology between companies deliberately to make apple-to-apple comparisons nearly impossible.

The Real Game-Changer Tools like ComparisonAdviser absolutely terrify insurance companies because they eliminate our biggest advantage: information asymmetry. When customers can instantly see what competitors charge with identical coverage and discounts applied, our whole "loyalty tax" model collapses.

I've watched too many good people get fleeced by an industry that profits from customer ignorance. Use ComparisonAdviser religiously - it's the only way to beat a system designed to exploit your trust.

The truth? Every year you don't comparison shop, you're probably donating $500-1,500 to your insurance company's profit margins.

Upvote · 

12.5K 12.5K

999 421

Related questions

More answers below

If you could change the sequels of Star Wars, how would you?

If you could choose one scene to rewrite in the sequel trilogy of Star Wars, which one would it be?

If you were to direct the Star Wars sequels, what ideas would you have for it that would make a much better story and why?

If you could rewrite one episode of Star Wars, which one and how would you change it?

If you could redo the Star Wars sequel trilogy, what changes to the storyline would you make?

Chris O'Leary

Unapologetic Star Wars Nerd · Upvoted by 

Stephane Dreyfus

, MBA Movies, University of California, Santa Cruz · Author has 4.3K answers and 120.2M answer views

·5y

Related

How would you fix the Star Wars sequel trilogy?

There are 3 points in the sequel trilogy when the writers failed and failed miserably.

Don’t get me wrong. I’m not actually a hater of the sequel trilogy, I think it’s much better than the prequel trilogy. Yeah, Yeah, Yeah, come at me. The bottom line is that where the sequel trilogy missed was in three missed opportunities for the writers where they could have just punched you in the mouth, and it would have been GREAT.

Point one:

Goodbye, Leia.

She dies here. It was a perfect scene. A great death. Until it wasn't. Anything they needed from her going forward, she was force trained, she could have

Continue Reading

There are 3 points in the sequel trilogy when the writers failed and failed miserably.

Don’t get me wrong. I’m not actually a hater of the sequel trilogy, I think it’s much better than the prequel trilogy. Yeah, Yeah, Yeah, come at me. The bottom line is that where the sequel trilogy missed was in three missed opportunities for the writers where they could have just punched you in the mouth, and it would have been GREAT.

Point one:

Goodbye, Leia.

She dies here. It was a perfect scene. A great death. Until it wasn't. Anything they needed from her going forward, she was force trained, she could have accomplished as a force ghost.

It was an INCREDIBLY powerful scene. Until it wasn’t. All they had to do was LET. HER. DIE.

Point Two:

Goodbye, Rose (maybe)

This scene required a sacrifice. Now, this could go one of two ways. Either the cannon takes out Rose as she bashes Finn out of its path, both ending her character whose arc had ended she was nothing but a point to tie up from that point on, or she fails to, and Finn dies, then going forward, Rose takes Finn’s place. Everything Finn did from that point on, Rose could have done. The fact is though that one of them needed to die here. Both together were in each other’s way for the rest of the way, it was cumbersome.

Point Three.

This. Right here …

… is where they killed the wrong character. This point right here, Rey comes back just enough to touch Ben’s face … they look lovingly at each other …

… And she fades away into oblivion.

It is at that point where all the toxic fanboys would have forgiven her. It’s at that point where all the “Mary Sue” talk would have gone away, and the one actor on screen capable of truly handling that moment would have had the screen to himself. The power of that scene would have been multiplied by 1000.

You then end the movie with Ben on Tatooine burying his Mother and his Uncle’s lightsabers together.

The old woman comes by, and says:

“There’s been no one here for so long…What is your name?”

Just as she did in the movie as written.

Ben looks up with his haunted eyes.

“Solo,” he replies.

“Solo who?” the old woman asked.

“Solo Skywalker.”

Upvote · 

2K 2K

999 230

99 15

Kevin Baker

Shader and Material Artist, Deep Silver Volition · Author has 9K answers and 38.2M answer views

·Updated 3y

Related

How would you fix the Star Wars sequel trilogy?

So I’d be a bit tempted to go in a wildly different direction, but it we’re maintaining the same basic outline:

Force Awakens:

*   Clarify the political situation in the galaxy, likely in the opening crawl, and simplify it a little bit. The Empire still controls much of the Galaxy. The Republic signed a peace treaty with them, but Resistance forces inside the Empire still fight to liberate more systems.
*   Make Jakku not look like Tatooine. It’s too on the nose of a callback. Make it a swampy planet or something else that communicates “backwater” but isn’t a desert. Keep the ruined ships, though; that p

Continue Reading

So I’d be a bit tempted to go in a wildly different direction, but it we’re maintaining the same basic outline:

Force Awakens:

*   Clarify the political situation in the galaxy, likely in the opening crawl, and simplify it a little bit. The Empire still controls much of the Galaxy. The Republic signed a peace treaty with them, but Resistance forces inside the Empire still fight to liberate more systems.
*   Make Jakku not look like Tatooine. It’s too on the nose of a callback. Make it a swampy planet or something else that communicates “backwater” but isn’t a desert. Keep the ruined ships, though; that part was great.
*   Get rid of Star Killer Base. It’s introduced too late in the film to be a compelling threat. Instead, have the Empire launch a Pearl Harbor-esque surprise attack against the Republic fleet, and have the final battle be to take out the hidden ship yards where the Empire has been secretly rebuilding their military.

The Last Jedi:

*   Luke/Rey/Kylo sections stay mostly the same, but have the reasons Luke is tempted to kill Kylo be a bit more concrete than just a premonition/sensing darkness. Maybe Kylo got carried away in an argument with a fellow student and seriously injures them with Force lightening?
*   On the Raddus, have them suspect there’s a spy to justify why they’re so cagey with information. Replace the Holdo Maneuver with a sub-light ramming; introducing hyperspace ramming raises too many questions.
*   Overall plot of the Canto Blight bit stays the same, but its length is cut pretty aggressively.
*   Make it clear that Finn ramming the siege cannon thing would have killed a bunch of enemy troops but wouldn’t have meaningfully altered the outcome of the battle.

Rise of Skywalker

*   Throw it out completely. Except for slug guy. He can stay.

*   Make the thematic focus of the film be about the forces of good coming together, while the forces of evil fall into in-fighting.
*   Have the film set against the backdrop of a desperate, seemingly unwinnable, battle to defend Coruscant. Think Helm’s Deep, but on a larger scale.
*   Rose and Finn sneak behind Imperial lines to foment a rebellion among the Stormtroopers.
*   Rey, Poe, and Lando travel to a surrendered, occupied world (maybe Mon Calamari) to try and convince them to rise up and join the fight.
*   Hux turns on Supreme Leader Kylo Ren, attempts to kill him, and takes the title of Supreme Leader for himself. Rey and Kylo form an uneasy alliance against him. Kylo never unambiguously returns to the light side—he’s still motivated by hate and revenge—but he does play a key role in bringing down Hux and his fleet, dying in the process.
*   Hux’s death, the arrival of the Mon Calamari fleet, and mass defection of Imperial enlisted personnel turn the tide of the battle.

Upvote · 

1.1K 1.1K

99 79

99 18

James Edward Hinds

Star Wars Legends Consumer Advocate · Author has 1.5K answers and 4.2M answer views

·Updated 5y

Related

What's wrong with the Star Wars sequels?

Say Nabisco put out a new Oreo. Rather than having two cookies, it’s two food-grade charcoal briquettes, and instead of a creamy filling, it has toothpaste flavored bubblegum. I guess they think people who don’t like brushing their teeth can just chew on this thing, instead. Unfortunately, the Marketing Department did not get the memo and left these in the default packaging. Let’s see what happens when “New Oreos” hits the market:

Attractiveness? 10 out of 10.

Utility for what it is intended to do? 8 out of 10.

Immediate valuation upon tasting? Negative 300 out of 10.

The problem with the Sequel T

Continue Reading

Say Nabisco put out a new Oreo. Rather than having two cookies, it’s two food-grade charcoal briquettes, and instead of a creamy filling, it has toothpaste flavored bubblegum. I guess they think people who don’t like brushing their teeth can just chew on this thing, instead. Unfortunately, the Marketing Department did not get the memo and left these in the default packaging. Let’s see what happens when “New Oreos” hits the market:

Attractiveness? 10 out of 10.

Utility for what it is intended to do? 8 out of 10.

Immediate valuation upon tasting? Negative 300 out of 10.

The problem with the Sequel Trilogy is that it never adopted a cohesive theme the way the Original Trilogy or the Prequels did. The OT was about Luke redeeming his father despite the circumstances and what his teachers told him, and the Prequels were about how an evil politician used the Jedi Order’s hypocrisy to destroy them.

Now, you could say that Lucas got this through dumb luck—the Prequels in particular struggled because Lucas thought it was about not always following the rules to do what’s right, but this isn’t actually supported in the story. The author’s imagined theme sort of conflicts with the actual theme. But even if they were unconsciously put in, Lucas’s writing had themes which made it all become a cohesive whole.

How does this compare to the Sequel Trilogy? In The Force Awakens, Abrams deliberately left themes off the table because he wanted to leave space for the next director, but then The Last Jedi decided to run hard on the “subverting audience expectations” train rather than implement a singular theme, and by the time The Rise of Skywalker came along, Lucasfilm was in full damage control and it was basically too late to retroactively add anything.

At the end of The Rise of Skywalker, we can look back at the whole Sequel Trilogy and see three things:

*   None of the characters have learned any important lessons,
*   The universe is not meaningfully different than it was at the end of Return of the Jedi, and
*   The audience hasn’t learned any important lessons by watching the characters’ struggles.

The Sequel Trilogy doesn’t even play with the Recursive History angle; it’s a 780 million dollar bridge to nowhere. It stops being a tasty treat you go back to over and over again and becomes an empty palate cleanser instead.

Upvote · 

999 458

99 12

Promoted by The Penny Hoarder

Lisa Dawson

Finance Writer at The Penny Hoarder

·Updated Nov 25

What's some brutally honest advice that everyone should know?

Here’s the thing: I wish I had known these money secrets sooner. They’ve helped so many people save hundreds, secure their family’s future, and grow their bank accounts—myself included.

And honestly? Putting them to use was way easier than I had expected. I bet you can knock out at least three or four of these right now—yes, even from your phone. Don’t wait like I did.

1. Cancel Your Car Insurance

You might not even realize it, but your car insurance company is probably overcharging you. In fact, they’re kind of counting on you not noticing. Luckily, this problem is easy to fix.

Don’t waste your t

Continue Reading

Here’s the thing: I wish I had known these money secrets sooner. They’ve helped so many people save hundreds, secure their family’s future, and grow their bank accounts—myself included.

And honestly? Putting them to use was way easier than I had expected. I bet you can knock out at least three or four of these right now—yes, even from your phone. Don’t wait like I did.

1. Cancel Your Car Insurance

You might not even realize it, but your car insurance company is probably overcharging you. In fact, they’re kind of counting on you not noticing. Luckily, this problem is easy to fix.

Don’t waste your time browsing insurance sites for a better deal. A company called Insurify shows you all your options at once — people who do this save up to $996 per year.

If you tell them a bit about yourself and your vehicle, they’ll send you personalized quotes so you can compare them and find the best one for you.

Tired of overpaying for car insurance? It takes just five minutes to compare your options with Insurify and see how much you could save on car insurance.

2. Set Up Direct Deposit — Pocket $300

When you set up direct deposit with SoFi Checking and Savings (Member FDIC), they’ll put up to $300 straight into your account. No… really. Just a nice little bonus for making a smart switch.

Why switch? With SoFi, you can earn up to 3.80% APY on savings and 0.50% on checking, plus a 0.20% APY boost for your first 6 months when you set up direct deposit or keep $5K in your account. That’s up to 4.00% APY total. Way better than letting your balance chill at 0.40% APY.

There’s no fees. No gotchas.Make the move to SoFi and get paid to upgrade your finances.

3. You Can Start Investing in Real Estate for Just $10

You don’t need to be a millionaire or know how to be a landlord to invest in real estate. With the Fundrise Flagship Fund, you can start with just $10 and let your money do the work for you.

So where does your $10 go? The Flagship Fund pools money from everyday investors and uses it to buy and manage real estate, things like apartment buildings or housing developments. As these properties earn money, you could receive quarterly dividends or watch your investment grow over time.

You don’t have to deal with tenants, repairs, or any of the hard stuff. The Flagship Fund takes care of it all, and you can track your progress anytime right from your phone. It only takes a few minutes to get started.

You can join the Fundrise Flagship Fund today and start building wealth with just $10.

This is a paid advertisement. Carefully consider the investment objectives, risks, charges and expenses of the Fundrise Flagship Fund before investing. This and other information can be found in the Fund’s prospectus. Read them carefully before investing.

4. Ask This Company to Get a Big Chunk of Debt Forgiven

A company named National Debt Relief has the capability to negotiate with lenders to reduce a portion of existing debt. This process does not require bankruptcy or loans, and credit history is not a determining factor.

For those with at least $10,000 in unsecured debt, such as credit card bills, personal loans, or medical expenses, experts at National Debt Relief can develop a monthly payment plan. As payments accumulate, negotiations with creditors may lead to a reduction in the total debt owed, which can then be settled in a lump sum.

On average, individuals might achieve debt freedom within 24 to 48 months. The sign-up process takes less than a minute to assess potential debt reduction options.

5. Get Up to $50,000 From This Company

Need a little extra cash to pay off credit card debt, remodel your house or to buy a big purchase?

We found a company willing to help.

Here’s how it works: If your credit score is at least 620,AmONE can help you borrow up to $50,000 (no collateral needed) with fixed rates starting at 6.40% and terms from 6 to 144 months.

AmONE won’t make you stand in line or call a bank. And if you’re worried you won’t qualify, it’s free to check online. It takes just two minutes, and it could save you thousands of dollars.

Totally worth it.

6. Get Paid $225/Month While Watching Movie Previews

If we told you that you could get paid while watching videos on your computer, you’d probably laugh.

It’s too good to be true, right?

But we’re serious. By signing up for a free account with InboxDollars, you could add up to $225 a month to your pocket. They’ll send you short surveys every day, which you can fill out while you watch someone bake brownies or catch up on the latest Kardashian drama.

No, InboxDollars won’t replace your full-time job, but it’s something easy you can do while you’re already on the couch tonight, wasting time on your phone.

Unlike other sites, InboxDollars pays you in cash — no points or gift cards. It’s already paid its users more than $56 million.

Signing up takes about one minute, and you’ll immediately receive a $5 bonus to get you started.

7. Earn $1000/Month by Reviewing Games and Products You Love

Okay, real talk—everything is crazy expensive right now, and let’s be honest, we could all use a little extra cash. But who has time for a second job?

Here’s the good news. You’re already playing games on your phone to kill time, relax, or just zone out. So why not make some extra cash while you’re at it?

With KashKick, you can actually get paid to play. No weird surveys, no endless ads, just real money for playing games you’d probably be playing anyway. Some people are even making over $1,000 a month just doing this!

Oh, and here’s a little pro tip: If you wanna cash out even faster, spending $2 on an in-app purchase to skip levels can help you hit your first $50+ payout way quicker.

Once you’ve got $10, you can cash out instantly through PayPal—no waiting around, just straight-up money in your account.

Seriously, you’re already playing—might as well make some money while you’re at it.Sign up for KashKick and start earning now!

Upvote · 

21.5K 21.5K

1.8K 1.8K

999 468

Related questions

If you could change the sequels of Star Wars, how would you?

If you could choose one scene to rewrite in the sequel trilogy of Star Wars, which one would it be?

If you were to direct the Star Wars sequels, what ideas would you have for it that would make a much better story and why?

If you could rewrite one episode of Star Wars, which one and how would you change it?

If you could redo the Star Wars sequel trilogy, what changes to the storyline would you make?

If you could write and direct the Star Wars sequel trilogy, what would you have done differently?

What would your ideal Star Wars sequel trilogy look like?

How would you have written the back story to the Star Wars sequels? The existing back story is somewhat laboured and unbelievable.

Aside from the recent Star Wars sequels, are there any examples of sequels or reboots shot by people who clearly know nothing about the series they are contributing to?

How would you change the story of the Star Wars sequels to add more consistency with the older movies/shows?

If you were in charge of making the Star Wars sequels, what story would you have gone for?

What does an alternate Star Wars sequel trilogy look like?

If you could change one thing in the Star Wars sequels and/or prequels, what would that be and why?

What would have happened if there were no sequels in Star Wars? Would that change how we perceive these films now, or not at all? How so/not so, exactly?

The year is 2035 and you're tasked with creating special editions of the Star Wars sequel movies (and standalone films). What changes (a la the 1997 special edition releases) do you make to each one?

Related questions

If you could change the sequels of Star Wars, how would you?

If you could choose one scene to rewrite in the sequel trilogy of Star Wars, which one would it be?

If you were to direct the Star Wars sequels, what ideas would you have for it that would make a much better story and why?

If you could rewrite one episode of Star Wars, which one and how would you change it?

If you could redo the Star Wars sequel trilogy, what changes to the storyline would you make?

If you could write and direct the Star Wars sequel trilogy, what would you have done differently?

Advertisement

About · Careers · Privacy · Terms · Contact · Languages · Your Ad Choices · Press · 

© Quora, Inc. 2025
