Title: Reblog by @caffeinewitchcraft

URL Source: https://www.tumblr.com/caffeinewitchcraft/705776374190915584/writing-prompt-s-you-are-a-villain-famous-for

Published Time: 2023-01-07T08:40:01.000Z

Markdown Content:
me out loud: "magic does work and you should expect results! It's not just in your head!"

me under my breath: "holy shit I can't believe that worked"

Reblogged

it’s 10pm. do you know who you are?

did i tell y’all that one time when my friends and i were making a joke mockumentary about a fake cryptid, my sibling and i got into a really bad hospitalizing car crash and instead of delaying it we just decided to film in the hospital and also convinced my mom and dad to play roles in it as well?

ulibeanz

ulibeanz

hey just wanted to say thanks for this incredibly chilling remark i’m so scared now

caffeinewitchcraftFor once I relate to US politicians because I too am eating popcorn and not doing anything productive #amazing work#caffeine chatter#this is a joke#I believe in some politicians#like eat the rich#consume the flesh of those who profit off our country’s bloated carcass of a democracy#yada yada102423

caffeinewitchcraftRebloggedstil-lindigoFollowKeep reading#other peoples writing#other people's writing199,50212,993

caffeinewitchcraftReblogged limegreen4neenarchiveFollowi know the gay coding of villains is bad for business but unfortunately it is REALLY sexy810,59916,743

caffeinewitchcraftReblogged slavicafirewhat-a-bastardFollowAccepting identities I don't understand is actually extremely easy because I just go "this isn't about me" and move on with my life unbothered by someone else's identity, it's truly that simple. 9259,24460,842

caffeinewitchcraftI’ll be starting to post my daily writing warm ups here in a week or so and just want to share what that’s going to look like first1) for me, writing warm ups range from about 200-1500 words of incomplete stories or experiments specifically written to improve various aspects of my writing. Sometimes it will be technical, other times it will be about storytelling, other times it will be to untangle an idea that isn’t quite a story yet2) These posts will be tagged “caffeine warms up” for those who’d like to block that daily post. Because many of them will be incomplete stories, I totally get not wanting to engage! All of my complete stories or chapters of stories will still be tagged “my writing”3) the purpose is to both hold myself accountable for my daily practice (and isn’t posting to the internet the most accountable? Lol) and to show what I mean when I say “daily writing practice”I do receive a lot of messages (that are very sweet!) from people who want to write like me or who would like advice on things they feel I do well in my stories. My answer these days is always “practice.”The most common pieces of advice I see on Tumblr are to “read more often” and “exorcise your self doubt.” Those are both very important things to do, obviously, but I’ll go to my grave saying this:Writing is a skill. Storytelling is a skill. Making them go together? That’s a skill. And skills need practice.There are a lot of valuable tips and tricks from writing blogs on this site. Practice them. I’ll be using a few of those posts as writing warmups as well#caffeine chatter#long post#caffeine warms up#writblr#writing advice#(I’ll be posting them all together to Patreon first in a weekly post then daily here)44344

caffeinewitchcraftReblogged spinning-logicflagellantFollow"my child is normal" your child writes the word house in blue#house of leaves4231526

caffeinewitchcraftReblogged bostonbakeddeanswarallthetime2003Followthe thing about this one is . you can only tell when someone comes back from the dead all wrong . if you knew them well enough in the first place .princesstokyomoon@hauntedharlequinn i am Obsessed with your tags#HM. GOING TO BE OBSESSED WITH THIS NOW. THANKS #imagine a ritual that recreates someone from your memories of them. to you they are perfect but #to someone who knew a different side of them its a stranger#inspiration #or no. the horror of the resurrected. you have been wiped clean out of your own existence #and the only parts of you that get to survive are the ones others found useful #all your private quirks and ticks are gone. they are you but you can't access them anymore #you are someone that left and was dragged back #and they don't know you well enough to be horrified #you resurrect your loved one and they stop surprising you. because they can't. they are only what #you asked for#wow wow wow#amazing concept#chills267,49012,883

caffeinewitchcraftReblogged runwildwithmebookmaniaFollowSeven years after, I see you again 😚 scripturient-manipulatorGuys this completely changed my writing, heed it. I often do an entire draft just looking at sentence variation and oftentimes the results are absolutely transformative in the difference.officialleehadanThis is very very good advice, and absolutely worth following. Read this. Read it again. Follow it. Your writing will get much, much better.veilebaslayancumlelerwhenever i see this post i am like goddamn this is so truecaffeinewitchcraftI love building stories like this 😭 I could rant for an hour about the power of a series of a compact sentences during the onset of a panic sequence which then suddenly gives way into a spiraling sentence of anxiety and fear. Then you cut it off—Into a more sedately paced paragraph of comfort or realization. I go so insane for works that vary the length of their sentences to show emotion or character or atmosphere (usually all three)! The horror genre is impeccable with this. The build up of fear as the protagonist notices an open door that was not open before, they’re sure, they remember closing it and feeling the tough wood grain on their fingers. They force themselves a trembling step forward, reaching for the doorknob to—what? To push it further open? To listen to the crawling dread they can barely keep locked behind their teeth and close the door without checking?They haven’t decided on the best course of action when the wind shudders through the house again, wailing down the chimney and through the fireplace at their back. The icy air slams into them a beat before their outstretched fingers touch the doorknob. The wind pushes the door open further. There’s a monster.#I love writing so much#it really is so fun and musical5058,31578,976

caffeinewitchcraftRebloggedcaffeinewitchcraftFollowEvery time I go to a holiday party, I wind up with a new significant other. One halloween got me a nihilist, another halloween got me an alchemist, one Christmas got me a news anchor, a St. Patrick’s day got me a poet and now, this New Years Eve, I am determined to remain singleI will prevailcaffeinewitchcraftAll bets are off if I meet someone wearing glitter. I fucking love glitter treehuggingwitchyhippy@caffeinewitchcraft was there someone wearing glitter in your stars last night?caffeinewitchcraftYet again I remain incredibly predictable! There was glitter from all the crowns the venue was giving out, and I now have a date with someone who was wearing a cape and a pearl necklace as an homage to Frank-N-Furter from Rocky Horror #I’m sure you all understand the power of a cape#we are going to the railroad museum to look at miniatures next weekend142861,319

caffeinewitchcraftRebloggedcaffeinewitchcraftFollowEvery time I go to a holiday party, I wind up with a new significant other. One halloween got me a nihilist, another halloween got me an alchemist, one Christmas got me a news anchor, a St. Patrick’s day got me a poet and now, this New Years Eve, I am determined to remain singleI will prevailcaffeinewitchcraftAll bets are off if I meet someone wearing glitter. I fucking love glitter 142861,319

caffeinewitchcraftEvery time I go to a holiday party, I wind up with a new significant other. One halloween got me a nihilist, another halloween got me an alchemist, one Christmas got me a news anchor, a St. Patrick’s day got me a poet and now, this New Years Eve, I am determined to remain singleI will prevail#caffeine chatter#the news anchor was the sweetest142861,319

caffeinewitchcraftCinderella Doesn’t Believe in Fairytales (part 9)(part 1) (part 2) (part 3). (Part 4) (part 5) (part 6) (part 7)(part 8)Baron Ramsey knows a secret.It is a very good position to be in, to be a noble and to know an important secret. The base of the aristocracy’s power comes from secrets after all and knowing one that many others don’t means he holds a special power. A different power. An important power.Baron Ramsey subtly pulls his collar away from his neck as he’s led down the long, ornate hall to the audience chamber. He can feel a bead of sweat just shy of his hairline and he hopes it doesn’t roll down his temple at the wrong moment. The knight leading him to the King and Queen has a hand on the silver hilt of his sword. He doesn’t look back at the Baron, but Baron Ramsey can feel his attention regardless. Like a flock of birds looking down from the trees as you pass underneath.Knowing a secret is a very good thing, he reminds himself. He dabs away the bead of sweat a beat before the knight opens the doors the audience chamber. He most likely has only been called to discuss a new item the Queen wants. Something that he who spends so much time abroad could find for her. It is a common occurrence. That is why he takes pains to never let her find him at home.“Baron David Ramsey,” the knight announces. He steps smartly to the side and bows without ever once looking at the occupants of the room. “Your majesties.”Baron David Ramsey. His name curls inside of his chest and settles like a band around his lungs. When he was a boy, his father took him to meet the Queen and King. His father said it was only natural to feel anxious and frightened in their presence. Natural and right, even. But now he can feel the unnaturalness in it and he struggles to take the first step forward. He could be crushed by their attention alone.Keep reading324151,050

caffeinewitchcraftI rarely speak about work online because I never want to be fired due to social mediaHoweverThey are slowly but surely removing my ability to bully customers back and I’m wondering if it’s even worth it anymoreBut then I see another barista get overwhelmed and I’m like “yeah this is my purpose” as I go to politely loud-speak at a middle aged doctor who may understand how my nervous system works but doesn’t understand what a latte is after having it explained five times#caffeine chatter#the day I see particular customers outside of work will be amazing#I don’t want to yell#I just want to know how it feels to be so willfully ignorant to the point of malice#just idle chatter really365513

caffeinewitchcraftReblogged mousedearvividviverridFollow"what advice do you have for new writers?" well i could say the typical (but important!) "practice" "read books" but my PERSONAL advice as someone who's been writing since he was a toddler is as follows: feel every emotion u can & touch every texture u can & search for obscure facts or antiquated words or animal behavior or something you wouldn't normally think about. the most arbitrary things can bring inspiration. branch out! leave your comfort zone and seek things that are new & unknown to you. learn to find wonder and beauty in some aspect of the world, but hopefully many aspects. learn how to be patient tbh. fall in any kind of love with anything. most importantly treat yourself with kindness and care and forgiveness - i get wanting to write about pain, trust me, but also trust me, your writing will evolve as your perception of yourself softens. oh yeah and always have a pen on youfaelanvanceOh, I love this. 44,1516,230
