Title: A Parent’s Guide to Claiming Tuition Tax Credit

URL Source: https://softrontax.com/blog/AParentGuidetoClaimingTuitionTaxCredit

Markdown Content:
**Key Takeaways**

*   Maximum tuition amounts which can be transferred from a child to a parent is $5,000 per child per tax year. 
*   The credit equals 15% of the amount paid in tuition fees during the year.
*   A student can transfer tuition to only one parent. 

As a parent, paying for your child’s college tuition can be a significant financial commitment especially now when the economy is slowing down and costs are rising. However, the tuition tax credit provides a valuable opportunity to offset some of these costs. This non-refundable credit allows you to use the tuition fees you have paid to reduce your taxable income. In this blog we will explore the intricacies of the tuition tax credit and how you as a parent can claim this credit on your taxes.

The tuition tax credit is a non-refundable tax credit available to post-secondary students in Canada. If you pay for your child’s tuition and other eligible educational costs such as exam fees, you can claim this amount when filing your personal income tax return. The credit equals to 15% of the amount paid in eligible tuition fees during the year, up to a maximum of $5,000 per child. If you have more than one child, your second or third child can also transfer a maximum of $5,000 in tuition amounts to you as the parent. In this case, assuming three children each transferring $5,000 in tuition amounts, the total amount you can claim as transfer tuition is $15,000.

Eligible tuition fees are fees paid by an individual to a post-secondary educational institution in Canada (that provides courses at a post-secondary level) or, fees paid by a deemed resident of Canada, to a post-secondary educational institution outside Canada (that provides courses at a post-secondary level), for courses that are not at the post-secondary school level are eligible for the tuition tax credit if the following conditions are met:

*   the individual is 16 years of age or older before the end of the year.
*   the individual is enrolled in the educational institution to obtain skills for, or improve their skills in, an occupation.
*   the tuition paid must be more than $100.

All eligible tuition amounts are reported using the **T2202 Form – Tuition and Enrollment Certificate or TL11A – Tuition and Enrollment Certificate – Outside of Canada.** The T2202 form is an official tax slip issued by qualified educational institutions in Canada. It's provided to students who have paid tuition or fees for eligible courses. TL11A is issued by universities outside of Canada certifying a student's eligibility for the tuition, education, and textbook amounts. Students show the transfer of tuition, education, and textbook amounts to a designated individual on it.

It is important to note that your child has the first claim to his/her current year's eligible tuition fees and any unused tuition, education, and textbook amounts carried forward from previous years on their Income Tax and Benefit Return, even if you paid his/her fees. This means that if your child has income and will need the tuition tax credit to reduce their tax payable, they have the first claim to the tuition amounts and they can not transfer the credit to you before they reduce their tax payable.

For further information please contact Softron at 1-877-SOFTRON or visit www.softrontax.com
