Title: HAPPIEST MOMENT IN MY LIFE

URL Source: https://medium.com/@ayeshaa1497/happiest-moment-in-my-life-fa9b24d7c533

Published Time: 2020-12-08T15:48:17Z

Markdown Content:
**_HAPPIEST MOMENT IN MY LIFE_**

Life is a long journey and it’s not a bed of roses. We see happy and sad moments both but we always cherish the happy ones and think about them most of the time and it always brightens up our faces with beautiful smiles. Happy moments are when you get good grades in school, making your parents proud, getting whatever you pray for, build your home, getting admission to your desired university, and many more.

Some of the moments are forgotten with time but other leaves an everlasting impression and we cherish the moments of pleasures throughout our life. Even if those moments are from our childhood we still remember and cherish them and sometimes it brings tears to our eyes that how time flies and only memories left and we want to relive them.

Today I will share my happiest moment. Whenever someone asks me a

What’s the moment in my life that I cherish the most? I always tell them this story:

I was always an average student who never got her name on the top 3 students list and I still remember the time when my mother used to say that how badly she wanted any one of her children to get the top position and make her proud so that she would go on the stage and receive our trophy and certificate.

6 years ago, when I was in grade 8, it was a result day. It’s a fact that if you perform well in exams you’re always looking forward to the result day and overexcited too. When I was in 8th grade and the night before my result day, I couldn’t sleep. I kept thinking about my result. Thousands of questions came into my mind that what if I didn’t get good grades or what if I wouldn’t be able to make my parents proud? Even though, my exams had gone pretty well but I was still nervous about the results. While having these questions on my mind, I fell into sleep. The next day when I entered school, my friends were waiting for me at the school entrance gate. And I went along with them. I still remember that the weather was fairly cold and the wind was blowing and everyone was getting prepared for the resulting ceremony at the assembly area. School teachers, principal, headmaster, parents, and students were all present there.

As soon as the ceremony started, the headmaster came on stage and after a few words, he welcomed the principal. Then the principal distributed the certificates and trophies to all the students who made it to the top 3 list. Then a student came and delivered a speech. While attending the ceremony, my teacher was sitting next to me. She was my social studies teacher and my class teacher too. She called me and it felt like my heart was beating 10 times faster than before،Anyways, I went to her and she told me something that surprised me and I stood still for a moment. She told me that I performed well in exams this time. Listening to this I shouted, Oh really!!!! I didn’t know how many marks I got but I was still happy that my teacher praised me in front of everyone. And the very next moment, I told my mother that I got good grades, and the smile she had on her face melted my heart. She gave me a tight hug. The whole atmosphere was filled with joy. When everyone was done with the debates, we got up to go to classes to collect our result cards. I got 90% in my exams and the top of that I got 100 marks in maths. Can you believe it? I was so so happy that day. And on our way back home my mother got me a gift. And the news of my result spread like a fire in my family, friends, and relatives. Everybody called to congratulate me. And the next day, we had gone to my favorite place to celebrate it. Even today, when I remember that day, I still want to go back to that time and relive that moment.

There are very few best moments in our lives that we never forget this one was the best of them.
