Title: Lung Blood Flow - an overview

URL Source: https://www.sciencedirect.com/topics/immunology-and-microbiology/lung-blood-flow

Markdown Content:
Chapters and Articles
---------------------

You might find these chapters and articles relevant to this topic.

### Blood Flow

Blood flow is as important for gas exchange as is ventilation. This has not always been appreciated, partly because the process of ventilation is more obvious, especially in the dyspneic patient, and is more accessible to measurement. Much has been learned about the pulmonary circulation in the past few years, especially its metabolic functions. The anatomy and function of the pulmonary circulation is also described in Chapters 1 and 6.

#### Pressures of the Pulmonary Circulation

The pressures in the pulmonary circulation are very low compared with those in the systemic circulation, and this feature is responsible for much of its special behavior. The normal pressures in the human pulmonary artery are typically approximately 25 mm Hg systolic, 8 mm Hg diastolic, and 15 mm Hg mean. Normal mean systemic arterial pressure is approximately 100 mm Hg, which is six times higher than that in the pulmonary circulation. The evolutionary force to keep the pressures in the pulmonary circulation so low is the mechanical vulnerability of the extremely thin blood-gas barrier. Higher pressures in the pulmonary capillaries would cause stress failure of the capillary wall.12

##### Pressure Inside Blood Vessels

Because the pulmonary arterial pressure is so low, hydrostatic effects within the pulmonary circulation are very important. The adult upright human lung is some 30 cm high, giving a hydrostatic difference in pressure of 30 cm blood between the extreme apex and the base, which is equivalent to approximately 23 mm Hg. As a result, there are very substantial differences in flow within the small pulmonary arteries and the capillaries between the top and bottom of the upright lung. This topic is discussed further in the section on the distribution of pulmonary blood flow.

Various techniques have been used to determine the pattern of pressure drop along the pulmonary blood vessels. These include measurement of the transudation pressure on the pleural surface of isolated lung, measurement of the pressure transient resulting from the injection of a slug of low- or high-viscosity blood into the pulmonary artery,13 and direct puncture of different-sized vessels along with direct measurement of hydrostatic pressure.14 The direct puncture measurements indicate that much of the normal pressure drop in the pulmonary circulation probably takes place in the pulmonary capillaries, and that the mean capillary pressure is approximately halfway between that in the pulmonary artery and that in the pulmonary vein (Fig. 4-6). This distribution of the pressure drop is consistent with the main function of the pulmonary circulation, which is to expose as large an area of blood as possible to the alveolar gas.

The distribution of pressure along the pulmonary blood vessels depends on lung volume. At low states of lung inflation, the resistance of the extra-alveolar vessels (see next section) increases, and more pressure drop then takes place across the pulmonary arteries and veins. By contrast, there is evidence that, at very high states of lung inflation, the resistance of the capillary bed is increased, and therefore there will be an additional pressure drop in the capillaries.

The pressures in the pulmonary circulation are highly pulsatile; indeed, if we take the normal systolic and diastolic pressures in the main pulmonary artery as 25 and 8 mm Hg, respectively, this represents a much greater proportional change than the systolic-diastolic difference in systemic arteries (120 and 80 mm Hg, respectively). There is good evidence that the pulsatility of pressure, and therefore flow, extends to the pulmonary capillaries.15

##### Pressures Outside Blood Vessels

Some pulmonary blood vessels are exposed to alveolar pressure (or very nearly), whereas others are outside the influence of alveolar pressure but are very sensitive to the state of lung inflation. These two types of vessels are known as alveolar and extra-alveolar, respectively (Fig. 4-7).

The alveolar vessels are largely capillaries that course through the alveolar walls. The pressure to which they are exposed is very nearly alveolar pressure. However, it can be shown that, when the lung is expanded from a very low lung volume, this pericapillary pressure falls below alveolar pressure because of surface tension effects in the alveolar lining layer.16 By contrast, during deflation from high lung volumes, the pericapillary pressure is very close to alveolar pressure.

The extra-alveolar vessels are not exposed to alveolar pressure. The caliber of these vessels is determined by the radial traction of the surrounding alveolar walls and therefore depends on lung volume. When the lung inflates, the caliber of these vessels increases; when the lung deflates, their caliber decreases because of the elastic tissue in their walls and also because of a small amount of smooth muscle tone. The important point is that extra-alveolar vessel resistance falls with lung inflation, whereas alveolar vessel (capillary) resistance rises with lung inflation.

The small vessels (of approximately 30 µm diameter) in the corners of the alveolar walls behave in a manner that is intermediate between that of the capillaries and the extra-alveolar vessels. These corner vessels can remain open when the capillaries are closed. Indeed, this is the normal appearance in zone 1 lung 17 (see later section on the distribution of blood flow). However, the shape and attachments of the corner vessels are very different from those of the larger extra-alveolar vessels, and it is unlikely that the pressure outside them varies in the same way when the lung expands.

The extra-alveolar vessels are surrounded by a potential perivascular space, which has an important role in the transport of extravascular fluid in the lung. The lymph vessels run in this space, although lymph can also traverse the space outside lymph vessels. One of the earliest histologic signs of interstitial pulmonary edema is “cuffing” of the perivascular space around the extra-alveolar vessels.18,19 A distinction should be drawn between the net pressure (sum of forces per unit area) pulling on the wall of an extra-alveolar vessel on the one hand, and the fluid hydrostatic pressure in the perivascular space on the other. The fluid hydrostatic pressure determines the movement of fluid into this region, and there is evidence that this pressure is very low compared with the hydrostatic pressure in the interstitium of the alveolar wall. As a consequence, fluid that passes from the capillaries into the interstitial space of the alveolar wall eventually finds its way to the perivascular low-pressure region by virtue of the hydrostatic pressure gradient.20

#### Pulmonary Vascular Resistance

Pulmonary vascular resistance is given by the following relationship:

[10]Pulmonary arterial pressure−pulmonary venous pressure Pulmonary blood flow

Because all three variables vary between systole and diastole, mean values are generally used. This definition is similar to that used for electrical resistance, which is the difference of voltage across a resistor divided by the current. However, whereas the resistance of an electrical resistor is independent of the voltage at both ends and the current, this is not the case for pulmonary vascular resistance. For example, an increase in either pulmonary arterial pressure or pulmonary venous pressure generally results in a decrease in pulmonary vascular resistance because as capillary pressure rises, there is both capillary recruitment and distention (see later). Similarly, if pulmonary blood flow is increased (e.g., by raising pulmonary arterial pressure), pulmonary vascular resistance usually decreases.

It is important to appreciate that a single number for pulmonary vascular resistance is a very incomplete description of the pressure-flow properties of the pulmonary circulation. However, in practice, pulmonary vascular resistance is often a useful measurement because, although the normal value varies considerably, we often wish to compare the normal lung with a markedly abnormal one in which the vascular resistance is greatly increased.

In practice, pulmonary venous pressure is difficult to measure. Therefore the ratio of pulmonary artery pressure to blood flow is sometimes reported and is termed _total pulmonary vascular resistance_. An estimate of pulmonary venous pressure can be obtained by wedging a catheter in a small pulmonary artery (the so-called pulmonary wedge pressure).

##### Pressure-Flow Relations

If pulmonary blood flow is measured in an isolated, perfused lung, when pulmonary arterial pressure is raised (while pulmonary venous pressure, alveolar pressure, and lung volume are held constant), then flow increases relatively more than pressure (Fig. 4-8). This figure shows that pulmonary vascular resistance decreases both when pulmonary arterial pressure is raised and when pulmonary venous pressure is raised (other pressures held constant) even as flow now falls. The unifying explanation for reduced resistance in both cases is vascular distention and recruitment due to raised intravascular pressure.

The decreases in pulmonary vascular resistance shown in Figure 4-8 help to limit the work of the right heart under conditions of high pulmonary blood flow. For example, during exercise, both pulmonary arterial and venous pressures rise. Although the normal pulmonary vascular resistance is remarkably small (the normal 5 L/min pulmonary blood flow is associated with an arterial-venous pressure difference of only approximately 10 mm Hg), the resistance falls to even lower values when the pulmonary arterial and venous pressures rise, as during exercise.

Two mechanisms responsible for the fall in pulmonary vascular resistance are _recruitment_, that is, opening up of previously closed blood vessels, and _distention_, that is, increase in caliber of vessels. Figure 4-9A shows experimental data from rapidly frozen dog lung preparations, indicating the importance of recruitment as the pulmonary arterial pressure is raised from low values.21 Note that the number of open capillaries per millimeter of length of alveolar wall increased from approximately 25 to over 50 as pulmonary arterial pressure was raised from zero to almost 15 cm H 2 O. Figure 4-9B shows data on the importance of distention of pulmonary capillaries.17 Note that the mean width of the capillaries increased from approximately 3.5 to nearly 7 µm as the capillary pressure was increased to approximately 50 cm H 2 O. Beyond that, there was very little change.

The mechanism of recruitment of pulmonary capillaries is not fully understood. It has been suggested that, as the pulmonary arterial pressure is increased, the critical opening pressures of various arterioles are successively overcome. However, it has been shown that the red blood cell concentration, used as a measure of perfusion, varied within areas supplied by single arterioles indicating that capillaries, not arterioles, probably accounted for the heterogenous perfusion.21 This suggests that vessels are recruited at the capillary rather than the arterial level.

A possible mechanism of recruitment of pulmonary capillaries is based on the stochastic properties of a dense network of numerous interconnected capillary segments.22 It can be shown in such a model that, if each capillary segment requires a very small critical pressure before flow begins and the network contains a distribution of these critical pressures, capillaries can be recruited over a large range of arterial pressures. For example, in a network with as many elements as in the human pulmonary capillary bed,1 a critical pressure of the order of only 0.02 cm H 2 O for the individual segments could result in recruitment over a range of arterial pressures from 0 to 30 cm H 2 O. Such a very small critical pressure could result from the intrinsic flow properties of blood, especially when the diameter of the red cells equals that of the capillary lumen.

The mechanism of distention of pulmonary capillaries is apparently simply the bulging of the capillary wall as the transmural pressure of the capillaries is raised. As Figure 4-9B shows, the mean capillary diameter increases as capillary transmural pressure rises. Probably this behavior is caused by a change in shape of the capillaries rather than actual stretching of the capillary wall. There is evidence that the strength of the wall (at least on the thin side) comes from the type IV collagen in the basement membranes (see later), which has a high tensile strength and Young's modulus (i.e., it is very stiff). It is unlikely that it stretches appreciably when the capillary transmural pressure rises to 30 cm H 2 O. However, surface tension forces and also longitudinal tension in the alveolar wall associated with lung inflation tend to flatten the capillaries at low capillary transmural pressures, and this means that their diameter can increase when capillary pressure rises. In photomicrographs of rapidly frozen lung preparations, pulmonary capillaries with very high intracapillary pressures show remarkable bulging.17

Recruitment and distention also provide mechanisms for increasing both the surface area of the lung microvasculature in contact with alveolar gas and the red cell transit time through the microvasculature, which may facilitate gas exchange.

##### Effect of Lung Volume

Lung volume has an important influence on pulmonary vascular resistance. Figure 4-10 shows that, as lung volume is increased from very low values, vascular resistance first decreases and then increases. The lung normally operates near the minimal value of vascular resistance, that is, FRC coincides with a low vascular resistance.

The increase in pulmonary vascular resistance at very low lung volume is caused by the decrease in caliber of the extra-alveolar vessels. Because these vessels are normally held open by the radial traction of the surrounding parenchyma, their caliber is least in the collapsed lung. Under these conditions the presence of elastic tissue and smooth muscle with tone in the wall of these vessels may result in a critical opening pressure of approximately 7 cm H 2 O.23 Also, at low lung volumes, vascular resistance is extremely sensitive to vasoconstrictor drugs, such as serotonin, which cause contraction of vascular smooth muscle.24

Another factor that may contribute to the high pulmonary vascular resistance at low states of lung inflation is folding and distortion of pulmonary capillaries.25,26 However, the possible importance of distortion of the pulmonary capillaries as a cause of the increase of vascular resistance at low lung volumes is still uncertain.

At high states of lung inflation, the increase in pulmonary vascular resistance is probably caused by narrowing of the pulmonary capillaries. An analogy is a piece of thin rubber tubing that narrows considerably when it is stretched across its diameter. This distortion increases the resistance to fluid moving through it. Direct measurements on rapidly frozen dog lungs show that the mean width of the capillaries is greatly decreased at high states of lung inflation.17

In considering the effects of lung inflation, a distinction should be made between “positive” and “negative” pressure inflation. The results shown in Figure 4-10 were found with negative-pressure inflation, that is, when the lung was expanded by reducing pleural pressure and the relationship between pulmonary arterial and alveolar pressures was held constant. If positive-pressure inflation is used (i.e., alveolar pressure is increased with respect to pulmonary arterial pressure), pulmonary vascular resistance increases even more at high states of lung inflation. The reason is that lung inflation is then associated with a decrease in the transmural pressure of the capillaries and they are, in effect, squashed by the increased alveolar pressure. This is actually the case in normal subjects, for example, during inhalation to total lung capacity. Although alveolar pressure remains at atmospheric pressure at the end of inspiration (glottis open), pulmonary arterial and venous pressures fall along with intrapleural pressure. Thus the net result is to decrease the transmural pressure across the pulmonary capillaries, and this is an additional contributing factor in the increase of pulmonary vascular resistance.

##### Other Factors Affecting Pulmonary Vascular Resistance

Various drugs affect pulmonary vascular resistance. In some instances, the effects depend on the species of animal. However, in general, serotonin, histamine, and norepinephrine cause contraction of pulmonary vascular smooth muscle and increase vascular resistance. These drugs are particularly effective as vasoconstrictors when the lung volume is small and the radial traction of surrounding parenchyma on the extra-alveolar vessels is weak. Drugs that often relax smooth muscle in the pulmonary circulation include acetylcholine and isoproterenol. However, normal pulmonary blood vessels have little resting tone, so the degree of potential relaxation is small.

The autonomic nervous system exercises a weak control on the pulmonary circulation. There is evidence that increased sympathetic tone can cause vasoconstriction and stiffening of the walls of the larger pulmonary arteries. Both α- and β-adrenergic receptors are present.27 Increased parasympathetic activity has a weak vasodilator action. As already indicated, any changes of vascular smooth muscle tone are much more effective at low states of lung inflation (when the extra-alveolar vessels are narrowed) or in the fetal state (when the amount of smooth muscle present is much greater than in the adult).

Pulmonary edema increases vascular resistance by a mechanism that is poorly understood. It may be that there are different mechanisms, depending on the type and stage of edema. Interstitial pulmonary edema causes marked cuffing of the perivascular spaces of the extra-alveolar vessels. Presumably this increases their vascular resistance,28 because, as already indicated, these vessels rely on the radial traction of the surrounding parenchyma to hold them expanded. In addition, however, it may be that edema in the interstitium of the alveolar wall encroaches on the pulmonary capillaries to some extent, thus increasing their vascular resistance.29 Pulmonary edema results in reduced ventilation of the most affected regions. This (see gas exchange section) reduces their local alveolar P o 2, and this in turn may stimulate what is known as hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction. This is discussed in a later section and in Chapter 6.

#### Distribution of Pulmonary Blood Flow

Just as for ventilation, blood flow is not partitioned equally to all alveoli, even in the normal lung. Both gravitational (topographic) and nongravitational factors affect the distribution of blood flow.

##### Normal Distribution

The topographic distribution of pulmonary blood flow can conveniently be measured using radioactive materials. In one technique, 133m Xe is dissolved in saline and injected into a peripheral vein. When the xenon reaches the pulmonary capillaries, it evolves into the alveolar gas because of its low blood solubility. The resulting distribution of radioactivity within the lung can be measured using a gamma camera or similar device and reflects the regional distribution of blood flow. Subsequently the distribution of alveolar volume is obtained by having the subject rebreathe radioactive xenon to equilibrium. By combining the two measurements, the blood flow per unit alveolar volume of the lung can be obtained. The distribution of blood flow can also be measured with radioactive albumin macroaggregates and with a variety of other radioactive gases, including 15 O-labeled carbon dioxide and 13 N. Functional magnetic resonance imaging of the lung has been used to assess distribution of pulmonary blood flow.30 This noninvasive technique does not expose subjects to radioactivity; therefore it can be used repetitively and shows great promise for the future.

In the normal upright human lung, pulmonary blood flow decreases approximately linearly with distance up the lung, reaching very low values at the apex.31 However, if the subject lies supine, apical and basal blood flow become the same, and now blood flow is less in the anterior (uppermost) than posterior (lowermost) regions of the lung. Thus blood flow distribution is highly dependent on gravitational effects. During exercise in the upright position, both apical and basal blood flow rates increase and the relative differences are reduced.

The factors responsible for the uneven topographic distribution of blood flow can be studied conveniently in isolated lung preparations. These studies show that, in the presence of normal vascular pressures, blood flow decreases approximately linearly up the lung 32 as it does in intact humans. However, if the pulmonary arterial pressure is reduced, blood flows only up to the level at which pulmonary arterial equals alveolar pressures; above this point, no flow can be detected. If venous pressure is raised, the distribution of blood flow may become more uniform in the region of the lung below the point at which pulmonary venous equals alveolar pressure.

##### Three-Zone Model for the Distribution of Blood Flow

Figure 4-11 shows a simple model for understanding the factors responsible for the topographic inequality of blood flow in the lung.32 The lung is divided into three zones according to the relative magnitudes of the pulmonary arterial, alveolar, and venous pressures.

Zone 1 is that region of the lung above the level at which pulmonary arterial equals alveolar pressures; in other words, in this region, alveolar pressure exceeds arterial pressure. Measurements in isolated lungs show that there is no blood flow in zone 1, the explanation being that the collapsible capillaries close because the pressure outside exceeds the pressure inside. Micrographs of rapidly frozen lung from zone 1 show that the capillaries have collapsed, although occasionally trapped red blood cells can be seen within them.17

The vertical level of blood flow can be influenced by the surface tension of the alveolar lining layer, as discussed earlier. If measurements are made on a lung immediately after it is inflated from a near-collapsed state, blood flow reaches 3 or 4 cm above the level at which pulmonary arterial and alveolar pressures are equal.16 This can be explained by the reduced surface tension, which lowers the pericapillary hydrostatic pressure.

Zone 2 is that part of the lung in which pulmonary arterial pressure exceeds alveolar pressure, but alveolar pressure exceeds venous pressure. Here the vessels behave like Starling resistors,33 that is, as collapsible tubes surrounded by a pressure chamber. Under these conditions, flow is determined by the difference between arterial and alveolar pressures, rather than by the expected arterial-venous pressure difference. One way of looking at this is that the thin wall of the vessel offers no resistance to the collapsing pressure, so the pressure inside the tube at the downstream end is equal to chamber pressure. Thus the pressure difference responsible for flow is perfusion minus chamber pressure. This behavior has been variously referred to as the waterfall 33 or sluice 34 effect and can be demonstrated in rubber-tube models on the laboratory bench. The increase in blood flow down zone 2 can be explained by the hydrostatic increase in pulmonary arterial pressure down the zone, whereas the alveolar pressure remains constant. Thus the pressure difference determining flow increases linearly with distance.

Zone 3 is that part of the lung in which venous pressure exceeds alveolar pressure. Radioactive gas measurements show that blood flow increases as one measures vertically down this zone, although, in some preparations at least, the rate of increase is apparently less than found in zone 2. Because the pressure difference responsible for flow is arterial minus venous pressure and because these two pressures increase similarly with distance down the zone, the increase in blood flow is not explained by changes in perfusing pressure. Instead, blood flow increases down this zone because vascular resistance falls with distance down the zone, likely because of progressive distention (confirmed histologically 17) from the increasing transmural pressure (intravascular pressure increasing down the zone while alveolar pressure is constant). However, resistance may also be reduced by recruitment of capillaries.

##### The Effect of Lung Volume on the Distribution of Blood Flow—Zone 4

In spite of its simplicity, the three-zone model of Figure 4-11, based on the effects of pulmonary arterial, alveolar, and venous pressures, accounts for many of the distributions seen in the normal lung. However, other factors play a role; one of these is lung volume. For example, under most circumstances, a zone of reduced blood flow, known as zone 4, is seen in the lowermost region of the upright human lung.35 This zone becomes smaller as lung volume is increased, but careful measurements indicate that a small area of reduced blood flow is present at total lung capacity at the lung base. As lung volume is reduced, this region of reduced blood flow extends further and further up the lung, so that at FRC, blood flow decreases in the bottom half of the lung. At RV the zone of reduced blood flow extends all the way up the lung, so that blood flow at the apex exceeds that at the base.35

These patterns cannot be explained by the interactions of the pulmonary arterial, venous, and alveolar pressures as in Figure 4-11. Instead, we have to take into account the contribution of the extra-alveolar vessels. As pointed out previously (see Fig. 4-10), the caliber of these vessels is determined by the degree of lung inflation; as lung volume is reduced, the vessels narrow. In the upright human lung, the alveoli are less well expanded at the base than at the apex because of distortion of the elastic lung caused by its weight (see Fig. 4-5). As a result the extra-alveolar vessels are relatively narrow at the base, and their increased contribution to pulmonary vascular resistance results in the presence of a zone of reduced blood flow in that region. As overall lung volume is reduced, the contribution of the extra-alveolar vessels to the distribution of blood flow increases, and zone 4 extends further up the lung. At residual volume the caliber of the extra-alveolar vessels is so small that they completely dominate the picture and determine the distribution of blood flow.

Vasoactive drugs and interstitial edema can modify the contribution of extra-alveolar vessels to pulmonary vascular resistance. For example, the role of the extra-alveolar vessels can be exaggerated by injecting vasoconstrictor drugs such as serotonin.36 Under these conditions, zone 4 extends even further up the lung. The opposite effect is seen if a vasodilator drug such as isoproterenol is infused into the pulmonary circulation. With interstitial edema, the contribution of the extra-alveolar vessels increases, because the edema creates a cuff of fluid around the vessels and thereby narrows them. This is thought to be the cause of the increased pulmonary vascular resistance seen at the base of the human lung in conditions of interstitial pulmonary edema,28 in which the distribution of blood flow often becomes inverted (e.g., in chronic mitral stenosis).37 Under these conditions the blood flow to the apex of the upright lung consistently exceeds the flow to the basal regions. However, the effects of interstitial edema on blood flow distribution are still not fully understood.

##### Other Factors Affecting the Distribution of Blood Flow

Because the topographic distribution of blood flow in the normal lung can be attributed to gravity, it is not surprising that, during increased acceleration, the distribution of blood flow becomes more uneven.38 For example, during exposure to +3 _g_ acceleration, that is, three times the normal acceleration experienced by someone in the upright posture, the upper half of the lung is completely unperfused. The amount of unperfused lung is approximately proportional to the _g_ level.

By contrast, in astronauts during sustained microgravity in space, the distribution of blood flow becomes more uniform.39 Because it is not possible to use radioactive gases in this environment, the inequality of blood flow has been determined indirectly from the size of the cardiogenic oscillations for P co 2. Cardiogenic oscillations are fluctuations in the concentrations of gases such as oxygen, carbon dioxide, and nitrogen during a single expiration. They have the same frequency as heart rate and are considered to be caused by differential rates of emptying of different parts of the lung due to contraction and dilatation of the heart exerting direct pressure on nearby but not distant lung parenchyma. For oscillations to be detected, these differentially emptying regions must also have different alveolar P o 2 and P co 2 values, and this happens when blood flow and ventilation are not uniformly distributed throughout the lung. Microgravity almost abolishes cardiogenic oscillations, implying greater uniformity in the distribution of blood flow and/or ventilation in the absence of gravity. Interestingly, because these oscillations can still be seen, albeit to a much smaller extent than on earth, some inequality remains, indicating that gravity-independent mechanisms are also present.

Although gravity is a major factor determining the uneven distribution of blood flow in the upright human lung, it is now clear that nongravitational factors also play an important role. There are several possible mechanisms. One is that there may be regional differences of vascular conductance, with some regions of the pulmonary vasculature having an intrinsically higher vascular resistance than others. This has been shown to be the case in isolated dog lungs,40 and there is some evidence for higher blood flows in the dorsal-caudal than the ventral regions of the lung in both intact dogs and horses. Another possible factor is a difference in blood flow between the central and peripheral regions of the lung,41 although this finding is controversial. Some measurements show differences in blood flow along the acinus, with the more distal regions of the acinus being less well perfused than the proximal regions.42,43 Finally, as pointed out earlier, because of the complexity of the pulmonary circulation at the alveolar level, including the very large number of capillary segments, it is likely that there is inequality of blood flow at this level. Reference has already been made to the possibility of recruitment of pulmonary capillaries based on the stochastic properties of a dense network of numerous interconnected capillary segments.22 There is also work suggesting that the distribution of pulmonary blood flow in small vessels may follow a fractal pattern.44 The term _fractal_ describes a branching pattern of both structure (blood vessels) and function (blood flow) that repeats itself with each generation. This means that any subsection of the vascular tree exhibits the same branching pattern as the entire tree. Were a picture of such a subsection to be enlarged, it would overlie and match the pattern of the whole tree. Just as mentioned for ventilation earlier, repeated branching of blood vessels has implications for how blood flow is distributed independently of gravitational influences. The greater the number of branch points, the greater the likely inequality of perfusion among alveoli. This implies that the finer the spatial resolution of the method used to assess flow distribution, the greater the amount of inequality likely to be detected.

##### Abnormal Patterns of Blood Flow

The normal distribution of pulmonary blood flow is frequently altered by lung and heart disease. Localized lung disease, such as fibrosis and cyst formation, usually causes a local reduction of flow. The same is true of pulmonary embolism, in which the local reduction in blood flow, as determined from a perfusion scan, is usually coupled with normal ventilation, and this pattern provides important diagnostic information. Bronchial carcinoma may reduce regional blood flow, and occasionally a small hilar lesion can cause a marked reduction of blood flow to one lung, presumably through compression of the main pulmonary artery. Generalized lung diseases, such as COPD and bronchial asthma, also frequently cause patchy inequality of blood flow. Sometimes, asthmatic patients whose disease is thought to be fairly well controlled show marked impairment of blood flow in some lung regions.

Heart disease frequently alters the distribution of blood flow, as might be expected from the factors responsible for the normal distribution (see Fig. 4-11). For example, patients with pulmonary hypertension or increased blood flow through left-to-right shunts usually show a more uniform distribution of blood flow.45 Diseases in which pulmonary arterial pressure is reduced, such as tetralogy of Fallot with oligemic lungs, are associated with reduced perfusion of the lung apices. Increased pulmonary venous pressure, as in mitral stenosis, initially causes a more uniform distribution than normal. However, in advanced disease, an inversion of the normal distribution of blood flow is frequently seen, with more perfusion to the upper than to the lower zones. The mechanism for this shift is not fully understood, but, as indicated earlier, perivascular edema causing an increased vascular resistance of the extra-alveolar vessels is thought to be a factor.

#### Active Control of the Pulmonary Circulation

The distribution of pulmonary blood flow and the pressure-flow relations of the pulmonary circulation are normally dominated by the passive effects of the hydrostatic pressure gradient described earlier. Thus the roles of gravity, of variation in vascular lengths and diameters, and of recruitment and distention can account for much of the behavior of the normal circulation. The normal adult pulmonary circulation has a limited amount of smooth muscle in the walls of the vessels, and active control of vascular tone is weak. However, in some conditions, there is an increase in the amount of smooth muscle. This is the case in the fetal lung, in long-term residence at high altitude, and in prolonged pulmonary hypertension. In these situations the tone of the vascular smooth muscle plays a more significant role. However, some active control of the circulation is seen in the normal lung.

##### Hypoxic Pulmonary Vasoconstriction

In a region of a lung with alveolar hypoxia, vascular smooth muscle contracts and raises local vascular resistance, which may reduce blood flow. The precise mechanism of such hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction is still not known, but, because it can be observed in excised isolated lungs, it clearly does not depend on central nervous system connections. Furthermore, excised segments of pulmonary artery can be shown to constrict if their environment is made hypoxic, so it appears to be a local action of the hypoxia on the artery itself. It is also known that it is the P o 2 of the alveolar gas, not of the pulmonary arterial blood, that chiefly determines the response.46 This can be proved by perfusing a lung with blood with a high P o 2 while keeping the alveolar P o 2 low; under these conditions the vasoconstrictive response is still seen.

The mechanisms of hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction are still not fully understood. Studies indicate that voltage-gated potassium channels in the smooth muscle cells are involved, leading to increased intracellular calcium ion concentrations.47-50 There may be roles for vasoactive substances generated by the endothelial cell. More details are covered in Chapter 6.

Endothelium-derived vasoactive substances play a role. _Nitric oxide_ (NO) is an endothelium-derived relaxing factor for blood vessels. It is formed from l-arginine and is a final common pathway for a variety of biologic processes. NO activates soluble guanylate cyclase, which leads to smooth muscle relaxation by the synthesis of cyclic guanosine monophosphate. Inhibitors of NO synthesis augment hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction in animal preparations, and inhaled NO reduces hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction in humans.51 The required inhaled concentration of NO is extremely low (approximately 20 parts per million), and the gas is very toxic at high concentrations. The effects of NO on ventilation-perfusion matching (see later) and arterial P o 2 in patients with lung disease depends on whether vasodilatation increases perfusion of well-ventilated regions of the lung or not.52

Vasoconstrictor peptides, known as endothelins and released by pulmonary vascular endothelial cells, may participate as well.53 Their role in normal physiologic processes and disease is still being evaluated, but endothelin antagonists have become important therapeutic agents in pulmonary arterial hypertension.

The stimulus-response curve of hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction is very nonlinear (Fig. 4-12). When the alveolar P o 2 is altered in the region above 100 mm Hg, little change in vascular resistance is seen. However, when the alveolar P o 2 is reduced to approximately 70 mm Hg, vasoconstriction begins, and, at a very low P o 2 approaching that of mixed venous blood, the local blood flow may be almost abolished. The data shown in Figure 4-12 are from anesthetized cats.54 However, there are species differences in the stimulus-response curves. For example, in the coatimundi (a small South American mammal), there is an almost linear reduction of blood flow between alveolar P o 2 values of 150 and 40 mm Hg.55 The preparation in which these measurements were made had the additional advantages that the chest was closed and the measurements were made in a very small region of lung. These conditions probably give the best information on the role of the phenomenon in the local regulation of blood flow.

The major site of the vasoconstriction is in the small pulmonary arteries.56 In the normal human lung the small arteries have a meager amount of smooth muscle, which may be uneven in its distribution. This may explain why, even in global alveolar hypoxia (e.g., at high altitude), vasoconstriction is nonetheless uneven. For example, alveolar hypoxia nearly doubles the dispersion of transit times through the pulmonary circulation of a lobe of dog lung,57 and the distribution of India ink particles injected into the pulmonary circulation during alveolar hypoxia is more uneven than during normoxia.58 This uneven vasoconstriction probably plays a role in the mechanism of high-altitude pulmonary edema 59 (see later).

Hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction has the effect of directing blood flow away from hypoxic regions of lung, which is beneficial to gas exchange. Other things being equal, this reduces the amount of ventilation-perfusion inequality in a diseased lung and limits the depression of the arterial P o 2. An example of this is seen in patients with asthma when they are treated with certain bronchodilators. These sometimes reduce arterial P o 2 as a result of an increase in blood flow to poorly ventilated areas.60,61 In patients with severe COPD with elevated pulmonary arterial pressure, prolonged nocturnal treatment with oxygen has been shown to reduce the degree of pulmonary hypertension and to improve the prognosis in these patients. The mechanism is presumably gradual inhibition by hyperoxia of increased smooth muscle tone originally caused by the hypoxia. The reduction in pulmonary hypertension in turn reduces afterload on the right ventricle.

Residence at high altitude results in hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction, both in newcomers and in permanent residents. The increase in pulmonary arterial pressure is especially marked during exercise. If 100% oxygen is given to normal subjects after they have been exposed to hypoxia for as little as 2 weeks, the pulmonary arterial pressure does not immediately return to the normal level.62 This suggests that hypoxia has already induced some structural change in the pulmonary vessels and new experiments show changes in ion channels controlling smooth muscle contraction in pulmonary vessels that depend on HIF-1a.62a There is considerable variation in the response of pulmonary arterial pressure to alveolar hypoxia, leading some investigators to divide people into “responders” and “nonresponders.”

Probably the most important role for hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction is in the perinatal period. During fetal life, when the lungs do not undertake gas exchange, pulmonary vascular resistance is very high, partly because of hypoxic vasoconstriction, and only some 15% of the cardiac output flows through the lungs. The rest bypasses the lungs via the ductus arteriosus. The vasoconstriction is particularly effective because of the abundance of smooth muscle in the pulmonary arteries. At birth, when the first few breaths oxygenate the alveoli, the vascular resistance falls dramatically because of relaxation of vascular smooth muscle, and pulmonary blood flow increases enormously. In this situation the release of hypoxic vasoconstriction is critical in the transition from placental to air breathing, and it is this situation that is presumably responsible for the evolutionary pressure to maintain the phenomenon.

##### Other Physiologic Substances Affecting the Pulmonary Circulation

Many peptides and other substances can potentially alter the tone of muscular pulmonary blood vessels, although the roles of these substances under physiologic conditions are still being clarified.63 They include angiotensin II, bradykinin, vasopressin, atrial natriuretic peptide, endothelin, somatostatin, products of both the cyclooxygenase and lipoxygenase arms of the arachidonic acid cascade, and calcitonin gene–related peptide. Some substances show species differences, and some evoke either vasoconstriction or vasodilation, depending on their concentration. Biogenic amines such as acetylcholine, histamine, serotonin, and norepinephrine also affect pulmonary vascular smooth muscle.

#### Damage to Pulmonary Capillaries by High Wall Stresses

The blood-gas barrier has a basic dilemma. On the one hand, the barrier has to be extremely thin to allow efficient gas exchange by passive diffusion.On the other hand, the blood-gas barrier must be immensely strong because of the large mechanical stresses that develop in the capillary wall when the pressure in the capillaries rises or when the wall is stretched by inflating the lung to high volumes. There is evidence that the blood-gas barrier is just strong enough to withstand the highest stresses to which it is normally subjected. Unusually high capillary pressures or lung volumes result in ultrastructural damage or “stress failure” of the capillary wall, leading to a high-permeability type of pulmonary edema, or even pulmonary hemorrhage.

When the capillary transmural pressure is raised in animal preparations, disruption of the capillary endothelium, alveolar epithelium, or sometimes all layers of the capillary wall is seen. In the rabbit lung the first changes are seen at a transmural pressure of approximately 24 mm Hg, and the frequency of breaks increases as the pressure is raised.64 Although at first sight these capillary pressures seem to be very high, there is now good evidence that the capillary pressure rises to the mid-30s (mm Hg) in the normal lung during heavy exercise.65 This is largely secondary to the increase in left ventricular filling pressure.66

It can be shown that, at these increased capillary transmural pressures, the “hoop” or circumferential stresses in the capillary wall become extremely high. Indeed, they approach the breaking stress of collagen. The main reason for the very high stresses is the extreme thinness of the wall, which, in the human lung, is less than 0.3 µm in some places. It is now believed that the strength of the blood-gas barrier on the thin side comes from type IV collagen in the basement membranes. The thickness of the type IV collagen layer is only approximately 50 nm.

Stress failure is the mechanism of several clinical conditions characterized by high-permeability pulmonary edema or hemorrhage.67 Neurogenic pulmonary edema has been shown to be associated with very high capillary pressures, the edema is of the high-permeability type, and ultrastructural damage to the capillaries has been demonstrated, consistent with stress failure. High-altitude pulmonary edema is apparently caused by uneven hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction (referred to earlier), which allows some of the capillaries to be exposed to high pressure.68 Again, the edema is of the high-permeability type, and typical ultrastructural changes in the capillaries have been demonstrated in animal preparations.69

A particularly interesting condition is seen in racehorses, which can suffer bleeding into the lungs while galloping. This is very common and is caused by the extremely high pulmonary capillary pressures, which approach 100 mm Hg. Direct evidence of stress failure of pulmonary capillaries has been shown in these animals.70 In fact, there is evidence that elite human athletes develop some ultrastructural changes in their blood-gas barrier during extreme exercise because significantly higher concentrations of red blood cells, total protein, and leukotriene B 4 are seen in their bronchoalveolar lavage fluid than in sedentary controls.71 This only happens at extremely high levels of exercise.72 A similar group of athletes who exercised at submaximal levels for 1 hour showed no changes in the bronchoalveolar lavage fluid.73

Overinflation of the lung is known to increase the permeability of pulmonary capillaries. Stress failure is apparently the mechanism because it has been shown that, for the same capillary transmural pressure, the frequency of capillary wall damage is greatly increased at high lung volumes.74 This is because some of the increased tension in the alveolar wall associated with lung inflation is transmitted to the capillary wall. This may be important in ventilator-induced lung injury. Finally, conditions in which the basement membrane of the capillary wall is damaged are associated with alveolar bleeding.

#### Nonrespiratory Functions of the Pulmonary Circulation

Although the primary purpose of the pulmonary circulation is to provide the lung with mixed venous blood so that oxygen can be added and carbon dioxide removed, the pulmonary circulation has other functions, particularly those of metabolism.

A number of vasoactive substances are metabolized by the lung.75 Because it is the only organ whose microcirculation receives the whole cardiac output, the lung is uniquely situated to modify blood-borne substances. Indeed, a substantial fraction of all the vascular endothelial cells in the body is located in the lung.

The only known example of biologic activation by passage through the pulmonary circulation is the conversion of the relatively inactive polypeptide angiotensin I to the potent vasoconstrictor angiotensin II.76 The latter is up to 50 times more active than its precursor but is unaffected by passage through the lung. The conversion of angiotensin I is catalyzed by an enzyme, angiotensin I–converting enzyme, which is located in small pits (caveolae intracellulares) in the surface of the capillary endothelial cells.

A number of vasoactive substances are completely or partially inactivated during passage through the lung. Bradykinin is largely inactivated (up to 80%), and the enzyme responsible is angiotensin I–converting enzyme. The lung is the major site of inactivation of serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine), not by enzymatic degradation, but by an uptake and storage process. Some of the serotonin may be transferred to platelets in the lung or stored in some other way and released during anaphylaxis. The prostaglandins E 1, E 2, and F 2α are also inactivated in the lung. Norepinephrine is also taken up by the lung to some extent (up to 30%). Histamine appears not to be affected by the intact lung.75

Some vasoactive materials pass through the lung without significant gain or loss of activity. These include epinephrine, prostaglandins A 1 and A 2, angiotensin II, and vasopressin (also called antidiuretic hormone).

Several vasoactive substances are normally synthesized or stored within the lung but may be released into the circulation in pathologic conditions. For example, in anaphylaxis, or during an asthma attack, histamine, bradykinin, prostaglandins, and “slow-reacting substance” are discharged into the circulation. Other conditions in which the lung may release potent chemicals include pulmonary embolism (see Chapter 57) and alveolar hypoxia.

There is also evidence that the lung plays a role in the clotting mechanism of blood under normal and abnormal conditions. For example, in the interstitium, there are large numbers of mast cells containing heparin. In addition, the lung is able to secrete special immunoglobulins, particularly immunoglobulin A, in bronchial mucus, which contribute to its defenses against infection. The synthesis of phospholipids such as dipalmitoylphosphatidylcholine, a component of pulmonary surfactant (see Chapter 8), is an important function of alveolar type II cells that prevents lung collapse. Surfactant turnover is rapid, and, if the blood flow to a region of lung is obstructed (e.g., by an embolus), surfactant may become locally depleted with consequent atelectasis. Protein synthesis is also significant because collagen and elastin form the structural framework of the lung. Under abnormal conditions, proteases are apparently liberated from leukocytes or macrophages in the lung, causing breakdown of proteins and possibly emphysema (see Chapter 43). Another important activity is carbohydrate metabolism, especially the elaboration of the mucins and proteoglycans of bronchial mucus (see Chapter 10).

In addition to its metabolic functions, the lung has other functions apart from its primary gas-exchanging role. One is to act as a reservoir for blood. As stated previously, the lung has a remarkable ability to reduce its pulmonary vascular resistance through the mechanisms of recruitment and distention as vascular pressures are raised. The same mechanisms allow the lung to increase its blood volume with relatively small rises in pulmonary arterial or venous pressures. Such changes can be seen, for example, when a subject lies down after standing and blood drains from the legs into the lung.

Another function of the lung is to filter blood. Small intravascular thrombi are removed from the circulation before they can reach the brain or other vital organs. There is also evidence that many white blood cells are sequestered by the lung, although the significance of this is not clear.

Read full chapter

URL:

https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B978145573383500004X

### Blood flow distribution

As already mentioned, blood flow is preferentially distributed to the dorsal regions of the lung 11 (Fig. 27.2) and this pattern is exacerbated during exercise.12 The greatest perfusion redistribution occurs during moderate exercise intensity, with little further change when intensity further increases. Moreover, there is a considerable heterogeneity in each isogravitational plane,11 which obviously is in disagreement with the gravitational model for distribution of pulmonary blood flow. More than 70% of variation of pulmonary blood flow at rest and during exercise is determined by a fixed spatial pattern that is most likely related to the structural anatomy of the pulmonary vascular tree. Accordingly, despite a redistribution of pulmonary blood flow, heterogeneity of perfusion remains during effort.12 Furosemide, which is frequently used for its putative preventive effect on pulmonary hemorrhage in susceptible horses, slightly attenuates this blood redistribution, but does not influence flow heterogeneity.43 The remaining 30% variation of blood distribution can be attributable to modulation of vascular diameter or other factors, which remain to be elucidated. It must be pointed out that perfusion heterogeneity is greater in horses suffering from recurrent airway obstruction than in healthy horses.44

Vascular diameter is modulated by smooth muscles that respond to vasoactive compounds. A wide range of mediators can modulate vascular smooth muscle tone, and among these epinephrine, norepinephrine, dopamine, prostaglandin and endothelin,45 which is notably potent, are vasoconstrictors, and isoproterenol, bradykinin, histamine, nitric oxide and acetylcholine produce vasodilatation.

Lung volume also plays a role in pulmonary blood flow by passively modulating vascular resistance. A distinction must be made between extra-alveolar vessels and alveolar vessels (thin-walled capillaries which perfuse alveoli). The cross-section of extra-alveolar capillaries is dependent on the pressure changes in the interstitial tissues rather than in the alveoli, while the opposite is true for the intra-alveolar capillaries. Consequently, vascular resistance varies with degree of lung inflation, as shown in Figure 27.6.

During intense exercise, _pulmonary blood flow_ increases approximately 10-fold.46 The pulmonary right-to-left shunt fraction of cardiac output is approximately 1% at rest and 0.4% during heavy exercise.47 At the same time, mean _pulmonary arterial pressure_ rises about 3-fold, from 28 mmHg at rest to about 85 mmHg at a fast gallop, with maximal reported values of 100 mmHg.47–49 This increase in pulmonary artery pressure is associated with large increases in pulmonary capillary, wedge and venous pressures.50 This marked pulmonary _hypertension_ is a unique feature of exertion in horses and ponies and might be due, in part, to the high left atrial pressure which is necessary for rapid ventricular filling at maximal heart rates.

This elevation in pulmonary vascular pressure is nowadays largely thought as being one of the major factors responsible for the occurrence of pulmonary hemorrhage during strenuous exercise. While some authors did not find a relationship between pulmonary vascular pressure and occurrence of blood into the airways after exercise,50 others identified a pressure threshold of 90 mmHg above which hemorrhage occurred in the lungs of horses running on a treadmill.51

Read full chapter

URL:

https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9780702047718000272

### Blood supply

The lung is perfused with arterial blood from the pulmonary and bronchial circulations.

The _pulmonary circulation_ receives the total cardiac output from the right heart. At rest, it is a low-pressure low-resistance system. The branches of the pulmonary artery carry mixed venous blood to the lung, accompany the bronchi, and form rich capillary plexuses on the walls of the alveoli. The blood is arterialized at this level and returns to the left atrium via the pulmonary veins. The primary function of pulmonary circulation is consequently gas exchange. Other roles are the filtration of emboli or thrombi and the release or the removal of bioactive chemical substances.

Blood flow distribution is mainly influenced by gravity and shows consequently a vertical gradient according to the relative magnitude of pulmonary arterial, venous and alveolar pressures in humans.9 The ventral regions in the lungs of humans receive more perfusion per unit lung volume than the dorsal regions, and blood flow in the lung can be divided into three or four zones (Fig. 27.2).

It has been long thought that the same was true for horses, but recent work indicates that at rest gravity is a minor factor in determining blood flow distribution, despite the large hydrostatic gradient imposed by the height of the lung. Blood flow is preferentially distributed in the dorsal regions of the lung (thus opposite to gravity),10 a phenomenon which is exacerbated by exercise.12 The exercise-induced changes of blood distribution are described later in the text.

There is a large heterogeneity of blood distribution within the same isogravitational plane, showing that pulmonary blood flow depends on factors other than the pressure gradient between pulmonary arteries and veins, such as the vessel's length and resistance in a given area.11

The _bronchial circulation_ is a high pressure system. It comes from a single vessel, branching from the aorta and receiving, at rest, 2% of the cardiac output. It subsequently divides into a right and left bronchial artery at the hilar region of the lung. It provides nutritional blood flow to the lymphatic, vascular and airway components as well as to the pleura. Bronchial circulation seems to play a role in warming and humidifying the inspired air, as suggested by the increase of its blood flow during exercise.13 Bronchial circulation could be involved in local inflammatory processes, as suggested by its proliferation occurring in horses with lesions of exercise-induced pulmonary hemorrhage (EIPH).14

When pulmonary perfusion is locally impaired, the bronchial circulation can proliferate and at the level of the terminal bronchioles, pulmonary and bronchial circulations can anastomose. Most of these anastomoses occur between capillaries and veins rather than with arteries.15 They maintain some blood flow throughout the lung, thus contributing partly to gas exchange. Such proliferations also can occur during pulmonary inflammation. Because they are extensive in the dorso-caudal regions of the lungs, which are the sections that sometimes bleed during exercise, this neovascularisation has been related to the occurrence of EIPH.14

Read full chapter

URL:

https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9780702047718000272

### BLOOD FLOW

The lung receives blood flow from two circulations. The pulmonary circulation receives a total output of the right ventricle, perfuses the alveolar capillaries, and participates in gas exchange. The bronchial circulation, a branch of the systemic circulation, provides nutrient blood flow to airways and other structures within the lung.

#### Pulmonary Circulation

The main pulmonary arteries accompanying the bronchi are elastic, but the smaller arteries adjacent to the bronchioles and alveolar ducts are muscular. The terminal branches of the pulmonary arteries—the pulmonary arterioles—consist of endothelium and an elastic lamina and lead into the pulmonary capillaries, which form an extensive branching network of vessels within the alveolar septum. Not all capillaries are perfused in the resting animal, so that vessels can be recruited when pulmonary blood flow increases (e.g., during exercise). Pulmonary veins with thin walls conduct blood from capillaries to the left atrium and also form a reservoir of blood for the left ventricle.

#### Vascular Pressures and Resistance

Even though the pulmonary circulation receives the total output of the right ventricle, pulmonary arterial systolic, diastolic, and mean pressures average only 42, 18, and 26 mm Hg, respectively, in the horse at sea level.35,36 This observation shows that the pulmonary circulation has a low vascular resistance compared with the systemic circulation (see Chapter 3). Pulmonary wedge pressure (mean 8 mm Hg) is only slightly greater than left atrial pressure, showing that the pulmonary veins provide very little resistance to blood flow. Pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR) is calculated as

PVR=(PPA-PLA)/Q.

where PPA is mean pulmonary arterial pressure, PLA is left atrial pressure, and Q• is cardiac output.

Approximately half of vascular resistance in the pulmonary circulation is precapillary, and capillaries themselves provide a considerable portion of resistance to blood flow. Unlike the systemic circulation, arterioles do not provide a large resistance, and consequently pulmonary capillary blood flow is pulsatile.

#### Passive Changes in Vascular Resistance

Passive changes in vascular resistance result from changes in lung and vascular volumes and transpulmonary, intravascular, and interstitial pressures. The changes in pulmonary vascular resistance during lung inflation reflect the opposing effects on capillaries and large vessels. At residual volume, pulmonary vascular resistance is high because arteries and veins are narrowed. As the lung inflates to FRC, resistance decreases, primarily because of dilation of arteries and veins. Further inflation above FRC increases vascular resistance, primarily because the cross-section of alveolar capillaries changes from circular to elliptical.

Pulmonary vascular resistance is low in the resting horse, and it decreases even further when pulmonary blood flow or arterial pressure increases, as occurs during exercise. Increasing either pulmonary arterial or left atrial pressure or increasing vascular volume decreases pulmonary vascular resistance by distending already perfused vessels and recruiting previously unperfused vessels.

#### Vasomotor Regulation

Although pulmonary arteries have both sympathetic and parasympathetic innervation, the function of this autonomic supply is unclear. The pulmonary vasculature is subjected to a variety of vasodilator and vasoconstrictor chemical mediators released from nerves and inflammatory cells. Some mediators such as catecholamines, bradykinin, and prostaglandins are metabolized by the vascular endothelium; thus the effects may be modified by endothelial damage. Prostaglandins maintain a tonic vasodilator effect on the pulmonary circulation. Nitric oxide is a pulmonary vasodilator that is released from the pulmonary endothelium during exercise 37,38 or under the influence of some endothelial-dependent vasodilators such as acetylcholine.39 Administration of nitric oxide or its precursor nitroglycerin reduces pulmonary vascular resistance in resting horses 40 and foals 41 and therefore could provide temporary relief of pulmonary hypertension.

Alveolar hypoxia is a potent constrictor of small pulmonary arteries; this phenomenon is known as hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction (HPV). This response redistributes pulmonary blood flow toward better-ventilated regions of lung. The vasoconstrictor response to hypoxia is most vigorous in cattle and pigs, less vigorous in horses, and trivial in sheep and dogs. The response is more vigorous in neonates and older animals. There are also regional differences in the magnitude of hypoxic vasoconstriction that redistributes pulmonary blood flow to the dorsal caudal regions of the lung under hypoxic conditions.42 Constriction of the pulmonary arteries in response to hypoxia involves oxidant and redox signaling that leads to a rise in intracellular calcium concentration within pulmonary arterial smooth muscle. Endothelial cell signals also seem to be important during sustained hypoxia.43,44

The ability of local alveolar hypoxia to cause a local reduction in blood flow has been clearly demonstrated.45 Local blood flow is greatly reduced by a combination of vessel closure as the lung collapses and vasoconstriction in response to local hypoxia under conditions of atelectasis when there is no ventilation to a collapsed region of lung. The amount of flow redistribution away from the hypoxic region of lung is a complex function of the volume of the hypoxic region, pulmonary vascular pressures, and the degree of hypoxia.45 Anesthetic agents tend to inhibit HPV and flow redistribution (see Pulmonary Blood Flow and its Distribution Under Anesthesia later in the chapter).

#### Distribution of Pulmonary Blood Flow

Until quite recently gravity was thought to be of major importance in the determination of the distribution of pulmonary blood flow; and elegant models that incorporated pulmonary arterial and venous pressures and alveolar pressure were used to explain the distribution of blood flow within the lung. Equine anesthesiologists were the first to question the role of gravity by demonstrating that the caudal part of the caudal lobe of the horse lung receives the greatest blood flow, regardless of the posture of the horse (Figures 2-10, _A_ and _B_ and 2-11, _A_ and _B_).46 Other groups 47–49 then showed that in standing quadrupeds, the dorsal caudal region of the lung receives the highest blood flow and this distribution becomes more accentuated during exercise, even in horses.50 Regional distribution of blood flow is fractal;51 the fractal dimension is determined by the branching pattern of the pulmonary circulation and the relative resistances of various vascular pathways. However, there are also regional differences in mechanisms controlling blood vessel diameter that play a part in the distribution.39,42 However, gravity is not unimportant. In a laterally recumbent anesthetized horse, pulmonary hypotension could mean that the uppermost part of the upper lung is less well perfused than the more dependent parts of the lung. It is also worth noting that many anesthetic agents relax pulmonary vascular smooth muscle and this in itself may cause changes in resistance that alter the distribution of flow.

#### Bronchial Circulation

The bronchial circulation, which provides nutrient flow to airways, large vessels, and visceral pleura, receives approximately 2% of the output of the left ventricle.52,53 Bronchial arteries follow the tracheobronchial tree to the terminal bronchioles, forming a plexus in the peribronchial connective tissue and under the epithelium along the length of the airways. Bronchial vessels anastomose with the pulmonary circulation at the level of the terminal bronchiole. Most anastomoses occur at the capillary or venular level. The bronchial blood flow to the large extrapulmonary airways drains into the azygos vein; intrapulmonary bronchial blood flow enters the pulmonary circulation at both the prepulmonary and postpulmonary capillary level.

Inflow pressure to the bronchial circulation is systemic arterial pressure, but outflow pressure varies, depending on whether venous drainage is by way of the azygos vein or pulmonary circulation. The bronchial artery blood flow is low in quietly standing horses and averages only 1% to 2% of pulmonary artery flow. Bronchial artery flow is reduced (about threefold) to a greater degree than pulmonary artery flow during halothane anesthesia and therefore is not responsible for an alveolar-arterial gradient during dorsal recumbency.54 Changes in pressure in both the systemic and pulmonary vascular bed affect the magnitude of bronchial blood flow. Increasing systemic pressure increases flow, but increasing pulmonary vascular pressures (downstream pressure) reduces and may even reverse flow.

#### Pulmonary Blood Flow and Its Distribution Under Anesthesia

Anesthesia results in changes in posture, lung volumes, cardiac output, and vascular pressures and resistance, all of which can alter blood flow distribution that contributes to the mismatching of ventilation and blood flow (Box 2-1). Changes in cardiac output alter not only the distribution of blood flow and gas exchange in the lung but also the delivery of oxygen to the tissues. For this reason, there have been many studies of the effects of anesthetic agents on cardiac function (see Chapters 3, 10, 12, and 15).

Positive-pressure ventilation and PEEP tend to decrease cardiac output (see Chapter 17). These procedures decrease venous return to the right atrium by increasing intrathoracic pressure. Positive-pressure ventilation also increases alveolar pressure, which compresses pulmonary capillaries and increases pulmonary vascular resistance (see Chapter 17 Figure 2-12). Sometimes high airway pressures coupled with PEEP are necessary to improve oxygen exchange under anesthesia. A recent paper suggested that this can be done in ponies with only slight detriments to cardiovascular function.33

Before the distribution of blood flow was measured in the lungs of anesthetized horses, their poor oxygen exchange was hypothesized to be a result of the preferential distribution of blood flow to the poorly ventilated dependent lung. However, actual measurements of blood flow distribution using microspheres demonstrated that this is not the case. In dorsally (supine) recumbent horses, blood flow is distributed preferentially to the most dependent lung region, the diaphragmatic lobe adjacent to the spine and the diaphragm (Figures 2-10, _B_ and 2-11).46 This is the distribution that might be expected if gravity were the dominating force. However, the same distribution of blood flow persists when horses are in lateral recumbency and even in the standing conscious horse. Therefore blood flow seems to be distributed preferentially to the caudal most part of the caudal lobe, regardless of the animals' posture.46,47

One of the factors that could affect blood flow distribution is HPV, which normally redistributes flow to the better-oxygenated alveoli (see Box 2-1). Halothane, enflurane, and isoflurane depress HPV in a concentration-dependent manner 55,56 so that animals that are anesthetized with these agents are less able than unanesthetized animals to divert blood flow away from hypoxic regions of lung. The newer agents sevoflurane 57 and desflurane 58 also have this propensity, but the effect is not as clinically important.59–61 Nitrous oxide, barbiturates, and propofol 62,63 have less depressant effects on hypoxic constriction than the halogenated agents. For the latter reason PaO 2 is better maintained under propofol than with halogenated agents when one lung needs to be collapsed during surgery.

##### Pulmonary Fluid Exchange

The lung continuously produces lymph as a result of the net fluid movement from the pulmonary microvasculature into the pulmonary interstitium. Normally the lymphatics remove fluid from the arterioles, capillaries, and veins at the same rate as it is produced in the alveoli and therefore remain dry.64 This is even the case in the exercising horse in which 5 or more liters per minute of fluid are transferred from the pulmonary circulation into the lung.65 When the capacity of lymphatics is overloaded, fluid accumulates in the pulmonary interstitium and eventually leaks into the alveoli, resulting in pulmonary edema.

Fluid filtration normally occurs between the capillary and the interstitial tissue on the “thick” side of the alveolar septum where a layer of interstitium is interposed between the endothelium and the epithelial basement membrane. On the “thin” side of the septum, the capillary endothelium shares a basement membrane with the alveolar epithelium, and there is no interstitial tissue (Figure 2-13). Because the alveolar epithelium is less permeable than the capillary endothelium, fluid does not leak into the alveoli unless the epithelium is damaged or there is considerable fluid accumulation in the interstitium.

Forces described in the Starling equation govern the movement of fluid across the endothelium:

Qf=Kfc[(Pmv–Pif)–α(π mv–π if)]

where Qf is the amount of fluid flowing per minute, Kfc is the capillary filtration coefficient, Pmv is microvascular hydrostatic pressure, Pif is interstitial fluid hydrostatic pressure, πmv and πif are microvascular and interstitial colloid osmotic (oncotic) pressures, respectively; and α is the colloid reflection coefficient (see Figure 2-13).

The net filtration force favors fluid movement from the capillaries to the interstitium of the lung (see Figure 2-13). The fluid flux between the capillaries in the interstitium varies with changes in vascular permeability and hydrostatic and oncotic pressures. Left heart failure or the excessive administration of intravenous fluids raises capillary hydrostatic pressure, which increases fluid filtration across pulmonary capillaries and may cause pulmonary edema. Pulmonary edema can result from a decrease in plasma oncotic pressure (hypoproteinemia), which can be caused by starvation or overly vigorous administration of intravenous fluids. Increased vascular permeability occurs after severe hypoxia and in many inflammatory lung diseases such as pneumonia because of the effects of neutrophil products, probably oxygen radicals, on the endothelium. Protein-rich fluid leaks into the interstitium, elevating interstitial fluid oncotic pressure and causing osmotic attraction of water from the vasculature.

Fluid filtered from capillaries moves through the interstitium toward the perivascular and peribronchial tissues where lymphatics are located. Lymphatic vasomotion, valves, and the pumping action of the lungs during breathing aid fluid transport along lymphatics. Lymphatics can accommodate large increases in fluid flux, and compliant peribronchial and perivascular spaces also provide intrapulmonary sinks for fluid accumulation. Fluid does not accumulate in the lung unless there is a large increase in the amount of fluid being filtered from the capillaries. Alveolar flooding occurs after the peribronchial capacity is exceeded; fluid probably enters the airspaces across the alveolar epithelial cells or at the level of the bronchioles. The foaming of clinical pulmonary edema results from the mixing of air, edema fluid, and surfactant within the airways.

Changes in vascular permeability in the lung and pleura can be a complicating factor in anesthesia. Sepsis and endotoxin both increase fluid flux from the pulmonary vasculature. An increase in pulmonary vascular pressure caused, for example, by intravenous fluid administration, could cause pulmonary edema in a horse exposed to gram-negative bacterial endotoxin. In addition, pulmonary edema associated with airway obstruction could result in negative-pressure pulmonary edema (NPPE). Inspiratory efforts against a closed glottis can cause a precipitous decrease in mean intrathoracic pressure and an increased transmural pressure gradient for all intrathoracic vascular structures. The large transmural pressure gradient at the level of the capillary increases permeability and alters Starling forces; both changes promote the movement of fluid from capillaries to the interstitial space. When the transmural pressure gradient is large enough, stress failure of the capillary occurs, resulting in hemorrhagic pulmonary edema.66 Recent evidence suggests that anesthetics such as propofol and isoflurane may provide some protection for the lung against oxidant stress that accompanies endotoxemia and other injuries.67,68

Read full chapter

URL:

https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B978141602326500002X

### The Distribution of Pulmonary Blood Flow

Blood flow within the lung is heterogenous in distribution. For example, between lung regions of secondary lobule size (∼10 cm 3), there is a modest amount of heterogeneity, with flow increasing with vertical distance. This is gravity-dependent heterogeneity (West et al., 1964). Within these lung regions and within the respiratory acinus there is a greater degree of heterogeneity, which is independent of gravity.

#### Gravity-Dependent Flow

The effects of gravity are best illustrated by considering that in the erect posture at rest in humans, mean pulmonary artery pressure (Ppa) at the level of the hilum is about 18 cmH 2 O, whereas the apex of the lung is 20 cmH 2 O above the hilum. Consequently the apex of the lung will only be perfused during the systolic pressure peak. In the supine position, the apical blood flow increases, with the result that the distribution from apex to base becomes more uniform. During exercise,with the increase in cardiac output, both upper and lower zone blood flow increase but the upper increases more than the lower, so that flow becomes more even. The role of gravity in determining pulmonary blood flow was extended by West and encompassed in the three zone model of pulmonary circulation. This model relies on the assumption that the site of major flow resistance is in the small vessels whose extravascular pressure is alveolar pressure (Palv). The driving pressure for blood flow is determined by the relationship between Palv, Ppa, and Ppv down the upright lung. A further zone (zone IV) is found at the lung base. In this zone blood flow is observed to decrease with distance down the lung and is due to increased perivascular pressure in extraalveolar vessels.

#### Gravity Independent Flow

The branching pattern of pulmonary arteries imposes changes in perfusion that are independent of gravity. Within any given horizontal level of the upright lung there is a decrease in blood flow in peripheral lung regions compared to central hilar regions. This is thought to be due to the reduction in Ppa in small acinar arteries with increasing distance from the hilum. This pattern is also seen at the level of the secondary lobule (the group of acini supplied by one terminal bronchiole), with a decreasing gradient of blood flow from the center to the periphery.

Read full chapter

URL:

https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9780128012383002166

### Distribution of Pulmonary Blood Flow

Until quite recently gravity was thought to be of major importance in the determination of the distribution of pulmonary blood flow; and elegant models that incorporated pulmonary arterial and venous pressures and alveolar pressure were used to explain the distribution of blood flow within the lung. Equine anesthesiologists were the first to question the role of gravity by demonstrating that the caudal part of the caudal lobe of the horse lung receives the greatest blood flow, regardless of the posture of the horse (Figures 2-10, _A_ and _B_ and 2-11, _A_ and _B_).46 Other groups 47–49 then showed that in standing quadrupeds, the dorsal caudal region of the lung receives the highest blood flow and this distribution becomes more accentuated during exercise, even in horses.50 Regional distribution of blood flow is fractal;51 the fractal dimension is determined by the branching pattern of the pulmonary circulation and the relative resistances of various vascular pathways. However, there are also regional differences in mechanisms controlling blood vessel diameter that play a part in the distribution.39,42 However, gravity is not unimportant. In a laterally recumbent anesthetized horse, pulmonary hypotension could mean that the uppermost part of the upper lung is less well perfused than the more dependent parts of the lung. It is also worth noting that many anesthetic agents relax pulmonary vascular smooth muscle and this in itself may cause changes in resistance that alter the distribution of flow.

Read full chapter

URL:

https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B978141602326500002X

### Pulmonary perfusion

The lungs are perfused by the pulmonary artery, which supplies the gas-exchange regions. The distribution of blood flow throughout the lung depends on the pressure difference between the pulmonary artery and the pulmonary vein and the vascular resistance. This, as in other species, is influenced by the gravitational forces. Blood flow to the conducting airways, interlobular septa, and pleura is supplied by the bronchial artery, and the filtrated fluid is drained by the lymphatic circulation.

The differences between pulmonary and bronchial circulations are outlined in Table 9-1. Pulmonary vascular resistance is very low; it is estimated at only one seventh the resistance of the systemic circulation. Consequently, the mean pressure throughout these vessels is much less than in the systemic circulation (∼25 versus ∼125 mm Hg). Although the vascular resistance in the systemic circulation is totally due to the precapillary vessels, the pulmonary vascular resistance is equally distributed between the pre- and postcapillary vessels. Because of the peculiar distribution and the low value of the pulmonary vascular resistance, pressure in the pulmonary capillaries remains pulsatile.

During strenuous exercise, pulmonary blood flow increases five- to eightfold (Franklin et al., 2012; Parks and Manohar, 1983; Thomas and Fregin, 1981; Thomas et al., 1983; Thornton et al., 1983). A marked simultaneous pulmonary hypertension is a feature of exertion in horses and ponies; the mean pulmonary arterial pressure rises about threefold, from 28 mm Hg at rest to about 84 mm Hg at a fast gallop, with maximal reported values of 100 mm Hg (Erickson et al., 1990; Erickson et al., 1992; Evans and Rose, 1988a, b, c; Franklin et al., 2012; Goetz and Manohar, 1986; Wagner et al., 1989). The pulmonary right-to-left shunt of the cardiac output is approximately 1% at rest. It may decrease up to 0.4% during heavy exercise (Franklin et al., 2012; Wagner et al, 1989).

#### Factors influencing pulmonary vascular resistance

Factors capable of modifying the pulmonary vascular resistance are either extravascular or intravascular. Changes in lung volume represent the main _extravascular factor._ The pulmonary vascular resistance increases at extreme lung volumes because of the compression of the lung vessels during forced expiration (small lung volume) or during forced inspiration (lung distended) (Fishman, 1985). The increase in blood viscosity related to the exercise-induced rise in packed cell volume is another extravascular factor influencing pulmonary vascular resistance; each increase of 1% in the packed cell volume induces an increase of 4% in the pulmonary vascular resistance (Taylor et al., 1989).

Vasoactive compounds or changes in the local composition of blood are _intravascular factors_ that regulate the pulmonary vascular resistance by modifying vascular smooth muscle tone. Pulmonary vascular resistance decreases with an increase in blood flow, pulmonary arterial pressure, or both (Franklin et al., 2012; Taylor et al., 1989). This results from a combination of dilation of the perfused vessels (increase in their cross-sectional area and consequently decrease in their flow resistance) and recruitment of previously unperfused vessels. Therefore, despite the substantial increase in packed cell volume, there is an approximately threefold decrease (from 0.32 to 0.11 mm Hg/L/min) in pulmonary vascular resistance with strenuous exercise (see Table 9-2).

#### Factors influencing pulmonary perfusion distribution

##### Gravitational factors

It has been shown that there is a vertical gradient of pulmonary blood flow, with the ventral regions receiving more perfusion per unit lung volume than the dorsal regions (Amis et al., 1984; Franklin et al., 2012). According to the relative magnitudes of pulmonary arterial, venous, and alveolar pressures, blood flow in the lung can be divided into four zones (Fishman, 1985).

In _zone 1_, at the top of the lung, there is no blood flow, because the mean pulmonary arterial pressure is too low to overcome the hydrostatic pressure imposed by the column of blood connecting the pulmonary artery to the apical blood vessels. Therefore, alveolar pressure exceeds both pulmonary arterial and venous pressures, and the collapsible capillaries remain closed. However, because the mean pulmonary arterial pressure is about 15 to 18 mm Hg (i.e., 20 to 25 cmH 2 O), it may be sufficient to perfuse the vertical height of the lung above the heart. This zone is probably small in most horses. Because this lung region is unperfused, it does not participate in gas exchange and represents the “alveolar dead space.” During exercise, the increased pulmonary arterial pressure probably improves the recruitment of the vessels in zone 1 and therefore makes the distribution of perfusion more homogeneous. The alveolar dead space is estimated to be 0.8 L to 1 L in the resting horse or about 3.5% of the functional residual capacity and is very likely to disappear in the exercising horse (Franklin et al., 2012; Lekeux et al., 1992).

In _zone 2_, pulmonary arterial pressure is greater than the alveolar pressure, the latter being, in turn, greater than venous pressure. Therefore, the capillary is open for a part of its length, until the point where alveolar pressure exceeds intravascular pressure. Consequently, blood flow in zone 2 is determined by the respective values of alveolar and arterial pulmonary pressures (and is independent of venous pressure); it, therefore, increases down this zone of lung, according to the progressive increase of pulmonary arterial pressure as a result of the hydrostatic gradient.

In _zone 3_, both pulmonary arterial and venous pressures exceed alveolar pressure; capillaries are perfused throughout their length and are increasingly distended down this zone.

A _zone 4_ is sometimes described in which the pulmonary blood flow decreases as a result of a compressing interstitial pressure on the vessel. Although it is well established that pulmonary blood flow is distributed in a vertical direction with respect to gravity, Hakim et al. (1987) suggested that in humans there also could be a gradient from the center to the periphery. Because local or peripheral vascular resistance rises in proportion to distance from the lung hilum, the center of each lobe will be better perfused than its periphery.

##### Humoral and neural factors

Although predominantly passive mechanical forces determine regional blood flow distribution, the smooth muscles in arteries and veins respond to vasoactive compounds. The magnitude and mechanism of these responses depend on numerous factors such as the pre-existing level of pulmonary vascular tone and the integrity of the pulmonary vascular endothelium (Bray and Anderson, 1991).

A modest autonomic innervation, with both adrenergic and cholinergic components, is found in the muscular vessels of the pulmonary circulation. Stimulation of the sympathetic nervous system constricts the blood vessels of the lung, whereas parasympathetic stimulation causes vasodilation.

##### Hypoxic vasoconstriction

The modification of ventilation in some regions of the lung or in the whole lung also influences pulmonary perfusion. In unventilated regions of the lung, alveolar hypoxia occurs, inducing a local hypoxic vasoconstriction. This constriction provides a mechanism to redistribute pulmonary blood flow from less-ventilated regions to well-ventilated regions and therefore improves the ventilation to perfusion ratio and the gas exchange. The magnitude of the response to hypoxia depends on the thickness of the pulmonary arterial smooth muscle layer; the response of the horse is intermediate between such species as cattle and pigs, in which the response is quite vigorous, and sheep and dogs, in which the response is minimal (Bisgard et al., 1975; Robinson, 1982). The mechanism for the occurrence of this constriction is still unclear. A combination of the action of a vasoactive agent with cellular mechanisms has been suggested as a possible cause. Hypoxic vasoconstriction is generally advantageous when occurring locally but may become unfavorable when occurring through the whole lung, as occurs in acute hypoxia. Exercise-induced pulmonary hypertension occurring in the horse does not appear to be caused by hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction (Franklin et al., 2012; Pelletier and Leith, 1991).

#### Bronchial circulation

The bronchial circulation receives approximately 1% to 2% of the cardiac output from the left side of the heart (i.e., oxygenated blood). It supplies the airways, large pulmonary blood vessels, septa, pleura, and other lung structures. However, the lung does not suffer from a partial obstruction of the bronchial circulation. The numerous anastomoses between the pulmonary and bronchial circulations may provide blood flow to the bronchial circulation (Franklin et al., 2012; Taylor et al., 1989). Conversely, when the pulmonary perfusion is locally impaired, the bronchial circulation may proliferate and maintain some blood flow throughout the lung, thus contributing partly to gas exchange (Lilker and Nagy, 1975). Such vascular proliferations also may occur in response to pulmonary inflammation. Because these may be extensive in the dorsocaudal regions of the lungs, which are the regions that sometimes bleed during intense exercise, they have been related to the occurrence of exercise-induced pulmonary hemorrhage. In addition, the role played by pulmonary hypertension, bronchial hypertension, or both in exercise-induced pulmonary hemorrhage is strongly suspected but has not been demonstrated so far (Franklin et al., 2012).

Postpulmonary shunts may result from anastomoses between pulmonary and bronchial circulations and, theoretically, may be partly responsible for the fall in the arterial oxygen partial pressure (pO 2) observed during exercise. However, a shunt of 1%, which is a reasonable approximation, would reduce arterial pO 2 by 5 mm Hg, whereas the actual decrease during exercise is much larger (Franklin et al., 2012; Wagner et al., 1989).

#### Lymphatic circulation

Fluid filtration occurs between the capillaries and the interstitial tissue. The alveolar endothelium is less permeable than the capillary endothelium. Therefore, the fluid does not leak into the alveoli unless the epithelium is damaged or unless there is a considerable accumulation of fluid in the interstitial tissue. Fluid filtered from the capillaries moves through the interstitium toward perivascular and peribronchial tissues, where lymphatic vessels are located. During exercise, the marked increase in the pulmonary arterial pressure probably induces an increase in the rate of fluid filtration across the capillary walls of the lung. The fact that this condition is not associated with pulmonary edema suggests that in horses, as in other species (Coates et al., 1984), the lymphatic system has a substantial capacity to drain the pulmonary interstitial space (Taylor et al., 1989). Moreover, the “pumping” action associated with the large and frequent pressure changes in the equine thoracic cage during exercise could contribute to the adequacy of the lymphatic drainage.

Read full chapter

URL:

https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9780721600758000186

### Other Factors Affecting the Distribution of Blood Flow

Because the topographic distribution of blood flow in the normal lung can be attributed to gravity, it is not surprising that, during increased acceleration, the distribution of blood flow becomes more uneven.38 For example, during exposure to +3 _g_ acceleration, that is, three times the normal acceleration experienced by someone in the upright posture, the upper half of the lung is completely unperfused. The amount of unperfused lung is approximately proportional to the _g_ level.

By contrast, in astronauts during sustained microgravity in space, the distribution of blood flow becomes more uniform.39 Because it is not possible to use radioactive gases in this environment, the inequality of blood flow has been determined indirectly from the size of the cardiogenic oscillations for P co 2. Cardiogenic oscillations are fluctuations in the concentrations of gases such as oxygen, carbon dioxide, and nitrogen during a single expiration. They have the same frequency as heart rate and are considered to be caused by differential rates of emptying of different parts of the lung due to contraction and dilatation of the heart exerting direct pressure on nearby but not distant lung parenchyma. For oscillations to be detected, these differentially emptying regions must also have different alveolar P o 2 and P co 2 values, and this happens when blood flow and ventilation are not uniformly distributed throughout the lung. Microgravity almost abolishes cardiogenic oscillations, implying greater uniformity in the distribution of blood flow and/or ventilation in the absence of gravity. Interestingly, because these oscillations can still be seen, albeit to a much smaller extent than on earth, some inequality remains, indicating that gravity-independent mechanisms are also present.

Although gravity is a major factor determining the uneven distribution of blood flow in the upright human lung, it is now clear that nongravitational factors also play an important role. There are several possible mechanisms. One is that there may be regional differences of vascular conductance, with some regions of the pulmonary vasculature having an intrinsically higher vascular resistance than others. This has been shown to be the case in isolated dog lungs,40 and there is some evidence for higher blood flows in the dorsal-caudal than the ventral regions of the lung in both intact dogs and horses. Another possible factor is a difference in blood flow between the central and peripheral regions of the lung,41 although this finding is controversial. Some measurements show differences in blood flow along the acinus, with the more distal regions of the acinus being less well perfused than the proximal regions.42,43 Finally, as pointed out earlier, because of the complexity of the pulmonary circulation at the alveolar level, including the very large number of capillary segments, it is likely that there is inequality of blood flow at this level. Reference has already been made to the possibility of recruitment of pulmonary capillaries based on the stochastic properties of a dense network of numerous interconnected capillary segments.22 There is also work suggesting that the distribution of pulmonary blood flow in small vessels may follow a fractal pattern.44 The term _fractal_ describes a branching pattern of both structure (blood vessels) and function (blood flow) that repeats itself with each generation. This means that any subsection of the vascular tree exhibits the same branching pattern as the entire tree. Were a picture of such a subsection to be enlarged, it would overlie and match the pattern of the whole tree. Just as mentioned for ventilation earlier, repeated branching of blood vessels has implications for how blood flow is distributed independently of gravitational influences. The greater the number of branch points, the greater the likely inequality of perfusion among alveoli. This implies that the finer the spatial resolution of the method used to assess flow distribution, the greater the amount of inequality likely to be detected.

Read full chapter

URL:

https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B978145573383500004X

### PULMONARY CIRCULATION

The lungs receive the entire output of the right ventricle. Consequently, pulmonary blood flow is equal to cardiac output, about 5 L/min.

The normal transit time for blood through the pulmonary capillaries is about 0.75 seconds. Gas equilibration between the alveolar air and the pulmonary capillary takes about 0.25 seconds for O 2 and about 0.05 seconds for CO 2. This means that there is a large “safety factor” ensuring that gas equilibrates with pulmonary blood. Even during exercise, pulmonary capillary transit times remain sufficient to ensure adequate exchange. The longer time for O 2 equilibration, however, means that in disease states, O 2 exchange becomes limited more quickly than does CO 2 exchange.

Pulmonary vascular resistance is much lower than systemic vascular resistance, and blood pressures in the pulmonary system are much lower than the corresponding systemic vascular segments. Pulmonary arterial pressure is about 25/15 mmHg, pulmonary capillary pressure about 12 mmHg, and pulmonary venous pressure about 8 mm Hg. These pressures are recorded during the passage of a Swan-Ganz catheter from the systemic veins into the pulmonary artery (Fig. 10-12).

A small amount of systemic arterial blood flow, the bronchial circulation, supplies nutrient flow to the trachea, bronchi, and large thoracic blood vessels. Most of the bronchial circulation empties into the pulmonary veins, representing a source of O 2-depleted blood that mixes with blood that absorbed O 2 while passing through the pulmonary capillaries. This flow is part of normal right-to-left shunt flow and accounts for the pulmonary venous blood having a slightly lower O 2 saturation than would otherwise be expected.

In contrast to the systemic circulation, extravascular compression from the alveoli represents a significant component to pulmonary vascular resistance. This extravascular compression can come from interpleural pressures in the case of vessels outside the lungs, or from alveoli for pulmonary capillaries. At lung volumes approaching residual volume, the higher (less negative) interpleural pressure provides compression on the vessels outside the lung and increases pulmonary vascular resistance. At lung volumes approaching total lung capacity, expansion of alveoli provides compression of the pulmonary capillaries and increases pulmonary vascular resistance. The lowest total vascular resistance is at lung volumes approaching the functional residual capacity.

The relatively low pressures in the pulmonary vasculature render pulmonary blood flow susceptible to changes due to gravity (Fig. 10-13). Pulmonary blood flow is highest in the base of the lungs (zone 3). If pulmonary venous pressure falls below alveolar pressure, the alveoli can limit blood flow (zone 2). If alveolar pressure exceeds pulmonary artery pressure, the alveoli can completely obstruct pulmonary blood flow (zone 1). Zone 1 represents a nonfunctional portion of the lung and does not occur physiologically. In disease states characterized by low pulmonary vascular pressure (e.g., hemorrhagic shock) or high alveolar pressure (i.e., positive pressure ventilation), zone 1 can develop and impair gas exchange.

Pulmonary vascular smooth muscle can play an important role in shunting blood away from unventilated portions of the lungs. In the lungs, hypoxia causes vasoconstriction (in contrast to the vasodilation in systemic vasculature). This allows pulmonary blood flow to be shunted to regions of the lung that are better ventilated. Hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction is the principal mechanism balancing pulmonary perfusion and alveolar ventilation.

Read full chapter

URL:

https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9780323043182500169
