When I was young, I used to think that grief was always this frequent in everyone's life. Although it is something we all experience in our lives, it seems to happen so much in our people.  

Due to effects of residential schools, colonization and intergenerational trauma, I believe our people experience it to the extent that we do. All of that paired with sudden tragic loss amounts up to losing a lot of people in our lives.  

I remember in grade 7, I had to leave school a few times in a short period of time to attend funerals. I will always remember the other students saying to me "didn't you just go to a funeral last week? How do you know this many people that die?" At that time, it was another close relative who passed on but it seemed that this was the norm.  

I asked them "haven't you ever lost a grandma or grandpa? Or an aunty or uncle?" They said no, they still had these people in their lives. I thought how lucky they are. My grandpa Morris passed when I was 3 or 4, my grandma Annie at 11, my other grandpa at 19.  

I have lost countless family members and friends in my life. Just two days ago, another cousin and now a couple friends too. In the last couple years alone, 4 aunts, 2 uncles, many cousins and close friends have all made their journey home.  

It’s hard losing people we love. Now when you know a lot of people, it seems like you're always losing someone. But oh how lucky I am to have met all these beautiful people and experienced their love.  

Grief is hard. It’s inevitable. It is going to be a part of our journey whether we want it to or not. But let’s take the time to realize how lucky we are to have had someone in our life that we loved so much.  

We really are lucky to have experienced their love, their light, their energy, and to have created all those memories with them. Yes, it’s hard to move forward without them. Grief doesn't ever really go away, but we learn how to grow around it.  

The most beautiful way to honor them is by taking good care of us—it’s what they wanted while they were here and what they want now. Their spirit lives on. Their love lasts forever. Take good care of yourself as a way to honor your loved ones.