Title: The Grinch's Monster [COMPLETE] - The Grinch

URL Source: https://www.wattpad.com/504151933-the-grinch's-monster-complete-the-grinch

Markdown Content:
As I come to, the first thing I notice is that I'm no longer outside, the place is fixer-upper for sure. And the ratty mattress squeaks as I sit up and look around.

                              
It's a cave, the stone ceiling sloping into a peak high above my head. But it's cold so I pull some fuzzy socks from my suitcase at the foot of the bed and start walking, jacket still wrapped around me. Upon entering what I guess is the living room, a dog trots up to me with a twinkle in his eyes. I smile before gently scratching him between the ears.

                              
"Max! Where'd you-" The barking voice stops short and as I look up so does my mind.

                              
It's a man, a green haired man with a beer belly and legs and arms too long and skinny. His eyes are bright, blurred yellow with long eyelashes above a flat nose, hairless cheeks and lips that are still green. I think it's his eyes, reflecting something secretly broken from long ago, that tell me who I'm looking at.

                              
"You're the Grinch." He quirks an eyebrow. "Well aren't you clever." His eyes dart to the canine by my feet. "He likes you. Given the fact we don't get out much that's a surprise." I smile gently.

                              
"Speaking of visitors, what the hell are you doing away from home little Who girl?" I frown lightly. "I'm twenty-four, that doesn't count as little." "You're still away from home." "Which is none of your damn business." Both his eyes go wide at my sudden brash tone.

                              
"Pretty feisty for a Who." I raise a brow with a slight smile. "Thanks? I guess." The faintest signs of a smile sparkle in his eyes.

                              
"You might as well tell me your name Ms. Feisty." A light giggle falls from my lips, not sure why. "It's Wilma, Wilma Opal Who." He taps his chin for a moment. "WOW?" I laugh, it bounces around the room. "Yes actually, that's what..." smile fades, "my mother used to call me." Truth be told, the nickname had been long since forgotten until now.

                              
"Eh, I prefer Ms. Feisty. Or firecracker, I'm gonna call you Firecracker." I fix my face to look utterly lifeless. "Does _this_ look like a firecracker?" Abruptly, he pinches my face in one hand so my lips are puckered. He looks over my face, an unexpected blush leaps to my cheeks, realizing how close he is.

                              
"Yep." He lets go and steps back, I roll my jaw in one hand and shrug off my jacket with the other. His eyes pop upon noticing my dress. "Your dress is green." "So? Green's my favorite color." The impact of the statement hits me just as our eyes meet.

                              
Suddenly, my entire face is burning and something in his eyes gives off a spark, like I'm one step closer to unlocking something within him.
