Title: The Truth About The Grinch and the Song That Defamed a Man's Character

URL Source: https://substack.com/home/post/p-140074159

Published Time: 2023-12-26T00:58:25+00:00

Markdown Content:
66 years ago, Dr. Seuss told the story of a seemingly wicked creature hell-bent on ruining an entire town’s beloved holiday. But even though a life-altering event caused him to inevitably change his ways, The Grinch would ultimately be remembered for the sins of his past.

If you choose to accept this story as such, then you’re discrediting the hardships that one man had to endure after he was cast away as a vile monster and bullied into solitary. Remember, the town of Whoville, which is a cult made up of freaks named ‘Who’s’ segregated the one person in their world who looked different than them.

Yet, the only negative connotations that stem from this story is the word “Grinch”. Today, when we say that word, it screams Anti-Christmas. In fact, it’s synonymous with anyone who lacks holiday spirit, love, happiness, family values, etc. To that, I ask a simple question: _Did you get to the end?!_

When we utter the names ‘Rudy’ and ‘Rocky’, we don’t think of the frail, dyslexic nobodies that never amounted to anything more than the blue-collar lifestyle they were destined for. _No_, we think of the underdog that rose to the occasion despite the odds that were stacked against them. We think of crowd’s chanting their names while being hoisted onto teammates shoulders. Ending the cold war with a simple post-fight message. ‘Rudy’ and ‘Rocky’ ignite thoughts of bravery and inspiration, and for that, they both have statues in their respective cities.

And what does The Grinch have? A diss track created by Thurl Ravenscroft.

You're a monster, Mr. Grinch

Your heart's an empty hole

Your brain is full of spiders, you've got garlic in your soul, Mr. Grinch

I wouldn't touch you with a thirty-nine-and-a-half-foot pole

Before the animated film was released in 1966, all the world had was Dr. Seuss’ story to formulate their own opinions of him. Anyone that had ever read ‘_How The Grinch Stole Christmas_’ could tell you that the title is aptly used to mislead its readers. When we skip to the end, we meet a man who put his hand up and took accountability for the mistakes he made. In a final noble deed, he even showed a willingness to risk his life in order to save thousands of gifts from falling off of a mountain.

Though Dr. Seuss’ story never said how exactly he did it, we all witnessed what Mr. Grinch did that fateful Christmas morning. We know because we would see it for ourselves 5 decades later in this story's second adapted film. What The Grinch did was display his massive set of balls, dug his toes in the ground, and leaned over the peak of a 3,000 foot mountain, forcing the sleigh to a halt.

Luckily for the Grinch, he had super strength that he didn’t know about. Think about that for a second. If he didn’t have _super strength_, he was going to face an uncertain death. It would be a miserable death that would involve hundreds of broken bones. He would likely impale himself at some point before hitting ground level and wherever he would land, he would wake up freezing in the process of bleeding out. He was ready to die on Mount Crumpit. But he had _Super. Fricken. Strength. (_ That he did not know about!). Do you understand how unbelievable that is? He felt so guilty for what he had done that he was legitimately ready to die for his sins.

Following that act of heroism was no cakewalk either. He suffered a reverse-heart attack so brutal that his heart tripled in size. Some see this as beautiful and a touching way to end the story. But The Grinch almost died from it, in a moment that would be both terrifying and agonizing.Had this story been treated differently, the word “Grinch” would be thought of in the same regard as Rudy and Rocky.

However, Thurl Ravenscroft didn’t see it this way. In 1966, he chose to side with the very people who locked The Grinch out of their town for several years and made a completely one-sided defamation piece. He wouldn’t write a song about owning up to your mistakes. He wouldn’t write a song about risking your life for the sake of an entire town’s happiness. And he wouldn’t write a song about choosing to forgive your enemies.

_No_. He would cast those things aside as an afterthought and go on to open up The Grinch’s closet, revealing each and every skeleton that was in there. The theme song of the 1966 animated film would unfortunately go on to become a massive hit and spread a hateful message for many years to come. And in turn, change the nature of The Grinch’s character for eternity.

You're a foul one, Mr. Grinch

You're a nasty-wasty skunk

Your heart is full of unwashed socks, your soul is full of gunk, Mr. Grinch

The three words that best describe you are as follows, and I quote, "Stink, stank, stunk"

You don’t talk about people this way. Plain and simple. Especially somebody as noble and forgiving as The Grinch.

If I had a Christmas wish, it would d be to ban Thurl Ravenscroft's propaganda from the airwaves. But we all know that won’t happen. Instead, if we as a society can strive to treat each other better then maybe something like this will never happen again.
