Title: How can you tell a personal story without using the word "I"?

URL Source: https://www.quora.com/How-can-you-tell-a-personal-story-without-using-the-word-I

Markdown Content:
Many times you simply won’t be able to avoid using “I”, but you can easily reduce the frequency of use. When appropriate, try focusing on the object rather than the subject because it is already understood that in a first person narrative the subject is “I”. Here are a few examples. “Two men were approaching.”instead of “I saw two men approaching.” “The air raid sirens sounded the alarm throughout the city.” instead of “I heard the air raid sirens sounding the alarm throughout the city.” “Visiting my family was always stressful.” Instead of “I always found visiting my family stressful.” Good luck with your writing.

Related questions

Because you’re telling a story in the first-person point of view, some “I’s” are expected. I have an example that might help you.

I was in the grocery store trying to buy something sweet for dessert. It always seems when I walk in, there aren’t any lines. I made a beeline for the bakery department and found the last carrot cake it was perfect. Cake in hand, we made out way to the checkout and every one of them had long lines, they must have come in when I was back in the bakery department.

First-person is going to be “I” heavy. The best I could do was bury the “I” in the middle of the sentences. If you can, try ...

She looked up at me through brimming eyes, setting the box on the bottom step. It was filled with my sweaters and slippers and small knick-knacks that in other times brought comfort and smiles.

“It’s over,” she said, her voice firm but shaking as the tears rolled down her cheeks. “This just isn’t working for me anymore.”

She blinked slowly and nodded. Watching her from the top of the stairs, unable to speak, my hand gripped the worn bannister, my fingers digging into the old paint. My throat was constricted. There was nothing to say. She turned and walked out the door. Every sound in that hallway was magnified a thousand times; every smell burned into my brain. The door squeaked as it slowly shut until even the click of the latch seemed like cannon fire and cruelly marked the end of… everything. Visible through the tiny, grimy panes, she walked down the crumbling concrete steps to her Ford Ghia, got in and drove off. She didn’t even look back at the house. She didn’t even hesitate. It really was over this time. This time, for good. This time, for real. My hot tears flowed freely now but it was too late… and pointless.

It is possible to write a narrative about one's self by using the third person.

Related questions

You can use the word “we,” but the word “I” would be better.

If the “I” key is broken on your typewriter, or if a creative-writing teacher gave you this assignment, you could also use the word “me.”

Related

How would you like your life story to be told?

I would so much like to be known as a woman who tried to make the world more beautiful everyday in some small way. That is how I remember my mother. And that is, now my aim in life.

With my art, my writing, my words, my gardens… my examples in daily living.

That every person who ever took the time to know me would feel enriched somehow, more powerful—if they could see from my eyes,how beautiful and worthwhile he or she truly is.

That if you read my stories you will see some kernel of hope.

Every place I choose to live, every person I choose to let into my life, every project I undertake is an opportunity to bring a little happiness, to share a little love and care.

The world is good and so are we.

That is OUR story, yours and mine.

With a little daily effort, from each and everyone of us, it can be our better place.

If the personal story is about me, I can use my name or a descriptive.

If it is about another person, I do not even have to say anything about me.

Related

How can you tell me a story with just a single word?

1.   Marriage.
2.   Love.
3.   Hate.
4.   Friendship.
5.   Happiness.
6.   Pain.
7.   Fail.
8.   Succeed.
9.   One-sided love.
10.   School.

Thankyou.

Related

How can I relate a personal story to someone, without using "I" so much?

Hello

First, in English, we “relate” a story. “Relay” means to transfer from one place to another.

Write a draft of your story. Draw a line through every “I” or “me”. Allow yourself to use “I” once or twice only as you re-write them.

Now, try to rewrite the sentences without “I”’s. You will have to combine clauses and you’ll have to think about the logical connection between ideas.

I have provided you with a WEAK EXAMPLE with too many I’s and an IMPROVED EXAMPLE. The [ ] in the IMPROVED example below, indicate the parts of the WEAK EXAMPLE have been replaced right beside the words that have replaced them. The logical connector “so” (therefore) was added to link two sentences.

WEAK EXAMPLE: Yesterday, I was driving along the Pan American Highway in the rain when I saw the highway suddenly wash out in front of and behind my car. I saw a wall of moving mud about four feet high about thirty feet in front of my vehicle. When I looked up, I saw that the mountain beside my car was a rock face. That is why I was not swept away.

IMPROVED EXAMPLE with WEAK EXAMPLE IN [ ] : While driving along the Pan American Highway in the rain yesterday, [Yesterday, I was driving along the Pan American Highway in the rain when I saw] the highway suddenly washed out in front of and behind my car. A wall of moving mud about four feet high [ I saw a wall of moving mud about four feet high] was moving down the mountain about thirty feet in front of my behicle. The mountainside beside my car was a sheer rock face, so there was no soil to become mud and put my car at risk.[When I looked up, I saw that the mountain beside my car was a rock face. That is why I was not swept away. ]

Related

We all have that one personal story that ends with "Well, it seemed like a good idea at the time." What's yours?

Accidentally convinced my mother I was kidnapped by an unfriendly foreign power.

So a few years ago, I was passing by a protest against Ahmadinejad and I decided to join in, and the crowd asked me to speak. “Mr. Ahmadinejad, the Holocaust happened, and denying makes you the criminal” I shout into the microphone, to loud screams of approval in Farsi.

My mother calls. “Hey, Imma, can’t talk, Iranians have me,” I say and hang up and close my phone so I can keep speaking.

I’ll pause for all my readers to roll their eyes.

Now, we’re Israeli. Even if Imma was raised mostly in the West, we are citizens of that fine country. And I have…a history of doing crazy things (I’m discussing only ONE of them here, there are ones I cannot discuss in public) so my mother begins panicking. While Iranians individually are lovely people, Israel and Iran are enemies politically, and her daughter is…very innocent at times and could be extremely naive.

Problem is, she’s getting on a flight to Israel and won’t have a phone for twelve hours. And she keeps calling. And thinking of the screams in Farsi. And my phone is off.

This is the part where people ask me if something is fundamentally wrong with my judgement. Why turn off my phone?

Because I didn’t want to be distracted. Seemed like a good idea at the time.

My mother was sure the next info she’d get of me is me bound and gagged, with a ransom demand for prisoner exchange.

I do feel sorta guilty about it now. I did scare her badly. Happily, she managed to track me down and find out I was fine.

I’m lucky she was in Israel, or I think she’d have gone nuclear on me.

Related

What are some ways to begin a personal narrative without using "I"?

Lately I find myself using the phrase “Me personally.” I dont know why either. Or you could go all third person. Scott doesn't like third person though. Scott thinks third person is weird. Scott doesn't know why he thinks that way, but Scott does.

Related

How can you tell me a story with just a single word?

Complicated.

—

Related

We all have that one personal story that ends with "Well, it seemed like a good idea at the time." What's yours?

I was the nursing supervisor at a home for profoundly mentally retarded children. It was a ghetto ass place but I loved the kids.

There were times where I was the only nursing supervisor there. We'd go without a director of nursing for months on end and the other nursing supervisors would quit or get fired. There were times when we didn't even have an administrator there.

I need to add this here. In places like this there's a very big "us vs. them" attitude towards the "upstairs" people. By upstairs I mean the human resources, secretaries, payroll people, etc. They don't know anything about the patients and usually don't care to. They have no idea who they're actually serving.

It was one of these times where we had no Director of Nursing or administrator that someone decided I should have a daily meeting with the woman from HR to tell her what was going on in the facility. I didn't know why the HELL the nursing supervisor would have to deal with HR every single day. HR- one of the "upstairs" people. But since I was told I had to, I did.

She never knew what the hell I was talking about. It was a total waste of my time. I'd go in at the beginning of my shift and spend about a half hour telling her shit she didn't even need to know.

And in one of those meeting it happened.

Jenny Burke. That was her name. She was a few years younger than me and really thought she was high class.

Jenny said, "Bianca, I want you to be frank with me. Why do you think people here hate me?"

Brash. It's a term I've had hooked to my name forever. And, shit. She was just HR. Who cared if I hurt her feelings? She asked me to be FRANK.

"Well. Because you're a stuck up bitch. You walk through this place with your nose in the air and you have no idea who any of the patients are. When state comes in you pretend like you help feed these patients or wheel them around but the other 360 days out of the year you're far too good to deal with them. You need to get out of your clique and spend some time with the people you serve."

A week later she was named our new administrator and my ten years of working there came to a quick end. She hounded me. When we got a new director of nursing she hounded her. "How's Bianca doing?"

It was just a few weeks before my annual evaluation was due and I'd be getting a raise when she pulled me into her office.

"First off, I want you to know that I've had complaints about your attitude problem. Secondly, the nurses you supervise have complained that you call them "my nurses". And thirdly, you call the patients "my patients". Your sense of ownership is unacceptable."

I knew my nurses hadn't complained. I knew no one had gone to her to complain about my attitude. The floor staff loved me there and knew that I was fair, honest, and loyal.

"Jenny, you've never called me into this office to tell me I'm doing a good job. Not once. When I first came here there was an extreme shortage in nursing staff. We used agency nurses. Now? Fully staffed with nurses who've been here for years. Our patients are clean and well taken care of. No bedsores in the entire facility because of the great work out there. And YOU. You're worried about me calling the nurses on my shift "my nurses?"'

She piped in, "There's that bad attitude I'm talking about."

There was no amount of self talk that could have kept me from doing what I did next. Brash. It's what I am.

"Know what? Here's some more bad attitude for you. You can take this job and shove it up your tight asshole!"

I quit. No notice. Walked right out the door.

Eh, seemed like a good idea at the time. I didn't suffer or have a hard time finding another job. Nothing like that. But I left those very same patients I'd pledged to take care of. I never saw them again.
